The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Imitation Learning from Observation
Faraz Torabi1
1

The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas 78712-0233
faraztrb@cs.utexas.edu

Introduction

limitation has recently motivated increased interest in the
area of imitation from observation (IfO) (Liu et al. 2017), in
which agents seek to perform imitation learning using stateonly demonstrations.
In this thesis, we decompose the imitation from observation problem into two main components: (1) perception of
the demonstration, and (2) learning an autonomous control
policy. The goal of this thesis is to address each of these
parts and integrate them in order to create an agent with the
capability of imitation from raw video inputs.

One well-studied way in which artificially-intelligent agents
are currently able to learn to perform tasks autonomously
is via reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998)
techniques. Using these techniques, if agents are able to interact with the world and receive feedback (known as reward) based on how well they are performing with respect
to a particular task, they are able to use their own experience to improve their future behavior. However, designing
a proper feedback mechanism for complex tasks can sometimes prove to be extremely difficult for system designers.
Moreover, learning based solely on one’s own experience
can be exceedingly slow.
Concerns such as the ones above have given rise to the
study of imitation learning (Argall et al. 2009), where agents
instead attempt to learn a task by observing another, more
expert agent perform that task. Because the information
about how to perform the task is communicated to the imitating agent via a demonstration, this paradigm does not require the explicit design of a reward function. Furthermore,
because the demonstrations directly provide rich information regarding how to perform the task correctly, imitation
learning is typically faster than RL. Imitation learning methods have been used to successfully learn a variety of tasks
such as navigation for quadrotors (Giusti et al. 2016) and autonomous ground vehicles (Bojarski et al. 2016), dish placement, and pouring (Finn, Levine, and Abbeel 2016).
Importantly, most of the imitation learning literature has
thus far concentrated only on situations in which the imitator not only has the ability to observe the demonstrating
agent’s states (e.g., observable quantities such as spatial location), but also the ability to observe the demonstrator’s
actions (e.g., internal control signals such as motor commands). While this extra information can make the imitation
learning problem easier, requiring it is also limiting. In particular, requiring action observations makes a large number
of valuable learning resources – e.g., vast quantities of online videos of humans performing different tasks (Zhou, Xu,
and Corso 2017) – useless. For the demonstrations present in
such resources, the actions of the expert are unknown. This

Previous Contributions
Thus far, I have developed two algorithms that learn control policies from state features-only demonstration trajectories which are explained in the following in more details.
These works are done with the collaboration of Garrett Warnell of Army Research Laboratory (ARL) and advised by
Peter Stone of UT Austin.

Behavioral Cloning from Observation (BCO)
For humans to imitate a task, they do not require access to
the actions performed by an expert. They watch the expert
performing a task, infer the actions that are executed and
practice them themselves. Moreover, this process of learning
is typically done very quickly. This ability comes from the
fact that humans have had experience in the world through
interaction and have the knowledge of the effects of each action on the environment. The proposed algorithm is specifically designed for the following goal: given a set of stateonly demonstration trajectories, D, find a good imitation policy using a minimal number of interactions after observing
the demonstration (post-demonstration interactions).
We were motivated by the fact that humans have access to
a large amount of prior experience knowledge about themselves, and so we aimed to also provide an autonomous
agent with this same prior knowledge. To do so, before
any demonstration information is observed, we allow the
agent to explore its own action space by performing random actions. During this step, we collect states and actions
of the agent and learn a mapping from state-transitions to
the responsible actions for those transitions. This mapping
is called inverse dynamics model. Then, upon observation

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9900

