The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Modelling Autobiographical Memory Loss across Life Span
Di Wang,1 Ah-Hwee Tan,1,2 Chunyan Miao,1,2,3 Ahmed A. Moustafa4,5
1

Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering
3
Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
School of Social Sciences and Psychology, Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia
5
Department of Social Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar
{wangdi,asahtan,ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg, a.moustafa@westernsydney.edu.au
Abstract

the psychological basis presented by Conway and PleydellPearce (2000), which has been widely accepted and supported by neural imaging evidence (Addis et al. 2012). Our
prior work (Wang, Tan, and Miao 2016) focuses on memory
retrievals using imperfect cues and “wandering in reminiscence”, which refers to recalling a sequence of seemingly
random but contextually connected memory across different
episodes of life events. In that prior work, we assume that
the memory formation and retrieval processes can always
be performed perfectly, which would rarely be true in realworld scenarios. Moreover, due to the hardware constraints
in agents or robots, discard of certain portion of the stored
memory is necessary in most complex application domains.
Therefore, with a totally different purpose, in this paper, we
show AM-ART can accurately emulate various human memory loss phenomena.
Specifically, we employ three key processes in AM-ART
to replicate the three widely studied memory loss phases,
namely during memory formation, storage and retrieval
(Jahn 2013), respectively. Moreover, we introduce three
novel parameters to AM-ART to regulate the corresponding
memory loss processes, namely overload as the likelihood
of being affected by cognitive overload during formation
(Daselaar et al. 2009), decay as the rate of long-term memory fading during storage (Rubin 1982), and inhibition as
the likelihood of retrieval failure during retrieval (Storm and
Levy 2012). Our approach of using a neural network with
relevant control parameters to model memory loss aligns
with cognitive experts’ opinion that “the individual pattern
of impaired memory functions correlates with parameters of
structural or functional brain integrity” (Jahn 2013).
For performance evaluations, we collect an autobiographical memory dataset comprising more than one thousand
life events from public domains. However, because this collected dataset does not span across one’s entire life (e.g.,
from childhood to 70s), in order to conduct relevant experiments, we alter the event dates so that the collected
life events are equally distributed across the life stages and
the ratio among pleasant, neutral and unpleasant memories
in each life stage conforms to the distribution reported by
Berntsen and Rubin (2002). Moreover, it has been found that
people of all ages tend to recall more pleasant memories
rather than unpleasant ones, although the voluntarily nonrecalled unpleasant memories are still retained. We model

Neurocomputational modelling of long-term memory is a
core topic in computational cognitive neuroscience, which is
essential towards self-regulating brain-like AI systems. In this
paper, we study how people generally lose their memories
and emulate various memory loss phenomena using a neurocomputational autobiographical memory model. Specifically,
based on prior neurocognitive and neuropsychology studies,
we identify three neural processes, namely overload, decay
and inhibition, which lead to memory loss in memory formation, storage and retrieval, respectively. For model validation, we collect a memory dataset comprising more than one
thousand life events and emulate the three key memory loss
processes with model parameters learnt from memory recall
behavioural patterns found in human subjects of different age
groups. The emulation results show high correlation with human memory recall performance across their life span, even
with another population not being used for learning. To the
best of our knowledge, this paper is the first research work
on quantitative evaluations of autobiographical memory loss
using a neurocomputational model.

Introduction
In recent years, many governments and agencies have invested a record-high amount of resources to look deeper into
human brain’s functional dynamics. However, as of today,
it is still difficult or impossible to quantitatively evaluate a
wide range of brain dynamics at the neural network level.
From the point of view of AI, neurocomputational models
built upon neurocognitive and neuropsychology theories can
provide insight into human behavioural processes in a rapid
and quantitative manner. For example, according to Wang,
Gauthier, and Cottrell (2016), “one advantage of computational models is that we can analyse them in ways we cannot
analyse human participants to provide hypotheses as to the
underlying mechanisms of an effect.”
In this paper, we evaluate how people generally lose
their memories by exploiting an established computational
autobiographical memory model (Wang, Tan, and Miao
2016), named Autobiographical Memory-Adaptive Resonance Theory network (AM-ART). AM-ART is built upon
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1368

