The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Switch-LSTMs for Multi-Criteria Chinese Word Segmentation
Jingjing Gong,∗ Xinchi Chen,∗ Tao Gui, Xipeng Qiu†
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Institute of Intelligent Electronics and Systems
{jjgong, xinchichen13, tgui16, xpqiu}@fudan.edu.cn

Corpora
CTB
PKU
MSRA

Abstract
Multi-criteria Chinese word segmentation is a promising but
challenging task, which exploits several different segmentation criteria and mines their common underlying knowledge.
In this paper, we propose a flexible multi-criteria learning for
Chinese word segmentation. Usually, a segmentation criterion could be decomposed into multiple sub-criteria, which
are shareable with other segmentation criteria. The process
of word segmentation is a routing among these sub-criteria.
From this perspective, we present Switch-LSTMs to segment
words, which consist of several long short-term memory neural networks (LSTM), and a switcher to automatically switch
the routing among these LSTMs. With these auto-switched
LSTMs, our model provides a more flexible solution for
multi-criteria CWS, which is also easy to transfer the learned
knowledge to new criteria. Experiments show that our model
obtains significant improvements on eight corpora with heterogeneous segmentation criteria, compared to the previous
method and single-criterion learning.

Lin

Dan

won

the championship

林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军

林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军

Table 1: Illustration of the different segmentation criteria,
which partially share some underlying sub-criteria.

Chen et al. (2017) proposed a multi-criteria learning
framework for CWS. Specifically, they regard each segmentation criterion as a single task under the framework of
multi-task learning (Caruana 1997), where a shared layer
is used to extract the criteria-invariant features, and a private layer is used to extract the criteria-specific features.
However, it is unnecessary to use a specific private layer
for each criterion. These different criterions often have
partial overlaps. As shown in Table 1, given a sentence
“林丹拿了总冠军 (Lin Dan won the championship)”, the three
commonly-used corpora, PKU’s People’s Daily (PKU) (Yu
et al. 2001), Penn Chinese Treebank (CTB) (Fei 2000) and
MSRA (Emerson 2005), use different segmentation crite(Lin Dan)” is the same as in
ria. The segmentation of “林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军
林丹拿了总冠军
|
PKU and MSRA criteria, and the segmentation of
“
(the championship)” is the same as in CTB and MSRA criteria. All these three criteria have same segmentation for the
林丹拿了总冠军
word
“
(won)”.
Inspired by the above example, we propose a more flexible model for multi-criteria CWS. Each segmentation criterion can be separated into several sub-criteria, each of which
is implemented by a long short-term memory neural network (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). When
segmenting a sentence, these sub-criteria are automatically
switched for different words. Therefore, specific segmentation criteria can be regarded as a combination of these subcriteria.
Specifically, our model consists of several LSTM cells,
each of which represents a segmentation sub-criterion, and a
controller, called switcher, to switch the routing among the
different LSTMs. These sub-criteria could be shared among
different segmentation criteria.
The major merits of our proposed approach are simplicity
and flexibility. Existing work on multi-task learning usually
has private layers for each task, parameter, and scale of the

Introduction
Chinese word segmentation (CWS) is a preliminary and important task for Chinese natural language processing (NLP).
Currently, the state-of-the-art CWS methods are based on
supervised machine learning algorithms and greatly rely on
a large-scale annotated corpus whose cost is extremely expensive. Although several CWS corpora have been built with
great efforts, their segmentation criteria are different. Since
these segmentation criteria are from different linguistic perspectives, it remains to be a challenging problem on how to
effectively utilize these resources.
Most existing methods focus on improving the performance of each single segmentation criterion. Recently, deep
learning methods have been widely used in segmenting Chinese words and can effectively reduce the efforts of feature engineering (Zheng, Chen, and Xu 2013; Pei, Ge, and
Baobao 2014; Chen et al. 2015a; 2015b; Cai and Zhao 2016;
Zhang, Zhang, and Fu 2016; Yao and Huang 2016; Gong et
al. 2017). However, it is a waste of resources if we fail to
fully exploit all the corpora with different criteria.
∗

J. Gong and X. Chen contributed equally to this paper.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6457

