The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Generating Distractors for Reading
Comprehension Questions from Real Examinations
Yifan Gao,1∗ Lidong Bing,2† Piji Li,3 Irwin King,1 Michael R. Lyu1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
2
R&D Center Singapore, Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba DAMO Academy
3
Tencent AI Lab
1
{yfgao,king,lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk 2 l.bing@alibaba-inc.com 3 pijili@tencent.com
Abstract
Article:
...
The Yanomami live along the rivers of the rainforest in the
north of Brazil. They have lived in the rainforest for about
10,000 years and they use more than 2,000 different plants for
food and for medicine. But in 1988, someone found gold in
their forest, and suddenly 45,000 people came to the forest and
began looking for gold. They cut down the forest to make
roads. They made more than a hundred airports. The
Yanomami people lost land and food. Many died because new
diseases came to the forest with the strangers.
...
In 1987, they closed fifteen roads for eight months. No one cut
down any trees during that time. In Panama, the Kuna people
saved their forest. They made a forest park which tourists pay
to visit. The Gavioes people of Brazil use the forest, but they
protect it as well. They find and sell the Brazil nuts which grow
on the forest trees.

We investigate the task of distractor generation for multiple
choice reading comprehension questions from examinations.
In contrast to all previous works, we do not aim at preparing words or short phrases distractors, instead, we endeavor
to generate longer and semantic-rich distractors which are
closer to distractors in real reading comprehension from examinations. Taking a reading comprehension article, a pair of
question and its correct option as input, our goal is to generate
several distractors which are somehow related to the answer,
consistent with the semantic context of the question and have
some trace in the article. We propose a hierarchical encoderdecoder framework with static and dynamic attention mechanisms to tackle this task. Specifically, the dynamic attention
can combine sentence-level and word-level attention varying
at each recurrent time step to generate a more readable sequence. The static attention is to modulate the dynamic attention not to focus on question irrelevant sentences or sentences which contribute to the correct option. Our proposed
framework outperforms several strong baselines on the first
prepared distractor generation dataset of real reading comprehension questions. For human evaluation, compared with
those distractors generated by baselines, our generated distractors are more functional to confuse the annotators.

Question:
Those people built roads and airports in order to _ .
A. carry away the gold conveniently (Answer)
B. make people there live a better life (Distractor)
C. stop spreading the new diseases (Distractor)
D. develop the tourism there (Distractor)

Introduction
Reading comprehension (RC) is regarded as an avant-garde
task in NLP research for practising the capability of language understanding. Models with recent advances of deep
learning techniques are even capable of exceeding human
performance in some RC tasks, such as for questions with
span-based answers (Yu et al. 2018). However, it is not
the case when directly applying the state-of-the-art models to multiple choice questions (MCQs) in RACE dataset
(Lai et al. 2017), elaborately designed by human experts
for real examinations, where the task is to select the correct
answer from a few given options after reading the article.
The performance gap between the state-of-the-art deep models (53.3%) (Tay, Tuan, and Hui 2018) and ceiling (95%)

Figure 1: Sample multiple choice question along with the
corresponding article. The question, options and their relevant sentences in the article are marked with the same color.
(Lai et al. 2017) is significant. One possible reason is that
in MCQs, besides the question and the correct answer option, there are a few distractors (wrong options) to distract
humans or machines from the correct answer. Most distractors are somehow related to the answer and consistent
with the semantic context of the question, and all of them
have correct grammar (Goodrich 1977; Liang et al. 2018;
Ma, Lyu, and King 2010). Furthermore, most of the distractors have some trace in the article, which fails the state-ofthe-art models utilizing context matching only to yield decent results.
The MCQs in the RACE dataset are collected from the
English exams for Chinese students from grade 7 to 12. Constructing RACE-like MCQ dataset is important and nontriv-

∗
This work was mainly done when Yifan Gao was an intern at
Tencent AI Lab.
†
This work was mainly done when Lidong Bing was working
at Tencent AI Lab.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6423

