The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Selecting Compliant Agents for Opt-in Micro-Tolling
Josiah P. Hanna,1 Guni Sharon,2 Stephen D. Boyles,1 Peter Stone1
1

The University of Texas at Austin
2
Texas A & M University
jphanna@cs.utexas.edu, guni@tamu.edu, sboyles@mail.utexas.edu, pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

(e.g., a lump-sum payment) for rational agents to gain utility by opting-in. The system benefits in turn by being able
to influence the routes selected by these agents through setting tolls. We refer to agents that join the system as compliant agents; otherwise they are non-compliant agents. Noncompliant agents plan their route to minimize travel time
and are not subject to tolls. Both sets of agents may choose
to take any link in the road network.

This paper examines the impact of tolls on social welfare in
the context of a transportation network in which only a portion of the agents are subject to tolls. More specifically, this
paper addresses the question: which subset of agents provides
the most system benefit if they are compliant with an approximate marginal cost tolling scheme? Since previous work suggests this problem is NP-hard, we examine a heuristic approach. Our experimental results on three real-world traffic
scenarios suggest that evaluating the marginal impact of a
given agent serves as a particularly strong heuristic for selecting an agent to be compliant. Results from using this heuristic for selecting 7.6% of the agents to be compliant achieved
an increase of up to 10.9% in social welfare over not tolling
at all. The presented heuristic approach and conclusions can
help practitioners target specific agents to participate in an
opt-in tolling scheme.

1

A key problem towards implementing such an opt-in
micro-tolling system is the problem of identifying the set
of agents who provide the most benefit to the system if they
opt-in. Consider a single compliant agent that must take a
congested road to reach its destination. Being able to influence this user has little value for reducing congestion
as the agent has no alternative but to take the congested
road. While previous work has shown that it is possible
to achieve system optimal performance with partial compliance (Sharon et al. 2018), it is an open question as to
how the set of compliant agents should be selected. Solving this problem would allow practitioners to identify the
set of agents that maximizes system benefit and target them
with specific incentives to become compliant. This paper addresses this problem by answering the question, “Given that
we can select n compliant agents, how should we select the
n agents such that the system social welfare is maximized?”

Introduction

Within road networks, the latest advances in GPS-based
tolling technology and electronic road pricing systems are
making it possible to charge specific tolls on each link of
the network (Numrich, Ruja, and Voß 2012; Chen et al.
2018). Such micro-tolling systems dynamically update the
tolls in response to real-time observations of traffic conditions. From the other end, vehicles (either autonomous or
human drivers with computer-based routing) may re-route
according to how they value paying tolls compared to taking
an alternative path. A large body of research has shown that
appropriately setting tolls can lead to improved and even optimal social welfare in transportation networks (Pigou 1920;
Roughgarden and Tardos 2002; Braess 1969).
Despite the promise of such tolling systems, political factors might deter public officials from allowing such a microtolling scheme to be realized. Road-pricing is known to
cause a great deal of public unrest and is thus opposed by
governmental institutions (Schaller 2010). Motivated by the
unpopularity of road-pricing, we propose an opt-in microtolling system. An opt-in micro-tolling system is a system
where agents may voluntarily join the system and pay tolls.
Naturally, such a system would require an initial incentive

Prior work on a related problem suggests that computing
the optimal set of compliant agents is NP-hard (Sharon et
al. 2018). Thus, we develop a heuristic method that selects
compliant agents based on a heuristic estimate of the agent’s
marginal impact on the system. While this exact quantity
cannot be computed in practice, we show that it can be approximated. We present experimental results obtained from
a dynamic traffic assignment simulation of three real-world
traffic scenarios. The results show that assigning the compliant set according to our presented heuristic results in better overall performance compared to baseline approaches for
selecting the compliant set. Moreover, the results suggest
that a significant improvement in traffic flow can be achieved
when as little as 7.6% of the agents are compliant. Additionally, our experimental results suggest, counter-intuitively,
that having a moderate number of compliant agents can yield
higher social welfare compared to a larger number of compliant agents in an adaptive tolling scheme.

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

565

