The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Zero-Shot Neural Transfer for Cross-Lingual Entity Linking
Shruti Rijhwani, Jiateng Xie, Graham Neubig, Jaime Carbonell
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
{srijhwan, jiatengx, gneubig, jgc}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Marathi

Cross-lingual entity linking maps an entity mention in a
source language to its corresponding entry in a structured
knowledge base that is in a different (target) language. While
previous work relies heavily on bilingual lexical resources
to bridge the gap between the source and the target languages, these resources are scarce or unavailable for many
low-resource languages. To address this problem, we investigate zero-shot cross-lingual entity linking, in which we assume no bilingual lexical resources are available in the source
low-resource language. Specifically, we propose pivot-based
entity linking, which leverages information from a highresource “pivot” language to train character-level neural entity linking models that are transferred to the source lowresource language in a zero-shot manner. With experiments
on 9 low-resource languages and transfer through a total of
54 languages, we show that our proposed pivot-based framework improves entity linking accuracy 17% (absolute) on average over the baseline systems, for the zero-shot scenario.1
Further, we also investigate the use of language-universal
phonological representations which improves average accuracy (absolute) by 36% when transferring between languages
that use different scripts.

[पोलंड] हा मध्य युरोपातील एक देश आहे
Gloss: [Poland] is a country in Central Europe.

Cross-lingual Entity Linking

पोलंड

Poland

Marathi

Grapheme Pivoting

पोलंड

पोलैंड

Marathi

Hindi

Poland

Phoneme Pivoting

polənɖə

polæːnɖə

powlənd

Marathi IPA

Hindi IPA

English IPA

Figure 1: Cross-lingual EL of an entity mention in a Marathi
sentence to an English KB: (1) direct Marathi–English linking. (2) Pivoting Marathi through Hindi for linking. (3) Using IPA for pivoting. The arrows represent entity linking and
the solid blue lines represent parallel data from bilingual lexicons, used for pivoting.

Introduction
Entity linking (EL) is the task of associating an entity mention with its corresponding entry in a structured knowledge
base (such as Wikipedia or Freebase), with several downstream applications including document understanding, entity and event coreference, text mining and information retrieval (Mihalcea and Csomai 2007). In this work, we focus
on cross-lingual EL (McNamee et al. 2011), where the given
entity mention is in a (source) language different from the
(target) language of the knowledge base. In Figure 1, for example, the input entity in Marathi (‘Poland’) is linked to the
appropriate entry in an English knowledge base (KB).
In monolingual EL, simple methods like string similarity
and Wikipedia anchor-text can be used effectively to identify candidate KB entries for each entity mention (Sil et al.
2017). However, such methods often fail in the case of crosslingual EL, because entity mentions in the source language

and KB entries in the target language are frequently dissimilar. Existing work uses bilingual resources to bridge this gap,
including lexicons and Wikipedia inter-language links (Pan
et al. 2017; Tsai and Roth 2018). However, the vast majority
of the world’s ≈ 7, 000 living languages are low-resourced,
and have extremely limited or zero bilingual resources. Even
within the 300 languages available on Wikipedia, some have
an extremely small number of articles (for example, Oromo
and Tigrinya have only 773 and 168 Wikipedia pages respectively, while English has over 5 million). In order to enable
cross-lingual EL for such low-resource languages (LRLs), it
is imperative to design methods that do not rely heavily on
lexicons or other resources in the LRLs.
In this work, we take this to the extreme: we perform
the first study on zero-shot cross-lingual entity linking, devising methods that require no bilingual resources in the
source language (i.e., the language that the input entity mention is sourced from). We propose pivot-based entity link-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code and data are available at https://github.com/neulab/pivotbased-entity-linking

6924

