The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Jointly Learning to Label Sentences and Tokens
Marek Rei

Anders Søgaard

The ALTA Institute
Computer Laboratory
University of Cambridge
United Kingdom
marek.rei@cl.cam.ac.uk

CoAStaL DIKU
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
Denmark
soegaard@di.ku.dk

Abstract

tions for language composition and attention. In practice, the
variability in natural language is very large and the available
annotated datasets are often too small to learn everything automatically. Furthermore, the patterns discovered in the data
might not always correspond to the behaviour that we expect
or desire our models to exhibit. Therefore, we would benefit
from having methods for directly supervising the composition functions based on previous knowledge and available
annotation, while still taking advantage of the end-to-end
supervision signal of the main task. Recent work has shown
that alignment annotation can be used to guide the attention function in neural machine translation models (Liu et al.
2016). However, similar approaches could also be extended
beyond alignment, making them applicable to learning better composition functions for a wide variety of tasks.
In this paper, we investigate how supervised objectives at
different granularities can be combined in order to learn better overall language representations and composition functions. The proposed model uses a self-attention mechanism
for constructing sentence-level representations for text classification, learning to dynamically control the focus at each
word position. We modify the attention component to also
behave as a token labeling system, allowing us to directly
supervise the attention values based on existing token-level
annotation. Auxiliary objectives using language modeling
are also investigated, which regularize the composition functions towards the language style of the training domain.
The joint labeling objective encourages the model to apply more attention to the same areas as the human annotators, making the system more robust to noise in the training
data and the model behaviour more intelligible for human
users. The token-level predictions directly reflect the internal decisions of the composition model, making them wellsuited for interpreting the model and analysing the output.
The token labeling component itself also benefits from the
sentence-level objective, as this performs task-specific regularization and compensates for noisy or missing labels. The
approach is evaluated on three different language analysis
tasks where labeling can be performed either on sentences
or tokens: grammatical error detection, uncertainty detection and sentiment detection. The joint labeling architecture
is able to return predictions for both full sentences and individual tokens, and the combined model is shown to improve
performance on both levels of granularity.

Learning to construct text representations in end-to-end systems can be difficult, as natural languages are highly compositional and task-specific annotated datasets are often limited in size. Methods for directly supervising language composition can allow us to guide the models based on existing
knowledge, regularizing them towards more robust and interpretable representations. In this paper, we investigate how
objectives at different granularities can be used to learn better
language representations and we propose an architecture for
jointly learning to label sentences and tokens. The predictions
at each level are combined together using an attention mechanism, with token-level labels also acting as explicit supervision for composing sentence-level representations. Our experiments show that by learning to perform these tasks jointly
on multiple levels, the model achieves substantial improvements for both sentence classification and sequence labeling.

Introduction
Language composition is a core requirement for many Natural Language Processing tasks, as it allows systems to construct the meaning of a phrase or sentence by combining individual words. Many languages are highly compositional
and the correct predictions often depend on long sequences
of context, therefore it is crucial that the learned composition
functions are dynamic and accurate. LSTMs (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) have become a common approach for
constructing text representations, providing a method for iteratively combining word embeddings and learning practical composition functions (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Huang, Xu, and Yu 2015; Kim et al. 2016; Melis, Dyer, and
Blunsom 2017). Convolutional networks have also been explored as an alternative, operating over fixed window sizes
and allowing for more computation to be parallelized (Kim
2014; Dauphin et al. 2017; Gehring et al. 2017). Each of
these can be further extended with an attention-based architecture, giving the model more flexibility and allowing it to
dynamically decide which areas of the text should receive
more focus for a given task (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio
2015; Yang et al. 2016).
Most contemporary neural architectures are trained endto-end, expecting the models to discover the necessary funcCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6916

