The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Connecting Language to Images: A Progressive Attention-Guided
Network for Simultaneous Image Captioning and Language Grounding
Lingyun Song,1 Jun Liu,2 Buyue Qian,1 Yihe Chen3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
2
Guang Dong Xi’an Jiaotong University Academy, Shunde, China
3
Department of Statistical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, M5S 3G3, Canada
lingyun.a.song@gmail.com, {liukeen,qianbuyue}@xjtu.edu.cn, yiko.chen@mail.utoronto.ca
Abstract

applicability to vision tasks, such as image annotation (Song
et al. 2016) and visual question answering (Anderson et al.
2018).
To address the above limitations, we propose a
Progressive Attention-Guided Network (PAGNet), which
not only generates descriptive sentences for input images,
but grounds (i.e., aligns) the words of the generated descriptions to image regions.

Image captioning and visual language grounding are two important tasks for image understanding, but are seldom considered together. In this paper, we propose a Progressive
Attention-Guided Network (PAGNet), which simultaneously
generates image captions and predicts bounding boxes for
caption words. PAGNet mainly has two distinctive properties:
i) It can progressively refine the predictive results of image
captioning, by updating the attention map with the predicted
bounding boxes. ii) It learns bounding boxes of the words using a weakly supervised strategy, which combines the frameworks of Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) and Markov Decision Process (MDP). By using the attention map generated
in the captioning process, PAGNet significantly reduces the
search space of the MDP. We conduct experiments on benchmark datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of PAGNet and
results show that PAGNet achieves the best performance.

1

1.1

Contributions

The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows: 1) We combines the tasks of image captioning and
language grounding by a PAGNet, which has two appealing properties: i) PAGNet predicts caption sentences for images in a progressive manner. Specifically, the attention over
the image can be progressively updated using the grounding
results (i.e., bounding boxes) of the words, which enables
PAGNet to refine the predictive captions. ii) By combining the frameworks of MDP and MIL, PAGNet can predict
bounding boxes for caption words via only image-level annotations, without the requirement of region proposal algorithms to hypothesize target locations. 2)We conduct extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets to evaluate
the performance of PAGNet and results show that PAGNet
achieves state-of-the-art performance on all the datasets.

Introduction

Deep neural networks have great advances on the tasks of
image understanding, such as object detection and image
captioning. Object detection aims to recognize and localize the objects that occur in images, which overlooks the
relationships among objects in natural language and thus is
far from the end of image understanding. Image captioning
aims to compress salient visual information into descriptive
language and the state-of-the-art performance is achieved
by neural image captioning models (Anderson et al. 2018),
which usually adopt the encoder-decoder framework (Cho
et al. 2014) consisting of two components: a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) for image feature extraction and a
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) for caption generation.
Considering the fact that each caption word is always
related to partial image contents, neural image captioning
models usually incorporate attention mechanisms to allow
their models to attend to different parts of the input image.
However, in these models the attended regions for predicting each word may be meaningless and inaccurate (Liu et
al. 2017), which impedes their performance. Besides, these
models cannot predict accurate locations (i.e., the bounding
box) for the words of the generated captions, which is inconsistent with the ability of human vision and limits their

2
2.1

Related work

Image captioning

Many approaches (Anderson et al. 2018; Yao et al. 2017;
Chen et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2015) based on RNN have
been proposed for image captioning. Inspired by the human vision system that selectively processes salient features with attention, some approaches (Xu et al. 2015;
Chen et al. 2016) incorporates different attention mechanisms, which allows their models to focus only on related
image regions for predicting different words. For example, Chen et al.(2016) proposed a spatial and channel-wise
attention-based model, which modulates the sentence generation context in multi-layer feature maps. Anderson et
al.(2018) proposed an attention model for image captioning
which combines bottom-up and top-down attention mechanisms. Lu et al.(2018) proposed an attention framework
called Neural Baby Talk for image captioning, which first

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8885

