The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Designing Preferences, Beliefs,
and Identities for Artificial Intelligence
Vincent Conitzer
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA

Abstract

are generally left to philosophers (e.g., the ship of Theseus:
does an object that has had all its parts replaced remain the
same object?), and the same is true for questions of what
preferences we should have (identifying “the good life”).
The premise of the research vision layed out here is that
as AI is getting broadly deployed in the world, we, as AI researchers, do in fact need to address these types of questions.
In earlier stages of AI research, this was naturally not the
top priority: it was hard enough to get AI systems to behave
effectively even if their identities, beliefs, and preferences
were clearly specified. Techniques were (and of course continue to be) tested in abstract domains. For well-specified
games such as chess, Go, or poker, the identities, beliefs, and
preferences of the agents are in principle clear from the definition of the game. In contrast, when systems are deployed in
messy, ambiguous, real-world environments, the pursuit of
what may at first appear to be natural objective functions can
easily lead us astray. In deployed machine learning systems,
maximizing the fraction of instances classified correctly may
result in systems that discriminate against certain subgroups
of the population. In social media, showing posts to maximize the amount of positive feedback may result in a more
polarized society. In both cases, the solution to the problem
may not be as simple as a straightforward modification of
the objective function; it may also require fundamentally rethinking the modeling of the situation, including on whose
behalf different parts of the AI system are supposed to act.
As can be seen even from these two examples (which certainly do not constitute an exhaustive list), the precise issues
that need to be addressed differ from domain to domain.
This suggests that there is much valuable domain-specific
research to be done on these topics. However, it is also worth
taking a step back and attempting to identify general principles. Generally speaking, are we thinking in the right way
about how to specify preferences (or objectives) for a system, about defining the boundaries of agents (e.g., should
the system be split up into multiple agents that represent
different people or other real-world stakeholders or objectives), and even about how exactly these agents form beliefs? These themes are appearing in various conversations
among researchers with an interest in AI. At one extreme,
there is a community of people that worry about how to
specify goals for hypothetical superintelligent AI (artificial
general intelligence that broadly exceeds human capabili-

Research in artificial intelligence, as well as in economics
and other related fields, generally proceeds from the premise
that each agent has a well-defined identity, well-defined preferences over outcomes, and well-defined beliefs about the
world. However, as we design AI systems, we in fact need to
specify where the boundaries between one agent and another
in the system lie, what objective functions these agents aim
to maximize, and to some extent even what belief formation
processes they use.
The premise of this paper is that as AI is being broadly deployed in the world, we need well-founded theories of, and
methodologies and algorithms for, how to design preferences,
identities, and beliefs. This paper lays out an approach to address these problems from a rigorous foundation in decision
theory, game theory, social choice theory, and the algorithmic
and computational aspects of these fields.

Problem Overview
Agents are generally assumed to have a well-defined identity over time, well-defined beliefs about the world as it is
and how it will develop over time, and well-defined preferences over the different ways in which things may proceed.
Perhaps the main exception is that in machine learning, in
fact, we do develop techniques for obtaining beliefs about
the world and how it develops, but this is not always integrated into the more decision- and game-theoretic work on
AI.1 But the agent’s preferences (or the objective it pursues)
are usually taken to be given exogenously. Economic theory,
and the AI literature that is based on the same ideas, proceeds from the maxim de gustibus non est disputandum—
there is (to be) no arguing about taste. Similarly, the agent’s
identity is usually taken to be clear; occasionally, in economics, there is some discussion of whether, for example,
we can reasonably consider a household to be a single agent
or we need to split it up into its individual members, but in
the end most of the analysis focuses on other aspects. Fundamental questions of how we should think about identity
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
There are, of course, clear exceptions, including some of the
work on learning in games; for an overview, see Fudenberg and
Levine (1998) or the 2007 issue of the journal Artificial Intelligence
on multiagent learning.

9755

