The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Weakly Supervised Scene Parsing with Point-Based Distance Metric Learning
Rui Qian,1,3 Yunchao Wei,1∗ Honghui Shi,2,1 Jiachen Li,1 Jiaying Liu,3 Thomas Huang1
1

IFP Group, Beckman Institute, UIUC, 2 IBM Research, 3 Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
{qianrui,liujiaying}@pku.edu.cn, honghui.shi@ibm.com, {yunchao,jiachenl,t-huang1}@illinois.edu

Abstract

annotated data would be magnified as dozens of new circumstances i.e. autonomous driving in the wild, drone navigation coming into horizon. It is both time consuming and
expensive to carefully annotate a brand new dataset for each
specific application.
Attempts have been made to alleviate the annotation burden by introducing multiple weakly supervised formats i.e.
image-level supervision (Pathak et al. 2014), box supervision (Dai, He, and Sun 2015) and scribble supervision (Lin
et al. 2016). In the mean time, as suggested in (Bearman
et al. 2016), to annotate a single pixel for each instance is
a natural scheme for human reference and the cost could
be greatly alleviated. Furthermore, Bearman’s work tackles
the easier semantic segmentation and focuses more on analyzing the effectiveness of the point-based scheme itself by
analyzing the annotation quality and taking the interaction
with annotators as an important factor in the loss function.
We believe that the potential of point-based supervision has
not been well explored and also, the more challenging task
of point-based scene parsing has remained untouched.
Thus, this paper serves as an initial attempt to explore the
possibility of point-guided weakly supervised scene parsing. Being given only one semantic annotated point per
instance, we propose a novel point-based distance metric
learning method (PDML) to tackle this challenging task.
PDML leverages semantic relationship among the annotated points by encouraging the feature representations of
the intra- and inter-category points to keep consistent. Points
within the same category are optimized to share more similar feature representations and oppositely, features of points
from different categories are optimized to be more distinct.
We implement this optimizing procedure by utilizing a distance metric loss, which collaborates with the point-wise
cross-entropy loss to optimize the whole deep neural network. More important, different from current weakly supervised methods whose solutions are constrained in a single
image, we conduct distance metric learning across different
training images, so that the limited human annotated points
can be fully exploited. Extensive experiments are performed
on two challenging scene parsing benchmarks: PASCALContext and ADE 20K. We achieve the mIoU score of 30.0%
on PASCAL-Context, which is impressive compared to the
result of 39.6% from fully supervised scheme by using only
7.2 × 10−5 the number of annotated pixels. And we achieve

Semantic scene parsing is suffering from the fact that pixellevel annotations are hard to be collected. To tackle this issue,
we propose a Point-based Distance Metric Learning (PDML)
in this paper. PDML does not require dense annotated masks
and only leverages several labeled points that are much easier
to obtain to guide the training process. Concretely, we leverage semantic relationship among the annotated points by encouraging the feature representations of the intra- and intercategory points to keep consistent, i.e. points within the same
category should have more similar feature representations
compared to those from different categories. We formulate
such a characteristic into a simple distance metric loss, which
collaborates with the point-wise cross-entropy loss to optimize the deep neural networks. Furthermore, to fully exploit
the limited annotations, distance metric learning is conducted
across different training images instead of simply adopting an
image-dependent manner. We conduct extensive experiments
on two challenging scene parsing benchmarks of PASCALContext and ADE 20K to validate the effectiveness of our
PDML, and competitive mIoU scores are achieved.

Introduction
Scene parsing is of critical importance in mid- and highlevel vision. Various machine vision applications lie on the
basis of detailed and accurate scene analysis and segmentation i.e. outdoor driving system (Ess et al. 2009), image
retrieval (Wan et al. 2014) and editing (Tsai et al. 2016).
To achieve the goal of successfully recognizing objects in
common scenes, datasets with careful and comprehensive labeling such as the PASCAL-Context (Mottaghi et al. 2014)
and ADE 20K (Zhou et al. 2017) are putting forward to the
community at great expense. Compared with image semantic segmentation where many semantic regions are coarsely
divided into a unified background class, pixel-wise annotations for scene parsing datasets require much more efforts
as more fine-grained regions (e.g. wall and ground) need to
be specified manually. Though current state-of-the-art methods such as PSPNet (Zhao et al. 2017) and Deeplab (Chen
et al. 2018) have already obtained impressive performance
on these datasets, the limitations of relying on densely∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8843

