The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DeepDPM: Dynamic Population Mapping via Deep Neural Network
Zefang Zong,∗ Jie Feng,∗ Kechun Liu, Hongzhi Shi, Yong Li†
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{zzf15,feng-j16,lkc15,shz17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Some previous studies utilized external information like
remote-sensing data to generate HRPD (Wu, Qiu, and Wang
2005; Gaughan et al. 2013; Stevens et al. 2015). As the stateof-the-art for these works, R. Stevens. et.al. (Stevens et al.
2015) used random forest algorithm via lots of data sources.
However, these works heavily rely on many ancillary data
sets that are expensive to obtain, difficult to process, and
limited to certain time slots.
Other studies developed interpolation algorithms for
super-resolution images, which provided powerful tools to
convert low-resolution data into high-resolution data, independent of other ancillary data (Nasrollahi and Moeslund
2014; Yang, Ma, and Yang 2014; Vandal et al. 2017). One
of the state-of-the-art method is SRCNN (Dong et al. 2016),
which first utilized convolutional neural network as the interpolate function to model complex spatial relations in image.
However, the amplification of this model is limited to 2 ∼ 4,
which is too small for our population application. Additionally, the HRPD is not only related to the coarse population
distribution but also the structure of the urban, which can not
be considered directly by these existing methods.
Several challenges exist in dynamic population mapping.
First, it is not easy to define a simple math function to describe the complex spatial relations. Second, the HRPD is influenced by other external knowledge like urban structures.
Third, generating temporal trends from scratch is difficult.
In this paper, we propose DeepDPM, a deep learning
based model that consists of augmented stacked superresolution convolution neural network(SRCNN) as the static
part, and time-embedded LSTM as the dynamic part, to evaluate population mapping in both spatial and temporal dimensions. Our static part predicts HRPD at different time
slots, while the static output is further used by the dynamic
part to generate temporal trends. PoI(Point of Interest) is
also considered as an ancillary data which is easy to obtain. Our experiments showed that DeepDPM outperforms
other traditional methods, and generates high-resolution results for urban population structures.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

Dynamic high resolution data on human population distribution is of great importance for a wide spectrum of activities
and real-life applications, but is too difficult and expensive to
obtain directly. Therefore, generating fine-scaled population
distributions from coarse population data is of great significance. However, there are three major challenges: 1) the complexity in spatial relations between high and low resolution
population; 2) the dependence of population distributions on
other external information; 3) the difficulty in retrieving temporal distribution patterns. In this paper, we first propose the
idea to generate dynamic population distributions in full-time
series, then we design dynamic population mapping via deep
neural network(DeepDPM), a model that describes both spatial and temporal patterns using coarse data and point of interest information. In DeepDPM, we utilize super-resolution
convolutional neural network(SRCNN) based model to directly map coarse data into higher resolution data, and a timeembedded long short-term memory model to effectively capture the periodicity nature to smooth the finer-scaled results
from the previous static SRCNN model. We perform extensive experiments on a real-life mobile dataset collected from
Shanghai. Our results demonstrate that DeepDPM outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods and a suite of frequent data-mining approaches. Moreover, DeepDPM breaks
through the limitation from previous works in time dimension so that dynamic predictions in all-day time slots can be
obtained.

Introduction
Obtaining high-resolution population distribution(HRPD) is
of great importance for urban applications of business locating, transportation planning, city service managing, etc.
However, the HRPD is only available to some specific companies like the internet service providers. The general businesses have to pay a lot for it or rely on some coarse
and static population data to make decisions. Meanwhile,
the real-time collection of HRPD data is also computingconsuming and generates unnecessary burdens to computing
systems. Thus, more efficient methods are highly required in
obtaining HRPD data.

• We present the idea to generate, in a scalable manner,
dynamic population distributions in full time series from
static disaggregate data sets into finer scales. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first time to analyze both spatial and temporal patterns in an urban population mapping

∗

Equal contribution.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1294

