The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Tile2Vec: Unsupervised Representation Learning for Spatially Distributed Data
Neal Jean,1,2 Sherrie Wang,3,4 Anshul Samar,1 George Azzari,4 David Lobell,4 Stefano Ermon1
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
3
Institute of Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
4
Department of Earth System Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
{nealjean, sherwang, asamar, gazzari, dlobell}@stanford.edu, ermon@cs.stanford.edu
2

Abstract

perficially resembling natural images, have unique characteristics that require new methodologies. Unlike natural images — object-centric, two-dimensional depictions of threedimensional scenes — remote sensing images are taken
from a bird’s eye perspective, and they are also often multispectral. These differences present both challenges and opportunities. On one hand, models pre-trained on ImageNet
do not transfer well and cannot take advantage of additional
spectral bands (Xie et al. 2016). On the other, there are fewer
occlusions, permutations of object placement, and changes
of scale to contend with — this spatial coherence provides a
powerful signal for learning representations.
Our main assumption is that image tiles that are geographic neighbors (i.e., close spatially) should have similar
semantics and therefore representations, while tiles far apart
are likely to have dissimilar semantics and should therefore
have dissimilar representations. This is akin to the distributional hypothesis used to construct word vector representations in natural language: words that appear in similar contexts should have similar meanings. The main computational
(and statistical) challenge is that image patches are themselves complex, high-dimensional vectors, unlike words.
In this paper, we propose Tile2Vec, a method for learning compressed yet informative representations from unlabeled remote sensing data. We evaluate our algorithm on a
wide range of remote sensing datasets and find that it generalizes across data modalities, with stable training and robustness to hyperparameter choices. On a difficult land use
classification task, our learned representations outperform
other unsupervised features and even exceed the performance of supervised models trained on large labeled training sets. Tile2Vec learns a meaningful embedding space,
demonstrated through visual query by example, latent space
interpolation, and visual analogy experiments. Finally, we
apply Tile2Vec to the non-image task of predicting country health indices from economic data, suggesting that realworld applications of Tile2Vec may extend to domains beyond remote sensing.

Geospatial analysis lacks methods like the word vector representations and pre-trained networks that significantly boost
performance across a wide range of natural language and
computer vision tasks. To fill this gap, we introduce Tile2Vec,
an unsupervised representation learning algorithm that extends the distributional hypothesis from natural language —
words appearing in similar contexts tend to have similar
meanings — to spatially distributed data. We demonstrate
empirically that Tile2Vec learns semantically meaningful
representations for both image and non-image datasets. Our
learned representations significantly improve performance in
downstream classification tasks and, similarly to word vectors, allow visual analogies to be obtained via simple arithmetic in the latent space.

1

Introduction

Remote sensing, the measurement of the Earth’s surface
through aircraft- or satellite-based sensors, is becoming increasingly important to many applications, including land
use monitoring, precision agriculture, and military intelligence (Foody 2003; Mulla 2013; Oshri et al. 2018). Combined with recent advances in deep learning and computer
vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al.
2016), there is enormous potential for monitoring global issues through the automated analysis of remote sensing and
other geospatial data streams. However, recent successes in
machine learning have largely relied on supervised learning techniques and the availability of very large annotated
datasets. Remote sensing provides a huge supply of data,
but many downstream tasks of interest are constrained by a
lack of labels.
The research community has developed a number of techniques to mitigate the need for labeled data. Often, the key
underlying idea is to find a low-dimensional representation of the data that is more suitable for downstream machine learning tasks. In many NLP applications, pre-trained
word vectors have led to dramatic performance improvements. In computer vision, pre-training on ImageNet is a de
facto standard that drastically reduces the amount of training data needed for new tasks. Existing techniques, however, are not suitable for remote sensing data that, while su-

2

Tile2Vec

For clarity, in this section we focus on the application of
Tile2Vec to remotely sensed image datasets. The extension
to non-image spatial data is straightforward, and we revisit
this setting in Section 4.4.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3967

