The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

WAIS: Word Attention for Joint Intent Detection and Slot Filling
Sixuan Chen,1 * Shuai Yu 2 *
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
E-mail: schenbd@connect.ust.hk, Tel: +852 95175593

Abstract

The contribution of this work is threefold: (1) We propose
a word attention technique to utilize word level information
for joint training the two tasks. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to introduce the word level information for
the two tasks. (2) Further, we propose a fusion gate that integrates the context vectors from word level information and
semantic level information. (3) The conducted experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach that
sets the state-of-the-art.

Attention-based recurrent neural network models for joint intent detection and slot filling have achieved a state-of-the-art
performance. Most previous works exploited semantic level
information to calculate the attention weights. However, few
works have taken the importance of word level information
into consideration. In this paper, we propose WAIS, word attention for joint intent detection and slot filling. Considering
that intent detection and slot filling have a strong relationship, we further propose a fusion gate that integrates the word
level information and semantic level information together for
jointly training the two tasks. Extensive experiments show
that the proposed model has robust superiority over its competitors and sets the state-of-the-art.

Methodology
The bidirectional long short-term memory (BLSTM) model
takes a word sequence x = (x1 , ..., xT ) as input, and then
→
−
generates the forward hidden state hi and the backward hid←
−
den state hi . The final hidden state hi at time step i is a
→
−
←
−
→ ←
−
−
concatenation of hi and hi , i.e. hi = [ hi , hi ].
Slot Filling. For slot filling, x is mapped to its corresponding slot label y = (y1s , ..., yTs ). For each hidden state
hi , we compute the slot context vector csi as the weighted
sum of the hidden states by the learned attention weights:

Introduction
Spoken language understanding (SLU) is a critical component in spoken dialogue systems. SLU aims to form a semantic frame that captures the semantics of user utterances
or queries. It typically involves two tasks: intent detection
and slot filling (Tur and De Mori 2011). These two tasks focus on predicting speaker’s intent and extracting semantic
concepts as constraints for natural language.
Considering that pipelined approaches usually suffer from
error propagation due to their independent models, the joint
model has been proposed to improve sentence-level semantics via mutual enhancement between two tasks (Guo et al.
2014; Hakkani-Tür et al. 2016). In addition, the attention
mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) was introduced and leveraged into the model in order to provide a precise focus, which allows the network to learn where to pay
attention to in the input sequence for each output label (Liu
and Lane 2015; 2016). The attentional model proposed by
Liu and Lane (Liu and Lane 2016) achieved the state-of-theart performance. However, the prior works ignored the importance of word level information, instead, only semantic
information was exploited to calculate the attention weights
for the two tasks. Inspired by the success (Wu et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2018) on NLP tasks, we introduce word-level
attention for this task.

csi =

T
X

s
αi,j
hj

(1)

j=1

where the slot attention can be calculated as below:
exp(ei,j )
s
αi,j
= PT
k=1 exp(ei,k )

(2)

ei,k = σ(Whs hk )

(3)

where σ is activation function and Whs is the weight matrix
of a feed-forward neural network. Then the hidden state and
the slot context vector are utilized for slot filling:
s
yis = Sof tmax(Why
(hi + csi ))

(4)

s
where Why
is the weight matrix and yis is the slot label of

the i-th word in the input.
Intent Detection. For intent detection, the intent context
vector cI can also be computed in the same manner as csi ,
but the intent detection part only takes the last hidden of
BLSTM hT . The intent prediction can be modeled as below:

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2
Shuai Yu is the corresponding author. * denotes that the two
authors contributed equally.

I
y I = Sof tmax(Why
(hT + cI ))

9927

(5)

