The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Model Learning for Look-Ahead Exploration in Continuous Control
Arpit Agarwal, Katharina Muelling, Katerina Fragkiadaki
Carnegie Mellon University
United States
{arpita1,katharam}@andrew.cmu.edu, katef@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

with obtaining the optimal sequence of options to accomplish the task. The performance of the policy therefore critically depends on the set of options available to the agent. If
the option set is poorly chosen, the resulting composed policies will be suboptimal (Dietterich 1999). Many researchers
have tried to find a “golden” set of options (Chentanez,
Barto, and Singh 2005) to compose hierarchical policies
from (Dietterich 1999). However, with a growing number of
options the efficiency of learning will suffer. This leads to a
trade-off between flexibility and learning speed: the fewer
options, the faster the learning, the less optimal the resulting
composed policy. In light of the above, this paper proposes
temporally abstracted look-ahead search for exploration, yet
fine-grained action composition for policy representations in
the manipulation domain. In other words, a small set of generalized basic manipulation policies, which we call skills or
options, are learnt and their coarse transition functions are
used to unroll forward a tree search during the exploration
loop. Yet, policy search still operates over low-level primitive actions, and thus the resulting policies are not limited
to coarse skill compositions, as previous hierarchical reinforcement learning formulations (Sutton, Precup, and Singh
1999). This design choice accelerates learning while at the
same time permits flexibility in option (skill) selection: as
long as the set of skills and the states they visit sufficiently
covers the state space necessary for complex manipulation,
skills can be redundant, overlapping, or varying in duration,
without loss in performance of the final policy.
In a nutshell, our framework works as follows. We train a
set of simple manipulation skills, such as grasp, transfer, and
reach. Each of these skills represents a (generalized) policy
that can handle a set of related goals and is parametrized by
both the current state and the desired goal (see Figure 1).
Each skill may involve a different number of objects, thus
different skills may have different state representations. For
each skill we learn a coarse-grain transition function, that,
given a pair of initial and goal states, it predicts the resulting
state, after execution of the skill.
During training of a new manipulation task represented
by a goal configuration, we perform look-ahead tree search
using the coarse-grain learned skill dynamics: at each time
step of an episode, we unfold a search tree by sampling skillgoal combinations and using the learned neural skill dynamics to predict resulting states (Figure 1). We choose the tree

We propose an exploration method that incorporates lookahead search over basic learnt skills and their dynamics, and
use it for reinforcement learning (RL) of manipulation policies . Our skills are multi-goal policies learned in isolation in
simpler environments using existing multigoal RL formulations, analogous to options or macroactions. Coarse skill dynamics, i.e., the state transition caused by a (complete) skill
execution, are learnt and are unrolled forward during lookahead search. Policy search benefits from temporal abstraction during exploration, though itself operates over low-level
primitive actions, and thus the resulting policies does not suffer from suboptimality and inflexibility caused by coarse skill
chaining. We show that the proposed exploration strategy
results in effective learning of complex manipulation policies faster than current state-of-the-art RL methods, and converges to better policies than methods that use options or
parametrized skills as building blocks of the policy itself, as
opposed to guiding exploration. We show that the proposed
exploration strategy results in effective learning of complex
manipulation policies faster than current state-of-the-art RL
methods, and converges to better policies than methods that
use options or parameterized skills as building blocks of the
policy itself, as opposed to guiding exploration.

Introduction
In animals, skill composition greatly increases the efficiency to solve new problems (White 1959). The skills act
as the “building blocks” out of which an agent can form
solutions to new problem configurations as well as entirely new problems (Chentanez, Barto, and Singh 2005).
Instead of creating a solution from low-level motor commands for each new challenge, skill composition enables
the agent to focus on combining and adjusting higher-level
skills to achieve the goal. This principle of hierarchical skill
composition has been applied by researchers in Reinforcement Learning (RL) in the hope to achieve a similar efficiency for artificial agents (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999;
Kulkarni et al. 2015). In this context, skills are often referred
to as options or macro-actions (Sutton, Precup, and Singh
1999). Options realize the idea of temporally extended actions that can independently accomplish a sub-goal for a defined set of scenarios. The higher-level policy is then tasked
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3151

