The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Human-Like Sketch Object Recognition
v ia Analogical Learning
Kezhen Chen, Irina Rabkina, Matthew D. McLure, Kenneth D. Forbus
Northwestern University
{KezhenChen2021 | irabkina | mclure}@u.northwestern.edu | forbus@northwestern.edu

Abstract

year-old children, however, require fewer than 150 examples to learn to identify a novel symbol (Gibson, 1963).
Adults require even fewer examples. Clearly, human learning is far more data-efficient than learning by deep neural
networks.
Human learning is also more stable. Neural networks are
easily fooled: not only do state of the art neural networks
classify white noise as, for example, a robin with extremely high confidence (Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune, 2015),
but slight perturbations to correctly classified images—
called adversarial examples—can cause a neural network
to no longer classify the image correctly (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy, 2015; Carlini and
Wagner, 2017). These perturbations are small enough that
a human cannot detect them, let alone be fooled by them.
Furthermore, convolutional neural networks do not
model human spatial cognition. When classifying images,
they learn discriminative patterns that are driven by lowlevel relationships between nearby pixels. On the other
hand, vision psychologists have ample evidence for structured, relational models in human vision (Marr, 1982;
Palmer, 1999). Perhaps computational approaches that are
based on structured, relational information can demonstrate
human-like learning, in terms of both number of examples
and stability, within and across datasets.
Indeed, it has been demonstrated that such models can
match human learning on tasks that involve higher order
cognition. For example, Kandaswamy, Forbus, and
Gentner (2014) showed that the Structure Mapping Engine
(SME) can match the learning performance of 4-year-olds
on a higher-order pattern matching task. Similarly, Lovett
and Forbus (2013) showed that CogSketch (Forbus et al.,
2011), a model of human visual perception that relies on
relational structure, can solve mental rotation and paper
folding tasks using SME. Furthermore, these representations and analogical comparison have been used to model
human performance on several visual problem-solving
tasks, including Ravens’ Progressive Matrices (Lovett &

Deep learning systems can perform well on some image
recognition tasks. However, they have serious limitations,
including requiring far more training data than humans do
and being fooled by adversarial examples. By contrast, analogical learning over relational representations tends to be
far more data-efficient, requiring only human-like amounts
of training data. This paper introduces an approach that
combines automatically constructed qualitative visual representations with analogical learning to tackle a hard computer vision problem, object recognition from sketches. Results
from the MNIST dataset and a novel dataset, the Coloring
Book Objects dataset, are provided. Comparison to existing
approaches indicates that analogical generalization can be
used to identify sketched objects from these datasets with
several orders of magnitude fewer examples than deep
learning systems require.

Introduction
Deep learning approaches have, in recent years, become
very popular within artificial intelligence. This excitement
is reasonable given that such systems often do provide impressive results given enough training data. On the MNIST
handwritten digit recognition task (LeCun et al., 1998), for
example, several convolutional neural network techniques
have achieved error rates below 0.3% (e.g. Ciresan et al.,
2011; Ciresan et al., 2012).
This result is remarkably close to the estimated human
error rate of 0.2% on this dataset (LeCun et al., 1998) and
even better than the human classification accuracies from
two experimental trials 96.8% and 97.8% (Harding et al.,
2018). However, the approach itself is not at all humanlike. The network with the lowest error rate (Ciresan et al.,
2012), for example, was trained on 6 slightly deformed
versions of the MNIST dataset and validated using the
original—a total of 420,000 training examples. Eleven-

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1336

