The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

f -Similarity Preservation Loss for Soft Labels:
A Demonstration on Cross-Corpus Speech Emotion Recognition
Yuqing Kong∗

Biqiao Zhang∗
University of Michigan
2260 Hayward St
Ann Arbor, MI, USA 48109
didizbq@umich.edu

Georg Essl

f -Similarity Preservation Loss (f -SPL), based on the dual
form of f -divergence. f -SPL is designed for DML with soft
labels, here defined as real-valued labels that are distributed
along one or multiple dimensions. f -SPL aims to preserve
the label similarities in the learned feature space and can
be applied to tasks that require either continuous or discrete
(e.g., a class index) test output. Further, we introduce a pair
sampling method for the efficient implementation of f -SPL
in neural networks.
We evaluate our methods on cross-corpus speech emotion
recognition (SER). SER aims to automatically identify human emotions from speech. SER is complicated by the comodulations that are present in the speech signals (e.g., lexical information and speaker identity). Networks may be unintentionally over-trained to capture signals that are specific
to certain speakers or lexical artifacts in the data, resulting
in poor generalizability and poor robustness in cross-corpus
tasks. DML can be used to generate an embedding space in
which distances between examples correspond to the label
relationships. This provides a mechanism to reduce the influence of factors other than emotion. However, conventional
DML based on hard labels may not be ideal for SER. The labels used in SER systems are usually collected through perceptual experiments. The variability in emotion expression
and the subjectivity of emotion perception lead to datasets
with uncertain labels. Previous work in SER has demonstrated the efficacy of using soft labels given uncertainty
(Steidl et al. 2005; Mower, Mataric, and Narayanan 2011;
Fayek, Lech, and Cavedon 2016).
We form the problem as binary classification of softlabeled valence (positive vs. negative) and activation (calm
vs. excited) (Russell 1980). We combine the proposed loss
with classification loss in the training of DNN classifiers.
Our baseline is the same classifier trained with classification
loss only. The results show that our multi-task framework
with the added f -SPL statistically significantly increases
system performance in the majority of the experiments and
is more robust to over-training than the baseline system.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Deep Metric Learning (DML) approach that supports soft labels. DML seeks to learn representations that encode the similarity between examples through
deep neural networks. DML generally presupposes that data
can be divided into discrete classes using hard labels. However, some tasks, such as our exemplary domain of speech
emotion recognition (SER), work with inherently subjective
data, data for which it may not be possible to identify a single hard label. We propose a family of loss functions, f Similarity Preservation Loss (f -SPL), based on the dual form
of f -divergence for DML with soft labels. We show that the
minimizer of f -SPL preserves the pairwise label similarities
in the learned feature embeddings. We demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed loss function on the task of cross-corpus
SER with soft labels. Our approach, which combines f -SPL
and classification loss, significantly outperforms a baseline
SER system with the same structure but trained with only
classification loss in most experiments. We show that the presented techniques are more robust to over-training and can
learn an embedding space in which the similarity between
examples is meaningful.

1

Emily Mower Provost

University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee University of Michigan
Peking University
2260 Hayward St
2442 E Hartford Ave
5 Yiheyuan Road
Ann Arbor, MI, USA 48109
Milwaukee, WI, USA 53211
Beijing, China 100871
emilykmp@umich.edu
essl@uwm.edu
yuqing.kong@pku.edu.cn

Introduction

Deep metric learning (DML) aims to use deep neural networks (DNN) to project input data to a learned space, in
which the similarity between examples can be directly measured (Lu, Hu, and Zhou 2017). DML has been successfully
applied to many visual understanding tasks, such as face verification, image classification, and person re-identification
(Taigman et al. 2014; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin
2015; Hoffer and Ailon 2015; Yi et al. 2014). These tasks
often rely on hard class labels to determine the pairwise relationship between data. Yet, soft labels may be preferable
to hard labels in some cases: they provide more information
for each training example (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015)
and are more robust against label noise (Thiel 2008).
However, the additional information contained in soft labels is not fully exploited in traditional DML approaches.
Motivated by this, we propose a family of loss functions, the

2

∗

Biqiao Zhang and Yuqing Kong contributed equally to this
work.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2.1

Related Works

Deep Metric Learning

Deep metric learning approaches predominantly focus on
hard labels (Lu, Hu, and Zhou 2017). These approaches of5725

