The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Localize Objects with Noisy Labeled Instances
Xiaopeng Zhang,1 Yang Yang,2 Jiashi Feng1
2

1
National University of Singapore
Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{elezxi,elefjia}@nus.edu.sg, dlyyang@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper addresses Weakly Supervised Object Localization
(WSOL) with only image-level supervision. We model the
missing object locations as latent variables, and contribute a
novel self-directed optimization strategy to infer them. With
the strategy, our developed Self-Directed Localization Network (SD-LocNet) is able to localize object instance whose
initial location is noisy. The self-directed inference hinges on
an adaptive sampling method to identify reliable object instance via measuring its localization stability score. In this
way, the resulted model is robust to noisy initialized object
locations which we find is important in WSOL. Furthermore,
we introduce a reliability induced prior propagation strategy
to transfer object priors of the reliable instances to those unreliable ones by promoting their feature similarity, which effectively refines the unreliable object instances for better localization. The proposed SD-LocNet achieves 70.9% CorLoc and 51.3% mAP on PASCAL VOC 2007, surpassing the
state-of-the-arts by a large margin.

1

(a)

Self-Directed
Localization

(b)

Figure 1: Given a collection of noisy labeled instances, our
goal is to automatically discover those well localized instances (a) and propagate such priors to those noisy labeled
instances (b) for better localization.
difficulties caused by noisy initialized latent variables. Intuitively, different images present different levels of difficulty
in object localization due to the variational viewpoints, occlusions and backgrounds. The model is able to successfully
localize objects in some easy images, even it is trained from
noisy labeled instances. The localizations on these easy images provide valuable information and can be exploited as
priors that are easily obtained. Therefore we propose to use
such prior knowledge to assist latent variable inference on
difficult images. Motivated by such progressive inference
strategy, we develop a Self-Directed Localization Network
(SD-LocNet), which is able to automatically figure out the
easy images during network training and harness the corresponding localizations for latent variable update. Since the
latent variables are updated automatically from the easy images to those difficult ones, we refer this process as self
directed localization. As illustrated in Fig. 1, SD-LocNet
makes use of the localizations from easy images as object
priors to direct the discovery of the corresponding category
in difficult images, thus improves the localization performance on the whole image set.
Our proposed SD-LocNet consists of two core modules.
The first one is the adaptive sampling module, which targets at mining reliable object instances1 , taken as reliable
latent variables, for network training. We propose an effective criterion, named Localization Stability Score (LSS), to
measure the reliability of a candidate positive sample being

Introduction

Weakly Supervised Object Localization (WSOL) refers to
localizing objects with only image-level labels that indicate
presence of an object, and has been extensively studied (Cinbis, Verbeek, and Schmid 2014), (Song et al. 2014b), (Wang
et al. 2014). However, WSOL still remains challenging due
to the gap between classification and localization. Successful classification may only need to grasp some discriminative details of an object (e.g., the face of a human instance),
while localization is more demanding and requires to predict accurate spatial extent of the whole object. To mitigate
this gap, current approaches (Jie et al. 2017), (Li et al. 2016),
(Tang et al. 2017) usually model the missing object locations
as latent variables, and alternate between updating the latent variables and learning a classifier based on current latent
variables. Nevertheless, learning the parameters of a model
with latent variables often requires solving a non-convex optimization problem, and is prone to get stuck in local minima
if the latent variables were not properly initialized.
In this work, we take the object location as latent variable (whose initial value can be estimated from off-the-shelf
WSOL models) and consider how to address the learning

1

If an object is easy to localize, we term the object as the reliable instance and the corresponding image as the easy image. Otherwise, they are defined as unreliable instance and difficult image.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9219

