The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Sensitivity Analysis of Deep Neural Networks
Hai Shu

Hongtu Zhu

Department of Biostatistics
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas, USA

AI Labs, Didi Chuxing
Beijing, China
zhuhongtu@didiglobal.com

Abstract

network trainable parameters on DNNs. To the best of our
knowledge, (Cheney, Schrimpf, and Kreiman 2017) is the
first paper to examine the robustness of AlexNet (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) by tracking the classification
performance over several chosen standard deviations of Gaussian perturbations to network weights.
The aim of this paper is to develop a novel perturbation
manifold and its associated influence measure to evalute
the effects of various perturbations to input samples and/or
network trainable parameters. Our influence measure is a
novel extension of the local influence measures proposed in
(Zhu et al. 2007; Zhu, Ibrahim, and Tang 2011) to classification problems by using information geometry (Amari 1985;
Amari and Nagaoka 2000). Compared with the existing methods (Akhtar and Mian 2018), we make the following two
major methodological contributions.
Our influence measure is motivated by information geometry, and its calculation is computationally straightforward and
does not require optimizing any objective function. When the
dimension of the perturbation vector is larger than the number of classes, the perturbation manifold in (Zhu et al. 2007;
Zhu, Ibrahim, and Tang 2011) has a singular metric tensor
and thus fails to form a Riemannian manifold. We address
this singularity issue by introducing a low-dimensional transform and show that our influence measure still provides the
invariance under diffeomorphisms of the original perturbation. Such an invariance property is critical for assessing the
simultaneous effects or comparing the individual impacts
of different external and/or internal perturbations within or
between DNNs without concerning their difference in scales,
such as the comparison between perturbations to trainable
parameters in a convolution layer and those in a batch normalization layer within a single DNN. In contrast, existing
measures, such as the Jacobian norm (Novak et al. 2018) and
Cook’s local influence measure (Cook 1986), do not have
this invariance property, leading to some misleading results.
Our proposed influence measure is applicable to various
forms of external and internal perturbations and useful for
four important model building tasks: (i) detecting potential
‘outliers’, (ii) analyzing the sensitivity of model architectures,
(iii) comparing network sensitivity between training and test
sets, and (iv) locating vulnerable areas. For task (i), downweighting outliers may be used to train a DNN with increased
robustness. Task (ii) may serve as a guide to the improvement

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved superior performance in various prediction tasks, but can be very vulnerable
to adversarial examples or perturbations. Therefore, it is crucial to measure the sensitivity of DNNs to various forms of
perturbations in real applications. We introduce a novel perturbation manifold and its associated influence measure to
quantify the effects of various perturbations on DNN classifiers. Such perturbations include various external and internal perturbations to input samples and network parameters.
The proposed measure is motivated by information geometry
and provides desirable invariance properties. We demonstrate
that our influence measure is useful for four model building
tasks: detecting potential ‘outliers’, analyzing the sensitivity of model architectures, comparing network sensitivity between training and test sets, and locating vulnerable areas.
Experiments show reasonably good performance of the proposed measure for the popular DNN models ResNet50 and
DenseNet121 on CIFAR10 and MNIST datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have exhibited impressive
power in image classification and outperformed human detection in the ImageNet challenge (Russakovsky et al. 2015;
He et al. 2015; 2016; Huang et al. 2017). Despite this huge
success, it is well known that state-of-the-art DNNs can be
sensitive to small perturbations (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi,
and Frossard 2016; Carlini and Wagner 2017; Su, Vargas,
and Kouichi 2017). This vulnerability has called into question their usage in safety-critical applications, including selfdriving cars (Bojarski et al. 2016) and face recognition (Sharif
et al. 2017), among many others (Akhtar and Mian 2018).
There is rich literature on quantifying the sensitivity or robustness of DNNs to external perturbations that affect the input
samples; see (Fawzi, Moosavi-Dezfooli, and Frossard 2017;
Akhtar and Mian 2018; Novak et al. 2018). For instance,
one popular robustness measure computes the minimum adversarial distortion for a given sample (Moosavi-Dezfooli,
Fawzi, and Frossard 2016; Hein and Andriushchenko 2017;
Weng et al. 2018). However, very little work has been done
on measuring the effects of various internal perturbations to
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4943

