The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Context System for Optimization Problems
Tiep Le, Tran Cao Son, Enrico Pontelli
Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
{tile, tson, epontell}@cs.nmsu.edu

Abstract

does not provide a means for modeling distributed optimization problems where distributed components (or agents) coordinate with each other to achieve a most preferred (best)
solution. This is because an MCS may have many equilibria
but there is no means to express the preference among them
as well as obtain a most preferred equilibrium.
In a different line of research, within the MAS community, Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems
(DCOPs) (Modi et al. 2005; Petcu and Faltings 2005;
Mailler and Lesser 2004; Gershman, Meisels, and Zivan
2009; Yeoh and Yokoo 2012) have emerged as a prominent agent model to govern the agents’ autonomous behavior in solving distributed optimization problems. A DCOP
is typically specified by a finite set of variables and a finite set of constraints among these variables. Each constraint indicates a utility for each value assignment of the
variables involved in it. Agents in DCOPs need to coordinate value assignments of their variables, in a decentralized and distributed manner, to optimize their objective functions. Researchers have used DCOPs to model various multiagent coordination and resource allocation problems (Maheswaran et al. 2004; Zivan, Glinton, and Sycara 2009;
Zivan, Okamoto, and Peled 2014; Lass et al. 2008; Kumar,
Faltings, and Petcu 2009; Ueda, Iwasaki, and Yokoo 2010;
Léauté and Faltings 2011).
Although both the MCS and DCOP research communities have the similar goal of developing a general framework for modeling multi-agent and distributed systems, it
is interesting to observe that there is little connection between the two communities. Obviously, the two frameworks
cannot be more different: DCOP is homogeneous and MCS
is heterogenous. DCOP emphasizes optimization and MCS
satisfaction. There have been several systems developed for
computing solutions of DCOP whilst only a few experimental systems for computing equilibria of MCSs are available.
Can we develop a framework that exploits the advantages of
both MCS and DCOP?
In this paper, we make the first steps to bridge the two
different research directions, MCS and DCOP, exploiting
their advantages in modeling distributed optimization problems. We introduce a novel, more general form of MCS,
called MCS for Optimization Problems (MCS-OP), where
each bridge rule can be associated to a conditional cost via
the so-called cost-assignment bridge rules. This feature al-

This paper proposes Multi-context System for Optimization Problems (MCS-OP) by introducing conditional costassignment bridge rules to Multi-context Systems (MCS).
This novel feature facilitates the definition of a preorder
among equilibria, based on the total incurred cost of applied bridge rules. As an application of MCS-OP, the paper describes how MCS-OP can be used in modeling Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOP), a prominent class of distributed optimization problems that is frequently employed in multi-agent system (MAS) research.
The paper shows, by means of an example, that MCS-OP is
more expressive than DCOP, and hence, could potentially be
useful in modeling distributed optimization problems which
cannot be easily dealt with using DCOPs. It also contains a
complexity analysis of MCS-OP.

Introduction
The paradigm of Multi-context Systems (MCS) has been
introduced in (McCarthy 1987; Roelofsen and Serafini
2005; Brewka and Eiter 2007) as a framework for integration of knowledge from different sources. Intuitively, an
MCS (Brewka and Eiter 2007) consists of several theories,
referred to as contexts, e.g., representing different reasoning components in distributed settings or different agents
in multi-agent systems (MAS). The contexts may be heterogeneous, in the sense that each context could use a different logical language for its knowledge base (e.g., deductive databases, triple-stores, description logic, logic programming (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1991)) and thus may use
a different inference system. The flow of information between contexts are modeled via bridge rules in a declarative
way, where bridge rules describe how the beliefs of one context depend on the beliefs of other contexts. The semantics
of MCS is defined in terms of equilibria (Brewka and Eiter
2007).
An equilibrium of an MCS can be seen as a state where
each context holds a set of its beliefs, and those sets of beliefs of contexts must together satisfy the conditions specified in the bridge rules. Therefore, MCSs are very suitable
for modeling distributed satisfaction problems. However, it
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2929

