The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning a Key-Value Memory Co-Attention
Matching Network for Person Re-Identification
Yaqing Zhang, Xi Li,∗ Zhongfei Zhang
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{yaqing, xilizju, zhongfei}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

representation as well as its associated matching mechanism.
In this paper, we propose a Key-Value Memory Matching Network (KVM-MN) that comprises the modules of key-value
memory representation and key-value co-attention matching.
Specifically, the key-value memory representation module
is in charge of encoding the spatial feature information in
the form of multi-head key-value memory, where the key
indicates the presence index of a feature component while
the value stands for its detailed feature attribute information.
In this way, a person image is naturally represented as a
set of local-position-aware key-value pairs. Based on these
key-value pairs, the matching problem for a given person
image pair is converted to that of dense cross-matching between the person-specific key-value pairs. In order to make
cross-matching more robust and interpretable, the key-value
co-attention matching module further makes use of multihead co-attention to automatically learn a collection of crossperson-matching patterns. Consequently, the above two modules are jointly learned in a unified end-to-end framework.
For the sake of effective matching network learning, we
build a setwise learning mechanism that supports the joint
learning task with a query image and a set of gallery images. The mechanism is capable of adaptively selecting the
matched gallery image from the set with a certain matching
confidence, resulting in a more flexible learning pipeline
against pairwise or triplet training (Cheng et al. 2016a;
Ahmed, Jones, and Marks 2015).
In summary, the main contributions of this work are threefold. Firstly, we propose a dense local-position-aware keyvalue memory representation, which effectively encodes the
spatial structure information on person images. Secondly, we
present a Key-Value Memory Matching Network that fully
utilizes multi-head co-attention to adaptively discover a set of
inherent cross-person-matching patterns over key-value pairs.
Thirdly, we introduce a setwise learning mechanism that
performs the query-to-gallery-image-set learning procedure
in a more flexible manner.

Person re-identification (Re-ID) is typically cast as the problem of semantic representation and alignment, which requires
precisely discovering and modeling the inherent spatial structure information on person images. Motivated by this observation, we propose a Key-Value Memory Matching Network
(KVM-MN) model that consists of key-value memory representation and key-value co-attention matching. The proposed
KVM-MN model is capable of building an effective localposition-aware person representation that encodes the spatial
feature information in the form of multi-head key-value memory. Furthermore, the proposed KVM-MN model makes use
of multi-head co-attention to automatically learn a number
of cross-person-matching patterns, resulting in more robust
and interpretable matching results. Finally, we build a setwise learning mechanism that implements a more generalized
query-to-gallery-image-set learning procedure. Experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model
against the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
As an important and challenging problem in computer vision,
person re-identification (Re-ID) focuses on effectively matching persons across non-overlapping cameras, and has a wide
range of applications such as cross-camera person tracking
and target person search. Typically, a key challenge for Re-ID
is how to precisely align person images in semantics. To address this problem, many efforts have been devoted to taking
into account auxiliary prior information for misalignment
reduction such as pose-driven approaches(Su et al. 2017;
Sarfraz et al. 2017) and part-segmented models(Qi et al. 2018;
Kalayeh et al. 2018). Usually, such prior information is expensive to obtain in practice, and relies on scenario-specific
settings with a certain inflexibility. Motivated by this observation, we concentrate on designing an end-to-end learning
scheme with the capability of adaptively discovering the inherent matching structures in a totally data-driven fashion.
As shown in Fig. 1, precise semantic matching for the
paired images is confronted with many difficulties like localposition-sensitive correspondence (e.g., bag). Therefore, it is
necessary to set up an effective local-position-aware person

Related Works
Matching in Re-ID: Many recent works on person reidentification focus on finding the spatial relationships of the
paired images. People have adopted a bunch of techniques
to align the paired images for comparison, fixed or learningbased. The approaches with fixed alignment models often

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9235

