The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Amsterdam to Dublin Eventually Delayed?
LSTM and Transfer Learning for Predicting Delays of Low Cost Airlines
Nicholas McCarthy

Mohammad Karzand

Freddy Lecue

Accenture Labs, Dublin, Ireland
nicholas.mccarthy@accenture.com

Accenture Labs, Dublin, Ireland
mohammad.karzand@accenture.com

CortAIx Thales, Montreal, Canada
Inria, Sophia Antipolis, France
freddy.lecue@inria.fr

Abstract

and customer loyalty. As a result of this delay, airlines suffer penalties, fines, higher rates of customer complaints, and
additional operation costs such as crew and aircraft retention
in airports.
Towards these issues, our contribution is twofold:
Contribution 1: In this work we propose an approach for
training an LSTM network to model the flight delay. We
model sequences of flights for a given aircraft over a period
of time with trips to multiple airports, and aim to find a good
estimator of future flight delay by learning the context of
past flight delay from historic airline data.
Contribution 2: As low cost airline companies only hold
a small volume of data due to the small fleet size, limited routes or crew, we suggest a transfer learning approach
which uses data sourced from other airlines and domains to
improve the performance of the initial LSTM model.
It appears intuitive that learning an estimator to predict
the delay for multiple airlines should be easier than learning
each in isolation. We show that the model trained on both
data sets outperforms the model trained just on the smaller
data set.
In the following section we give a summary of different flight delay prediction methods and transfer learning
approaches over heterogeneous feature spaces, which are
highly relevant to our application. Section 3 presents how
we addressed the problem of predicting sequences of flight
delays under very limited data constraints. Section 4 reports
experimental results and lessons learned from low cost airline companies in Europe. Finally we draw some conclusions and discuss future work.

Flight delays impact airlines, airports and passengers. Delay
prediction is crucial during the decision-making process for
all players in commercial aviation, and in particular for airlines to meet their on-time performance objectives. Although
many machine learning approaches have been experimented
with, they fail in (i) predicting delays in minutes with low
errors (less than 15 minutes), (ii) being applied to small carriers i.e., low cost companies characterized by a small amount
of data. This work presents a Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) approach to predicting flight delay, modeled as a
sequence of flights across multiple airports for a particular
aircraft throughout the day. We then suggest a transfer learning approach between heterogeneous feature spaces to train
a prediction model for a given smaller airline using the data
from another larger airline. Our approach is demonstrated to
be robust and accurate for low cost airlines in Europe.

Introduction
Delay is an important indicator of the quality of service in
any transportation system. It drives the decision-making
process of all players in the commercial aviation industry.
It is particularly important for airlines as it is a key factor for
measuring their on-time performance. Many machine learning approaches have been applied previously to the problem of predicting delay, however these generally suffer from
poor performance when predicting delays in minutes with
low error (less than 15 minutes), and when applied to small
carriers, i.e. low-cost companies characterized by a small
amount of data. Our approach has demonstrated to be robust and accurate for low cost airlines in Europe.
The commercial aviation industry defines delay as the duration of time that a flight is late or postponed, and considers any flight that arrives more than 15 minutes past its
scheduled gate arrival time as delayed. In 2013 over 30%
of flights were delayed by more than five minutes in Europe
and by more than fifteen minutes in the US, (ANAC 2017)
and (CODA Digest 2017).
The impact of flight delay on airlines is multifold, ranging
from clearly defined outcomes such as compensation owed
to passengers, late fines, and increased operational costs, to
more intangible consequences for airline brand perception

Related work
We review literature related to our application area, i.e., the
domains of route / flight delay prediction and propagation,
as well as recent work on transfer learning in heterogeneous
feature spaces.
Route Delay: Flight delay prediction can be modeled in
many ways, depending on the objectives of the research. The
use of machine learning for analysis of flight systems has
become increasingly prevalent, particularly in classification
and prediction applications.
Previous methods applied to the problem of predicting
airplane route delay include the k-Nearest Neighbour algo-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9541

