The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Two-Stream Mutual Attention Network for
Semi-Supervised Biomedical Segmentation with Noisy Labels
Shaobo Min, Xuejin Chen,∗ Zheng-Jun Zha, Feng Wu, Yongdong Zhang
National Engineering Laboratory for Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology and Application,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China

Abstract

Data with Noisy Labels
Labeled
Data

Unlabeled
Data

Manual
Labels

Pseudo
Labels

Hierarchical
Distillation

Learning-based methods suffer from a deficiency of clean annotations, especially in biomedical segmentation. Although
many semi-supervised methods have been proposed to provide extra training data, automatically generated labels are
usually too noisy to retrain models effectively. In this paper,
we propose a Two-Stream Mutual Attention Network (TSMAN) that weakens the influence of back-propagated gradients caused by incorrect labels, thereby rendering the network robust to unclean data. The proposed TSMAN consists
of two sub-networks that are connected by three types of
attention models in different layers. The target of each attention model is to indicate potentially incorrect gradients
in a certain layer for both sub-networks by analyzing their
inferred features using the same input. In order to achieve
this purpose, the attention models are designed based on the
propagation analysis of noisy gradients at different layers.
This allows the attention models to effectively discover incorrect labels and weaken their influence during parameter
updating process. By exchanging multi-level features within
two-stream architecture, the effects of noisy labels in each
sub-network are reduced by decreasing the noisy gradients.
Furthermore, a hierarchical distillation is developed to provide reliable pseudo labels for unlabelded data, which further
boosts the performance of TSMAN. The experiments using
both HVSMR 2016 and BRATS 2015 benchmarks demonstrate that our semi-supervised learning framework surpasses
the state-of-the-art fully-supervised results.

Two-Stream Mutual
Attention Network
Figure 1: The pipeline of our self-training framework. The
hierarchical distillation first generates reliable pseudo labels
for unlabeled data, and then mixed data is used to retrain
the two-stream mutual attention network, which is robust to
noisy labels.

simple but effective distillation model to generate reliable
pseudo labels.
Self-training is a typical semi-supervised method, which
generates pseudo labels for unlabeled data by using trained
models. Obviously, the quality of pseudo labels is crucial
to the performance of a final retrained model. Among existing methods that generate labels automatically, model
distillation (Hansen and Salamon 1990; Gupta, Hoffman,
and Malik 2016) is one of the most widely used methods,
which aggregates the inferences from multiple models for
better pseudo labels. Different from model distillation, Radosavovic et al. (2018) recently proposed a data distillation
that aggregates the inferences from multiple transformations
of a data sample; this method proves to be superior to model
distillation. Although both distillation methods are effective,
the generated pseudo labels are still noisy, which limits the
performance of self-training.
To resolve the problems caused by unclean data, Malach
and Shalev-Shwartz (2017) propose training two models and
only updating them when their predictions are different.
They believe that the same predictions usually occur when
two models obtain both right or wrong answers to easy or
hard samples, respectively. Thus, removing the hard sam-

Introduction
Recently, many successful deep networks have been proposed to segment 3D magnetic resonance (MR) data (Tseng
et al. 2017; Çiçek et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2017a; 2017b). However, the scarcity of clean, labeled data severely hinders further development of deep learning methods for real applications. Even for manual annotation, it is inevitable that data
experts may make mistakes due to the effects of fatigue and
human error. Thus, it is urgently important to improve the
robustness of networks to noisy labels and generate more
reliable machine annotations. In this paper, we design a network that is less disturbed by noisy labels and propose a
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4578

