The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

To Find Where You Talk: Temporal Sentence
Localization in Video with Attention Based Location Regression
Yitian Yuan,1 Tao Mei,2 Wenwu Zhu∗1,3
1

Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, China
2
JD AI Research, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
yyt18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, tmei@jd.com, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
We have witnessed the tremendous growth of videos over
the Internet, where most of these videos are typically paired
with abundant sentence descriptions, such as video titles, captions and comments. Therefore, it has been increasingly crucial to associate specific video segments with the corresponding informative text descriptions, for a deeper understanding of video content. This motivates us to explore an overlooked problem in the research community — temporal sentence localization in video, which aims to automatically determine the start and end points of a given sentence within
a paired video. For solving this problem, we face three critical challenges: (1) preserving the intrinsic temporal structure
and global context of video to locate accurate positions over
the entire video sequence; (2) fully exploring the sentence
semantics to give clear guidance for localization; (3) ensuring the efficiency of the localization method to adapt to long
videos. To address these issues, we propose a novel Attention
Based Location Regression (ABLR) approach to localize sentence descriptions in videos in an efficient end-to-end manner.
Specifically, to preserve the context information, ABLR first
encodes both video and sentence via Bi-directional LSTM
networks. Then, a multi-modal co-attention mechanism is
presented to generate both video and sentence attentions. The
former reflects the global video structure, while the latter
highlights the sentence details for temporal localization. Finally, a novel attention based location prediction network is
designed to regress the temporal coordinates of sentence from
the previous attentions. We evaluate the proposed ABLR
approach on two public datasets ActivityNet Captions and
TACoS. Experimental results show that ABLR significantly
outperforms the existing approaches in both effectiveness and
efficiency.

Figure 1: Temporal sentence localization in untrimmed
video.
generation conditioned on captions (Pan et al. 2017) and
video question answering (Xu et al. 2017). While promising
results have been achieved, one fundamental issue underlying these technologies is overlooked, i.e., the informative
video segments should be trimmed and aligned with the relevant textual descriptions. This motivates us to investigate
the problem of temporal sentence localization in video. Formally, as shown in Figure 1, given an untrimmed video and a
sentence query, the task is to identify the start and end points
of the video segment in response to the given sentence query.
To solve the temporal sentence localization in video, people may first consider applying the typical multi-modal
matching architecture (Hendricks et al. 2017; Bojanowski
et al. 2015; Gao et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018). One can
first sample candidate clips by scanning videos with various sliding windows, then compare the sentence query with
each of these clips individually in a multi-modal common
latent space, and finally choose the highest matched clip
as the localization result. While simple and intuitive, this
“scan and localize” architecture still has certain limitations
as follows. First, independently fetching video clips may
break the intrinsic temporal structure and global context of
videos, making it difficult to holistically predict locations
over the entire video sequence. Second, as the whole sentence is represented with a coarse feature vector in the multimodal matching procedure, some important sentence details
for temporal localization are not fully explored and leveraged. Third, densely sampling sliding window is computationally expensive, which limits the efficiency of the localization method in applying to long daily videos in practice.
To address the above limitations, we consider that temporal sentence localization should be strengthened from both
video and sentence aspects. From the video aspect, compared with partially watching each candidate clip, it is more
natural for people to look through the whole video and then

Introduction
Video has become a new way of communication between
Internet users with the proliferation of sensor-rich mobile
devices. Moreover, as videos are often accompanied by text
descriptions, e.g., titles, captions or comments, it has encouraged the development of advanced techniques for a
broad range of video-text understanding applications, such
as video captioning (Pan et al. 2016; Duan et al. 2018), video
∗

Wenwu Zhu is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9159

