The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

TDSNN: From Deep Neural Networks to Deep
Spike Neural Networks with Temporal-Coding
Lei Zhang,1,2,3 Shengyuan Zhou,1,2,3 Tian Zhi,1,3 Zidong Du,1,3 Yunji Chen∗1,2
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Cambricon Tech. Ltd
{zhanglei03, zhousy, zhitian, duzidong, cyj}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

Unlike SNNs, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been
able to perform the state-of-the-art results on many complex
tasks such as image recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; Krizhevsky 2009; Simonyan and Zisserman
2014; He et al. 2015), speech recognition (Abdel-Hamid et
al. 2012; Sainath et al. 2013; Hinton et al. 2012), natural language processing (Kim 2014; Severyn and Moschitti 2015)
and so on. But heavy computation load promotes researchers
to find more efficient approach to deploy them in mobiles or
embedded systems. This inspires the SNN researchers that
a fully-trained DNN might be slightly tuned to be directly
converted to a SNN without complicated training procedure. Beginning with the work of (Perezcarrasco et al. 2013),
where DNN units were translated into biologically inspired
spiking units with leaks and refractory periods, continuous efforts have been made to realize this idea. After a series of success in transferring deep networks like Lenet and
VGG-16 (Cao, Chen, and Khosla 2015; Diehl et al. 2015;
Rueckauer et al. 2017), now the rate-coding based SNN
can achieve state-of-the-art performance with minor accuracy loss even in the conversion of complicated layers like
Max-Pool, BatchNorm and SoftMax.
However, weak points in rate-coding based SNN are obvious. Firstly, the rate-coding based SNN could become more
accurate with the increasement of the simulation duration
and the average firing rate of its neurons. But it may lose potential performance advantage over the DNNs as the firing
rates increase (Rueckauer and Liu 2018). Secondly, part of
the accuracy loss in the conversion occurs at the parameter
determination procedure. In rate-coding based SNN, determination of important parameters like firing threshold seriously affect the final accuracy while non deterministic methods have been proposed to eliminate the loss.
This poses challenges to researchers to find conversion
methods based on another coding scheme—temporal coding. Neurons based on temporal-coding make full use of the
spike time to complete the transmission of information, and
the number of spikes is significantly reduced. Also, temporal coding has been proved to be efficient in computing even
in biological brains (Van and Thorpe 2001). The temporalcoding based neurons apply a so-called time-to-first-spike
(TTFS) scheme and each neuron fires at most once during the forward inference (Thorpe, Delorme, and Rullen
2001). Obviously, temporal-coding based SNN is more com-

Continuous-valued deep convolutional networks (DNNs) can
be converted into accurate rate-coding based spike neural networks (SNNs). However, the substantial computational and
energy costs, which is caused by multiple spikes, limit their
use in mobile and embedded applications. And recent works
have shown that the newly emerged temporal-coding based
SNNs converted from DNNs can reduce the computational
load effectively. In this paper, we propose a novel method
to convert DNNs to temporal-coding SNNs, called TDSNN.
Combined with the characteristic of the leaky integrate-andfire (LIF) neural model, we put forward a new coding principle Reverse Coding and design a novel Ticking Neuron mechanism. According to our evaluation, our proposed method
achieves 42% total operations reduction on average in large
networks comparing with DNNs with no more than 0.5% accuracy loss. The evaluation shows that TDSNN may prove
to be one of the key enablers to make the adoption of SNNs
widespread.

Introduction
SNNs are considered to be the third generation of neural networks which are more powerful on processing of both spatial and temporal information (Maass 1997). However, it is
difficult to train an SNN directly. A series of works have
tuned the backpropagation algorithms to fit for the SNN
models (Bohte, Kok, and Han 2000; Lee, Delbruck, and
Pfeiffer 2016). Although they achieve satisfactory results
in simple tasks like MNIST (Lecun et al. 1998), the training methods can hardly be scaled into deep SNN models
to solve more complex tasks like ImageNet (Russakovsky
et al. 2014). Meanwhile, the researches on the biological
training methods also meet the same problem. These works
have put many existing brain mechanisms into the modeling
of SNN including spike timing dependent plasticity (STDP)
and long-term potentiation or depression, short-term facilitation or depression, hetero-synaptic plasticity, etc. Recently,
Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2018) proposed a novel multilayer SNN model which applies biological mechanisms and
achieves 98.52% on MNIST dataset, but its performance is
unknown when applied on larger datasets.
∗

Yunji Chen (cyj@ict.ac.cn) is the corresponding author.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1319

