The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Satellite Detection of Moving Vessels in Marine Environments
Natalie Fridman,∗ Doron Amir,∗ Yinon Douchan,∗ Noa Agmon∗∗
∗

Research & Innovation Team
ImageSat International (ISI)
∗∗
Computer Science Department
Bar-Ilan University

Abstract

hour. On the other hand, current commercial satellites mission planning may take several hours. Therefore, in order to
task a satellite for detecting a moving vessel with no additional aids after 3 hours, one must cover a very large area
of about 17, 000km2 . This will end up in a cost of about
150, 000 − 200, 000 USD per ship, which is practically not
affordable. Choosing relevant satellite imagery is equivalent
to looking for a needle in a haystack: one satellite image is
commonly of size 50km2 − 100km2 , i.e., less than 1% of
the total area’s size. Therefore, in this paper we focus on efficient ways for decreasing the search area for the vessel by
using vessel behavior prediction, and use that to increase the
probability of acquiring relevant information from the satellite imagery. Reduction of the position uncertainty will also
lead to a much more economic solution.

There is a growing need for coverage of large maritime areas,
mainly in the exclusive economic zone (EEZ). Due to the difficulty of accessing such large areas, the use of satellite based
sensors is the most efficient and cost-effective way to perform
this task. Vessel behavior prediction is a necessary ability for
detection of moving vessels with satellite imagery. In this paper we present an algorithm for selection of the best satellite
observation window to detect a moving object. First, we describe a model for vessel behavior prediction and compare its
performance to two base models. We use real marine traffic
data (AIS) to compare their ability to predict vessel behavior
in a time frame of between 1–24 hours. Then, we present a
KINGFISHER, maritime intelligence system which uses our
algorithm to track suspected vessels with satellite sensor. We
also present the results of the algorithm in operational scenarios of the KINGFISHER.

1

Despite significant progress in vessel prediction in maritime domain, existing solutions do not yet account for longterm vessel behavior prediction, thus they are irrelevant in
the space domain. Our goal is to track moving vessels with
satellite sensors, and select the most suitable satellite and its
best time frame for detection (referred to observation window) for this mission. Thus, an algorithm for long-term prediction of vessel behavior is required in this domain.

Introduction

There is a growing need for coverage detection of large maritime areas, mainly in the exclusive economic zone (EEZ).
Physically accessing such a large area is practically impossible, thus the use of satellite-based sensors is an efficient and
cost-effective way to perform this task. We focus on maritime missions, where the main goal is to monitor moving
vessels with satellite sensors, in order to detect vessels that
may mislead about their identity and transmit wrong identification parameters, for example their size and type. All
civilian ships are required to transmit an Automatic Identification System (AIS) signal, which indicates the vessel’s
position and identification parameters. However, since this
information is unreliable, the total maritime awareness is
achieved through the integration and analysis of visual data
from Electro-Optic (EO) and SAR satellites, enabling visual
identification of vessels instead of relying only on cooperative vessel AIS transmission.
Satellite imagery is an expensive product, which covers a very small area, and can be acquired only at predefined acquisition opportunities. The time it takes from vessel transmission of an AIS signal until it can be analyzed in
ground segment (known as data cycle), is typically over one

In this paper we present an algorithm for selection of the
best satellite observation window for detection of a moving
object. First, we present a model for vessel behavior prediction and compare its performance to the base model. We use
real marine traffic data (AIS) to compare the ability of the
models to predict vessel behavior in a time frame of 1–24
hours. Based on satellite simulation, we propose a method
for selecting the satellite observation window that increases
the probability to detect the moving object.
Then, we present KINGFISHER, a maritime multilayered intelligence system created for an in-depth analysis of large maritime areas of interest, in order to provide
maritime awareness and detect illegal activities such as illegal fishing. KINGFISHER uses the proposed algorithms to
enable decision support for maritime operators and provide
an optimal, autonomous and economic solution for maritime
environments. Finally, we present the results of our algorithm on several operational scenarios.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9452

