The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Predicting and Analyzing Language Specificity in Social Media Posts
Yifan Gao,∗‡ Yang Zhong,∗‡ Daniel Preoţiuc-Pietro,♦ Junyi Jessy Li†
‡

Department of Mathematics, † Department of Linguistics,
The University of Texas at Austin
{yifan233@,yang.zhong@,jessy@austin.}utexas.edu
♦
Bloomberg LP
dpreotiucpie@bloomberg.net

Abstract

specificity in serving effective communication, e.g., in political discourse (Cook 2016), argumentation (Swanson, Ecker,
and Walker 2015) and classroom discussions (Luo and Litman 2016; Lugini and Litman 2017). Prior work in clinical
psychology explored potential links between specificity and
autism (Li et al. 2017).
Findings from these studies, though encouraging, relied
on either hand-coded analysis of limited scale, or sentence specificity prediction systems (Li and Nenkova 2015;
Lugini and Litman 2017) that are trained to produce 2-3 categories of specificity sentences, which is too coarse to be
analyzed (Li et al. 2016). Furthermore, the only open-source
tool (Li and Nenkova 2015) is trained from news sentences,
a genre vastly different from the spontaneous and expressive text from social media which can reveal more about the
writer (Schwartz et al. 2013). Because of these bottlenecks,
our understanding of text specificity and its relationship with
an individual’s traits, as well as its utility in automated text
processing, is still in its infancy.
To this end, we first introduce a large dataset of 7,267
tweets annotated with text specificity on a fine-grained scale
of 1-5. The tweets are sampled from an existing dataset with
demographic information such as age, gender, education,
income, political ideology, and religion obtained through
survey-based methods (Preoţiuc-Pietro et al. 2017), making
it ideal for large-scale sociolinguistics studies. The dataset is
also sufficiently large to train supervised systems for specificity prediction that enable the automatic analysis of specificity in informal, spontaneous text. Our dataset and system
are openly available online.2
Using this dataset, we train regression models that can accurately estimate the specificity of tweets. The models use
hand crafted features that capture the lexical, content, and
emotional aspects of the data. Our system achieves a mean
absolute error of 0.3578 and 0.73 Pearson correlation, substantially improving upon several baselines and existing systems for sentence specificity.
We also present a series of analyses that reflect the social and temporal dynamics of language specificity on social media. We uncover that specificity is significantly associated with demographic factors such as age and education level. Specificity displays distinct temporal patterns that

In computational linguistics, specificity quantifies how much
detail is engaged in text. It is an important characteristic of
speaker intention and language style, and is useful in NLP applications such as summarization and argumentation mining.
Yet to date, expert-annotated data for sentence-level specificity are scarce and confined to the news genre. In addition,
systems that predict sentence specificity are classifiers trained
to produce binary labels (general or specific).
We collect a dataset of over 7,000 tweets annotated with
specificity on a fine-grained scale. Using this dataset, we train
a supervised regression model that accurately estimates specificity in social media posts, reaching a mean absolute error
of 0.3578 (for ratings on a scale of 1-5) and 0.73 Pearson
correlation, significantly improving over baselines and previous sentence specificity prediction systems. We also present
the first large-scale study revealing the social, temporal and
mental health factors underlying language specificity on social media.

1

Introduction

Texts vary in their levels of detail and their involvement of
particular concepts, objects and events, i.e., their specificity.
Consider the two posts below from Twitter; the first one is
very specific, while the other is rather general:
[1]: I was eating a cookie over the trashcan to catch
the crumbs. One of the chocolate chips jumped ship. I
considered diving after it. #Finals
[2]: How curious that I, looking at you, am thinking
exactly what you, looking at me, are thinking and yet...
we both cannot understand
Specificity is a pragmatic concept of text whose significance spans across various fields of research. Studies in
cognitive linguistics showed that the organization of general and specific information in text impacts reading comprehension speed (Dixon 1987). In discourse analysis, specificity is connected with several discourse relations (Mann
and Thompson 1988; Prasad et al. 2008), making it a coherence device. Several works also highlighted the role of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Equal contribution.

2

6415

https://github.com/cs329yangzhong/specificityTwitter

