The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dueling Bandits with Qualitative Feedback
Liyuan Xu,1,2 Junya Honda,1,2 Masashi Sugiyama1,2
1

The University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN
liyuan@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, honda@stat.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

Even when the numeric feedback is not available, we may
still have direct access to qualitative feedback. For example,
in information retrieval, users might report the relevance of a
document returned by a system on a scale of “Irrelevant”—
“Partially Relevant”—“Relevant”. In such a situation, we
can consider a special kind of the DB problem first introduced by Busa-Fekete et al. (2013), which we call the qualitative DB (QDB) problem.
In the QDB problem, an agent pulls one arm at each round
and observes qualitative feedback. Although a duel is not
conducted explicitly in the QDB problem, we consider algorithms to minimize the same regret as the DB problem, in
which the probability of an arm winning a duel with another
arm corresponds to the probability of the arm getting higher
qualitative feedback than the other. Therefore, we can adapt
any algorithms for the DB problem to the QDB problem by
converting the feedback in every two rounds into the result
of one duel.
However, this reduction significantly worsens the performance because, in the QDB problem, the winning probability can be calculated from the estimated feedback distributions. Busa-Fekete et al. (2013) also partially considered
this problem, and they improved the performance of the classic DB algorithms by constructing a tight confidence bound.
However, they still use the same exploration strategy as the
classic DB algorithm. In this paper, we show that we can
further improve the performance by designing a specific exploration strategy for the QDB problem.
Several definitions of the “best arm” have been proposed
for the DB problem. In this paper, we consider two types of
winners, the Condorcet winner and the Borda winner, both
of which are defined in Section 3, and we propose algorithms
for each winner. The proposed algorithms are inspired by algorithms in the MAB, namely Thompson sampling (Thompson 1933) and the upper confidence bound (UCB) algorithm
(Auer 2003). Interestingly, the algorithm based on Thompson sampling, one of the most popular algorithms for the
MAB problem, only works for the criterion of the Condorcet
winner and suffers polynomial regret in a specific instance
in the criterion of the Borda winner.
The rest of paper is structured as follows. After discussing
related work in Section 2, we formulate the QDB problem
in detail in Section 3. We introduce two formulations of the
QDB problem and propose algorithms for these problems in

We formulate and study a novel multi-armed bandit problem
called the qualitative dueling bandit (QDB) problem, where
an agent observes not numeric but qualitative feedback by
pulling each arm. We employ the same regret as the dueling
bandit (DB) problem where the duel is carried out by comparing the qualitative feedback. Although we can naively use
classic DB algorithms for solving the QDB problem, this reduction significantly worsens the performance—actually, in
the QDB problem, the probability that one arm wins the duel
over another arm can be directly estimated without carrying
out actual duels. In this paper1 , we propose such direct algorithms for the QDB problem. Our theoretical analysis shows
that the proposed algorithms significantly outperform DB algorithms by incorporating the qualitative feedback, and experimental results also demonstrate vast improvement over
the existing DB algorithms.

1

Introduction

The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a sequential decision-making problem, where an agent repeatedly chooses one option from K alternatives (which are often called arms). At each round, the agent receives a random reward that depends on the arm being selected, and the
goal is to maximize the cumulative reward. This problem has
been extensively studied for many years, both from theoretical and practical aspects. Numerous algorithms have been
proposed for the problem (Thompson 1933; Auer 2003) and
applied to various fields including the design of clinical trials
(Villar, Bowden, and Wason 2015), economics (Rothschild
1974) and crowdsourcing (Zhou, Chen, and Li 2014).
The dueling bandit (DB) problem (Yue et al. 2012) is a
variant of the MAB problem, where an agent only observes
the result of a “duel”, a noisy comparison between the selected two arms. While the MAB problem assumes that the
feedback is numeric, the DB problem only assumes that the
arms are comparable based on the feedback. Therefore, it is
useful when the numeric feedback is not available, such as
information retrieval and clinical trials.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The longer version including all appendices is available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.05274

5549

