The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dynamic Vehicle Traffic Control Using Deep
Reinforcement Learning in Automated Material Handling System
Younkook Kang, Sungwon Lyu, Jeeyung Kim, Bongjoon Park, Sungzoon Cho*
Department of Industrial Engineering, Seoul National University
{ykkang, lyusungwon, jeeyung.kim, bongjoon}@dm.snu.ac.kr, zoon@snu.ac.kr

orders every 1 to 2 seconds and carry materials to the designated destination in 3 to 4 minutes on average. The challenge in the prediction of traffic flow comes from the frequent, yet seemingly erratic, breakouts of congestions.
In this paper, we proposed a deep reinforcement learning
model in order to minimize delivery time and delay given
(real-time) changes in the routing costs at key paths. We
first determine paths with the greatest impact on traffic and
select them as the key paths of prediction. Then, we adjust
traffic weights using these key paths in our deep reinforcement learning model which utilizes Q-learning and a
recurrent neural network. Experiment results show that: (1)
RNN structure works well with predicting traffic patterns
on a real-time basis, and; (2) reinforcement learning component well predicts the state and the action values at a
given traffic state. Our proposed model contributes to the
existing literature by developing an autonomous traffic
adjustment system flexibly responding to the real-time
changes in the line traffic while requiring minimum human
interference.

Abstract
In automated material handling systems (AMHS), delivery time is
an important issue directly associated with the production cost
and the quality of the product. In this paper, we propose a dynamic routing strategy to shorten delivery time and delay. We set the
target of control by analyzing traffic flows and selecting the region with the highest flow rate and congestion frequency. Then,
we impose a routing cost in order to dynamically reflect the realtime changes of traffic states. Our deep reinforcement learning
model consists of a Q-learning step and a recurrent neural network, through which traffic states and action values are predicted.
Experiment results show that the proposed method decreases
manufacturing costs while increasing productivity. Additionally,
we find evidence the reinforcement learning structure proposed in
this study can autonomously and dynamically adjust to the
changes in traffic patterns.

Introduction
In the semiconductor manufacturing environment, an automated material handling system (AMHS) plays a major
role in raising productivity. There are two main components in a typical AMHS: vehicles and vehicle controllers.
Transfer robots serve as vehicles of the system by moving
materials between manufacturing equipment. The vehicle
controllers, on the other hand, are in charge of dispatching
and routing these vehicles. As is in a transportation system,
predicting traffic flow and congestion is one of the main
issues addressed by AMHS researchers and experts, yet it
differs from the typical transportation system problems in a
sense that it requires optimizing traffic in the entire manufacturing system rather than optimizing a specific path or a
vehicle trajectory. In this paper, we aim to shorten the average delivery time and delay by considering traffic states
on a real-time basis when selecting routes.
In our experiment setting, the subject factory consists of
500 vehicles scattered through a layout area larger than an
archetypal soccer field. These vehicles receive delivery

Related Work
There has been a myriad of studies focusing on solving the
vehicle routing problems via optimization, for example, the
time window approach (Smolic-Rocak et al., 2010). Another branch of work includes congestion-awareness based
dynamic routing, such as the study by Bartlett et al., 2014.
However, these studies are limited in terms of: (1) the size
of lines considered in the experiment; (2) simplification of
circumstantial conditions, or; (3) fixed traffic patterns.
Recent rise of the deep learning methods such as convolutional neural networks (CNN) or recurrent neural networks (RNN) have resulted in the utilization of these techniques when tackling prediction of traffic congestions
(Wang et al., 2016). Most of these studies, however, focus
only on prediction. Moreover, there exist specific conditions, peculiar only to the manufacturing environment, that
must be considered when solving the congestion problems
under AHMS setting, which most of the related studies fail
to concern.

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9949

