The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Implanting Rational Knowledge into
Distributed Representation at Morpheme Level
Zi Lin,1,3 Yang Liu2,3
1

Department of Chinese Language and Literature, Peking University
2
Institute of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
3
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics (Ministry of Education), Peking University
{zi.lin, liuyang}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

(Zhu 1982). Previously, linguists define morpheme as the
smallest meaning-bearing unit of language as well as the
smallest unit of syntax (Matthews 1972). The Chinese morpheme is close to this definition in terms of semantics but
requires a smallest phonetic sound, i.e., it should correspond
to a character in form. Therefore, the character “huā” in “huā
qián” and “táo huā” refers to different morphemes “huā1 ”
and “huā2 ”. We sometimes use the term sememe to refer to
the meanings of morphemes, so the sememe of “huā1 ” is to
spend, while the sememe of “huā2 ” is flowers.
The meanings of words and the meanings of morphemes
are highly related to some extent, and the sub-units of words
will form patterns during word-building. For example, in
Chinese words “táo huā” (peach-blossom) and “hé huā”
(lotus-blossom), one will find “huā”, which means flowers,
as a common component. The components before “huā”, as
different modifiers, also hold their meanings. These words
are of Modifier-Head structure, and the morphology is somewhat similar to that of syntax in Chinese.
Therefore, morphemes and their combination patterns
are very important for the generation of the meanings of
words. Researchers have addressed the importance of morphological compositionality and word-formation analysis.
(Lazaridou et al. 2013) explored the application of compositional distributed semantic models, originally designed
to learn phrase meanings. (Luong, Socher, and Manning
2013) combined recursive neural networks with neural language models to consider contextual information in learning
morphologically-aware word representations.
As for Chinese, (Chen et al. 2015) proposed a characterenhanced word embeddings model (CWE) by regarding the
word as the simple combination of characters and obtained
character embeddings on the corpus, without further knowledge of morphemes or sememes input. (Niu et al. 2017) employed HowNet to learn word representation on corpus for
the SE-WRL model. By using attention schema for rough
word sense disambiguation, HowNet sememe embeddings
were thus obtained directly from the large-scale corpus.
To avoid sense disambiguation on the corpus, there was
also work trying to obtain word sense embeddings by
leveraging the dictionary definitions or lexical resources.
Dict2vec used the English version of Cambridge, Oxford,
Collins and dictionary.com to build new word pairs so that
semantically-related words are moved closer, and negative

Previously, researchers paid no attention to the creation of
unambiguous morpheme embeddings independent from the
corpus, while such information plays an important role in expressing the exact meanings of words for parataxis languages
like Chinese. In this paper, after constructing the Chinese lexical and semantic ontology based on word-formation, we propose a novel approach to implanting the structured rational
knowledge into distributed representation at morpheme level,
naturally avoiding heavy disambiguation in the corpus. We
design a template to create the instances as pseudo-sentences
merely from the pieces of knowledge of morphemes built in
the lexicon. To exploit hierarchical information and tackle
the data sparseness problem, the instance proliferation technique is applied based on similarity to expand the collection
of pseudo-sentences. The distributed representation for morphemes can then be trained on these pseudo-sentences using
word2vec. For evaluation, we validate the paradigmatic and
syntagmatic relations of morpheme embeddings, and apply
the obtained embeddings to word similarity measurement,
achieving significant improvements over the classical models by more than 5 Spearman scores or 8 percentage points,
which shows very promising prospects for adoption of the
new source of knowledge.

Introduction
Nowadays, learning representations for the meanings of
words has been a key problem in natural language processing (NLP). The basic unit in NLP is usually and mainly
word. However, for parataxis languages like Chinese, which
is made up of hieroglyphic characters, word is not a natural
unit, and character can provide yet rich semantic information (Fu 1981; Xu 2004).
Theoretically, the meanings of Chinese words can be deduced from the meanings of characters. However, the same
Chinese characters within words may hold different meanings, so the meanings of an identical character should be further differentiated. For example, in the words “huā qián” (to
spend money) and “táo huā” (peach-blossom), the character
meanings of “huā” are not the same. Chinese linguists use
the term yusu (morpheme) to distinguish identical characters with different meanings, which is defined as the smallest combination of meaning and phonetic sound in Chinese
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2954

