The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Biologically Motivated Algorithms for
Propagating Local Target Representations
Alexander G. Ororbia∗

Ankur Mali∗

Rochester Institute of Technology
102 Lomb Memorial Drive, Rochester, NY, USA 14623
ago@cs.rit.edu

Penn State University
Old Main, State College, PA 16801
aam35@ist.psu.edu

Abstract

a model’s output units and a target, e.g., class label, and
the global pathway relates how the internal processing elements affect this error. When considering modern theories of the brain (Grossberg 1982; Rao and Ballard 1999;
Huang and Rao 2011), which posit that local computations
occur at multiple levels of a somewhat hierarchical structure,
this global pathway should not be necessary to learn effectively. Furthermore, this pathway makes training very deep
networks difficult–due to many multiplications that underly
traversing along the global feedback pathway, error gradients
explode/vanish (Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio 2013). To
fix this, gradients are kept within reasonable magnitudes by
requiring layers to behave sufficiently linearly. However, this
remedy creates other highly undesirable side-effects, e.g.,
adversarial samples (Ororbia II, Kifer, and Giles 2017), and
prevents usage of neuro-biological mechanisms such as lateral competition and discrete-valued/stochastic activations
(since the pathway requires precise knowledge of function
derivatives (Bengio et al. 2015)).
If we remove this global feedback pathway, we create a
new problem–what are the learning signals for the hidden processing elements? This problem is one of the main concerns
of the recently introduced Discrepancy Reduction family of
learning algorithms (Ororbia II et al. 2017). In this paper,
we will develop two learning algorithms within this family–
error-driven Local Representation Alignment and adaptive
noise Difference Target Propagation. In experiments on two
classification benchmarks, we will show that these two algorithms generalize better than a variety of other biologically
motivated learning approaches, all without employing the
global feedback pathway required by back-propagation.

Finding biologically plausible alternatives to back-propagation
of errors is a fundamentally important challenge in artificial
neural network research. In this paper, we propose a learning
algorithm called error-driven Local Representation Alignment
(LRA-E), which has strong connections to predictive coding, a
theory that offers a mechanistic way of describing neurocomputational machinery. In addition, we propose an improved
variant of Difference Target Propagation, another procedure
that comes from the same family of algorithms as LRA-E.
We compare our procedures to several other biologicallymotivated algorithms, including two feedback alignment algorithms and Equilibrium Propagation. In two benchmarks, we
find that both of our proposed algorithms yield stable performance and strong generalization compared to other competing
back-propagation alternatives when training deeper, highly
nonlinear networks, with LRA-E performing the best overall.

Behind the modern achievements in artificial neural network
research is back-propagation of errors (Rumelhart, Hinton,
and Williams 1986) (or “backprop”), the key training algorithm used in computing updates for the parameters that
define the computational architectures applied to problems
ranging from computer vision to speech recognition. However, though neural architectures are inspired by our current
understanding of the human brain, the connections to the actual mechanisms of systems of natural neurons are often very
loose, at best. More importantly, backprop faces some of the
strongest neuro-biological criticisms, argued to be a highly
implausible way in which learning occurs in the human brain.
Among the many problems with back-propagation, some
of the most prominent are: 1) the “weight transport problem”,
where the feedback weights that carry back error signals must
be the transposes of the feedforward weights, 2) forward and
backward propagation utilize different computations, and
3) the error gradients are stored separately from the activations. These problems, as originally argued in (Ororbia II
et al. 2017; Ororbia et al. 2018), largely center around one
critical component of backprop–the global feedback pathway
needed for transporting error derivatives across the system.
This pathway is necessary given the design of modern supervised learning systems–a loss measures error between

Coordinated Local Learning Algorithms
Algorithms within the Discrepancy Reduction (Ororbia II et
al. 2017) family offer computational mechanisms for two key
steps when learning from patterns. These steps include:
1. Search for latent representations that better explain the
input/output, also known as target representations. This
creates the need for local (higher-level) objectives that will
guide current latent representations towards better ones.
2. Reduce, as much as possible, the mismatch between a
model’s currently “guessed” representations and target
representations. The sum of the internal, local losses is

∗

Both authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4651

