The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Insufficient Data Can Also Rock! Learning to
Converse Using Smaller Data with Augmentation
Juntao Li,1,2,∗ Lisong Qiu,1,2,∗ Bo Tang,3 Dongmin Chen,1 Dongyan Zhao,1,2 Rui Yan1,2†
1

Center for Data Science, Academy for
Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
{lijuntao,qiuls,dongminchen,zhaody,ruiyan}@pku.edu.cn
tangb3@sustc.edu.cn
Abstract

training, e.g. adversarial and reinforcement learning (Li et
al. 2017) to achieve improvement on an existing dataset.
As progress on dialogue generation is restricted by the
size of training datasets, we investigate to move the frontier of dialogue generation forward from a different angle,
i.e. training dialogue system on smaller data through using
data augmentation techniques. To augment existing dialogue
training data, there are two main issues to be addressed. The
first one is how to get sufficient alternative expressions of the
raw query response pairs since small data will result in the
over-fitting problem and make conversation system vulnerable to unseen data (Hou et al. 2018). In real-world chit-chats,
there are many proper responses for one specific query and
there are also alternative responses with different syntactical structure but same semantic information. Another challenge is how to control the quality of augmented query response training pairs. It is expected that the data augmentation method can generate more valid training data that can
supplement the expressions of original data and further improve the performance of trained dialogue systems. To obtain more valid training data and limit negative noise, an effective data augmentation model is required to generate each
query-response pair with high relevance, and meanwhile reduce repetitions between augmented query-response pairs.
While important, there are only a few studies presented
for addressing the aforementioned challenges in dialogue
data augmentation. To improve the performance of taskoriented dialogue system, Kurata et al. (2016) introduced
an auto-encoder with random noise to produce more different utterances. Beyond that, another data augmentation approach for dialogue language understanding was presented
through combing sequence-to-sequence and diversity rank
to generate more diverse utterances (Hou et al. 2018). Although these methods have achieved performance improvement on specific tasks, there is still noticeable gap between
these models and the aforementioned requirements. For one
thing, they suffer from data sparsity as there are a few proper
transformations only considering the lexical-level alternative expressions. For another, integrating random noise to
generate more data without supervision and feedback about
the feasibility of the augmented utterances is risky.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose a
novel data augmentation model for open-domain dialogue
generation. Specifically, we use a conditional variational au-

Recent successes of open-domain dialogue generation mainly
rely on the advances of deep neural networks. The effectiveness of deep neural network models depends on the amount
of training data. As it is laboursome and expensive to acquire
a huge amount of data in most scenarios, how to effectively
utilize existing data is the crux of this issue. In this paper,
we use data augmentation techniques to improve the performance of neural dialogue models on the condition of insufficient data. Specifically, we propose a novel generative model
to augment existing data, where the conditional variational
autoencoder (CVAE) is employed as the generator to output
more training data with diversified expressions. To improve
the correlation of each augmented training pair, we design a
discriminator with adversarial training to supervise the augmentation process. Moreover, we thoroughly investigate various data augmentation schemes for neural dialogue system
with generative models, both GAN and CVAE. Experimental
results on two open corpora, Weibo and Twitter, demonstrate
the superiority of our proposed data augmentation model.

Introduction
Open-domain dialogue generation is becoming a research
hotspot in the community of natural language processing
due to their penitential applications. Along with the flourishing development of neural networks, plenty systems have
been proposed to improve the quality of generated dialogues from many aspects such as diversity (Li et al. 2015;
Zhao, Zhao, and Eskenazi 2017), topic (Xing et al. 2017),
persona modeling (Zhang et al. 2018) and emotion controlling (Zhou et al. 2017). Generally, in the paradigm of
deep neural networks, a large quantity of training data is required for facilitating the convergence of these models. For
instance, Li et al. (2016) collected over 24 millions of queryresponse training pairs for building personalized dialogue
generation systems. Hence, the crucial point of building dialogue systems depends on whether exists proper dataset
with sufficient training pairs. In other words, current dialogue generation models mainly focused on using effective
model frameworks, e.g. CVAE (Shen et al. 2017), and model
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@pku.edu.cn)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6698

