The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Large-Scale Visual Relationship Understanding
Ji Zhang,1,2 Yannis Kalantidis,1 Marcus Rohrbach,1
Manohar Paluri,1 Ahmed Elgammal,2 Mohamed Elhoseiny1
1

2

Facebook Research
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University

Abstract
Large scale visual understanding is challenging, as it requires
a model to handle the widely-spread and imbalanced distribution of hsubject, relation, objecti triples. In real-world scenarios with large numbers of objects and relations, some are
seen very commonly while others are barely seen. We develop
a new relationship detection model that embeds objects and
relations into two vector spaces where both discriminative capability and semantic affinity are preserved. We learn a visual
and a semantic module that map features from the two modalities into a shared space, where matched pairs of features have
to discriminate against those unmatched, but also maintain
close distances to semantically similar ones. Benefiting from
that, our model can achieve superior performance even when
the visual entity categories scale up to more than 80, 000,
with extremely skewed class distribution. We demonstrate the
efficacy of our model on a large and imbalanced benchmark
based of Visual Genome that comprises 53, 000+ objects and
29, 000+ relations, a scale at which no previous work has
been evaluated at. We show superiority of our model over
competitive baselines on the original Visual Genome dataset
with 80, 000+ categories. We also show state-of-the-art performance on the VRD dataset and the scene graph dataset
which is a subset of Visual Genome with 200 categories.

Figure 1: Relationships predicted by our approach on an image. Different relationships are colored differently with a relation line connecting each subject and object. Our model
is able to recognize relationships composed of over 53, 000
object categories and over 29, 000 relation categories.

Another challenge is that object categories are often semantically associated (Deng et al., 2009; Krishna et al.,
2017; Deng et al., 2014), and such connections could be
more subtle for relationships since they are conditioned on
the contexts. For example, an image of hperson,ride,horsei
could look like one of hperson,ride,elephanti since they both
belong to the kind of relationships where a person is riding
an animal, but hperson,ride,horsei would look very different
from hperson,walk with,horsei even though they have the
same subject and object. It is critical for a model to be able
to leverage such conditional connections.
In this work, we study relationship recognition at an unprecedented scale where the total number of visual entities is
more than 80,000. To achieve that we use a continuous output space for objects and relations instead of discrete labels.
We demonstrate superiority of our model over competitive
baselines on a large and imbalanced benchmark based of Visual Genome that comprises 53, 000+ objects and 29, 000+
relations. We also achieve state-of-the-art performance on
the Visual Relationship Detection (VRD) dataset (Lu et al.,
2016), and the scene graph dataset (Xu et al., 2017).

Introduction
Scale matters. In the real world, people tend to describe visual entities with open vocabulary, e.g., the raw ImageNet
(Deng et al., 2009) dataset has 21,841 synsets that cover
a vast range of objects. The number of entities is significantly larger for relationships since the combinations of
hsubject, relation, objecti are orders of magnitude more than
objects (Lu et al., 2016; Plummer et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2017c). Moreover, the long-tailed distribution of objects can
be an obstacle for a model to learn all classes sufficiently
well, and such challenge is exacerbated in relationship detection because either the subject, the object, or the relation
could be infrequent, or their triple might be jointly infrequent. Figure 1 shows an example from the Visual Genome
dataset, which contains commonly seen relationship (e.g.,
hman,wearing,glassesi) along with uncommon ones (e.g.,
hdog,next to,womani).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9185

