The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DoPAMINE: Double-Sided Masked CNN for
Pixel Adaptive Multiplicative Noise Despeckling
Sunghwan Joo,1 Sungmin Cha,1 Taesup Moon1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
{shjoo840, csm9493, tsmoon}@skku.edu

Abstract

by casting the despeckling as a supervised learning problem, the CNN models are trained to learn a mapping from
the noisy patch to the clean patch. For example, (Wang,
Zhang, and Patel 2017) proposed ID-CNN that uses exactly the same architecture as DnCNN on the Gammadistributed multiplicative noise and introduced a total variation (TV) regularization; (Chierchia et al. 2017) transformed
both clean and noisy images to the log domain then carried
out the same process as in the additive noise case; (Zhang et
al. 2018) proposed SAR-DRN, which added dilated convolution and skip connections to the ID-DCN architecture. As
in the additive noise denoising case, the CNN-based models
have achieved superior despeckling performances than the
classical approaches.
Despite the impressive performance, above methods have
one critical limitation, however. That is, once the supervised training of the network is done, the network parameters get frozen and no adaptation of the despeckling model
to a given noisy image can be done. To overcome such limitation, (Cha and Moon 2018b) have recently proposed an
adaptive method, dubbed as N-AIDE, for the additive noise
case that can carry out both the supervised training (on an offline dataset) and adaptive fine-tuning (on a given noisy data)
of the network parameters. Later, N-AIDE was extended in
(Cha and Moon 2018a) to implement a fully convolutional
architecture and unknown noise variance estimation scheme.
The crux of N-AIDE is to design the neural network to learn
pixelwise affine mappings with a specific conditional independence constraint and learn the network parameters by
setting an unbiased estimate of the true mean-squared error
(MSE) of the mappings as an optimizing objective.
In this paper, we show the framework of N-AIDE can
be successfully extended to the multiplicative noise case as
well and attain the state-of-the-art performance. Our contribution is threefold. First, we derive a new unbiased estimate of MSE for the multiplicative noise case while remaining in learning the pixelwise affine mappings with neural
networks, as in N-AIDE. Our estimate of MSE can be interpreted to give an intuitive explanation of the adaptivity
of our algorithm. Second, we devise a novel double-sided
masked CNN architecture, dubbed as DoPAMINE (Doublesided masked CNN for Pixelwise Adaptive MultIplicative
Noise dEspeckling), which maintains the conditional independence property of each pixel in any feature map given

We propose DoPAMINE, a new neural network based multiplicative noise despeckling algorithm. Our algorithm is inspired by Neural AIDE (N-AIDE), which is a recently proposed neural adaptive image denoiser. While the original NAIDE was designed for the additive noise case, we show that
the same framework, i.e., adaptively learning a network for
pixel-wise affine denoisers by minimizing an unbiased estimate of MSE, can be applied to the multiplicative noise case
as well. Moreover, we derive a double-sided masked CNN
architecture which can control the variance of the activation
values in each layer and converge fast to high denoising performance during supervised training. In the experimental results, we show our DoPAMINE possesses high adaptivity via
fine-tuning the network parameters based on the given noisy
image and achieves significantly better despeckling results
compared to SAR-DRN, a state-of-the-art CNN-based algorithm.

Introduction
Multiplicative noise, also known as speckle noise, typically
occurs in active imaging system, for example, laser images,
microscope images, and SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar)
images. While many general image denoising algorithms
have focused on the additive noise setting, despeckling the
multiplicative noise is also becoming important as the active sensors, e.g., SAR, are gradually becoming a significant
source of remote sensing data in the field of geographic mapping, resource surveying, and military reconnaissance, etc.
During the last few decades, various different approaches
have been proposed for the multiplicative noise despeckling; e.g., Bayesian methods (Lee 1980; 1981), non-local filtering (Buades, Coll, and Morel 2005; Dabov et al. 2007;
Rudin, Osher, and Fatemi 1992), total variation regularization (Huang, Ng, and Wen 2009), compressed sensing
based (Hao, Feng, and Xu 2012), and variational approaches
(Augert and Aujol 2008), etc. For more extensive survey on
the topic, we refer the readers to (Argenti et al. 2013).
In addition to the above mentioned classical approaches,
the deep learning-based multiplicative noise despeckling
methods have been recently considered, as in the additive
noise denoising case, e.g., (Zhang et al. 2017). Namely,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4031

