The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Blameworthiness in Multi-Agent Settings
Meir Friedenberg

Joseph Y. Halpern

Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
meir@cs.cornell.edu

Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
halpern@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract

an accident is brought about due to the actions of multiple
agents, we would like to understand to what extent each one
is blameworthy.
We tackle that problem here by defining a notion of group
blameworthiness in multi-agent scenarios. Our notion can
be viewed as a generalization of the single-agent notion of
blameworthiness defined by HK. However, as we shall see,
subtleties arise when considering groups. Once we have a
way of ascribing blameworthiness to a group, we show that
a standard notion from cooperative game theory, the Shapley value (Shapley 1953), can be used to apportion blame to
individual members of the group, and is in fact the only way
to do so that satisfies a number of desirable properties.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2
we review the basic causal framework used. Section 3 constitutes the core of the work; in it, we review the Halpern and
Kleiman-Weiner definition of blameworthiness in the singleagent setting, define group blameworthiness, show how to
apportion it to individual agents, and demonstrate how the
definition plays out in an illustrative example. In Section 4
we review related work and in Section 5 we conclude.

We provide a formal definition of blameworthiness in settings where multiple agents can collaborate to avoid a negative outcome. We first provide a method for ascribing blameworthiness to groups relative to an epistemic state (a distribution over causal models that describe how the outcome might
arise). We then show how we can go from an ascription of
blameworthiness for groups to an ascription of blameworthiness for individuals using a standard notion from cooperative game theory, the Shapley value. We believe that getting a good notion of blameworthiness in a group setting will
be critical for designing autonomous agents that behave in a
moral manner.

1

Introduction

As we move towards an era where autonomous systems are
ubiquitous, being able to reason formally about moral responsibility will become more and more critical. Such reasoning will be necessary not only for legal ascription of responsibility, but also in order to design systems that behave
in a moral manner in the first place. Unfortunately, though,
pinning down the many notions related to moral responsibility has been notoriously difficult to do, even informally. In
this work, we lay foundations on which these problems can
be solved.
Halpern and Kleiman-Weiner (2018) (HK from now on)
made important headway on this work by providing a definition of blameworthiness based on a causal framework. An
epistemic state, that is, a distribution over causal models, can
be used to capture an agent’s beliefs about the effects that actions may have. Given an epistemic state, they then provide
a definition of blameworthiness for an outcome by taking
into account both whether the agent believed they could affect the likelihood of the outcome and the cost they believed
would be necessary to do so.
While their definition seems compelling in single-agent
settings, as HK themselves observe, the definition does not
capture blameworthiness in multi-agent settings where, if
the group could coordinate their actions, they could easily
bring about a different outcome (see Section 3.2 for more
discussion of this issue). Being able to analyze blameworthiness in multi-agent scenarios seems critical in practice; if

2

Causal Models

At the heart of our definitions is the causal model framework
of Halpern and Pearl (2005). We briefly review the relevant
material here.
A causal situation is characterized by a set of variables
and their values. A set of structural equations describes
the effects that the different variables have on each other.
Among the variables we distinguish between exogenous
variables (those variables whose values are determined by
factors not modeled) and endogenous variables (those variables whose values are determined by factors in the model).
A causal model M = (S, F) consists of a signature S and
a set F of structural equations. A signature S = (U, V, R) is
in turn composed of a (finite but nonempty) set U of exogenous variables, a (finite but nonempty) set V of endogenous
variables, and a range function R that maps each variable in
U ∪V to a set of values it can take on. F associates with each
endogenous variable X ∈ V a function denoted FX such
that FX : (×U ∈U R(U )) × (×Y ∈V−{X} R(Y )) → R(X);
that is, FX determines the value of X, given the values of
all the other variables in U ∪ V.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

525

