The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Training Temporal Word Embeddings with a Compass
Valerio Di Carlo,1 Federico Bianchi,2 Matteo Palmonari2
1

BUP Solutions, Rome, Italy, 2 University of Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
valerio.dicarlo@bupsolutions.com, federico.bianchi@disco.unimib.it, palmonari@disco.unimib.it

Abstract

based on the distributional hypothesis (Firth 1957), which
states that the meaning of a word can be defined by the
word’s context.
Word embedding models based on this hypothesis have
received great attention over the last few years, driven by
the success of the neural network-based model Word2vec
(Mikolov et al. 2013a). These models represent word meanings as vectors, i.e., word embeddings. Most state-of-the-art
approaches, including Word2vec, are formulated as static
models. Since they assume that the meaning of each word
is fixed in time, they do not account for the semantic shifts
of words. Thus, recent approaches have tried to capture
the dynamics of language (Hamilton, Leskovec, and Jurafsky 2016; Bamler and Mandt 2018; Szymanski 2017;
Yao et al. 2018; Rudolph and Blei 2018).
A Temporal Word Embedding Model (TWEM) is a model
that learns temporal word embeddings, i.e., vectors that represent the meaning of words during a specific temporal interval. For example, a TWEM is expected to associate different vectors to the word gay at different times: its vector
in 1900 is expected to be more similar to the vector of joyful
than its vector in 2005. By building a sequence of temporal embeddings of a word over consecutive time intervals,
one can track the semantic shift occurred in the word usage.
Moreover, temporal word embeddings make it possible to
find distinct words that share a similar meaning in different
periods of time, e.g., by retrieving temporal embeddings that
occupy similar regions in the vector spaces that correspond
to distinct time periods.
The training process of a TWEM relies on diachronic text
corpora, which are obtained by partitioning text corpora into
temporal “slices” (Hamilton, Leskovec, and Jurafsky 2016;
Yao et al. 2018). Because of the stochastic nature of the neural networks training process, if we apply a Word2vec-like
model on each slice, the output vectors of each slice will be
placed in a vector space that has a different coordinate system. This will preclude comparison of vectors across different times (Hamilton, Leskovec, and Jurafsky 2016). A close
analogy would be to ask two cartographers to draw a map of
Italy during different periods, without giving either of them
a compass: the maps would be similar, although one will be
rotated by an unknown angle with respect to the other (Smith
et al. 2017). To be able to compare embeddings across time,
their vector spaces corresponding to different time periods

Temporal word embeddings have been proposed to support
the analysis of word meaning shifts during time and to study
the evolution of languages. Different approaches have been
proposed to generate vector representations of words that
embed their meaning during a specific time interval. However, the training process used in these approaches is complex, may be inefficient or it may require large text corpora.
As a consequence, these approaches may be difficult to apply in resource-scarce domains or by scientists with limited
in-depth knowledge of embedding models. In this paper, we
propose a new heuristic to train temporal word embeddings
based on the Word2vec model. The heuristic consists in using atemporal vectors as a reference, i.e., as a compass, when
training the representations specific to a given time interval.
The use of the compass simplifies the training process and
makes it more efficient. Experiments conducted using stateof-the-art datasets and methodologies suggest that our approach outperforms or equals comparable approaches while
being more robust in terms of the required corpus size.

Introduction
Language is constantly evolving, reflecting the continuous
changes in the world and the needs of the speakers. While
new words are introduced to refer to new concepts and experiences (e.g., Internet, hashtag, microaggression), some
words are subject to semantic shifts, i.e., their meanings
change over time (Basile et al. 2016). For example, in the
English language, the word gay originally meant joyful,
happy; only during the 20th century the word began to be
used in association with sexual orientation (Kulkarni et al.
2015).
Finding methods to represent and analyze word evolution
over time is a key task to understand the dynamics of human language, revealing statistical laws of semantic evolution (Hamilton, Leskovec, and Jurafsky 2016). In addition,
time-dependent word representations may be useful when
natural language processing algorithms that use these representations, e.g., an entity linking algorithm (Yamada et al.
2017), are applied to texts written in a specific time period.
Distributional semantics advocates a “usage-based” perspective on word meaning representation: this approach is
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6326

