The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-GCN: Graph Convolutional Networks for Multi-View Networks,
with Applications to Global Poverty
Muhammad Raza Khan, Joshua E. Blumenstock
University of California, Berkeley
mraza@bekeley.edu, jblumenstock@berkeley.edu

Abstract

able algorithms for performing prediction tasks on sparse
multi-view networks. Multi-view networks (also referred to
as multiplex and multi-modal networks), are networks in
which nodes can be related in multiple ways, and are the
natural abstraction for mobile phone networks, where different individuals have different types of relationships and can
interact using different modalities (such as phone calls, text
messages, money transfers, and app-based activity). Yet, the
vast majority of applied research using mobile phone data
— in developing and developed countries alike — ignores
the multi-view nature of phone networks.
This paper develops a novel approach for learning on
multi-view networks, which bridges two different strands
in the research literature. The first strand involves methods for efficient analysis of multi-view networks; the second explores algorithms for semi-supervised graph learning
(see Related Work, below). The method we develop provides an efficient approach for applying convolutional neural networks to multi-view graph-structured data. We benchmark this new method, which we call Multi-GCN (short for
Multi-View Graph Convolutional Networks), on three different mobile network datasets, on three different prediction tasks relevant to the international development community: (1) predicting the adoption of a new “financial inclusion” technology in a West African country; (2) predicting
whether an individual is living below the poverty line in an
East African country; (3) predicting the gender of mobile
phone subscribers in a South Asian country. In all cases,
we find that Multi-GCN outperforms state-of-the-art benchmarks, including standard Graph Convolutional Networks
(Kipf and Welling 2017), Node2Vec (Grover and Leskovec
2016), Deepwalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014), and
LINE (Tang et al. 2015).
While designed specifically with the developing-country
context in mind (where the sparsity and multi-view properties of networks are very salient), we show that MultiGCN can be more generally applied to a wide range of
problems involving multi-view networks. Indeed, most realworld networks are multi-view, including the network data
most frequently used by AI researchers (e.g., data from
Twitter, Amazon, Netflix, etc.). Our second set of results
shows that Multi-GCN can improve upon state-of-the-art algorithms not just in poverty-related contexts, but also in traditional classification problems. In particular, we show that

With the rapid expansion of mobile phone networks in developing countries, large-scale graph machine learning has
gained sudden relevance in the study of global poverty.
Recent applications range from humanitarian response and
poverty estimation to urban planning and epidemic containment. Yet the vast majority of computational tools and algorithms used in these applications do not account for the
multi-view nature of social networks: people are related in
myriad ways, but most graph learning models treat relations
as binary. In this paper, we develop a graph-based convolutional network for learning on multi-view networks. We show
that this method outperforms state-of-the-art semi-supervised
learning algorithms on three different prediction tasks using
mobile phone datasets from three different developing countries. We also show that, while designed specifically for use
in poverty research, the algorithm also outperforms existing
benchmarks on a broader set of learning tasks on multi-view
networks, including node labelling in citation networks.

1

Introduction

Over the past several years, large-scale graph machine learning has gained increasing relevance in the domain of international poverty research (Blumenstock 2016). Driven largely
by the expansion of mobile phone networks throughout developing countries – roughly 95% of the world population
now has mobile phone coverage (GSMA 2016) – vast quantities of network data are constantly being generated by people living in even extremely poor and marginalized communities. Recent work has shown how such data can be
used to inform critical policy decisions, including the measurement of living conditions (Blumenstock, Cadamuro, and
On 2015), the spread of infectious diseases (Wesolowski et
al. 2015), and the management of humanitarian crises (Lu,
Bengtsson, and Holme 2012). Private companies are also
taking advantage of this new source of data, for instance by
using data from mobile phones to generate credit scores that
can expand credit to millions of people historically shut out
of the formal banking ecosystem (Francis, Blumenstock, and
Robinson 2017).
However, a critical constraint to the use of these data in
settings related to economic development is the lack of scalCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

606

