The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Diffusions without Timestamps
Hao Huang,1 Qian Yan,1 Ting Gan,1 Di Niu,2 Wei Lu,3 Yunjun Gao4
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Canada
3
School of Information and DEKE, MOE, Renmin University of China, China
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{haohuang, qy, ganting}@whu.edu.cn, dniu@ualberta.ca, lu-wei@ruc.edu.cn, gaoyj@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

with given cascades, a major method is adopting a convex optimization framework to find influence relationships
that maximize the likelihood of the cascades, and utilizing techniques, such as sequential quadratic programming
(Myers and Leskovec 2010; Gomez-Rodriguez, Balduzzi,
and Schölkopf 2011), block coordinate descent (Du et al.
2012), stochastic and proximal gradient methods (GomezRodriguez, Leskovec, and Schölkopf 2013b; Daneshmand et
al. 2014), survival theory (Gomez-Rodriguez, Leskovec, and
Schölkopf 2013a), EM algorithm (Wang et al. 2014; Rong,
Zhu, and Cheng 2016), and sparse recovery (Pouget-Abadie
and Horel 2015), to approximate the optimal solution. While
several other approaches adopt non-convex optimization
frameworks, each of them finally decouples the non-convex
problem into multiple smaller convex problems (Netrapalli
and Sanghavi 2012; Narasimhan, Parkes, and Singer 2015;
Kalimeris et al. 2018). Another effective method is transforming the problem of diffusion network inference into that
of submodular optimization (Gomez-Rodriguez, Leskovec,
and Krause 2010; Gomez-Rodriguez and Schölkopf 2012)
by constructing a likelihood function of cascades with the
property of submodularity. Then, a near-optimal solution
of the submodular optimization problem can be achieved
by applying greedy algorithm. It has been validated that
with adequate amount of complete and correct cascades,
the influence relationships can be accurately recovered,
even using some simple inference approaches (Abrahao,
Chierichetti, and Kleinberg 2013). In addition, some more
sophisticated approaches are proposed to handle the case
that cascades have partial incorrect infection timestamps
(Sefer and Kingsford 2015) or miss partial snapshots of the
network (He et al. 2016; Lokhov 2016).

To learn the underlying parent-child influence relationships
between nodes in a diffusion network, most existing approaches require timestamps that pinpoint the exact time
when node infections occur in historical diffusion processes.
In many real-world diffusion processes like the spread of
epidemics, monitoring such infection temporal information
is often expensive and difficult. In this work, we study how
to carry out diffusion network inference without infection
timestamps, using only the final infection statuses of nodes
in each historical diffusion process, which are more readily
accessible in practice. Our main result is a probabilistic
model that can find for each node an appropriate number
of most probable parent nodes, who are most likely to have
generated the historical infection results of the node. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world networks
are conducted, and the results verify the effectiveness and
efficiency of our approach.

Introduction
In real life, many underlying influence relationships among
people form various diffusion networks, spreading different
contents such as information, viewpoints, or even viruses.
Diffusion network inference aims to uncover these influence relationships based on the spread results observed
in historical diffusion processes. Therefore, this problem
is fundamental in many applications such as information
propagation (He et al. 2015), viral marketing (Leskovec,
Adamic, and Huberman 2007), and epidemic prevention
(Wallinga and Teunis 2004), in which the inferred influence
relationships can intuitively illustrate the latent diffusion
paths, and help users to better predict, promote or prevent
future diffusion events.
Most existing approaches to diffusion network inference
are based on the following basic ideas: nodes that are
infected sequentially within a time interval are assumed
to have influence relationships, and the previously infected
ones are regarded as potential parent nodes of the subsequently infected ones. Hence, these approaches require the
observed spread results used by them (known as cascades)
to include the exact infection timestamps of the infected
nodes in each diffusion process. To infer diffusion networks

Although the cascade-based approaches have shown their
efficacy on diffusion network inference, acquiring the cascades are often expensive in many real-world diffusion
processes, such as the spread of epidemics and the viral
marketing campaigns. This is because, unlike tracing the infection timestamps of nodes in online social networks (e.g.,
Facebook and Weibo), monitoring the infections of nodes
to obtain the cascades through these real-world diffusion
processes is labor/resource demanding and time consuming.
Furthermore, due to a few unavoidable objective factors such
as a long incubation period (i.e., the time from infection
to illness), the observed cascades may not reflect the exact

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

582

