The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Hierarchical Multi-Task Approach for
Learning Embeddings from Semantic Tasks
Victor Sanh,1 Thomas Wolf,1 Sebastian Ruder2,3
1

2

Hugging Face, 20 Jay Street, Brooklyn, New York, United States
Insight Research Centre, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland
3
Aylien Ltd., 2 Harmony Court, Harmony Row, Dublin, Ireland
{victor, thomas}@huggingface.co, sebastian@ruder.io

Abstract

Table 1: A few examples motivating our selection of tasks.
Abbreviations: CR: Coreference Resolution, RE: Relation
Extraction, EMD: Entity Mention Detection, NER: Named
Entity Recognition, X Y: X is more likely to be Y.

Much effort has been devoted to evaluate whether multi-task
learning can be leveraged to learn rich representations that
can be used in various Natural Language Processing (NLP)
down-stream applications. However, there is still a lack of
understanding of the settings in which multi-task learning
has a significant effect. In this work, we introduce a hierarchical model trained in a multi-task learning setup on a set
of carefully selected semantic tasks. The model is trained in
a hierarchical fashion to introduce an inductive bias by supervising a set of low level tasks at the bottom layers of the
model and more complex tasks at the top layers of the model.
This model achieves state-of-the-art results on a number of
tasks, namely Named Entity Recognition, Entity Mention Detection and Relation Extraction without hand-engineered features or external NLP tools like syntactic parsers. The hierarchical training supervision induces a set of shared semantic
representations at lower layers of the model. We show that
as we move from the bottom to the top layers of the model,
the hidden states of the layers tend to represent more complex
semantic information.

Example
X works for Y
I love Melbourne. I’ve
lived three years in this
city.
Dell announced a $500M
net loss. The company is
near bankruptcy.

Predictions on one
task...
RE: {work, X, Y}
CR: (Melbourne,
this city)
RE: {live, I, this
city}
CR: (Dell, The
company)

...can help disambiguate
other tasks
X
Person (EMD)
Y
Organization or
Person (NER)
Melbourne
Location
(EMD/NER)
Dell
Organization
(EMD/NER)

tasks, such as, machine translation, sentiment classification or natural language inference. Although, (i) the selection of this diverse set of tasks, as well as, (ii) the control of the interactions between them are of great importance, a deeper understanding of (i) and (ii) is missing as
highlighted in the literature (Caruana 1997; Mitchell 1980;
Ruder 2017). This work explores this line of research by
combining, in a single model, four fundamental semantic NLP tasks: Named Entity Recognition, Entity Mention
Detection (also sometimes referred as mention detection),
Coreference Resolution and Relation Extraction. This selection of tasks is motivated by the inter-dependencies these
tasks share. In Table 1, we give three simple examples to
exemplify the reasons why these tasks should benefit from
each other. For instance, in the last example knowing that the
company and Dell are referring to the same real world entity,
Dell is more likely to be an organization than a person.
Several prior works (Yang, Salakhutdinov, and Cohen
2016; Bingel and Søgaard 2017) avoid the question of the
linguistic hierarchies between NLP tasks. We argue that
some tasks (so-called “low level” tasks) are simple and require a limited amount of modification to the input of the
model while other tasks (so-called “higher level” tasks) require a deeper processing of the inputs and likely a more
complex architecture. Following (Hashimoto et al. 2017;
Søgaard and Goldberg 2016), we therefore introduce a hierarchy between the tasks so that low level tasks are supervised
at lower levels of the architecture while keeping more com-

Introduction
Recent Natural Language Processing (NLP) models heavily rely on rich distributed representations (typically word
or sentence embeddings) to achieve good performance. One
example are so-called “universal representations” (Conneau
et al. 2017) which are expected to encode a varied set of
linguistic features, transferable to many NLP tasks. This
kind of rich word or sentence embeddings can be learned
by leveraging the training signal from different tasks in a
multi-task setting. It is known that a model trained in a
multi-task framework can take advantage of inductive transfer between the tasks, achieving a better generalization performance (Caruana 1993). Recent works in sentence embeddings (Subramanian et al. 2018; Jernite, Bowman, and
Sontag 2017) indicate that complementary aspects of the
sentence (e.g. syntax, sentence length, word order) should
be encoded in order for the model to produce sentence
embeddings that are able to generalize over a wide range
of tasks. Complementary aspects in representations can be
naturally encoded by training a model on a set of diverse
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6949

