The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

DeBGUer: A Tool for Bug Prediction and Diagnosis
Amir Elmishali, Roni Stern, Meir Kalech
The Cyber Security Research Center at Ben Gurion University of the Negev
amir9979@gmail.com, {sternron,kalech}@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

detection, LDP uses Machine Learning to train a fault prediction model that predicts which software components are
likely to contain bugs, providing guidance to testing efforts.
To support bug isolation, LDP uses a software diagnosis algorithm to detect the root cause of failed tests, and techniques from automated planning to plan additional tests.
In this paper, we describe DeBGUer, a novel open source
tool that is a partial implementation of LDP. DeBGUer provides a web interface to the LDP bug prediction and diagnosis capabilities. To use DeBGUer, a developer simply needs
to provide a link to its issue tracker (e.g., Jira) and source
control management system (e.g., Git). Then, DeBGUer visualizes the fault prediction results, showing a fault (bug)
likelihood estimate for every software component in a given
version of the code. Through its web interface, DeBGUer
also exposes the LDP diagnosis functionality: the developer
points to a set of tests, DeBGUer executes them, and if some
of the tests fail it outputs a set of software components that
may have caused the tests to fail.
Our tool can be seen as a counterpart to the GZoltar
tool (Campos et al. 2012). GZoltar provides two key functionalities: test suite minimization and software diagnosis.
DeBGUer does not deal with test suite minimization. The
DeBGUer software diagnosis algorithm is an improved version of diagnosis algorithm used by GZoltar.1 DeBGUer
also provides a software fault prediction functionality, which
is not supported by GZoltar.
Having such an implementation of LDP – DeBGUer –
serves several purposes. First, developers can use it in practice to follow LDP. Second, researchers working on software
fault prediction or software diagnosis can use DeBGUer to
evaluate their algorithms against the corresponding algorithms implemented in DeBGUer.
In this paper, we provide a brief description of the LDP
paradigm and describe our implementation of it in DeBGUer. Then, we report on an empirical evaluation of DeBGUer on 12 open-source projects so far. Results show accurate bug prediction and isolation capabilities, demonstrating the applicability of LDP in general and DeBGUer specifically.

In this paper, we present the DeBGUer tool, a web-based tool
for prediction and isolation of software bugs. DeBGUer is
a partial implementation of the Learn, Diagnose, and Plan
(LDP) paradigm, which is a recently introduced paradigm for
integrating Artificial Intelligence (AI) in the software bug detection and correction process. In LDP, a diagnosis (DX) algorithm is used to suggest possible explanations – diagnoses
– for an observed bug. If needed, a test planning algorithm
is subsequently used to suggest further testing. Both diagnosis and test planning algorithms consider a fault prediction model, which associates each software component (e.g.,
class or method) with the likelihood that it contains a bug.
DeBGUer implements the first two components of LDP, bug
prediction (Learn) and bug diagnosis (Diagnose). It provides
an easy-to-use web interface, and has been successfully tested
on 12 projects.

Introduction
Software is ubiquitous and its complexity is growing. Consequently, software bugs are common and their impact can
be very costly. Therefore, much effort is diverted by software engineers to detect, isolate, and fix bugs as early as
possible in the software development life cycle.
Learn, Diagnose, and Plan (LDP) is a recently proposed
paradigm that aims to support bug detection and isolation
using technologies from the Artificial Intelligence (AI) literature (Elmishali, Stern, and Kalech 2018). To support bug
Learn a Fault
Prediction Model

No

Generate
Tests

Run
Tests

Bug
Found?
Yes

Plan
Tests

No

Issue Tracking
System

Version
Control System

File Bug
Report

Fix Bug

Send bug
details

Run Dx
algorithm

Bug
Isolated?

Yes
Root cause

Figure 1: The workflow of the LDP paradigm.

1

GZoltar uses the Barinel algorithm (Abreu, Zoeteweij, and
van Gemund 2009), while DeBGUer uses a data-augmented version of Barinel that were already shown to outperform the vanilla

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9446

