The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Mechanism Design for Multi-Type
Housing Markets with Acceptable Bundles
Sujoy Sikdar, Sibel Adalı, Lirong Xia
Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
sikdas@rpi.edu, {sibel,xial}@cs.rpi.edu

Abstract

nism satisfies both core-selection and strategy-proofness in
such cases (Sönmez 1999). There have recently been two
major positive developments on core-selecting mechanisms
under natural assumptions on agents’ preferences with certain constraints on the final allocation. Fujita et al. (2015)
extend TTC under the assumption of lexicographic preferences, to the setting where agents are endowed with multiple items, and are allocated exactly as many items as their
initial endowments. Sikdar, Adali, and Xia (2017) extend
TTC to multi-type housing markets (Moulin 1995), where
there are multiple types of items, and each agents’ endowment and allocation consist of one item of each type, under
the assumption that agents’ preferences are represented by
lexicographic extensions of CP-nets. However, (Fujita et al.
2015) do not consider multiple types of items, and lexicographic extensions of CP-nets considered in (Sikdar, Adali,
and Xia 2017) cannot express preferences over bundles consisting multiple items of each type. This leaves the following open question: How to redistribute items when there are
multiple types of items and when agents are endowed with
multiple items of each type?

We extend the Top-Trading-Cycles (TTC) mechanism to select strict core allocations for housing markets with multiple types of items, where each agent may be endowed
and allocated with multiple items of each type. In doing so,
we advance the state of the art in mechanism design for
housing markets along two dimensions: First, our setting is
more general than multi-type housing markets (Moulin 1995;
Sikdar, Adali, and Xia 2017) and the setting of Fujita et
al. (2015). Further, we introduce housing markets with acceptable bundles (HMABs) as a more general setting where
each agent may have arbitrary sets of acceptable bundles.
Second, our extension of TTC is strict core selecting under
the weaker restriction on preferences of CMI-trees, which we
introduce as a new domain restriction on preferences that generalizes commonly-studied languages in previous works.

Introduction
Suppose there are two families: Family 1 owns two houses
and a car, while Family 2 owns a house and two cars. How
should they exchange their possessions when they each wish
to have exactly as many houses and cars as they initially
owned, and have preferences over combinations of houses
and cars? Shapley and Scarf (1974)’s housing markets are
an important model of such exchange economies. In a housing market, there are multiple agents, each initially endowed
with some indivisible items and preferences over bundles of
items. The goal is to design a mechanism without money to
re-allocate the items.
When each agent is initially endowed with a single item
and agents’ preferences are linear orders over all items,
Gale’s Top-Trading-Cycles (TTC) mechanism (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez 1999) satisfies many desirable properties. For example, it satisfies core-selection and strategyproofness, and runs in polynomial time. Core-selection requires that the outcome of the mechanism must be in the
core, which is the set of allocations where no group of agents
has an incentive to deviate by reallocating their initial endowments. Strategy-proofness requires that no agent has incentive to misreport preferences to obtain a better outcome.
However, when some agents initially own multiple items,
the problem becomes much more challenging as no mecha-

Our Contributions
We improve the state of the art in housing markets where
agents may own multiple items along two dimensions:
Dimension 1: We introduce the setting where agents may
be endowed and allocated with multiple items of each type.
Our setting is more general than previous works (Moulin
1995; Fujita et al. 2015; Sikdar, Adali, and Xia 2017).
Dimension 2: We introduce a new domain restriction
on preferences called conditionally-most-important trees
(CMI-trees). CMI-trees extends several popular languages
studied in previous work (in particular, the preference representations assumed in (Fujita et al. 2015) and (Sikdar, Adali,
and Xia 2017)), and represent preferences over bundles consisting of multiple items of each type.
We provide an extension of the TTC mechanism that is strict
core selecting for housing markets where agents may be endowed and allocated with multiple items of each type under
the assumption of CMI-tree preferences.
A housing market M is a tuple (N , I, O), where N is a
set of n agents, I is a set of indivisible items of p types, and
O gives each agent’s endowment of possibly multiple items

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2165

