The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Meimei: An Efficient Probabilistic Approach for Semantically Annotating Tables
Kunihiro Takeoka

Masafumi Oyamada

Shinji Nakadai

Takeshi Okadome

NEC Corporation
k-takeoka@az.jp.nec.com

NEC Corporation
m-oyamada@cq.jp.nec.com

NEC Corporation
s-nakadai@az.jp.nec.com

Kwansei Gakuin University
tokadome@acm.org

Abstract
Given a large amount of table data, how can we find the tables that contain the contents we want? A naive search fails
when the column names are ambiguous, such as if columns
containing stock price information are named “Close” in one
table and named “P” in another table.
One way of dealing with this problem that has been gaining
attention is the semantic annotation of table data columns by
using canonical knowledge. While previous studies successfully dealt with this problem for specific types of table data
such as web tables, it still remains for various other types of
table data: (1) most approaches do not handle table data with
numerical values, and (2) their predictive performance is not
satisfactory.
This paper presents a novel approach for table data annotation that combines a latent probabilistic model with multilabel classifiers. It features three advantages over previous
approaches due to using highly predictive multi-label classifiers in the probabilistic computation of semantic annotation.
(1) It is more versatile due to using multi-label classifiers in
the probabilistic model, which enables various types of data
such as numerical values to be supported. (2) It is more accurate due to the multi-label classifiers and probabilistic model
working together to improve predictive performance. (3) It is
more efficient due to potential functions based on multi-label
classifiers reducing the computational cost for annotation.
Extensive experiments demonstrated the superiority of the
proposed approach over state-of-the-art approaches for semantic annotation of real data (183 human-annotated tables
obtained from the UCI Machine Learning Repository).

1

Figure 1: Illustration of semantic table annotation. Ambiguous column names (e.g., columns containing a concept
“<Stock price>” are named either “P” or “Close”) are disambiguated by linking to corresponding canonical concepts
in a knowledge graph.

mantics by annotating table cells and columns with canonical knowledge (Venetis et al. 2011; Deng et al. 2013;
Mulwad, Finin, and Joshi 2013; Neumaier et al. 2016;
Pham et al. 2016; Zhang 2017).
Most conventional semantic table annotation methods
simply link column cells containing textual information
to knowledge graph concepts (entities) (Venetis et al.
2011; Deng et al. 2013; Mulwad, Finin, and Joshi 2013;
Zhang 2017). The columns containing these cells are called
“named-entity columns” (NE-columns). The columns containing numerical values are not linked to knowledge, which
are called “literal-columns.” While several methods for
annotating literal-columns have been reported, their predictive performance is not satisfactory (Pham et al. 2016;
Neumaier et al. 2016).
We have developed a novel approach for annotating various types of table data in which probabilistic-model-based
annotation is integrated with highly predictive multi-label
classifiers (Tsoumakas and Katakis 2007). Our approach extends a state-of-the-art semantic annotation method based
on a Markov random field model (Limaye, Sarawagi, and
Chakrabarti 2010) with multi-label classifiers to enable it to
support various types of columns including ones containing
numerical data and to improve its predictive performance.
We summarize our contributions:

Introduction

Given a large number of web tables, how can we find tables that contain stock price information? Conventional information retrieval techniques such as column-name based
search sometimes fail to find relevant tables because the column/table names are ambiguous. For instance, stock price
information may be stored with various column names,
sometimes as “P” (for “price”) or ”Close” (for “closing
price”) as shown in Figure 1. This issue led to increased
attention being paid by academia and industry to semantic annotation of table data, i.e., the unification of table sec 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

281

