The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

WSD-GAN: Word Sense Disambiguation Using Generative Adversarial Networks
Zijian Hu,1,2∗ Fuli Luo,1∗ Yutong Tan,2 Wenxin Zeng,3 Zhifang Sui1
1
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Ministry of Education,
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
zijian hu@mail.bnu.edu.cn, luofuli@pku.edu.cn, tanyt@mail.bnu.edu.cn,
zengwenxin@bupt.edu.cn, szf@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

2017), we propose a novel model WSD-GAN which unifies
the above mentioned two methods. Unlike the recent works
which incorporate knowledge into neural network (Luo et
al. 2018b), we adopt a minimax game theory. The generator aims to maximise the log-likelihood of classification by
learning from labelled data, while the discriminator acts as a
challenger which takes advantage of knowledge information
and further pushes the generator to its limit. Experimental
results show that the WSD-GAN takes the advantage of both
the two kinds of resources and then better combine the two
schools of thinking in WSD.

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD), as a tough task in Natural Language Processing (NLP), aims to identify the correct sense of an ambiguous word in a given context. There
are two mainstreams in WSD. Supervised methods mainly
utilize labeled context to train a classifier which generates
the right probability distribution of word senses. Meanwhile
knowledge-based (unsupervised) methods which focus on
glosses (word sense definitions) always calculate the similarity of context-gloss pair as score to find out the right
word sense. In this paper, we propose a generative adversarial framework WSD-GAN which combines two mainstream
methods in WSD. The generative model, based on supervised methods, tries to generate a probability distribution over
the word senses. Meanwhile the discriminative model, based
on knowledge-based methods, focuses on predicting the relevancy of the context-gloss pairs and identifies the correct
pairs over the others. Furthermore, in order to optimize both
two models, we leverage policy gradient to enhance the performances of the two models mutually. Our experimental results show that WSD-GAN achieves competitive results on
several English all-words WSD datasets.

WSD-GAN
Maximise the gap

Cosine Layer
c

D
BiLSTM Layer

X0 … Xt-1

Sampling Layer

g*

Xt

Xt+1 … Xn

gj

Softmax Layer

Introduction

G

There are several research lines about WSD. We can divide
them into two categories: knowledge-driven unsupervised
methods and data-driven supervised methods.
• Knowledge, especially the gloss which actually defines a
word sense meaning, proves helpful to WSD. The glossbased methods like Lesk (Basile, Caputo, and Semeraro
2014) solves the WSD problem by picking the highest
overlap (or similarity) between the context and gloss.
• Labeled data plays a key role in supervised methods
which treat WSD as a classification task(Kågebäck and
Salomonsson 2016). These models are trained beyond traditional log-likelihood and predict a word sense by choosing the highest probability over the word sense distribution.
In this paper, we consider the two schools of thinking as
two sides of the same coin. Inspired by Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) using in Information Retrieval (Wang et al.

c’

BiLSTM Layer

X0 … Xt-1

Xt

Xt+1 … Xn

Figure 1: Architecture of WSD-GAN

Architecture of WSD-GAN
The WSD-GAN architecture is illustrated in Fig 1, which
contains two separated models, the generator and the discriminator, represented as G and D.
Generator The input [x0 , x1 , ..., xt , ..., xn−1 , xn ] is the
context words around the target ambiguous words. Having
utilized the pre-trained embedding matrix, we feed them
into the bidirectional LSTM Layer. The representation of the
context c is computed as the concatenation of the forward
output at position t − 1 and the backward output at position
→
−
←
−
t + 1. More specifically, c = [ h t−1 : h t+1 ].
And then, we leverage a softmax layer to compute the
probability pθ (g|c) digstribution over all the senses (or

∗

Equal Contribution.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9943

