The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Novel Framework for Robustness Analysis of Visual QA Models
Jia-Hong Huang,1,2 Cuong Duc Dao,1,* Modar Alfadly,1,* Bernard Ghanem1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, 2 National Taiwan University
*
Authors contributed equally to this work
jiahong.huang@kaust.edu.sa, cuong@neuraltalks.io, modar.alfadly@kaust.edu.sa, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been playing an essential role in
many computer vision tasks including Visual Question Answering (VQA). Until recently, the study of their accuracy
was the main focus of research but now there is a trend toward
assessing the robustness of these models against adversarial
attacks by evaluating their tolerance to varying noise levels.
In VQA, adversarial attacks can target the image and/or the
proposed main question and yet there is a lack of proper analysis of the later. In this work, we propose a flexible framework that focuses on the language part of VQA that uses semantically relevant questions, dubbed basic questions, acting
as controllable noise to evaluate the robustness of VQA models. We hypothesize that the level of noise is negatively correlated to the similarity of a basic question to the main question.
Hence, to apply noise on any given main question, we rank a
pool of basic questions based on their similarity by casting
this ranking task as a LASSO optimization problem. Then,
we propose a novel robustness measure Rscore and two largescale basic question datasets (BQDs) in order to standardize
robustness analysis for VQA models.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: More robust models tolerate larger noise levels.
Thus, To assess the robustness of VQA models, we apply
noise at a controllable level to the main question. We sort
a dataset of basic questions based on their similarity to the
main question and append three basic questions at a time
as noise. The robustness is then measured by Rscore as the
deterioration in accuracy over a given testing dataset.

Visual Question Answering (VQA) is one of the most challenging computer vision tasks in which an algorithm is
given a natural language question about an image and tasked
with producing an answer for that image-question pair. Recently, various VQA models (Antol et al. 2015; Malinowski,
Rohrbach, and Fritz 2015; Noh, Hongsuck Seo, and Han
2016; Wu et al. 2016; Lu et al. 2016; Li and Jia 2016;
Ben-younes et al. 2017; Fukui et al. 2016; Kim et al. 2017)
have been proposed to tackle this problem, and their main
performance measure is accuracy. In general, any model
must have in some sense few aspects of quality relevant to
the problem it solves. Accuracy, robustness, stubbornness,
and myopia are some examples of such qualities for VQA
models that were studied by the community (Agrawal, Batra, and Parikh 2016). Obviously, some qualities are more
important than others and an overall evaluation of a model
should rationalize the interactions of these qualities if possible. In this work, we are interested only in the robustness
of VQA models to small noise or perturbation to the input
question, dubbed main question (MQ).

Motivation
The idea of analyzing model robustness as well as training
robust models is already a rapidly growing research topic for
deep learning models applied to images, e.g. adversarial attacks in image classification (Fawzi, Moosavi Dezfooli, and
Frossard 2017; Xu, Caramanis, and Mannor 2009). However, most VQA research study other quality aspects that test
certain signs of intelligence, such as stubbornness, compositionality, and myopia. Robustness is a concept that despite
its importance is heavily misinterpreted and commonly neglected. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
propose a measure for the robustness of VQA models.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8449

