The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Controllable Text Formalization
Parag Jain, Abhijit Mishra, Amar Prakash Azad,
Karthik Sankaranarayanan
IBM Research
{pajain34,abhijimi,amarazad,kartsank}@in.ibm.com

Abstract
We propose a novel framework for controllable natural language transformation. Realizing that the requirement of parallel corpus is practically unsustainable for controllable generation tasks, an unsupervised training scheme is introduced.
The crux of the framework is a deep neural encoder-decoder
that is reinforced with text-transformation knowledge through
auxiliary modules (called scorers). These scorers, based on
off-the-shelf language processing tools, decide the learning
scheme of the encoder-decoder based on its actions. We apply this framework for the text-transformation task of formalizing an input text by improving its readability grade; the degree of required formalization can be controlled by the user
at run-time. Experiments on public datasets demonstrate the
efficacy of our model towards: (a) transforming a given text
to a more formal style, and (b) varying the amount of formalness in the output text based on the specified input control.
Our code and datasets are released for academic use.

1

Figure 1: Controllable formalization showing an anecdotal
snippet and its expected variations w.r.t. input controls
both the language transformation (while preserving semantics), as well as the style transformation, simultaneously for
each task. We make 3 key observations with respect to this:
(i) since the preservation of language semantics is necessary
for transformation, whereas only the attribute or style of the
text needs to be changed, it should be possible to decouple
these two aspects, (ii) it should be cheaper to independently
verify these aspects at the output (with well-understood NLP
techniques) than to specify the required transformation for
each input text with its output example, and (iii) it should be
possible to control the degree or magnitude of the intended
attribute (readability level, politeness level, etc.) required at
the output. These observations motivate us to seek an unsupervised approach to such a gamut of text transformation
tasks and underlie the proposed NLG framework.
Our proposed framework relies only on unlabeled texts
for initialization and an ensemble of off-the-shelf language
processing modules. We test our framework for the task of
formalizing the input text, where the readability of the output text is improved while preserving its meaning (refer Figure 1 for an example). The degree of formalization required
may be decided by the user during run-time and is provided
as a control input to the system. This task is chosen due to
its relevance in many NLG applications such as formal conversation generation, email response composition, or summary document generation in compliance and regulatory domains etc. Moreover, such a standalone system can provide
assistance to professional writers, the same way Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) systems currently assist human
translators. This paves the way for cost- and time-effective
solutions for textual content creation.

Introduction

Automatic text style-transformation is one of the key goals
of text-to-text natural language generation (NLG) research
and most existing systems for such tasks are either supervised (e.g., variants of Seq2Seq neural models (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014),
or Statistical Machine Translation models (Koehn 2009)) or
template/rule based (Gatt and Reiter 2009). Supervised NLG
requires large-scale parallel corpora for training, which is a
major impediment in scaling to diverse use-cases. For example, in the context of commercial dialog systems alone,
there are several scenarios where a system’s answer (which
may be coming from a database (Jain et al. 2018)) needs to
be transformed either for its tone (politeness, excitedness,
etc.), or its level of formality (casual, formal, etc. based on
the user’s personality), or for its complexity (simplifying linguistic or domain-specific terminology such as in legal or
medical domains). As such requirements and use-cases keep
growing, it is practically unsustainable to obtain large scale
parallel corpora for each such text transformation task.
From a scientific perspective, a supervised treatment of
all such tasks using several parallel corpora seeks to learn
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6554

