The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Sharper Generalization Bound for Divide-and-Conquer Ridge Regression
Shusen Wang
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology
shusen.wang@stevens.edu

where γ is the regularization parameter trading off the bias
and variance. It requires O(nd) memory and O(nd2 ) time
√
(via the QR decomposition) or O(nd κ log d ) time (via
the conjugate gradient method), where κ is the condition
number of the Hessian matrix n1 XT X + γI and  is the error
tolerance. For big-data or high-dimensional problems, the
feature matrix X may not fit in the memory of any single
machine, and the computation may be too expensive.
Different methods have been proposed to address the
computational challenges. One approach is the randomized
approximation which sacrifices some accuracy for a significant reduction in the time and space complexities (Lu
et al. 2013; Avron, Clarkson, and Woodruff 2016; Wang,
Gittens, and Mahoney 2018; Wang et al. 2017; Derezinski
and Warmuth 2018). The key idea is the matrix sketching,
which finds a smaller matrix which preserves some taskspecific information in the original matrix and does the
computation on the smaller matrix (Drineas and Mahoney
2016; Mahoney 2011; Woodruff 2014). Although the theories in (Avron, Clarkson, and Woodruff 2016; Clarkson
and Woodruff 2013; Drineas, Mahoney, and Muthukrishnan
2006; Drineas et al. 2011) showed that this approximate
solution, denote w̃, is not far from the ERM solution werm in
the `2 norm sense, it magnifies either the bias or the variance
for all the commonly used matrix sketching (Raskutti and
Mahoney 2015; Wang, Gittens, and Mahoney 2018). Such a
pessimistic result indicates that in ML applications, matrix
sketching leads to much worse statistical risk.
Another popular approach to large-scale linear regression
is distributed computing which uses massive computation
power to handle big data, e.g., the works by (Avron, Maymounkov, and Toledo 2010; Meng, Saunders, and Mahoney
2014). Although it significantly reduces the local computation and memory costs, distributed computing inevitably
incurs communication across the computer network. Numerical methods such as conjugate gradient are highly
iterative, and each iteration requires communication and
synchronization. When implemented using distributed computing systems such as MapReduce (Dean and Ghemawat
2008), Apache Spark (Zaharia et al. 2010; Meng et al.
2016), and Parameter Server (Li et al. 2014), communication
and/or synchronization can often be the bottleneck of such
numerical methods. Avoiding or reducing communication
can make distributed computing much more efficient.

Abstract
We study the distributed machine learning problem where the
n feature-response pairs are partitioned among m machines
uniformly at random. The goal is to approximately solve an
empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem with the minimum amount of communication. The divide-and-conquer
(DC) method, which was proposed several years ago, lets
every worker machine independently solve the same ERM
problem using its local feature-response pairs and the driver
machine combine the solutions. This approach is in one-shot
and thereby extremely communication-efficient. Although
the DC method has been studied by many prior works,
reasonable generalization bound has not been established
before this work.
For the ridge regression problem, we show that the prediction
error of the DC method on unseen test samples is at most
 times larger than the optimal. There have been constantfactor bounds in the prior works, their sample complexities
have a quadratic dependence on d, which does not match the
setting of most real-world problems. In contrast, our bounds
are much stronger. First, our 1 +  error bound is much
better than their constant-factor bounds. Second, our sample
complexity is merely linear with d.

Introduction
We study linear regression, a fundamental problem in machine learning (ML), and conduct a statistical analysis of
the divide-and-conquer (DC) method (Zhang, Duchi, and
Wainwright 2013; 2015) for solving ridge regression. We
first formally define the problem. Let X = [x1 , · · · , xn ]T ∈
Rn×d be the training feature matrix and y = [y1 , · · · , yn ] ∈
Rn be the training response vector. Assume the observed
response yi is the sum of a linear function w0T xi and
unknown random noise. The goal is to estimate w0 based
on the training data and make a prediction for any unseen
test feature vector x0 ∈ Rd .
A principled approach to the estimation of w0 is the
regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM), including
the ridge regression, LASSO (Tibshirani 1996), and the
elastic net (Zou and Hastie 2005). Because of the simplicity,
we focus on the ridge regression model
1
kXw − yk22 + γ2 kwk22 ,
(1)
werm = argmin 2n
w∈Rd

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5305

