The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

What and Where the Themes Dominate in Image
Xinyu Xiao,1,2 Lingfeng Wang,1 Shiming Xiang,1,2 Chunhong Pan1
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xinyu.xiao, lfwang, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

The attention mechanism has been widely used in many
image captioning models (Xu et al. 2015; Lu et al. 2016;
Gu et al. 2018). There are two broad categories of visual
attention mechanisms: exogenous objects mainly based on
the visual stimulus and endogenous knowledge determined
by cognitive phenomena. The normal attention operation is
depended on the exogenous objects which focuses on specific parts of the visual input to compute the adequate responses. Differently, according to the research in (Borji,
Sihite, and Itti 2013), human visual attention is what you
see as well as what you known which means that it is
decided by the endogenous knowledge and the exogenous
salient objects simultaneously. It indicates that, when human describes a scene with a sentence, the known salient
objects (including instances, actions, scenes, etc.) are captured and served as the themes to guide the description generation. Since the unknown objects might be difficult to interpret in human brain, the attended objects would be always known about in advance to human. Rather than human
attention in scene description, the recently implemented attention mechanism in image captioning only focus on the
exogenous salient objects that come to the forefront dynamically. But what semantics the attended objects refer to
can not be confirmed. Some models (Pedersoli et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2017) utilize the development of object detection
(Ren et al. 2015), and apply the features of the detected regions to image captioning. These regions are known about
in advance, which is approaching to human behavior. But
the annotated of the detected regions are limited and cannot
meet the requirements of all the image captioning.
To human being, the distinctive description to a scene is
specially mentioned when distinguished from others. The
distinctiveness between every two different images is containing. If the image captioning model could capture it,
the diversity of the overall generated captions can improve.
Depending on the distinctiveness contained in image, the
themes in image have distinctiveness as well. Therefore, improving the distinctiveness of the theme learning can affect
the quality of the generated description.
Reinforcement learning (RL) has become a standard
method for training agents to interact with an environment,
even in fields like sequence learning (Rennie et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2017). In convention, because of the application of
Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), the log-likelihood

The image captioning is to describe an image with natural
language as human, which has benefited from the advances
in deep neural network and achieved substantial progress in
performance. However, the perspective of human description
to scene has not been fully considered in this task recently.
Actually, the human description to scene is tightly related to
the endogenous knowledge and the exogenous salient objects
simultaneously, which implies that the content in the description is confined to the known salient objects. Inspired by this
observation, this paper proposes a novel framework, which
explicitly applies the known salient objects in image captioning. Under this framework, the known salient objects are
served as the themes to guide the description generation. According to the property of the known salient object, a theme is
composed of two components: its endogenous concept (what)
and the exogenous spatial attention feature (where). Specifically, the prediction of each word is dominated by the concept
and spatial attention feature of the corresponding theme in the
process of caption prediction. Moreover, we introduce a novel
learning method of Distinctive Learning (DL) to get more
specificity of generated captions like human descriptions. It
formulates two constraints in the theme learning process to
encourage distinctiveness between different images. Particularly, reinforcement learning is introduced into the framework
to address the exposure bias problem between the training and
the testing modes. Extensive experiments on the COCO and
Flickr30K datasets achieve superior results when compared
with the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
The technique of image description is to simulate human
description of a scene content. Benefited from the development of the deep neural network, the performance of image captioning has achieved considerable progress in recent years (Vinyals et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2015; Rennie et
al. 2017). Current structure of image captioning methods
are typically developed by taking the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) plus Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
as the encoding-decoding framework. Based on the framework, various variants have been proposed to achieve the
goal of description with natural language (Lu et al. 2016;
Gan et al. 2016).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9021

