The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adversarial Actor-Critic Method for Task and
Motion Planning Problems Using Planning Experience
Beomjoon Kim, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Tomás Lozano-Pérez
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{beomjoon,lpk,tlp}@mit.edu

Abstract
We propose an actor-critic algorithm that uses past planning experience to improve the efficiency of solving robot
task-and-motion planning (TAMP) problems. TAMP planners search for goal-achieving sequences of high-level operator instances specified by both discrete and continuous
parameters. Our algorithm learns a policy for selecting the
continuous parameters during search, using a small training
set generated from the search trees of previously solved instances. We also introduce a novel fixed-length vector representation for world states with varying numbers of objects
with different shapes, based on a set of key robot configurations. We demonstrate experimentally that our method learns
more efficiently from less data than standard reinforcementlearning approaches and that using a learned policy to guide
a planner results in the improvement of planning efficiency.

(a) Conveyor belt domain: green objects must be packed in
room.

Introduction
A task and motion planning (TAMP) problem involves planning a sequence of low-level robot motions that achieves
a high level objective, such as cooking a meal, by integrating low-level geometric reasoning with high-level symbolic reasoning. This typically requires a search in a highdimensional hybrid space, for a sequence of high-level operators, each of which has both continuous and discrete parameters. Existing planners (Garrett, Kaelbling, and LozanoPérez 2017; Cambon, Alami, and Gravot 2009; Srivastava
et al. 2014; Kaelbling and Lozano-Perez 2011) successfully
tackle these problems, but they can be very computationally
costly, because each node expansion typically requires a call
to a motion planner to determine feasibility.
This paper proposes a learning algorithm that learns to
guide the planner’s search based on past search experience. We focus on an important subclass of TAMP called
geometric-TAMP (G-TAMP), whose emphasis is on geometric reasoning rather than symbolic task reasoning. In GTAMP, the primary interest is achieving a high-level objective by changing the poses of objects using collision-free
motions, as shown in Figures 1a and 1b. Whether cooking,
cleaning, or packing, all TAMP problems require geometric reasoning. Therefore, any efficiency improvements to GTAMP problems, will benefit TAMP more broadly. For G-

(b) Fetch domain: objects must be removed from path to target
object.

Figure 1: Examples of initial (left) and goal states (right).

TAMP problems, choosing values for the continuous parameters of operators (such as grasps or object placements) is a
crucial point of leverage. Choosing an infeasible value leads
to a motion-planner call that will take a long time to fail.
Even if the chosen value is feasible, but ultimately does not
lead to a full solution, the planner will waste time searching.
We propose to learn a policy that maps a representation of
the planning state to the continuous parameters of an operator to be applied in that state. We leave the rest of the decision variables, such as collision-free motions and discrete
operator parameters, to be filled in by the planner. This has
many benefits from both learning and planning perspectives.
For learning, this allows the policy to operate at a higher
level, namely by specifying goals for the low-level motion
planners. Such a policy can be learned from less experience
than a policy for low-level robot motions. For planning, such

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8017

