The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Neural Bag-of-Matrix-Summarization with Riemannian Network
Hong Liu,†∗ Jie Li,†∗ Yongjian Wu,‡ Rongrong Ji†‡\
†

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Department of Cognitive Science,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
‡
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
‡
Tencent Youtu Lab, Tencent Technology (Shanghai) Co.,Ltd, Shanghai, China
lynnliu.xmu@gmail.com, lijie32@stu.xmu.edu.cn, littlekenwu@tencent.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn
∗
Contributed Equally, \ Corresponding Author
Abstract

at capturing the overall probability of data variations. By
preserving such non-Euclidean geometric properties, SPD
matrices can measure nearness on a specific Riemannian
manifold (Sra 2012) rather than in the Euclidean space,
which considers the geodesic distance between two points
on the Riemannian manifold. As observed in (Arsigny et al.
2007), by using SPD matrices, the Riemannian space eliminates the large swelling effect that is previously existed in
the Euclidean space, which brings significant advantages in
handling various problems suiting for non-Euclidean metrics. However, directly applying traditional machine learning algorithms with Euclidean geometry to SPD metrics
often results in poor performance (Huang et al. 2017b).
To overcome this problem, the Riemannian metric based
learning model has received increasing focus, which can
directly conduct non-linear learning by fed into the SPD
matrix representations (Pennec, Fillard, and Ayache 2006;
Wang et al. 2015a).
Recently, deep learning methods have received much attention in visual feature representation (Lin et al. 2018).
However, most schemes consider solely first-order statistics using traditional neural networks. More recently, the
second-order statistics, such as covariance, are further considered to construct better regional descriptors to solve challenging problems like fine-grained visual recognition (Lin,
RoyChowdhury, and Maji 2015; Lin and Maji 2017). These
works do not use dimensionality reduction layers to obtain
effective second-order statistics, which instead directly use
the multiple fully-connected (FC) layers following the matrix vectorization processing of the SPD matrices. However,
such non-Euclidean representation implies the lack of familiar properties such as global parameterization, common coordinates, vector space structure, and shift-invariance. Consequently, basic operations like FC layers cannot be well defined on the non-Euclidean domains (Bronstein et al. 2017).
Moreover, such vanilla deep structure will destroy the Riemannian goemetry and corrupt the classification results, as
demonstrated in our experiments.
To overcome these problems, Riemannian SPD Matrix
Network (SPDNet) (Huang and Van Gool 2017) is proposed,
which receives SPD matrices as inputs. It aims to preserve
the SPD structure across layers to be non-linearly mapped
into latent space and then does the task like classification on
this latent space. In particular, SPDNet is composed of two

Symmetric positive defined (SPD) matrix has attracted increasing research focus in image/video analysis, which merits in capturing the Riemannian geometry in its structured 2D
feature representation. However, computation in the vector
space on SPD matrices cannot capture the geometric properties, which corrupts the classification performance. To this
end, Riemannian based deep network has become a promising solution for SPD matrix classification, because of its excellence in performing non-linear learning over SPD matrix. Besides, Riemannian metric learning typically adopts a
kNN classifier that cannot be extended to large-scale datasets,
which limits its application in many time-efficient scenarios.
In this paper, we propose a Bag-of-Matrix-Summarization
(BoMS) method to be combined with Riemannian network,
which handles the above issues towards highly efficient and
scalable SPD feature representation. Our key innovation lies
in the idea of summarizing data in a Riemannian geometric space instead of the vector space. First, the whole training set is compressed with a small number of matrix features
to ensure high scalability. Second, given such a compressed
set, a constant-length vector representation is extracted by
efficiently measuring the distribution variations between the
summarized data and the latent feature of the Riemannian
network. Finally, the proposed BoMS descriptor is integrated
into the Riemannian network, upon which the whole framework is end-to-end trained via matrix back-propagation. Experiments on four different classification tasks demonstrate
the superior performance of the proposed method over the
state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Symmetric Positive Defined (SPD) matrix has been recently
popular for feature representation in various computer vision and artificial intelligence applications, e.g., image classification (Fathy and Chellappa 2017), action recognition
(Huang et al. 2017a), image retrieval (Ji et al. 2017) and
brain computer interface (BCI) data analysis (Lotte et al.
2018). Existing works in feature representation with SPD
matrix can be categorized into either using covariance matrix (Wang et al. 2012) or using Gaussian distribution matrix
(Wang et al. 2015b). The former is to preserve the secondorder statistics of a set of vectors, while the latter targets
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8746

