The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unknown Agents in Friends Oriented
Hedonic Games: Stability and Complexity
Nathanaël Barrot,1,2 Kazunori Ota,2 Yuko Sakurai,3 Makoto Yokoo2,1
1

RIKEN, Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), 2 Kyushu University,
3
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
nathanaelbarrot@gmail.com, ota@agent.inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp
yuko.sakurai@aist.go.jp, yokoo@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract

i.e. our friends and our enemies. Agents that we don’t
know enough to identify as friends or enemies, i.e. unknown
agents, have a minor impact on our preferences. However,
we argue that the attitude toward unknown agents is not restricted to neutrality. In personality theory, the broadly recognized five-factor model presents extraversion as one of
the five core personality traits (see introduction (McCrae
and John 1992) and handbook (John and Srivastava 1999)).
Roughly speaking, individuals with high extraversion tend
to be sociable and to enjoy meeting new people, while those
with low extraversion tend to be reserved and to avoid large
social gatherings. In our setting, neutrality toward unknown
agents would lie in the middle of this continuous scale. In
this paper, we consider two alternative preferences which
take into account this personality trait: friends appreciation
with extraverted agents and friends appreciation with introverted agents, modelling agents who prefer coalitions with
respectively more or fewer unknown agents.
From a theoretical viewpoint, analyzing how unknown
agents affect stability concepts more precisely is meaningful. Indeed, under friends appreciation without unknown
agents, an individually stable coalition structure always exists (Dimitrov and Sung 2004), while when considering unknown agents with no impact on preferences, the question
has still to be addressed. In both models, there always exists a core stable coalition structure, which can be found in
polynomial time. Since in the more general model of additively separable preferences a core/individually stable outcome may not exist, we hope to clarify a boundary case
where core/individual stability is guaranteed.
Our results show that non-neutrality toward unknown
agents affects the existence of the core and of an individually
stable coalition structure: they are not guaranteed to exist in
the presence of extraverted agents. We also study individual
stability for friends appreciation under neutrality, showing
that an individually stable coalition structure may not exist.
For both stability notions under friends appreciation with
extraverted agents, we investigate the complexity of verifying whether a given coalition structure is stable (V ERIF)
and of deciding the existence of a stable coalition structure
(E XIST). We show that deciding whether core stable and
individually stable outcomes exist are respectively NPNP complete and NP-complete. The results contrast strongly in
the presence of introverted agents: both core stable outcomes

We study hedonic games under friends appreciation, where
each agent considers other agents friends, enemies, or unknown agents. Although existing work assumed that unknown agents have no impact on an agent’s preference, it may
be that her preference depends on the number of unknown
agents in her coalition. We extend the existing preference,
friends appreciation, by proposing two alternative attitudes
toward unknown agents, extraversion and introversion, depending on whether unknown agents have a slightly positive
or negative impact on preference. When each agent prefers
coalitions with more unknown agents, we show that both core
stable outcomes and individually stable outcomes may not exist. We also prove that deciding the existence of the core and
the existence of an individual stable coalition structure are
respectively NPNP -complete and NP-complete.

Introduction
In many real-life examples, ranging from sports clubs to
political parties, individuals (agents) carry out activities in
groups (coalitions) to achieve common goals. Coalition formation with hedonic preferences, or hedonic games, is concerned with settings where each agent’s payoff depends only
on the coalition that she joins. A natural question in hedonic games is the existence of stable partitions of the set of
agents (coalition structures). Various stability concepts have
been studied; among the most prominent are core and individual stability (see handbook Aziz and Savani (2016)).
In hedonic games, each agent’s preference is a weak order over the exponentially many coalitions that she can join.
Therefore, several compact preference representations have
been proposed in the literature. Dimitrov et al. (2006) proposed a notably simple preference representation, where
each agent partitions the set of agents into friends and enemies. They studied a preference extension called friends
appreciation where each agent prefers coalitions with more
friends and, in case of a tie, with fewer enemies. Recently
Ohta et al. (2017) slightly extended this model by introducing agents who do not impact preferences (neutral agents).
We propose to extend this analysis by generalizing friends
appreciation. Indeed it is quite natural to assume that only
a subset of agents significatively affects our preferences,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1756

