The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Neural Multi-Task Learning Framework to Jointly Model
Medical Named Entity Recognition and Normalization
Sendong Zhao,∗ Ting Liu,‡ Sicheng Zhao,† Fei Wang∗
∗

Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, USA
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California Berkeley, USA
‡
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{sez4001,few2001}@med.cornell.edu, schzhao@gmail.com, tliu@ir.hit.edu.cn
†

Abstract

malization. Lou et al. (2017) proposed a transition-based
model to jointly perform medical named entity recognition
and normalization, casting the output construction process
into an incremental state transition process. However, these
existing joint modeling methods (1) rely heavily on handcrafted features and task specific resources thus fail to encode complicated and general features such as characterlevel and semantic-level features; (2) use simplistic ways to
jointly model medical named entity recognition and normalization, which cannot provide essential mutual supports between these two.
To improve the joint modeling medical named entity
recognition and normalization (MER and MEN), we propose a novel deep neural multi-task learning (MTL) framework with two explicit feedback strategies, which can make
use of the mutual benefits between recognition and normalization in a more advanced and intelligent way. First, our
method benefits from general representations of both tasks
provided by multi-task learning, which enjoys a regularization effect (Collobert et al. 2011; Ruder 2017) that leads to
more general representations to help both tasks. Specifically,
it minimizes over-fitting to any specific tasks, thus makes
the learned representations universal across tasks. Second,
our method can successfully convert hierarchical tasks into
a parallel multi-task setting while maintaining mutual supports between tasks. Although the general concept of deep
neural multi-task learning is not new, the innovation of our
method is that it incorporates both the feedback strategies
from the low-level task to the high-level task and vice versa,
as shown in Figure 1. These two feedback strategies exploit the output of entity recognition to improve entity normalization and vice versa. In addition, our method uses BiLSTM to boost the sequential modeling of text and CNN
to encode clues hidden in character-level features such as
Zolmitriptan, Zomig and Zomigon.
We evaluate our models across two corpora (the BioCreative V Chemical Disease Relation (BC5CDR) task corpus
(Li et al. 2016) and the NCBI Disease corpus (Doğan, Leaman, and Lu 2014)) of medical articles and outperform the
state-of-the-art study by up to 4.53% F1 on medical named
entity recognition and 5.61% F1 on medical named entity
normalization.
Contribution. To make use of the mutual benefits in a more
sophisticated way, we propose a novel deep neural multi-

State-of-the-art studies have demonstrated the superiority of
joint modeling over pipeline implementation for medical
named entity recognition and normalization due to the mutual
benefits between the two processes. To exploit these benefits
in a more sophisticated way, we propose a novel deep neural
multi-task learning framework with explicit feedback strategies to jointly model recognition and normalization. On one
hand, our method benefits from the general representations
of both tasks provided by multi-task learning. On the other
hand, our method successfully converts hierarchical tasks into
a parallel multi-task setting while maintaining the mutual
supports between tasks. Both of these aspects improve the
model performance. Experimental results demonstrate that
our method performs significantly better than state-of-theart approaches on two publicly available medical literature
datasets.

Introduction
Due to the large amount of electronically-available medical
publications stored in databases such as PubMed, there has
been an increasing interest in applying text mining and information extraction to the medical literature. Those techniques
can generate tremendous benefits for both medical research
and applications. Among the medical literature mining tasks,
medical named entity recognition and normalization are the
most fundamental tasks.
The goal of medical named entity recognition and normalization is to find the boundaries of mentioning from the
medical text and map them onto a controlled vocabulary.
State-of-the-art studies have demonstrated the superiority of
joint modeling of medical named entity recognition and normalization compared to the pipeline implementation due to
mutual benefits between them. There are two main limitations of pipeline models: (1) errors from the recognition
tagging cascade into normalization errors, and (2) recognition and normalization are mutually useful to each other,
but pipeline models cannot utilize these potential benefits.
Joint modeling recognition and normalization can naturally
alleviate these limitations and achieve better performance.
For example, Leaman and Lu (2016) leveraged a joint scoring function for medical named entity recognition and norc 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

817

