The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Mirroring without Overimitation:
Learning Functionally Equivalent Manipulation Actions
Hangxin Liu,1 Chi Zhang,1,2 Yixin Zhu,1,2 Chenfanfu Jiang,3 Song-Chun Zhu1,2
1

UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning and Autonomy
2
International Center for AI and Robot Autonomy (CARA)
3
UPenn Computer and Information Science Department
{hx.liu,chi.zhang,yixin.zhu}@ucla.edu, cffjiang@seas.upenn.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu
Abstract
This paper presents a mirroring approach, inspired by the
neuroscience discovery of the mirror neurons, to transfer
demonstrated manipulation actions to robots. Designed to address the different embodiments between a human (demonstrator) and a robot, this approach extends the classic robot
Learning from Demonstration (LfD) in the following aspects:
i) It incorporates fine-grained hand forces collected by a tactile glove in demonstration to learn robot’s fine manipulative actions; ii) Through model-free reinforcement learning
and grammar induction, the demonstration is represented by
a goal-oriented grammar consisting of goal states and the corresponding forces to reach the states, independent of robot
embodiments; iii) A physics-based simulation engine is applied to emulate various robot actions and mirrors the actions that are functionally equivalent to the human’s in the
sense of causing the same state changes by exerting similar
forces. Through this approach, a robot reasons about which
forces to exert and what goals to achieve to generate actions
(i.e., mirroring), rather than strictly mimicking demonstration (i.e., overimitation). Thus the embodiment difference between a human and a robot is naturally overcome. In the experiment, we demonstrate the proposed approach by teaching
a real Baxter robot with a complex manipulation task involving haptic feedback—opening medicine bottles.

1

Figure 1: A robot mirrors human demonstrations with functional equivalence by inferring the action that produces similar force, resulting in similar changes of the physical states.
Q-Learning is applied to associate types of forces with the
categories of the object state changes to produce humanobject-interaction (hoi) units.

Introduction

identical procedure to achieve the goal. Such behavior is
analogous to a phenomenon called “overimitation” (Lyons,
Young, and Keil 2007) observed in human children. Therefore, the acquired skills can hardly be adapted to new robots
or new situations, demanding better solutions.
Meanwhile, the neuroscience discovery of mirror neurons
in primate (Gallese et al. 1996) showed that the mirror neuron system facilitates imitation learning in macaque monkey
and human (Rizzolatti, Fogassi, and Gallese 2001): a mirror
neuron fires when a primate performs a goal-directed action
or sees others performing the same action. Further findings
verify that human mirror neurons are activated during the
observation of robot task performance (Gazzola et al. 2007;
Oberman et al. 2007) even with different embodiments.
Inspired by the mirror neurons, we propose a mirroring
approach that extends the current LfD, through the physicsbased simulation, to address the correspondence problem.
Rather than overimitating the motion controls from the
demonstration, it is advantageous for the robot to seek func-

A hallmark of machine intelligence is the capability to adapt
to new tasks rapidly and “achieve goals in a wide range of
environments” (Legg and Hutter 2007). In comparison, a
human can quickly learn new skills by observing other individuals, expanding their repertoire swiftly to adapt to the
ever-changing environment. To emulate the similar learning
process, the robotics community has been developing the
framework of Learning from Demonstration (LfD) (Argall
et al. 2009), some of which has shown promising results.
However, the “correspondence problem” (Dautenhahn
and Nehaniv 2002), i.e., the difference of embodiments between a human and a robot, is rarely addressed in the prior
work of LfD. As a result, a one-to-one mapping is usually
handcrafted between the human demonstration and the robot
execution, restricting the LfD only to mimic the demonstrator’s low-level motor controls and replicate the (almost)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8025

