The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Random Feature Maps for the Itemset Kernel
Kyohei Atarashi

Subhransu Maji

Satoshi Oyama

Hokkaido University
atarashi k@complex.ist.hokudai.ac.jp

University of Massachusetts, Amherst
smaji@umass.cs.edu

Hokkaido University/RIKEN AIP
oyama@ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Abstract

proximately but efficiently using linear models in a low dimensional space by mapping the data points using Z(·). Examples include random Fourier feature maps that approximate shift-invariant kernels: K(x, y) = k(|x − y|) (Rahimi
and Recht 2008); random Maclaurin feature maps that approximate dot product kernels (Kar and Karnick 2012):
K(x, y) = k(hx, yi); and tensor sketching for polynomial
kernels: KPm (x, y; c) := (c + hx, yi)m (Pham and Pagh
2013). Although polynomial kernels are dot product kernels and can be approximated by random Maclaurin feature
maps, tensor sketching can be more efficient.
Factorization machines (FMs) (Rendle 2010; 2012) and
variants (Blondel et al. 2016a; 2016b; Novikov, Trofimov,
and Oseledets 2016) also model feature combinations without explicitly computing them, similar to kernel methods,
but have better scalability during evaluation. These methods can be thought of as a two-layer neural network with
polynomial activations with a fixed number of learnable parameters (See Equation (5)). However, unlike kernel methods, their optimization problem is generally non-convex and
difficult to solve. But due to their efficiency during evaluation FMs are attractive for large-scale problems and have
been successfully applied to applications such as link prediction and recommender systems. This work analyzes the
relationship between polynomial kernel models and factorization machines in more detail.
Our contributions. We present a random feature map for
the itemset kernel that takes into account all feature combinations within a family of itemsets S ⊆ 2[d] . To the best of
our knowledge, the random feature map for the itemset kernel is novel. The itemset kernel includes the ANOVA kernel, all-subsets kernel, and standard dot product, so linear
models using this map are an alternative to the ANOVA or
all-subsets kernel SVMs, FMs, and all-subsets model. They
scale well with the size of the training dataset, unlike kernel methods, and their optimization problem is convex and
easy to solve, unlike that of FMs. We also present theoretical analyses of the proposed random feature map and discuss
the relationship between linear models trained on these features and factorization machines. Furthermore, we present a
faster and more memory-efficient random feature map for
the ANOVA kernel based on the signed circulant matrix
technique (Feng, Hu, and Liao 2015). Finally, we evaluate
the effectiveness of the feature maps on several datasets.

Although kernel methods efficiently use feature combinations
without computing them directly, they do not scale well with
the size of the training dataset. Factorization machines (FMs)
and related models, on the other hand, enable feature combinations efficiently, but their optimization generally requires
solving a non-convex problem. We present random feature
maps for the itemset kernel, which uses feature combinations, and includes the ANOVA kernel, the all-subsets kernel, and the standard dot product. Linear models using one
of our proposed maps can be used as an alternative to kernel
methods and FMs, resulting in better scalability during both
training and evaluation. We also present theoretical results for
a proposed map, discuss the relationship between factorization machines and linear models using a proposed map for the
ANOVA kernel, and relate the proposed feature maps to prior
work. Furthermore, we show that the maps can be calculated
more efficiently by using a signed circulant matrix projection
technique. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of using
the proposed maps for real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods enable learning in high, possibly infinite
dimensional feature spaces without explicitly expressing
them. In particular, kernels that model feature combinations such as polynomial kernels, the ANOVA kernel, and
the all-subsets kernel (Blondel et al. 2016a; Shawe-Taylor
and Cristianini 2004) have been shown to be effective for
a number of tasks in computer vision and natural language understanding (Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji 2015;
Fukui et al. 2016). However their scalability remains a challenge; support vector machines (SVMs) with non-linear kernels require O(n2 ) time and O(n2 ) memory for training and
O(n) time and memory for evaluation, where n is the number of training instances (Chang and Lin 2011).
To address this issue several researchers have proposed
randomized feature maps Z(·) : Rd 7→ RD for kernels
K(·, ·) : Rd × Rd 7→ R that satisfy
E[hZ(x), Z(y)i] = K(x, y).

(1)

The idea is to perform classification, regression, or clustering on a corresponding high-dimensional feature space apCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3199

