The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Segregated Temporal Assembly Recurrent
Networks for Weakly Supervised Multiple Action Detection
Yunlu Xu,1∗ Chengwei Zhang,2∗ Zhanzhan Cheng,13† Jianwen Xie,1 Yi Niu,1 Shiliang Pu,1 Fei Wu3
1

Hikvision Research Institute, China; 2 Shanghai Jiaotong University, China; 3 Zhejiang University, China
{xuyunlu,chengzhanzhan,jianwen.xie,niuyi,pushiliang}@hikvision.com; cwzhang@sjtu.edu.cn; wufei@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a segregated temporal assembly recurrent (STAR) network for weakly-supervised multiple action
detection. The model learns from untrimmed videos with
only supervision of video-level labels and makes prediction
of intervals of multiple actions. Specifically, we first assemble video clips according to class labels by an attention mechanism that learns class-variable attention weights and thus
helps the noise relieving from background or other actions.
Secondly, we build temporal relationship between actions by
feeding the assembled features into an enhanced recurrent
neural network. Finally, we transform the output of recurrent
neural network into the corresponding action distribution. In
order to generate more precise temporal proposals, we design
a score term called segregated temporal gradient-weighted
class activation mapping (ST-GradCAM) fused with attention
weights. Experiments on THUMOS’14 and ActivityNet1.3
datasets show that our approach outperforms the state-of-theart weakly-supervised method, and performs at par with the
fully-supervised counterparts.

1

Figure 1: An illustration of the multiple action detection task
from the perspective of MIML.

tion detection. UntrimmedNet (Wang et al. 2017) proposes
to learn a selection module for detecting important segments, and later STPN (Nguyen et al. 2018) conquers the
single-label limitation by introducing temporal class activation maps (T-CAM) trained with cross-entropy loss. To address the issue that performing localization via thresholds
may not be robust to noises in class activation maps, AutoLoc (Shou et al. 2018) directly predicts temporal boundary and proposes a Outer-Inner-Contrastive loss to provide
the desired segment-level supervision. W-TALC (Paul et al.
2018) introduces the Co-Activity Similarity Loss and jointly
optimizes it with the cross-entropy loss for the weaklysupervised temporal action detection. However, the interference and relationship among actions in a video hitherto have
not been concerned.
In reality, a video in general describes multiple actions
occurring in a complex background. Intuitively, a desired
video descriptor should have two characteristics: (1) refraining from the interference of other unrelated actions or background, and (2) enhancing the correlation among actions.
In this paper, we focus on the task of weakly supervised
multiple action detection with only video-level labels. As illustrated in Figure 1, the task of multiple action detection
in a weakly-annotated video can be regarded as a multiinstance multi-label (MIML) (Zhou et al. 2008) problem
where an example (i.e., a video) is described by multiple
instances (i.e., actions) and associated with multiple class

Introduction

Multiple action detection, which aims at localizing temporal intervals of actions and simultaneously identifying
their categories in videos, is a fundamental problem in
video understanding. Many existing works (Shou, Wang,
and Chang 2016; Zhao et al. 2017; Shou et al. 2017; Xu,
Das, and Saenko 2017; Yang et al. 2018; Chao et al. 2018;
Lin et al. 2018; Alwassel, Caba Heilbron, and Ghanem
2018) make efforts to address this problem in a supervised
manner, where the algorithms rely on fully labeled data (i.e.,
videos with precise annotations of the starting and ending
frames of actions). However, such supervised methods are
prohibitively impractical in real applications, since framelevel annotations are substantially time-consuming and expensive. Therefore, learning to detect temporal action from
untrimmed videos remains a crucial and challenging problem in video understanding.
A few explorations based solely on video-level annotations have exemplified the weakly supervised temporal ac∗
Authors contribute equally. Zhang did this work during an internship in Hikvision Research Institute.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9070

