The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robust Metric Learning on Grassmann
Manifolds with Generalization Guarantees
Lei Luo,1 Jie Xu,1,2 Cheng Deng,2 Heng Huang1,3∗
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian, Shanxi, China, 3 JDDGlobal.com
lel94@pitt.edu, jie.xu@pitt.edu, chdeng.xd@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract

constraints to induce a powerful distance metric. Representative methods include Information Theoretic Metric Learning (ITML) (Davis et al. 2007), Large Margin Nearest
Neighbor (LMNN) (Weinberger and Saul 2009), Logistic
Discriminant Metric Learning (LDML) (Guillaumin, Verbeek, and Schmid 2009).
The most popular way to enhance robustness of metric
learning is to incorporate the structural information of metric matrix M or each sample xi into models. To this end,
some regularized metric learning methods (Law, Thome,
and Cord 2014; Huo, Nie, and Huang 2016) use the sparse
or low-rank regularization to characterize the structure of M.
Robust Structural Metric Learning (RSML) (Lim, McFee,
and Lanckriet 2013) enforces group sparsity structure on the
learned transformation. The maximum correntropy criterion
was introduced to improve the robustness (Xu et al. 2018c).
In (Xu et al. 2018b), the Wasserstein distance was utilized to
characterize the errors between pairwise samples. The matrix variate Gaussian mixture distribution was adopted to
model the structure of the metric matrix (Luo and Huang
2018).
More recently, a trend of integrating different traditional
techniques into metric learning has emerged. For instance,
RDML (Yi et al. 2012) uses the matrix completion technique
to rectify the noisy pairwise similarities in metric learning. Hamming Distance Metric Learning (Norouzi, Fleet,
and Salakhutdinov 2012) formulates the hashing problem
by preserving the relative similarity defined over triplets of
items. Hierarchical multimodal metric learning (Zhang, Patel, and Chellappa 2017) efficiently learns multiple metrics
for multimodal data while fully exploiting the relationships
among these metrics. Joint intensity metric learning method
(Makihara et al. 2017) induces the dissimilarity using a bilinear form of joint intensity and spatial metrics, and alternately optimizes it by linear SVM or ranking SVM. Metric Learning with multiple Kernels (Wang et al. 2011) combines metric learning and multiple kernel learning, while
deep metric learning method in (Oh Song et al. 2016) defines a novel structured prediction objective on the lifted
pairwise distance matrix during the neural network training.
The bilevel model was introduced to unify the metric learning and dictionary learning (Xu et al. 2018a).
It is worth noting that the metric matrix M can be decomposed as: M = PT P, where P ∈ Rp×d and p ≤ d,

In recent research, metric learning methods have attracted increasing interests in machine learning community and have
been applied to many applications. However, the existing
metric learning methods usually use a fixed L2 -norm to measure the distance between pairwise data samples in the projection space, which cannot provide an effective mechanism
to automatically remove the noise that exist in data samples.
To address this issue, we propose a new robust formulation
of metric learning. Our new model constructs a projection
from higher dimensional Grassmann manifold into the one in
a relative low-dimensional with more discriminative capability, where the errors between sample points are considered as
an MLE (maximum likelihood estimation)-like estimator. An
efficient iteratively reweighted algorithm is derived to solve
the proposed metric learning model. More importantly, we establish the generalization bounds for the proposed algorithm
by utilizing the techniques of U-statistics. Experiments on six
benchmark datasets clearly show that the proposed method
achieves consistent improvements in discrimination accuracy,
in comparison to state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
A large number of machine learning algorithms involve the
use of a distance metric over the original input space. An
effective distance, which successfully captures the important interrelations among data, can significantly improve the
performance of algorithms. The Mahalanobis distance generalizes the standard Euclidean distance by admitting arbitrary linear scalings and rotations of the feature space. It has
shown promising results in many machine learning tasks.
Recent studies on metric learning mainly focus on learning
an optimal Mahalanobis distance in supervised settings.
The goal of Mahalanobis metric learning is to seek a
square matrix M ∈ Rd×d from the training set X =
{x1 , x2 , · · ·, xn }(∈ Rd×n ), under which the distance between any two samples
xi and xj in X can be computed as:
p
dM (xi , xj ) = (xi − xj )T M(xi − xj ). Most of Mahalanobis metric learning methods utilize weakly-supervised
∗

Corresponding Author. L. Luo, H. Huang were partially supported by U.S. NSF IIS 1836945, IIS 1836938, DBI 1836866, IIS
1845666, IIS 1852606, IIS 1838627, IIS 1837956.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4480

