The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

HyperAdam: A Learnable Task-Adaptive Adam for Network Training
Shipeng Wang, Jian Sun,∗ Zongben Xu
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
wangshipeng8128@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {jiansun, zbxu}@xjtu.edu.cn

where {(xi , yi )}N
i=1 is the training set. For a deep neural network, the dimension p and number of training data N are
commonly large in real applications.
The network, as a learning machine, is referred to as a
learner, the loss for network training is defined as an optimizee, and the optimization algorithm to minimize optimizee is referred to as an optimizer. For example, a gradientbased optimizer can be written as a function O that maps the
gradient gt to network parameter update dt in t-th iteration:

Abstract
Deep neural networks are traditionally trained using humandesigned stochastic optimization algorithms, such as SGD
and Adam. Recently, the approach of learning to optimize
network parameters has emerged as a promising research
topic. However, these learned black-box optimizers sometimes do not fully utilize the experience in human-designed
optimizers, therefore have limitation in generalization ability.
In this paper, a new optimizer, dubbed as HyperAdam, is proposed that combines the idea of “learning to optimize” and
traditional Adam optimizer. Given a network for training, its
parameter update in each iteration generated by HyperAdam
is an adaptive combination of multiple updates generated by
Adam with varying decay rates . The combination weights
and decay rates in HyperAdam are adaptively learned depending on the task. HyperAdam is modeled as a recurrent
neural network with AdamCell, WeightCell and StateCell. It
is justified to be state-of-the-art for various network training,
such as multilayer perceptron, CNN and LSTM.

1

dt (Θ) = O(gt , Ht ; Θ),

where Ht represents the historical gradient information and
Θ represents the hyperparameters of the optimizer.
The human-designed optimizers, such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro 1951), RMSProp
(Tieleman and Hinton 2012), AdaGrad (Duchi, Hazan, and
Singer 2011), AdaDelta (Zeiler 2012) and Adam (Kingma
and Ba 2015), are popular in network training. They have
well generalization ability to various network architectures
and tasks. Adam takes the statistics of gradients as the historical information recursively accumulated with constant decay rates (i.e., β, γ in Alg. 1). Though universal, Adam suffers from unsatisfactory convergence in some cases because
of the constant decay rates (Reddi, Kale, and Kumar 2018).
Recently, “learning to optimize”, i.e., learning the optimizer by data-driven approach, triggered the interest of community. The optimizer (Andrychowicz et al. 2016) outputs
the update vector by RNN, whose generalization ability is
improved by two training tricks (Lv, Jiang, and Li 2017).
This idea is also applied to optimizing derivative-free blackbox functions (Chen et al. 2017). From the perspective of
reinforcement learning, the optimizer is taken as policy (Li
and Malik 2016). Though faster in decreasing training loss
than the traditional optimizers in some cases, the learned optimizers do not always generalize well to diverse variants of
learners. Moreover, they can not be guaranteed to output a
descent direction in each iteration for network training.
In this paper, we propose an effective optimizer HyperAdam, which is a generalized and learnable optimizer inspired by Adam. For network optimization, the parameter
update generated by HyperAdam is an ensemble of updates
generated by Adam with different decay rates. Both decay rates and combination weights for ensemble are adaptively learned depending on the task. To implement this

Introduction

Deep learning approach has exhibited strong capabilities in
data representation (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015), nonlinear mapping (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014), distribution learning (Goodfellow et al. 2014), etc. Deep learning
not only has wide applications in a broad field of academical studies, such as image analysis (He et al. 2016), speech
recognition (McMahan and Rao 2018), robotics (Lillicrap et
al. 2016), inverse problem (Yang et al. 2016), but also draws
attention of industry for realization in products.
One challenge in deep learning is the effective optimization of deep network parameters, required to be generalizable to varying network architectures, e.g., network type,
depth, width, non-linear activation functions. For a neural
network f (x; w), the aim of network training is to find the
optimal network parameters w∗ ∈ Rp to minimize empirical loss between the network output given input xi ∈ Rd
and the corresponding target label yi ∈ Rb :
w∗ = arg min ΣN
i=1 l(f (xi ; w), yi ),
w

(2)

(1)

∗

corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5297

