The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Counterfactual Learning from Bandit Feedback
Yusuke Narita

Shota Yasui

Kohei Yata

Yale University
yusuke.narita@yale.edu

CyberAgent Inc.
yasui shota@cyberagent.co.jp

Yale University
kohei.yata@yale.edu

Abstract

Swaminathan et al. 2017). Such evaluation allows us
to compare the performance of counterfactual policies to
decide which policy should be deployed in the field. This
alternative approach thus solves the above problem with the
naive A/B test approach.

What is the most statistically efficient way to do off-policy
optimization with batch data from bandit feedback? For log
data generated by contextual bandit algorithms, we consider
offline estimators for the expected reward from a counterfactual policy. Our estimators are shown to have lowest variance
in a wide class of estimators, achieving variance reduction
relative to standard estimators. We then apply our estimators
to improve advertisement design by a major advertisement
company. Consistent with the theoretical result, our estimators allow us to improve on the existing bandit algorithm
with more statistical confidence compared to a state-of-theart benchmark.

1

Method. For off-policy evaluation with log data of bandit
feedback, this paper develops and empirically implements
a variance minimization technique. Variance reduction and
statistical efficiency are important for minimizing the uncertainty we face in decision making. Indeed, an important
open question raised by Li (2015) is how to achieve “statistically more efficient (even optimal) offline estimation” from
batch bandit data. This question motivates a set of studies
that bound and characterize the variances of particular estimators (Dudı́k et al. 2014; Li, Munos, and Szepesvári 2015;
Thomas, Theocharous, and Ghavamzadeh 2015; Munos et
al. 2016; Thomas and Brunskill 2016; Agarwal et al. 2017).
We study this statistical efficiency question in the context
of offline policy value estimation with log data from a class
of contextual bandit algorithms. This class includes most
of the widely-used algorithms such as contextual -Greedy
and Thompson Sampling, as well as their non-contextual
analogs and random A/B testing. We allow the logging policy to be unknown, degenerate (non-stochastic), and timevarying, all of which are salient in real-world bandit applications. We also allow the evaluation target policy to be degenerate, again a key feature of real-life situations.
We consider offline estimators for the expected reward
from a counterfactual policy. Our estimators can also be used
for estimating the average treatment effect. Our estimators
are variations of well-known inverse probability weighting
estimators (Horvitz and Thompson (1952), Rosenbaum and
Rubin (1983), and modern studies cited above) except that
we use an estimated propensity score (logging policy) even
if we know the true propensity score. We show the following result, building upon Bickel et al. (1993), Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003), and Ackerberg et al. (2014) among
others:

Introduction

Interactive bandit systems (e.g. personalized education and
medicine, ad/news/recommendation/search platforms) produce log data valuable for evaluating and redesigning the
systems. For example, the logs of a news recommendation
system record which news article was presented and whether
the user read it, giving the system designer a chance to make
its recommendation more relevant. Exploiting log data is,
however, more difficult than conventional supervised machine learning: the result of each log is only observed for
the action chosen by the system (e.g. the presented news)
but not for all the other actions the system could have taken.
Moreover, the log entries are biased in that the logs overrepresent actions favored by the system.
A potential solution to this problem is an A/B test that
compares the performance of counterfactual systems. However, A/B testing counterfactual systems is often technically
or managerially infeasible, since deploying a new policy is
time- and money-consuming, and entails a risk of failure.
This leads us to the problem of counterfactual
(off-policy) evaluation and learning, where one
aims to use batch data collected by a logging policy to estimate the value of a counterfactual policy
or algorithm without employing it (Li et al. 2010;
Strehl et al. 2010; Li et al. 2011; 2012;
Bottou et al. 2013; Swaminathan and Joachims 2015a;
2015b;
Wang,
Agarwal,
and
Dudik
2017;

Theoretical Result 1. Our estimators minimize the
variance among all reasonable estimators. More precisely, our estimators minimize the asymptotic variance
among all “asymptotically normal” estimators (in the
standard statistical sense defined in Section 3).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4634

