The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Distributed Representation of Words in Cause and Effect Spaces
Zhipeng Xie, Feiteng Mu
School of Computer Science
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
xiezp@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

In recent years, there is an upsurge of deep learning in
natural language processing (Collobert et al. 2011), where
distributed representation of words serves as the basis. The
neural methods that learn vanilla distributed representation
of words (called word embeddings) usually capture only cooccurrence relationships between words (Levy and Goldberg 2014b). Although such a general-purpose word embeddings is helpful for various NLP tasks, the acquisition
of generality is often at the cost of losing specificity to a
certain degree. Some work has been devoted to enhance
word embeddings for specific tasks. Task-specific word embeddings capture task-specific word similarity. For example, if the task is about POS tagging, two nouns “cat” and
“man” might be considered similar by the model (Faruqui
et al. 2016). Tang et al. (2014) proposed learning sentimentspecific word embedding for sentiment analysis, where sentiment information is encoded into the continuous representation of words such that it can separate good and bad to
opposite ends of the spectrum. Hashimoto et al. (2015b) proposed a novel method to train word embeddings for semantic relation classification, by predicting words between noun
pairs using lexical relation-specific features. Li et al. (2017)
developed a tailored neural network to learn contradictionspecific word embedding.

This paper focuses on building up distributed representation
of words in cause and effect spaces, a task-specific word
embedding technique for causality. The causal embedding
model is trained on a large set of cause-effect phrase pairs
extracted from raw text corpus via a set of high-precision
causal patterns. Three strategies are proposed to transfer the
positive or negative labels from the level of phrase pairs to
the level of word pairs, leading to three causal embedding
models (Pairwise-Matching, Max-Matching, and AttentiveMatching) correspondingly. Experimental results have shown
that Max-Matching and Attentive-Matching models significantly outperform several state-of-the-art competitors by a
large margin on both English and Chinese corpora.

Introduction
Causality, also referred to as causation, is a fundamental
concept in human thinking and reasoning (Stukker, Sanders,
and Verhagen 2008). It indicates a special semantic relation between one process (the cause) with another process
or state (the effect), where the cause is partially responsible
for the effect, and the effect is partially dependent on the
cause. Causality is commonly expressed, explicitly or implicitly, in text of most natural languages, which is of great
value and has been exploited for various applications such
as why-question answering (Oh et al. 2013), event prediction (Radinsky, Davidovich, and Markovitch 2012), and future scenario generation (Hashimoto et al. 2014).
One key to the success of these downstream applications
lies in the automatic construction of a large causality base.
Many methods have been proposed to mine causalities from
text corpora, which can be categorized into classes. The oldest approaches used hand-coded domain-specific knowledge
bases to extract explicit causal knowledge from text (Kaplan and Berry-Rogghe 1991) and to rank the extracted
possible causalities (Girju and Moldovan 2002). These
works achieved satisfactory precision but low recall. New
approaches employed machine learning algorithms to extract explicit and implicit causalities from text (Girju 2003;
Chang and Choi 2006; Hashimoto et al. 2015a), which relies
heavily on feature engineering.

With vanilla word embedding, the underlying rationale of
its wide applicability is the inference rule based on similarity, which states that if A is similar to B, and A has some
property or has a semantic relation R with C, then it can be
hypothesized that B also has the property or has the relation
R with C. Such an inference rule may work for some properties and semantic relations, but definitely not applicable to
all of them, such as causal relation. We conjecture that it explains why there is little research work of embedding-driven
deep learning in causality-related tasks. The reason that the
similarity-based inference rule is not applicable to causality
exists possibly in the fact that causality is very sensitive to
the small variation of semantics. For example, “salmonella”
and “bacillus acidi lactici” have high similarity in their
vanilla word embeddings because they are both bacteria.
However, “salmonella” is the cause of some diseases, while
“bacillus acidi lactici” is non-pathogenic. Such a high sensitivity results in the inapplicability of vanilla word embedding to causality-related tasks, and at the same time, necessitates the development of causality-specific word embedding

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7330

