The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Consensus Adversarial Domain Adaptation
Han Zou,1∗ Yuxun Zhou,1 Jianfei Yang,2 Huihan Liu,1 Hari Prasanna Das,1 Costas J. Spanos1
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, USA
2
School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{hanzou, yxzhou, liuhh, hpdas, spanos}@berkeley.edu, yang0478@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

labeled data is available in the target domain. In many realworld cases, it is time-consuming, labor-intensive and expensive to collect and annotate a huge number of samples
in the target domain. Thus, in practice, research on UDA
is arguably more popular than SDA since collecting unlabeled target data is usually a trivial task. Conventional UDA
methods (e.g., DDC (Tzeng et al. 2014), RevGrad (Ganin
and Lempitsky 2015) and DRCN (Ghifary et al. 2016)) map
data from both domains into a common feature space to reduce the domain shift. This is achieved by minimizing some
measure of distance between the target and source feature
distributions, e.g., correlation distances or maximum mean
discrepancy. The goal is to identify a feature space in which
samples from both target and source domain are indistinguishable. Once the task is accomplished, the model constructed in the source domain can be applied to the tasks in
the target domain by embedding the dataset with the learned
transformation.

We propose a novel domain adaptation framework, namely
Consensus Adversarial Domain Adaptation (CADA), that
gives freedom to both target encoder and source encoder
to embed data from both domains into a common domaininvariant feature space until they achieve consensus during
adversarial learning. In this manner, the domain discrepancy can be further minimized in the embedded space, yielding more generalizable representations. The framework is
also extended to establish a new few-shot domain adaptation scheme (F-CADA), that remarkably enhances the ADA
performance by efficiently propagating a few labeled data
once available in the target domain. Extensive experiments
are conducted on the task of digit recognition across multiple benchmark datasets and a real-world problem involving
WiFi-enabled device-free gesture recognition under spatial
dynamics. The results show the compelling performance of
CADA versus the state-of-the-art unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) and supervised domain adaptation (SDA) methods. Numerical experiments also demonstrate that F-CADA
can significantly improve the adaptation performance even
with sparsely labeled data in the target domain.

Meanwhile, with the unprecedented success of Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014),
some researchers have proposed to construct an adversarial loss to accommodate the domain shift, which is commonly referred as adversarial domain adaptation (ADA) or
adversarial UDA (Tzeng et al. 2017). GAN trains a generator and a discriminator in a min-max fashion, where the
generator learns to generate high-quality data to fool the
discriminator, and the discriminator aims to distinguish the
real and synthetic data. Similar to the setup of GAN, ADA
aims to minimize an approximate domain discrepancy distance through an adversarial objective with respect to a domain discriminator. Through adversarial learning, it trains
a source encoder and a target encoder such that a wellformed domain discriminator cannot determine the domain
label of the encoded samples. Adversarial UDA methods,
e.g., CoGAN (Liu and Tuzel 2016) and ADDA (Tzeng et
al. 2017), achieve appealing performance compared to traditional UDA methods. However, the feature mapping is usually defined by the source encoder in these methods. More
specifically, previous methods align embedded feature representations of the target domain to the source domain by
fixing parameters of the source encoder during adversarial
learning. Additionally, their network settings follow that of

Introduction
In recent years, a booming development of deep learning
methods has been witnessed, partially as a consequence of
the availability of a large amount of labeled data to train and
validate more advanced models. More often than not, these
recognition models trained with the large datasets perform
extremely well in one domain, i.e., the source domain. However, they often fail to generalize well to new datasets or new
environments, i.e., the target domain, due to domain shift or
dataset bias (Tzeng et al. 2017).
To alleviate the issue of domain shift, a large body
of research has been carried out on domain adaptation,
which aims to distill the shared knowledge across domains
and therefore improving the generalization of the learned
model. Domain adaptation methods can be categorized into
2 classes, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) and supervised domain adaptation (SDA), depending on whether
∗

Han Zou is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5997

