The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Semi-Parametric Sampling for Stochastic Bandits with Many Arms
Mingdong Ou, Nan Li, Cheng Yang, Shenghuo Zhu, Rong Jin
Alibaba Group, Hang Zhou, China
{mingdong.omd, nanli.ln, charis.yangc, shenghuo.zhu, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

achieve larger reward in the future. However, it will probably obtain small reward in current time step. Such problem is ubiquitous in many practical applications, including
online advertisement (Schwartz, Bradlow, and Fader 2017),
personalized recommendation (Li et al. 2010), medical treatment (Wang et al. 2018). There are often many newly emerging items with unknown reward to explore in these applications. For example, on some news platforms, more than one
hundred thousand news articles are published every day and
we does not know their popularity. Since the number of new
items is often large, stochastic bandits with many arms becomes important.
Existing bandits algorithms can be generally categorized
into two groups: multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithms and
contextual bandit algorithms. Classic MAB algorithms, with
Upper Confidence Bound (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer
2002) and Thompson sampling (Thompson 1933) as representatives, assume independence among candidate arms and
estimate the expected reward of an arm by empirical mean
of historical stochastic rewards. The reward estimation can
be unbiased with sufficient data. However, as the arms are
independent, the agent
√ has to explore all the arms to collect
data, leading to Ω( N T ) regret bound, which is dependent
on the number of arms N . This makes such group of algorithms inefficient for large number of candidate arms. Contextual bandit algorithms, with LinUCB (Chu et al. 2011)
and LinTS (Agrawal and Goyal 2013) as representative examples, exploit the correlation among arms based on a parametric reward function of context features, and their regret is
usually free of arm number, indicating that they are efficient
for large arm set. In the following, contextual bandits are
called parametric methods, since they often employ a parametric function to model the reward expectation, and MAB
algorithms as non-parametric methods since they does not
make any parametric assumption of the reward. The fundamental assumption of parametric methods is that the expected reward can be well expressed as a function of context
features. However, it is generally difficult to specify a correct model and difficult to perfectly characterize the context
with numeric features, this makes the assumption impractical, leading to large regret in many applications. For example, it has been shown in (Gopalan, Maillard, and Zaki 2016;
Ghosh, Chowdhury, and Gopalan 2017) that the regret can
be linear, i.e. Õ(T ), in the case of mis-specified model.

We consider the stochastic bandit problem with a large candidate arm set. In this setting, classic multi-armed bandit algorithms, which assume independence among arms and adopt
non-parametric reward model, are inefficient, due to the large
number of arms. By exploiting arm correlations based on a
parametric reward model with arm features, contextual bandit algorithms are more efficient, but they can also suffer from
large regret in practical applications, due to the reward estimation bias from mis-specified model assumption or incomplete features. In this paper, we propose a novel Bayesian
framework, called Semi-Parametric Sampling (SPS), for this
problem, which employs semi-parametric function as the reward model. Specifically, the parametric part of SPS, which
models expected reward as a parametric function of arm
feature, can efficiently eliminate poor arms from candidate
set. The non-parametric part of SPS, which adopts nonparametric reward model, revises the parametric estimation
to avoid estimation bias, especially on the remained candidate
arms. We give an implementation of SPS, Linear SPS (LSPS),
which utilizes linear function as the parametric part. In
semi-parametric environment, theoretical analysis shows that
√ 1−α α √
d T)
LSPS achieves better regret bound (i.e. Õ( N
with α ∈ [0, 1]) than existing approaches. Also, experiments
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

In the stochastic bandit problem (Bubeck, Cesa-Bianchi, and
others 2012), the agent sequentially selects arms from a finite candidate set and receives corresponding stochastic reward. The objective is to maximize the expected cumulative
reward up to final time step T . As the expected reward of
each arm is unknown, the agent has to face the explorationexploitation dilemma. On one hand, the agent can exploit
historical knowledge (including selected arms, stochastic rewards and state of arms) to select the arm with largest estimated expected reward. This will guarantee relatively large
reward in current time step, but may suffer reward estimation error because of insufficient knowledge, then miss the
real optimal arm. On the other hand, the agent can explore
arms to collect knowledge for more accurate estimation and
identification of optimal arm. Thus, the agent can expect to
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7933

