The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Transferable Attention for Domain Adaptation
Ximei Wang, Liang Li, Weirui Ye, Mingsheng Long,B Jianmin Wang
School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
KLiss, MOE; BNRist; Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
{wxm17,liliang17,ywr16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

domain adaptation methods either bridge the source domain
and target domain by learning domain-invariant representations (Pan et al. 2011; Gong et al. 2012) or estimating instance importances (Huang et al. 2006; Gong, Grauman, and
Sha 2013) using labeled source data and unlabeled target
data. Recent researches have indicated that deep neural networks can learn more transferable representations (Oquab
et al. 2014; Donahue et al. 2014; Yosinski et al. 2014), by
disentangling explanatory factors of variations behind domains. The latest advances of deep domain adaptation for
classification task extract domain-invariant representations
by embedding domain adaptation modules in deep architectures, through minimizing the discrepancy between feature
distributions (Tzeng et al. 2014; Long et al. 2015; 2016;
2017) or adversarially learning the feature representations
to deceive some domain discriminator (Tzeng et al. 2015;
Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Ganin et al. 2016; 2016; Long
et al. 2018).
Despite their efficacy in various tasks, existing adversarial domain adaptation methods mainly align the representations extracted from the entire images across domains, without considering the complex distributions of different regions. It is obvious that different regions of an image are
not equally transferable. Some regions in the image, like
background, may not contribute much to domain adaptation though it is possible to be aligned across domains in the
feature space. Moreover, some images that are significantly
dissimilar across domains in the feature space should not be
forcefully aligned together across domains, otherwise it may
be vulnerable to negative transfer of irrelevant knowledge.
However, these problems were not considered by previous
domain adaptations methods.
In this paper, we tackle the aforementioned challenges in
a unified multi-adversarial learning framework while further
exploring the attention mechanism. Recent advances in domain adaptation reveal that fine-grained alignment of features extracted from different domains (Pei et al. 2018) can
yield better performance in many transfer learning tasks. Besides, the attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017) is an
effective method to focus on important regions of an image, with numerous successes in deep learning tasks such
as classification, segmentation and detection. Therefore, this
paper presents Transferable Attention for Domain Adaptation (TADA), which realizes two types of complementary

Recent work in domain adaptation bridges different domains
by adversarially learning a domain-invariant representation
that cannot be distinguished by a domain discriminator. Existing methods of adversarial domain adaptation mainly align
the global images across the source and target domains. However, it is obvious that not all regions of an image are transferable, while forcefully aligning the untransferable regions may
lead to negative transfer. Furthermore, some of the images
are significantly dissimilar across domains, resulting in weak
image-level transferability. To this end, we present Transferable Attention for Domain Adaptation (TADA), focusing our
adaptation model on transferable regions or images. We implement two types of complementary transferable attention:
transferable local attention generated by multiple region-level
domain discriminators to highlight transferable regions, and
transferable global attention generated by single image-level
domain discriminator to highlight transferable images. Extensive experiments validate that our proposed models exceed
state of the art results on standard domain adaptation datasets.

Introduction
Deep learning has been a huge success in diverse applications across many fields, such as computer vision, robotic
control and natural language processing with the help of
large-scale labeled datasets. However, owing to a phenomenon known as dataset bias or domain shift (Torralba
and Efros 2011), deep networks trained on one large labeled dataset do not generalize well to novel datasets and
tasks. The typical solution of further fine-tuning pre-trained
networks on task-specific datasets may be impractical because it is often prohibitively expensive to collect enough
labeled data to properly fine-tune the considerable number of network parameters. This dilemma has motivated
the research on domain adaptation, which aims to establish effective algorithms to reduce the labeling cost, typically by leveraging readily-available labeled data from a
different but related domain (Quionero-Candela et al. 2009;
Pan and Yang 2010).
Domain adaptation, a special scenario of transfer learning,
aims to learn a discriminative model that reduces the dataset
shift between the training and testing distributions. Previous
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5345

