The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Identifying Android Malware Using Network-Based Approaches
Emily Alfs,1 Doina Caragea,1 Nathan Albin,2 Pietro Poggi-Corradini2
1

Department of Computer Science, Kansas State University
2
Department of Mathematics, Kansas State University
{emilyalfs, dcaragea, albin, pietro}@ksu.edu

Abstract

Approach

The proliferation of Android apps has resulted in many malicious apps entering the market and causing significant damage. Robust techniques that determine if an app is malicious
are greatly needed. We propose the use of a network-based
approach to effectively separate malicious from benign apps,
based on a small labeled dataset. The apps in our dataset come
from the Google Play Store and have been scanned for malicious behavior using Virus Total to produce a ground truth
dataset with labels malicous or benign. The apps in the resulting dataset have been represented using binary feature vectors (where the features represent permissions, intent actions,
discriminative APIs, obfuscation signatures, and native code
signatures). We have used the feature vectors corresponding
to apps to build a weighted network that captures the “closeness” between apps. We propagate labels from the labeled
apps to unlabeled apps, and evaluate the effectiveness of the
proposed approach using the F1-measure. We have conducted
experiments to compare three variants of the label propagation approaches on datasets that include increasingly larger
amounts of labeled data. The results have shown that a variant proposed in this study gives the best results overall.

Our approach to the malware detection problem is to use the
notion of “closeness” of apps to create a network of labeled
and unlabeled apps, and subsequently, propagate labels in
the network. We determine closeness using the similarity
metric defined by the Gaussian kernel. A binary representation of the apps, derived in previous research (Roy et al.
2015), was used to calculate app-to-app similarity.
Label propagation is a standard technique that can be
applied in various ways. There are three main variants of
label propagation that we compare: hard-clamping, softclamping, and our proposed variant. The hard-clamping
variant aligns with the scikit-learn’s implementation
of Label Propagation (Pedregosa et al. 2011), which we used
in our hard-clamping experiments. The algorithm for hardclamping (Zhu and Ghahramani 2002) is as follows: Let `
and u be the number of labeled and unlabeled data points, respectively, c be the number of classes (in our case c = 2, for
benign and malware). Let X = {x1 , ..., xl , x`+1 , ...x`+u }
be the data matrix. Let W and T be (` + u) × (` + u) matrices, where Wij represents the similarity between apps xi
w
and xj , and Tij = P`+uij
represents the probability that

Introduction

we move from app xj to xi . The algorithm propagates the
labels using Y ← T Y , where Y is initialized with the original labels for labeled data and random values for unlabeled
data. Then it row normalizes Y , and finally it clamps the labeled data, and repeats the above steps until convergence.
By clamping the labeled data, the algorithm ensures that the
original labels, which are believe to be true, are maintained.
The
soft-clamping
variant
aligns
with
the
scikit-learn’s implementation of Label Spreading
(Pedregosa et al. 2011), which we used in the soft-clamping
experiments. The algorithm for soft-clamping (Zhou et al.
2004) works as follows: assuming the variables defined in
the hard-clamping algorithm, let F be a (` + u) × c matrix
where each row, i, corresponds to the labeling of node
1
1
xi . Construct S = D− 2 W D− 2 , where D is the diagonal
degree matrix. Then, iterate F ← αSF + (1 − α)Y until
convergence, where 0 < α < 1. The variable α, acts as a
weight that determines if we keep the original labels, when
α = 0, or disregard the original labels, when α = 1.
Our proposed variant is a hybrid of hard-clamping and
soft-clamping. Assuming the variables defined in hard/soft

k=1

Android apps are produced and published at a very high rate
in the Google Play Store, and many malicious apps can potentially enter the market. Malicious apps can have many
different purposes, including obtaining the user’s personal
information, such as passwords, credit card information, and
much more. With the threat of such information getting into
the wrong hands, it is necessary to find efficient and effective
solutions to this problem. Thus, the purpose of this study is
to identify malicious apps, or most specifically to classify
apps from the Google Play Store as malicious or benign.
Malicious apps are referred to as malware, a shorthand for
malicious software. While many malicious apps exist, the
ground truth labeled data is generally limited. To account for
the lack of labeled data, we use transductive labeled propagation approaches, and study the variation of performance
with the amount of labeled data, for both balanced datasets
and more realistic imbalanced datasets.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9911

wkj

