The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Latent Generative Models for Energy Disaggregation
Gissella Bejarano

David DeFazio

Arti Ramesh

SUNY Binghamton
gbejara1@binghamton.edu

SUNY Binghamton
ddefazi1@binghamton.edu

SUNY Binghamton
artir@binghamton.edu

Abstract

to as an encoder), and then use the generative network (referred to as a decoder) to reconstruct the input sequence by
sampling from the latent variables. Chung et al. (2015) propose variational recurrent neural networks (VRNNs), which
extend VAEs to model sequences by introducing high-level
latent variables in RNNs. Deep generative models such as
VRNNs and VAEs have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many sequence-to-sequence language tasks such
as machine translation, paraphrase generation, and textual
entailment, but have not been explored for the problem of
energy disaggregation.
In this work, we present a novel deep generative architecture for disaggregation that leverages and adapts VRNNs to
jointly disaggregate the total energy consumption into individual component appliance signals. Our proposed approach
learns the abstraction of the aggregated energy consumption
over latent variables at training time and then generates all
the individual appliance signals jointly by sampling from the
latent variables at test time. Hence, at test time our model
only depends on the aggregated signal and the latent variable abstractions learned during training and does not depend on contextual information and appliance data from previous time steps, making it a meaningful model for energy
disaggregation.
Specifically, we make the following contributions:

Thoroughly understanding how energy consumption is disaggregated into individual appliances can help reduce household expenses, integrate renewable sources of energy, and
lead to efficient use of energy. In this work, we propose a deep
latent generative model based on variational recurrent neural networks (VRNNs) for energy disaggregation. Our model
jointly disaggregates the aggregated energy signal into individual appliance signals, achieving superior performance
when compared to the state-of-the-art models for energy disaggregation, yielding a 29% and 41% performance improvement on two energy datasets, respectively, without explicitly
encoding temporal/contextual information or heuristics. Our
model also achieves better prediction performance on lowpower appliances, paving the way for a more nuanced disaggregation model. The structured output prediction in our
model helps in accurately discerning which appliance(s) contribute to the aggregated power consumption, thus providing
a more useful and meaningful disaggregation model.

Introduction
Designing machine learning models for smart energy consumption is an important research problem, having a tremendous impact on society. A crucial sub-problem in facilitating smart energy consumption is being able to accurately disaggregate energy signals into their component
appliance signals. This process is also known as energy
disaggregation/non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM). This
exercise provides residents with an accurate view and understanding of their energy consumption and can potentially
help in reducing the peak energy consumption and facilitating efficient usage and conservation of energy. Recent advances in variational inference for deep learning have resulted in more expressive deep generative models such as
variational auto-encoders (VAEs) and variational recurrent
neural networks (VRNNs) that possess the ability to encode
continuous latent variables. These latent variables provide
the models with a powerful layer of abstraction that captures
the variations in the input data and helps in generating the
output data. These models map the input sequence into continuous latent variables using an inference network (referred

1. We present a novel deep generative architecture for performing sequence-to-many-sequence prediction (aggregated consumption to appliance consumptions) needed
for energy disaggregation by leveraging and adapting
variational recurrent neural networks (VRNNs). Our
model generates continuous power consumption signals
as opposed to state-of-the-art approaches that model consumption through discrete appliance states.
2. We model the structure among the different appliances in
a household by jointly predicting each of them at the same
time from the aggregated signal. We cast the different appliance energy signatures as a structured prediction problem, modeling the structure among the different appliance
energy consumption signals over time, to effectively represent and reason about their dependence.
3. Our model achieves a performance improvement of 29%
and 41% for the REDD and Dataport datasets, respectively, when compared to two recent state-of-the-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

850

