The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

That’s Mine! Learning Ownership Relations and Norms for Robots
Zhi-Xuan Tan,1,2 Jake Brawer,1 Brian Scassellati1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
A*STAR Artificial Intelligence Initiative, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
xuan@aya.yale.edu, jake.brawer@yale.edu, brian.scassellati@yale.edu

Abstract
The ability for autonomous agents to learn and conform to
human norms is crucial for their safety and effectiveness in
social environments. While recent work has led to frameworks for the representation and inference of simple social
rules, research into norm learning remains at an exploratory
stage. Here, we present a robotic system capable of representing, learning, and inferring ownership relations and norms.
Ownership is represented as a graph of probabilistic relations
between objects and their owners, along with a database of
predicate-based norms that constrain the actions permissible
on owned objects. To learn these norms and relations, our
system integrates (i) a novel incremental norm learning algorithm capable of both one-shot learning and induction from
specific examples, (ii) Bayesian inference of ownership relations in response to apparent rule violations, and (iii) perceptbased prediction of an object’s likely owners. Through a series of simulated and real-world experiments, we demonstrate
the competence and flexibility of the system in performing
object manipulation tasks that require a variety of norms to
be followed, laying the groundwork for future research into
the acquisition and application of social norms.

Figure 1: Ownership learning via human-robot interaction.
Top: The robot is verbally halted mid-action by Xuan from
discarding object 2. Bottom: Having learned the ownership
relations and action permissions by interacting with Xuan,
the robot denies Jake’s request to discard object 2.

Introduction
With the growing prevalence of AI and robotics in our social lives, social competence is becoming a crucial component for intelligent systems that interact with humans. An
important element of such competence is the ability to learn
and conform to social and moral norms, as well as the corresponding ability to perceive and act in response to the social
dimensions of an environment. The concept of ownership
encapsulates one such set of norms that are critical for navigating and coexisting in a shared space. Yet, explicating and
implementing these norms in a robot is a deceptively challenging problem. For example, an effective collaborative
robot should be able to distinguish and track the permissions
of an unowned tool versus a tool that has been temporarily
shared by a collaborator. Likewise, a trash-collecting robot
should know to discard an empty soda can, but not a cherished photograph, or even an unopened soda can, without
having these permissions exhaustively enumerated for every
possible object.

We explore these issues in this paper by focusing on the
concept of ownership, and how a robotic system can learn
to deploy this concept by interacting with its environment.
Ownership is a particularly interesting concept as it extends
across social, ethical, and legal spheres. Enabling a robot
to learn and follow ownership norms thus brings not only
the practical benefit of social competence in environments
with owned objects, but also deeper insight into the effective
navigation of systems of human norms.
To these ends, we developed a system capable of learning
and conforming to ownership norms which was deployed
on the Baxter robotic platform. The system incorporates algorithms for dynamic and interactive learning of ownership
norms, which specify the permissibility of certain actions
given the social context of a task. These algorithms are novel
adaptions of incremental rule learning so as to be capable of
both receiving direct instruction (i.e. one-shot learning) and
generalization from specific examples. The system also incorporates Bayesian inference of ownership relations based

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8058

