The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

GIRNet: Interleaved Multi-Task Recurrent State Sequence Models
Divam Gupta,Q Tanmoy Chakraborty,Q Soumen Chakrabarti©
Q

IIIT Delhi, India, © IIT Bombay, India
{divam14038, tanmoy}@iiitd.ac.in, soumen@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract

learning, semi-supervised learning or multi-task learning
(MTL) is used.
In the most common form of MTL, related tasks such as
part-of-speech (POS) tagging and named entity recognition
(NER) share representation close to the input, e.g., as character n-gram or word embeddings, followed by separate networks tailored to each prediction task (Søgaard and Goldberg 2016; Maurer, Pontil, and Romera-Paredes 2016). Care
is needed to jointly train shared model parameters to prevent
one task from hijacking the representation (Ruder 2017).
Sequence labeling brings a new dimension to MTL. In
many NLP tasks, labeled sequences are readily available in
separate single languages, but our goal may be to label sequences from code-switched multilingual text. Or, we may
have trained models for labeling whole sentences or passages with overall sentiment, but the task at hand is to infer
the sentiment expressed toward a specific entity mentioned
in the text. Ideally, we would like to build a composite state
sequence representation where each position draws state information from the best ‘expert’ auxiliary sequence, but instances are diverse in terms of where the experts switch, and
annotating these transitions would entail prohibitive cognitive cost. We survey related work in Section 2, and explain
why most of them do not satisfy our requirements.
By abstracting the above requirements into a unified framework, in Section 3 we present GIRNet (Gated
Interleaved Recurrent Network)1 , a novel MTL network tailored for dynamically daisy-chaining at a word level the best
experts along the input sequence to derive a composite state
sequence that is ideally suited for the primary task. The
whole network over all tasks is jointly trained in an end-toend manner. GIRNet applies both when we have common
instances for the tasks and when we have only disjoint instances over the tasks. Motivated by low-resource NLP challenges, we assume that one task is primary but with scant
labeled data, whereas the auxiliary tasks have more labeled
data available. We train standard LSTMs on the auxiliary
models; but when a primary instance is run through the auxiliary networks, their states are interleaved using a novel,
dynamic gating mechanism. Remarkably, without access to
any segmentation of primary instances, GIRNet learns gate

In several natural language tasks, labeled sequences are available in separate domains (say, languages), but the goal is to
label sequences with mixed domain (such as code-switched
text). Or, we may have available models for labeling whole
passages (say, with sentiments), which we would like to
exploit toward better position-specific label inference (say,
target-dependent sentiment annotation). A key characteristic shared across such tasks is that different positions in a
primary instance can benefit from different ‘experts’ trained
from auxiliary data, but labeled primary instances are scarce,
and labeling the best expert for each position entails unacceptable cognitive burden. We propose GIRNet, a unified
position-sensitive multi-task recurrent neural network (RNN)
architecture for such applications. Auxiliary and primary
tasks need not share training instances. Auxiliary RNNs are
trained over auxiliary instances. A primary instance is also
submitted to each auxiliary RNN, but their state sequences
are gated and merged into a novel composite state sequence
tailored to the primary inference task. Our approach is in
sharp contrast to recent multi-task networks like the crossstitch and sluice networks, which do not control state transfer at such fine granularity. We demonstrate the superiority
of GIRNet using three applications: sentiment classification
of code-switched passages, part-of-speech tagging of codeswitched text, and target position-sensitive annotation of sentiment in monolingual passages. In all cases, we establish new
state-of-the-art performance beyond recent competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have shown outstanding results in many
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, particularly involving sequence labeling (Schmid 1994; Lample et al.
2016) and sequence-to-sequence translation (Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2014). The success is generally attributed
to their ability to learn good representations and recurrent
models in an end-to-end manner. Most deep models require
generous volumes of training data to adequately train their
large number of parameters. Collecting sufficient labeled
data for some tasks entails unacceptably high cognitive burden. To overcome this bottleneck, some form of transfer

1
The code is available at
https://github.com/divamgupta/mtl\ girnet

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6497

