The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Feature Sampling Based Unsupervised Semantic Clustering for Real Web
Multi-View Content
Xiaolong Gong, Linpeng Huang, Fuwei Wang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{gxl121438, lphuang, wfwzy2012}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

contents commonly have the following properties: 1) Every
single view of one web item1 has its own feature sets. 2) Different views of one item share some consistency in semantic
information. Just like a new story may be reported by different news resources, but the underlying content will not be
changed. 3) The diversity information among the representations of one web item exists in multi-view data, and each
representation corresponds to a single view content. Taking
our Doucom dataset as an example, a movie item in the web
community consisting of multiple views including summary,
short comment, long review, and user group. And each view
of a movie item mainly contains specific information in the
relevant content.
According to the above properties, multi-view clustering
has attracted more and more attention because it can explore the intrinsic structure of the multi-view dataset and
handle large numbers of unlabeled data. Generally, the main
challenge lies in how to make use of the complementary
characteristics embedded in the multiple sources of information and exploit the interactions and correlations between a various number of views accurately and automatically. Plenty of multi-view clustering algorithms have been
developed to solve this problem. Some methods perform
multi-view clustering through merging the clustering results
from different individual views (Long, Yu, and Zhang 2008;
Greene and Cunningham 2009). Some works (Cai, Nie,
and Huang 2013; Cheng et al. 2013; J. Sun and Kranzler 2014) seek groupings that are consistent across different views. Recently, some researches (Liu et al. 2013;
He et al. 2014) focus on nonnegative matrix factorization(NMF) framework, which attempts to interpret the distinction between different views via pairwise representation.
All the above studies have shown effective in multi-view
clustering, but they suffer from some inevitable problems:
1) Most of the studies ignore the curse of dimensionality
in feature space with the growth of data size. This problem
leads to a significant computational challenge when optimization algorithms load complete view matrix with large
dimensions. Most recently proposed multi-view clustering
methods (Hoyer 2004; Mohammadiha and Leijon 2009;
Sun et al. 2015; Gong, Wang, and Huang 2017) utilized
complete feature space to deal with the above problem,

Real web datasets are often associated with multiple views
such as long and short commentaries, users preference and so
on. However, with the rapid growth of user generated texts,
each view of the dataset has a large feature space and leads
to the computational challenge during matrix decomposition
process. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-view clustering algorithm based on the non-negative matrix factorization that attempts to use feature sampling strategy in order
to reduce the complexity during the iteration process. In particular, our method exploits unsupervised semantic information in the learning process to capture the intrinsic similarity through a graph regularization. Moreover, we use Hilbert
Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) to explore the unsupervised semantic diversity information among multi-view
contents of one web item. The overall objective is to minimize the loss function of multi-view non-negative matrix
factorization that combines with an intra-semantic similarity
graph regularizer and an inter-semantic diversity term. Compared with some state-of-the-art methods, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed method on a large real-world
dataset Doucom and the other three smaller datasets.

1

Introduction

Real world application has to deal with data presenting various perspectives and is usually characterized by various
heterogeneous sources of information. Web pages, multimedia documents, user profiles are examples of data that
can be organized into multi-graphs. It is common that relevant multi-view data from different sources may have semantic correlations. For example, a movie item in IMDB
often consists of many user reviews and one plot summary;
An artist in Last.fm is always associated with its description and lots of short comments. As different semantic information may emphasize different aspects of the data, it
gives rise to an emerging demand to explore the interactions
between multi-view data for the application like multi-view
clustering (Bickel and Scheffe 2004; Chaudhuri et al. 2009;
Liu et al. 2013), co-regularized spectral clustering (Kumar,
Rai, and Daumé 2011; Kumar and Daumé 2011) and crossview retrieval (Zhai et al. 2013). Different from the traditional data with a single view, large-scale multi-view web
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

102

In this paper, we use “item” and “instance” interchangeably

