The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dual Semi-Supervised Learning for Facial Action Unit Recognition
Guozhu Peng, Shangfei Wang∗
Key Lab of Computing and Communication Software of Anhui Province
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei, Anhui, P.R.China, 230027
{gzpeng@mail., sfwang@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

number and the definitions of AUs are absolutely clear in
Ekman’s facial action coding system (FACS) (Friesen and
Ekman 1978), we focus on AU recognition in this paper.
Compared to expressions, which describe global facial behavior, AUs represent subtle local facial changes and are
thus should be annotated by experts. To reduce reliance
on AU labels, we propose a semi-supervised AU recognition method, which trains AU classifiers from partially AUannotated images.
Each AU is controlled by one or more facial muscles.
AUs are closely related due to underlying facial anatomy.
For example, inner brow raiser (AU1) and outer brow raiser
(AU2) almost always appear together, since they are both related to the muscle group frontalis. Such AU dependencies
exist regardless of whether or not a facial image has been
annotated, and thus can be leveraged for semi-supervised
AU recognition. AUs are also strongly related to expressions. For example, Du et al. (Du, Tao, and Martinez 2014)
found that people usually lower their jaws (AU26) when
they show surprise, while the lip corner puller (AU12) rarely
appears in sad faces. Prkachin et al.(Prkachin 1992) found
that the pain expression is primarily conveyed by six AUs
(AU4, AU6, AU7, AU9, AU10, and AU43). The emotion facial action coding system (EMFACS) (Friesen and Ekman
1983) lists expression-dependent AU combinations. Both
expression-dependent and expression-independent AU relations are crucial to learn AU classifier. Expression labels are
easier and less time-consuming to annotate than AU labels.
Therefore, we prefer to learn AU classifiers from partially
AU-annotated facial images with full expression labels.
AU recognition from facial images and face synthesis
from the AU labels are dual tasks with intrinsic probabilistic
connections. Such connections are independent of annotation status. Dual tasks help each other when they are trained
together (Xia et al. 2017). Therefore, we consider the AU
recognition task and the face synthesis task simultaneously,
leveraging their links to improve the results of both tasks.
In this paper, we propose a dual semi-supervised generative adversarial network (DSGAN) to jointly learn an AU
classifier and a facial image generator. The joint distribution
of the input and the output from the AU classifier should be
the same as that from the generator. This is referred to as
probabilistic duality (Xia et al. 2017). Through adversarial
learning, we force the joint distributions of the inputs and

Current works on facial action unit (AU) recognition typically
require fully AU-labeled training samples. To reduce the reliance on time-consuming manual AU annotations, we propose a novel semi-supervised AU recognition method leveraging two kinds of readily available auxiliary information.
The method leverages the dependencies between AUs and expressions as well as the dependencies among AUs, which are
caused by facial anatomy and therefore embedded in all facial
images, independent on their AU annotation status. The other
auxiliary information is facial image synthesis given AUs, the
dual task of AU recognition from facial images, and therefore has intrinsic probabilistic connections with AU recognition, regardless of AU annotations. Specifically, we propose a
dual semi-supervised generative adversarial network for AU
recognition from partially AU-labeled and fully expressionlabeled facial images. The proposed network consists of an
AU classifier C, an image generator G, and a discriminator D. In addition to minimize the supervised losses of the
AU classifier and the face generator for labeled training data,
we explore the probabilistic duality between the tasks using adversary learning to force the convergence of the faceAU-expression tuples generated from the AU classifier and
the face generator, and the ground-truth distribution in labeled data for all training data. This joint distribution also
includes the inherent AU dependencies. Furthermore, we reconstruct the facial image using the output of the AU classifier as the input of the face generator, and create AU labels by feeding the output of the face generator to the AU
classifier. We minimize reconstruction losses for all training
data, thus exploiting the informative feedback provided by the
dual tasks. Within-database and cross-database experiments
on three benchmark databases demonstrate the superiority of
our method in both AU recognition and face synthesis compared to state-of-the-art works.

Introduction
Both facial expression and facial action units (AUs) are used
to describe facial behavior. Ekman’s six basic expressions
(i.e., anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, and surprise)
are commonly used to describe facial expressions. There
are also many compound expressions, although their number and definition is not universally agreed upon. As the
∗

This is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8827

