The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Bayesian Optimization on Attributed Graphs
Jiaxu Cui,1,2 Bo Yang,1,2∗ Xia Hu3

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, United States
1

2

Abstract

O: Oxygen atom
C: Carbon atom
N: Nitrogen atom
R1: Single bond
R2: Double bond
R3: Conjugated bond

Attributed graphs, which contain rich contextual features beyond just network structure, are ubiquitous and have been
observed to benefit various network analytics applications.
Graph structure optimization, aiming to find the optimal
graphs in terms of some specific measures, has become an
effective computational tool in complex network analysis.
However, traditional model-free methods suffer from the expensive computational cost of evaluating graphs; existing
vectorial Bayesian optimization methods cannot be directly
applied to attributed graphs and have the scalability issue due
to the use of Gaussian processes (GPs). To bridge the gap, in
this paper, we propose a novel scalable Deep Graph Bayesian
Optimization (DGBO) method on attributed graphs. The proposed DGBO prevents the cubical complexity of the GPs by
adopting a deep graph neural network to surrogate black-box
functions, and can scale linearly with the number of observations. Intensive experiments are conducted on both artificial
and real-world problems, including molecular discovery and
urban road network design, and demonstrate the effectiveness
of the DGBO compared with the state-of-the-art.

R1
C

G = (V, E, FV, FE, FG)
V = {0, 1, 2, 3}
E = {(0, 3), (1, 3), (2, 3)}

O

C O

R2, R3
FV =

C
R1, R3
N

Molecule: CC(=O)N

0: 1
1: 0
2: 0
3: 1

0
1
0
0

N

0
0
1
0

R1 R2 R3

(0,3): 1 0 0
FE = 1,3 : 0 1 1
2,3 : 1 0 1
FG = (1, 59.068, 1, 0, 0, 43.09)

Attributed graph

Figure 1: An illustration from a molecule sampling in Delaney data set (Delaney 2004) to an attributed graph (defined
in Section 2). Node feature is atomic type, edge feature is
chemical bond type, and global attributes contain minimum
degree, molecular weight, # h-bond donors, # rings, # rotatable bonds, and polar surface area.
Optimizing the graph structure is a fundamental task in
network analysis, aiming to find the optimal graphs with respect to some specific measures. Examples include discovering molecular structures with desired properties and designing road networks with better traffic conditions. In the literature, existing graph structure optimization methods generally fall into two categories, i.e., model-free methods and
model-based methods.
The model-free methods based on evolutionary strategies
or annealing strategies have been widely applied to road
network design (Xiong and Schneider 1992; Miandoabchi
and Farahani 2010; Farahani et al. 2013) and molecular discovery (Supady, Blum, and Baldauf 2015; Rupakheti et al.
2015). However, model-free methods will be less effective if
the computational cost of evaluating graphs is expensive, because such methods usually require a large number of evaluations to maintain population diversity in finding an optimal
solution. This is not acceptable particularly for the tasks with
large-scale search spaces. For instance, to evaluate the effectiveness of a candidate molecular structure, one has to do
lots of computer-aided simulations involving massive computing resources or do actual chemical experiments many
times with high costs and potential risks.
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al. 2016), a
model-based global optimization framework, has shown its
effectiveness in addressing the above-mentioned challenges.
BO is particularly proposed to optimize black-box functions

1 Introduction
Graphs have been intensively used to model network data
generated in important application domains such as chemistry, transportation, social networks, and knowledge graphs.
These real-world networks are often associated with a rich
set of available attributes with respect to nodes, edges, and
global structures, which are known as attributed graphs.
Fig.1 provides one example, in which atomic type, chemical
bond type, molecular weight, polar surface area, and other
attributes are observed on each molecule. It has been studied
that the attributes on graphs are highly correlated to topological structures (Zhang, Ding, and Milojević 2013) and can
benefit various network analysis tasks such as trust prediction (Tang et al. 2013) and network embedding (Huang, Li,
and Hu 2017). Motivated by these observations, in this work
we propose to study whether the attributes on graphs can
benefit the task of graph structure optimization and how to
comprehensively explore available attributes to address this
task more efficiently and effectively.
∗

Corresponding author. ybo@jlu.edu.cn
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1377

