The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Neural Speech Synthesis with Transformer Network
Naihan Li,∗1,4 Shujie Liu,2 Yanqing Liu,3 Sheng Zhao,3 Ming Liu1,4
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Microsoft STC Asia
4
CETC Big Data Research Institute Co.,Ltd, Guizhou, China
lnhzsbls1994@163.com
shujliu, yanqliu, szhao@microsoft.com
csmliu@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract

guage specific, which requires a lot of resource and manpower. Besides, synthesized audios often have glitches or
instability in prosody and pronunciation compared to human
speech, and thus sound unnatural.
Recently, with the rapid development of neural networks, end-to-end generative text-to-speech models, such
as Tacotron (Wang et al. 2017) and Tacotron2 (Shen et al.
2017), are proposed to simplify traditional speech synthesis pipeline by replacing the production of these linguistic
and acoustic features with a single neural network. Tacotron
and Tacotron2 first generate mel spectrograms directly from
texts, then synthesize the audio results by a vocoder such as
Griffin Lim algorithm (Griffin and Lim 1984) or WaveNet
(Van Den Oord et al. 2016). With the end-to-end neural network, quality of synthesized audios is greatly improved and
even comparable with human recordings on some datasets.
The end-to-end neural TTS models contain two components,
an encoder and a decoder. Given the input sequence (of
words or phonemes), the encoder tries to map them into a
semantic space and generates a sequence of encoder hidden
states, and the decoder, taking these hidden states as context
information with an attention mechanism, constructs the decoder hidden states then outputs the mel frames. For both
encoder and decoder, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are
usually leveraged, such as LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and GRU (Cho et al. 2014).
However, RNNs can only consume the input and generate
the output sequentially, since the previous hidden state and
the current input are both required to build the current hidden state. The characteristic of sequential process limits the
parallelization capability in both the training and inference
process. For the same reason, for a certain frame, information from many steps ahead may has been biased after multiple recurrent processing. To deal with these two problems,
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) is proposed to replace the
RNNs in NMT models.
Inspired by this idea, in this paper, we combine the advantages of Tacotron2 and Transformer to propose a novel
end-to-end TTS model, in which the multi-head attention
mechanism is introduced to replace the RNN structures in
the encoder and decoder, as well as the vanilla attention
network. The self-attention mechanism unties the sequential
dependency on the last previous hidden state to improve the
parallelization capability and relieve the long distance de-

Although end-to-end neural text-to-speech (TTS) methods
(such as Tacotron2) are proposed and achieve state-of-theart performance, they still suffer from two problems: 1) low
efficiency during training and inference; 2) hard to model
long dependency using current recurrent neural networks
(RNNs). Inspired by the success of Transformer network in
neural machine translation (NMT), in this paper, we introduce and adapt the multi-head attention mechanism to replace
the RNN structures and also the original attention mechanism in Tacotron2. With the help of multi-head self-attention,
the hidden states in the encoder and decoder are constructed
in parallel, which improves training efficiency. Meanwhile,
any two inputs at different times are connected directly by
a self-attention mechanism, which solves the long range dependency problem effectively. Using phoneme sequences as
input, our Transformer TTS network generates mel spectrograms, followed by a WaveNet vocoder to output the final audio results. Experiments are conducted to test the efficiency and performance of our new network. For the efficiency, our Transformer TTS network can speed up the training about 4.25 times faster compared with Tacotron2. For
the performance, rigorous human tests show that our proposed model achieves state-of-the-art performance (outperforms Tacotron2 with a gap of 0.048) and is very close to
human quality (4.39 vs 4.44 in MOS).

1

Introduction

Text to speech (TTS) is a very important task for user interaction, aiming to synthesize intelligible and natural audios
which are indistinguishable from human recordings. Traditional TTS systems have two components: front-end and
back-end. Front-end is responsible for text analysis and linguistic feature extraction, such as word segmentation, part
of speech tagging, multi-word disambiguation and prosodic
structure prediction; back-end is built for speech synthesis
based on linguistic features from front-end, such as speech
acoustic parameter modeling, prosody modeling and speech
generation. In the past decades, concatenative and parametric speech synthesis systems were mainstream techniques.
However, both of them have complex pipelines, and defining good linguistic features is often time-consuming and lan∗

Work done during internship at Microsoft STC Asia.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6706

