The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Understanding Learned Models by
Identifying Important Features at the Right Resolution
Kyubin Lee*

Akshay Sood*

Mark Craven

Dept. of Biostatistics & Medical Informatics
Clinical Genomics Analysis Branch
Dept. of Computer Sciences
Dept. of Computer Sciences
National Cancer Center
Dept. of Biostatistics & Medical Informatics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Republic of Korea
University of Wisconsin-Madison
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract

given domain learn models that are highly challenging to inspect and understand. For this reason, a number of approaches
have been developed for gaining insight into complex learned
models such as random forests and deep neural networks.
Methods for gaining comprehensible descriptions of
learned models can be divided into two broad categories.
The first category, which is referred to as prediction interpretability encompasses methods that lend insight into
learned models by locally explaining the decisions they make
for individual instances (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2017;
Fong and Vedaldi 2017; Koh and Liang 2017; Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016; Leino et al. 2018; Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016; 2018). The second category, referred
to as model interpretability, refers to methods that aim to
provide characterizations of how models make decisions
across the distribution of instances. Some methods in this
category are tailored to specific types of models (Bau et
al. 2017; Bojarski et al. 2017; Hara and Hayashi 2018;
Karpathy, Johnson, and Fei-Fei 2016), whereas others are
agnostic to the model type (Craven and Shavlik 1996;
Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; 2018).
Here we present a model-agnostic approach that is focused on gaining model interpretability. The crux of our
approach is to identify important features, groups of features, and interactions among them. The prior research
that is most closely related to ours includes methods that
aim to provide model interpretability by identifying important features through perturbations of input (Breiman 2001;
Friedman 2001; Li, Monroe, and Jurafsky 2016). There are
also methods that identify important features, but which are
not model agnostic (Epifanio 2017; Fabris et al. 2018). The
specific contributions of our approach are the following. First,
it is well suited to tasks with large, structured feature spaces.
In such applications, the base features that are used as input
to the model might not provide the best level of resolution
for understanding or characterizing what is important to the
learned model. Our approach tests feature groups, in addition
to base features, and tries to determine the level of resolution
at which we can determine the important features. Second,
we go beyond just ranking features according to their importance, and instead use hypothesis testing to assess the effect
of each feature on the model’s loss. Given the potentially
large number of hypothesis tests that must be done, we use
a hierarchical approach to control the false discovery rate

In many application domains, it is important to characterize
how complex learned models make their decisions across the
distribution of instances. One way to do this is to identify
the features and interactions among them that contribute to
a model’s predictive accuracy. We present a model-agnostic
approach to this task that makes the following specific contributions. Our approach (i) tests feature groups, in addition to
base features, and tries to determine the level of resolution at
which important features can be determined, (ii) uses hypothesis testing to rigorously assess the effect of each feature on
the model’s loss, (iii) employs a hierarchical approach to control the false discovery rate when testing feature groups and
individual base features for importance, and (iv) uses hypothesis testing to identify important interactions among features
and feature groups. We evaluate our approach by analyzing
random forest and LSTM neural network models learned in
two challenging biomedical applications.

Introduction
In many application domains, it is important to be able to
inspect, probe, and understand models learned by machinelearning systems. There are several principal reasons why
it might be critical to understand how learned models make
their decisions: (i) Trust: end users and other stakeholders
need to trust the models’ decisions and understand the basis
for them in order for the models to be accepted and employed;
(ii) Model development: to help improve the predictive performance of models, interpretable descriptions can aid in
selecting among models, detecting and avoiding overfitting,
and gaining insight into differences among input representations; (iii) Discovery: our knowledge of a problem domain
can be augmented by identifying previously unrecognized
salient features and relationships that models have learned.
In such application domains, there is a strong incentive to
use a learning method that directly learns interpretable models, such as logistic regression or a generalized additive model
(Lou et al. 2013). However, there is often tension between
the desiderata of model comprehensibility and predictive
performance. It may be the case that the machine-learning
approaches that provide the best predictive performance in a
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4155

