The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Data Augmentation for Spoken Language
Understanding via Joint Variational Generation
Kang Min Yoo, Youhyun Shin, Sang-goo Lee
Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
{kangminyoo, shinu89, sglee}@europa.snu.ac.kr

Abstract

other latent variable models for textual generation (Serban
et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2017; Hu et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017),
prompting investigations into the possibility of improving
model performances through generative data augmentation
(Kafle, Yousefhussien, and Kanan 2017; Kurata, Xiang, and
Zhou 2016a; Hou et al. 2018).
In order to alleviate the data issues, data augmentation
(DA) techniques that simply perform class-preserving transformation on data samples have been extensively used extensively (Simard, Steinkraus, and Platt 2003; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Fadaee, Bisazza, and Monz
2017). However, such DA methods require full supervision
and generated datasets lack variety and robustness. To reduce reliance on handcrafted transformation functions, there
has been growing interest in leveraging the generative power
of latent variable models to facilitate DA. These line of
works deserve a category of its own, to which we refer as
generative data augmentation (GDA). Recent works have
explored the idea for the SLU task (Kurata, Xiang, and Zhou
2016a; Hou et al. 2018).
In this paper, we formalize the notion of GDA by developing a general framework for the class of DA techniques in
the SLU domain. Upon the framework, we propose a generative model specialized in the generation of SLU datasets.
Finally, we wish to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through various experiments. In essence, our main
contributions are three folds:

Data scarcity is one of the main obstacles of domain adaptation in spoken language understanding (SLU) due to the
high cost of creating manually tagged SLU datasets. Recent
works in neural text generative models, particularly latent
variable models such as variational autoencoder (VAE), have
shown promising results in regards to generating plausible
and natural sentences. In this paper, we propose a novel generative architecture which leverages the generative power of
latent variable models to jointly synthesize fully annotated
utterances. Our experiments show that existing SLU models trained on the additional synthetic examples achieve performance gains. Our approach not only helps alleviate the
data scarcity issue in the SLU task for many datasets but
also indiscriminately improves language understanding performances for various SLU models, supported by extensive
experiments and rigorous statistical testing.

Introduction
Spoken language understanding (SLU) in current literature
refers to the study of models that parse spoken queries into
semantic frames. Semantic frames contain pieces of semantic units that best represent the speaker’s intentions and are
essential for the development of human-machine interfaces,
such as virtual assistants.
Scarcity of linguistic resources has been a recurring issue in many NLP tasks such as representation learning (AlRfou, Perozzi, and Skiena 2013), neural machine translation
(NMT) (Zoph et al. 2016), and SLU (Kurata, Xiang, and
Zhou 2016a). The issue is especially true for SLU, because
creating manually annotated SLU datasets is costly but the
domain space that might require new labeled datasets is near
infinite.
Even for domains with existing datasets, they might suffer
from the data sparsity issue, which have long been plaguing
many NLP tasks that require annotated linguistic datasets
(Lai et al. 2015). For example, most SLU datasets are not
large enough cover all possible data label pairs. Furthermore, biased data collection methods could exacerbate the
issue (Torralba and Efros 2011).
Recent years, there have been significant advances in variational autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013) and

1. The Generative DA Framework: We develop a general
framework of generative data augmentation specifically
for the SLU task. During formulation, we posit the importance of prior approximation in generation sampling
and propose a Monte Carlo-based method. Experiments
show that the Monte Carlo-based estimation is superior
compared to other approximation methods.
2. A Novel Model for Labeled Language Generation: We
propose a novel generative model for jointly synthesizing
spoken utterances and their semantic annotations (slot labels and intents). We show that the synthetic samples generated from the model are not only natural and accurately
annotated, but they improve SLU performances by a significant margin when used in the generative data augmentation framework. We also show that our model is better
than the previous work (Kurata, Xiang, and Zhou 2016a).

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7402

