The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Winner Contests for Strategic Diffusion in Social Networks
Wen Shen, Yang Feng, Cristina V. Lopes
University of California, Irvine, California 92697, United States
wen.shen@uci.edu, yang.feng@uci.edu, lopes@ics.uci.edu

Abstract

Bob then refers Cathy, both Alice and Bob are rewarded for
Cathy’s purchases. However, Bob is typically given more rewards than Alice for his direct referral. Such referral mechanisms are often called the geometric reward mechanisms,
or the incentive tree mechanisms (Pickard et al. 2011). Geometric reward mechanisms are usually effective and easy
to implement (Tang et al. 2011). As a result, they have witnessed a growing range of serious applications, including
product promotion (Drucker and Fleischer 2012), disaster
rescue (Rahwan et al. 2013), global manhunt (Rahwan et al.
2013), participatory sensing (Gao et al. 2015) and crowdfunding (Naroditskiy et al. 2014b).
Despite the promising prospects of the geometric reward mechanisms, they are usually vulnerable to manipulations (Drucker and Fleischer 2012). Under many geometric
reward mechanisms, indirect referrals are rewarded (Pickard
et al. 2011). A strategic player may create multiple fake
accounts or identities on his behalf with one referring another to increase his rewards. Players’ such malicious behaviors are often called false-name attacks. A false-name attack
refers to a strategy that a profit-maximizing agent utilizes to
gain benefits by creating multiple false identities (i.e., replicas). False identities can be analogous to “free riders” in the
sense that they pay less than what they should have paid.
This free rider problem arises when genuine identities are
unfeasible or difficult to be recognized. Unfortunately, many
social network services lack effective methods to fully eliminate false identities (Ferrara et al. 2016).
False-name attacks severely impede stakeholders from
implementing desired individual or societal outcomes. On
the one hand, false-name attacks are undesirable because
they not only diminish stakeholders’ revenues but also reduce other truthful players’ payoffs (Drucker and Fleischer 2012). On the other hand, prior research indicates that
false-name attacks are pervasive in social networks since
players may create false accounts with no or minimal efforts if no interventions are given (Lorenz et al. 2011;
Naroditskiy et al. 2014a; Ferrara et al. 2016).
Despite that much research has been devoted to tackling
the false-name-attack problems in social networks (Conitzer
et al. 2010; Emek et al. 2011; Todo, Iwasaki, and Yokoo
2011; Brill et al. 2016), our work is most closely related
to the mechanism design problem for multi-level marketing (Drucker and Fleischer 2012). In their work, Drucker

Strategic diffusion encourages participants to take active roles
in promoting stakeholders’ agendas by rewarding successful
referrals. As social media continues to transform the way people communicate, strategic diffusion has become a powerful
tool for stakeholders to influence people’s decisions or behaviors for desired objectives. Existing reward mechanisms
for strategic diffusion are usually either vulnerable to falsename attacks or not individually rational for participants that
have made successful referrals. Here, we introduce a novel
multi-winner contests (MWC) mechanism for strategic diffusion in social networks. The MWC mechanism satisfies several desirable properties, including false-name-proofness, individual rationality, budget constraint, monotonicity, and subgraph constraint. Numerical experiments on four real-world
social network datasets demonstrate that stakeholders can significantly boost participants’ aggregated efforts with proper
design of competitions. Our work sheds light on how to
design manipulation-resistant mechanisms with appropriate
contests.

Introduction
Strategic diffusion is the process of spreading information among social media users to promote desired private or social outcomes (Galeotti and Goyal 2009). As the
impact of social media on people’s daily lives continues
to grow, strategic diffusion has become a prominent tool
for stakeholders (e.g., individuals, companies, governments,
and NGOs) to influence people’s preferences, decisions or
behaviors (Jackson and Yariv 2011; Chaffey 2016). The vast
popularity of strategic diffusion in social networks is primarily because it encourages participants to take active roles in
promoting stakeholders’ agendas in a word-of-mouth fashion (i.e., in the forms of referrals). This viral marketing strategy can reach a broader audience at a faster pace and are
usually more economically efficient than traditional advertising such as newspapers, radios or televisions (Leskovec,
Adamic, and Huberman 2007; Galeotti and Goyal 2009).
To unleash the power of crowds, stakeholders usually reward both direct and indirect referrals to encourage potential
participants to perform the tasks early and invite influential
players to participate. For example, if Alice refers Bob and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6154

