The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Domain Agnostic Real-Valued Specificity Prediction
Wei-Jen Ko,∗ Greg Durrett,∗ Junyi Jessy Li†
∗

Department of Computer Science
†
Department of Linguistics
The University of Texas at Austin
wjko@cs.utexas.edu, gdurrett@cs.utexas.edu, jessy@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract

applications, such as summarization (Louis and Nenkova
2011b), argumentation mining (Swanson, Ecker, and Walker
2015), political discourse analysis (Cook 2016), student discussion assessment (Luo and Litman 2016; Lugini and Litman 2017), deception detection (Kleinberg et al. 2017), and
dialogue generation (Zhang et al. 2018).
Despite their usefulness, prior sentence specificity predictors (Louis and Nenkova 2011a; Li and Nenkova 2015;
Lugini and Litman 2017) are trained with sentences from
specific domains (news or classroom discussions), and
have been found to fall short when applied to other domains (Kleinberg et al. 2017; Lugini and Litman 2017).
They are also trained to label a sentence as either general or
specific (Louis and Nenkova 2011a; Li and Nenkova 2015),
or low/medium/high specificity (Lugini and Litman 2017),
though in practice specificity has been analyzed as a continuous value (Louis and Nenkova 2011b; 2013; Swanson,
Ecker, and Walker 2015; Cook 2016; Luo and Litman 2016;
Kleinberg et al. 2017), as it should be (Li et al. 2016b).
In this work, we present an unsupervised domain adaptation system for sentence specificity prediction, specifically
designed to output real-valued estimates. It effectively generalizes sentence specificity analysis to domains where no
labeled data is available, and outputs values that are close to
the real-world distribution of sentence specificity.
Our main framework is an unsupervised domain adaptation system based on Self-Ensembling (Tarvainen and
Valpola 2017; French, Mackiewicz, and Fisher 2018) that
simultaneously reduces source prediction errors and generates feature representations that are robust against noise and
across domains. Past applications of this technique have focused on computer vision problems; to make it effective for
text processing tasks, we modify the network to better utilize
labeled data in the source domain and explore several data
augmentation methods for text.
We further propose a posterior regularization technique
(Ganchev et al. 2010) that generally applies to the scenario where it is easy to get coarse-grained categories of labels, but fine-grained predictions are needed. Specifically,
our regularization term seeks to move the distribution of
the classifier posterior probabilities closer to that of a prespecified target distribution, which in our case is a specificity
distribution derived from the source domain.
Experimental results show that our system generates more

Sentence specificity quantifies the level of detail in a sentence, characterizing the organization of information in discourse. While this information is useful for many downstream applications, specificity prediction systems predict
very coarse labels (binary or ternary) and are trained on and
tailored toward specific domains (e.g., news). The goal of this
work is to generalize specificity prediction to domains where
no labeled data is available and output more nuanced realvalued specificity ratings.
We present an unsupervised domain adaptation system for
sentence specificity prediction, specifically designed to output real-valued estimates from binary training labels. To calibrate the values of these predictions appropriately, we regularize the posterior distribution of the labels towards a reference distribution. We show that our framework generalizes
well to three different domains with 50%-68% mean absolute
error reduction than the current state-of-the-art system trained
for news sentence specificity. We also demonstrate the potential of our work in improving the quality and informativeness
of dialogue generation systems.

1

Introduction

The specificity of a sentence measures its “quality of belonging or relating uniquely to a particular subject”1 (Lugini
and Litman 2017). It is often pragmatically defined as the
level of detail in the sentence (Louis and Nenkova 2011a; Li
and Nenkova 2015). When communicating, specificity is adjusted to serve the intentions of the writer or speaker (Grice
1975). In the examples below, the second sentence is clearly
more specific than the first one:
Ex1: This brand is very popular and many people use
its products regularly.
Ex2: Mascara is the most commonly worn cosmetic,
and women will spend an average of $4,000 on it in
their lifetimes.
Studies have demonstrated the important role of sentence
specificity in reading comprehension (Dixon 1987) and in
establishing common ground in dialog (Djalali et al. 2011).
It has also been shown to be a key property in analyses and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Definition from the Oxford Dictionary

6610

