The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

X-DMM: Fast and Scalable Model Based Text Clustering
Linwei Li,1 Liangchen Guo,1 Zhenying He,1,2,3 Yinan Jing,1,2,3 X. Sean Wang1,2,3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Key Lab of Data Science
3
Shanghai Institute of Intelligent Electronics & Systems, China
{lwli15, lcguo17, zhenying, jingyn, xywangCS}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

tering task. GSDMM assumes that the words in each document are generated by a single mixture component (i.e.
a cluster), and uses a collapsed Gibbs sampling algorithm
for model training. GSDMM achieves good balance in both
completeness and homogeneity of the clustering results. It
can process high dimensional sparse text data efficiently in
terms of both computation and memory resources, and converge quickly. On real world datasets, GSDMM is proved to
deliver the best clustering performance to date.
Although GSDMM uses bag-of-words model to represent each document and the order of words is ignored, the
time complexity of GSDMM, as discussed in (Yin and Wang
2014), is still proportional to the length of the document. In
this paper, we leverage the symmetric prior for the Dirichlet distribution to optimize the sequential multiplication by
constructing indices. This reduces the time complexity of
sampling each document from O(L) to O(U ) (here L is
the length of the document, and U is the number of unique
words in the document). With this optimization, the time
used for sampling is significantly reduced, especially for
long text datasets.
In GSDMM, the complexity of sampling each document
is also proportional to the number of clusters K. For largescale document datasets, the number of clusters may be very
large (e.g., 103 − 104 ), which leads to expensive computational cost for each sampling. FGSDMM+(Yin and others
2016) adopts an online initialization scheme for clustering,
and reduces the time complexity of clustering to be proportional to the number of non-empty clusters. In this work,
we observe that the word distribution in the clusters varies
slowly between each iteration, especially in the nearlyto-convergence stages. Thus we introduce a MetropolisHastings sampling method to reduce the time of sampling
each document from O(K ∗ U ) to O(U ) in each iteration,
which can significantly reduce the sampling time for large
text datasets.
For large-scale text datasets, we need resort to parallelization for acceleration. However, unlike its competitor similarity-based approaches such as Spherical K-means
(Dhillon and Modha 2001) and K-medoids (Park and Jun
2009) that are embarrassingly parallelizable, the sampling
process of GSDMM is strictly sequential and can not be parallelized. In this work, we introduce an uncollapsed Gibbs
sampler to parallelize the model training, and show its scal-

Text clustering is a widely studied problem in the text mining
domain. The Dirichlet Multinomial Mixture (DMM) model
based clustering algorithms have shown good performance
to cope with high dimensional sparse text data, obtaining
reasonable results in both clustering accuracy and computational efficiency. However, the time complexity of DMM
model training is proportional to the average document length
and the number of clusters, making it inefficient for scaling
up to long text and large corpora, which is common in realworld applications such as documents organization, retrieval
and recommendation. In this paper, we leverage a symmetric prior setting for Dirichlet distribution, and build indices
to decrease the time complexity of the sampling-based training for DMM from O(K ∗ L) to O(K ∗ U ), where K is the
number of clusters, L the average length of document, and U
the average number of unique words in each document. We
introduce a Metropolis-Hastings sampling algorithm, which
further reduces the sampling time complexity from O(K ∗U )
to O(U ) in the nearly-to-convergence training stages. Moreover, we also parallelize the DMM model training to obtain
a further acceleration by using an uncollapsed Gibbs sampler. We combine all these optimizations into a highly efficient implementation, called X-DMM, which enables the
DMM model to scale up for long and large-scale text clustering. We evaluate the performance of X-DMM on several
real world datasets, and the experimental results show that XDMM achieves substantial speed up compared with existing
state-of-the-art algorithms without clustering accuracy degradation.

Introduction
Text clustering is a popular problem in the field of data mining. The text data has the property of high dimensionality
and sparsity (there are hundreds of thousands of word tokens in the lexicon, but only hundreds of words in each document). For such cases, the accuracy and computational efficiency of similarity-based clustering algorithms are always
far from satisfactory. The model-based clustering algorithms
have shown better performance to cope with high dimensional text data. In (Yin and Wang 2014), researchers proposed a Gibbs Sampling algorithm for the Dirichlet Multinomial Mixture model (GSDMM) to deal with the text clusCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4197

