The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Memory Bounded Open-Loop Planning
in Large POMDPs Using Thompson Sampling
Thomy Phan

Lenz Belzner

Marie Kiermeier

LMU Munich
thomy.phan@ifi.lmu.de

MaibornWolff
lenz.belzner@maibornwolff.de

LMU Munich
marie.kiermeier@ifi.lmu.de

Markus Friedrich

Kyrill Schmid

Claudia Linnhoff-Popien

LMU Munich
markus.friedrich@ifi.lmu.de

LMU Munich
kyrill.schmid@ifi.lmu.de

LMU Munich
linnhoff@ifi.lmu.de

Abstract

large POMDPs (Silver and Veness 2010; Somani et al. 2013;
Bai et al. 2014). While these approaches avoid exhaustive search, the constructed closed-loop trees can still become arbitrarily large for highly complex domains, which
could limit the performance due to restricted memory resources (Powley, Cowling, and Whitehouse 2017). In contrast, open-loop approaches only focus on searching action sequences and are independent of the history and belief state space. Open-loop approaches are able to achieve
competitive performance compared to closed-loop planning,
when the problem is too large to provide sufficient computational and memory resources (Weinstein and Littman 2013;
Perez Liebana et al. 2015; Lecarpentier et al. 2018). However, open-loop planning has been a less popular choice for
decision making in POMDPs so far (Yu et al. 2005).
In this paper, we propose Partially Observable Stacked
Thompson Sampling (POSTS), a memory bounded approach
to open-loop planning in large POMDPs, which optimizes a
fixed size stack of Thompson Sampling bandits.
To evaluate the effectiveness of POSTS, we formulate a tree-based approach, called Partially Observable
Open-Loop Thompson Sampling (POOLTS) and show that
POOLTS is able to find optimal open-loop plans with sufficient computational and memory resources.
We empirically test POSTS in four large benchmark
problems and compare its performance with POOLTS and
other tree-based approaches like POMCP. We show that
POSTS achieves competitive performance compared to treebased open-loop planning and offers a performance-memory
tradeoff, making it suitable for partially observable planning
with highly restricted computational and memory resources.

State-of-the-art approaches to partially observable planning
like POMCP are based on stochastic tree search. While these
approaches are computationally efficient, they may still construct search trees of considerable size, which could limit
the performance due to restricted memory resources. In this
paper, we propose Partially Observable Stacked Thompson
Sampling (POSTS), a memory bounded approach to openloop planning in large POMDPs, which optimizes a fixed size
stack of Thompson Sampling bandits. We empirically evaluate POSTS in four large benchmark problems and compare its
performance with different tree-based approaches. We show
that POSTS achieves competitive performance compared to
tree-based open-loop planning and offers a performancememory tradeoff, making it suitable for partially observable
planning with highly restricted computational and memory
resources.

Introduction
Many real-world problems can be modeled as Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP), where the
true state is unknown to the agent due to limited and noisy
sensors. The agent has to reason about the history of past
observations and actions, and maintain a belief state as a
distribution of possible states. POMDPs have been widely
used to model decision making problems in the context of
planning and reinforcement learning (Ross et al. 2008).
Solving POMDPs exactly is computationally intractable
for domains with enormous state spaces and long planning
horizons. First, the space of possible belief states grows exponentially w.r.t. the number of states N , since that space is
N -dimensional, which is known as curse of dimensionality
(Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998). Second, the number of possible histories grows exponentially w.r.t. the horizon length, which is known as the curse of history (Pineau,
Gordon, and Thrun 2006).
In the last few years, Monte-Carlo planning has been proposed to break both curses with statistical sampling. These
methods construct sparse trees over belief states and actions,
representing the state-of-the-art for efficient planning in

Background
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
A POMDP is defined by a tuple M
=
hS, A, P, R, O, Ω, b0 i, where S is a (finite) set of states, A
is the (finite) set of actions, P(st+1 |st , at ) is the transition
probability function, R(st , at ) is the scalar reward function,
O is a (finite) set of observations, Ω(ot+1 |st+1 , at ) is the
observation probability function, and b0 is a probability
distribution over initial states s0 ∈ S. It is always assumed,
that st , st+1 ∈ S, at ∈ A, and ot , ot+1 ∈ O at time step t.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7941

