The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Optimal Rewiring Strategy for Cooperative Multiagent Social Learning
Hongyao Tang,1 Jianye Hao,1 Li Wang,1 Tim Baarslag,2 Zan Wang1
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{bluecontra, jianye.hao, wangli, wangzan}@tju.edu.cn, T.Baarslag@cwi.nl
+86 15620947182, Yaguan Road 135, Jinnan Distinct, Tianjin, China
2

Abstract

rewiring autonomously, and propose an optimal rewiring approach for agents to select most beneficial peers among all
reachable peers to maximize the accumulative payoff during
the long-run interactions.

Multiagent coordination in cooperative multiagent systems
(MASs) has been widely studied in both fixed-agent repeated
interaction setting and static social learning framework. However, two aspects of dynamics in real-world MASs are currently missing. First, the network topologies can dynamically
change during the course of interaction. Second, the interaction utilities between each pair of agents may not be identical
and not known as a prior. Both issues mentioned above increase the difficulty of coordination. In this paper, we consider the multiagent social learning in a dynamic environment in which agents can alter their connections and interact
with randomly chosen neighbors with unknown utilities beforehand. We propose an optimal rewiring strategy to select
most beneficial peers to maximize the accumulated payoffs in
long-run interactions. We empirically demonstrate the effects
of our approach in large-scale MASs.

Problem Description
We consider a population of agents N , in which each agent i
can only play with its reachable peers, defined as {Oi ∪ Ōi }.
Agent i can only interact with its neighborhood Oi through
the connections, and also has a probability ϕ to be able to
establish a new connection to a potential agent j ∈ Ōi with
cost cij through rewiring. For each rewiring, an old connection should be broken before establishing a new one to
model agents’ limited communication ability in practice.
We model the strategic interaction among each pair of
agents as cooperative games. A general form of two-action
cooperative games between agent i and j is denoted as
Gji = [ua , α, α, ub ], where ua (or ub ) is the payoff when
agent i and j both choose action a (or b) and α (≤ ua (ub ))
is the payoff for mis-coordination. To model the uncertainty
and diversity of agents’ utility functions, the coordination
payoff ua (or ub ) is sampled from a stochastic variable xa
(or xb ) following cumulative probability distribution Fa (x)
(or Fb (x)). In addition, Fa (x) (or Fb (x)) is unique for each
game. The value of ua (or ub ) is unknown before interaction
and is revealed when the corresponding outcome is reached
once. Each agent can observe the actions of its interaction
neighbor at the end of each interaction.

Introduction
Multiagent coordination in cooperative multiagent systems
(MASs) is a significant and widely studied problem. It requires agents to have the capability of coordinating with others effectively towards desirable outcomes. Until now, a lot
of works have studied the multiagent coordination problems
in cooperative MASs (Claus and Boutilier 1998). One class
of research is multiagent social learning (Sen and Airiau
2007), which study the multiagent coordination problem
among a population of cooperative agents with sparse and
local interactions (Hao and Leung 2013).
Most existing works under the social learning framework
assume that agents are located in a static network. However, two important aspects of dynamics in real-world MASs
are currently missing. First, the cooperative games for agent
pairs might be different due to the difference of agents’
preferences and the contexts they are situated in. Second,
the network topologies can be dynamic, i.e. agent’s interacting partners are not fixed and may change frequently.
Therefore, in this paper, we study the multiagent coordination problem in cooperative MASs with taking above two
aspects into consideration. We consider a dynamic environment where agents can alter their connections through

Social Learning Framework
The overall social learning framework is shown in Algorithm 1. During each round, agent i ∈ N goes through the
rewiring phase first and then the interaction phase.
Estimation of Expected Interaction Payoff The expected payoffs of agent i interacting with j according to an
known or unknown payoff matrix Gji , i.e., vij or xji , are evaluated respectively as follows:


vij = max pji (m)um + 1 − pji (m) α,
(1)
m∈Ai


xji = max pji (m)xm + 1 − pji (m) α.
(2)
m∈Ai
Agent j’s policy pji can be estimated from historical actions.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10049

