The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

ATP: Directed Graph Embedding with Asymmetric Transitivity Preservation
Jiankai Sun, Bortik Bandyopadhyay, Armin Bashizade, Jiongqian Liang, P. Sadayappan,
Srinivasan Parthasarathy
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, USA
{sun.1306,bandyopadhyay.14,bashizade.1,liang.420,sadayappan.1}.osu.edu,srini@cse.ohio-state.edu

Abstract

al. 2016; Sun et al. 2018a). Previous work (Wang, Jing Liu,
and Guo 2014; Sun et al. 2018a) proposed to assign a scalar
value to represent question difficulty (and user expertise).
However, question difficulty and user expertise can vary in
different topics. In Stack Exchange sites, users are required
to use tags (a tag is a word or phrase) to describe the topic(s)
of the question 1 . Each question can be assigned multi-tags
to represent its most relevant topics. For example, in our experiments, the average number of tags per question is 2.82
and 2.96 in Stack Exchange site Apple and Physics respectively. Hence a solely scalar value to represent question difficulty level or user expertise is not thorough.
Some graph embedding methods (Fang et al. 2016; Zhao
et al. 2016; Zhao et al. 2017) are then proposed to address
the above limitation. The problem of graph embedding seeks
to represent vertices of a graph in a low-dimensional vector
space in which meaningful semantic, relational and structural information conveyed by the graph can be accurately
captured (Ma et al. 2018). Recently, one has seen a surge
of interest in developing such methods including ones for
learning such representations for directed graphs (while preserving important properties) (Ou et al. 2016), which is the
focus of our research. A property of singular importance
within a directed graph is asymmetric transitivity, which
plays a very important role in tasks of graph inference and
analysis (Ou et al. 2016). Question difficulty and user expertise follow the characteristic of asymmetric transitivity.
For example, given a question q1 is easier than q2 and q2
is easier than q3 , we can infer that q1 is easier than q3 easily. It happens to estimating user expertise too. We can infer that u1 has more expertise than u3 based on the fact
that u1 has more expertise than u2 and u2 has more expertise than u3 in a specific domain. In this paper, we tackle
the challenge of directed graph embedding with asymmetric
transitivity preservation and then leverage the proposed embedding method to solve a fundamental task in CQAs: how
to appropriately route and assign newly posted questions to
users with the suitable expertise and interest in CQAs.
HOPE (Ou et al. 2016), one of the state-of-art directed
graph embedding methods, relies on high-order proximity
features (e.g. Adamic Adar (AA), Katz Index (KI), Common
Neighbors (CN)) to approximate asymmetric transitivity.

Directed graphs have been widely used in Community Question Answering services (CQAs) to model asymmetric relationships among different types of nodes in CQA graphs, e.g.,
question, answer, user. Asymmetric transitivity is an essential property of directed graphs, since it can play an important role in downstream graph inference and analysis. Question difficulty and user expertise follow the characteristic of
asymmetric transitivity. Maintaining such properties, while
reducing the graph to a lower dimensional vector embedding space, has been the focus of much recent research. In
this paper, we tackle the challenge of directed graph embedding with asymmetric transitivity preservation and then leverage the proposed embedding method to solve a fundamental
task in CQAs: how to appropriately route and assign newly
posted questions to users with the suitable expertise and interest in CQAs. The technique incorporates graph hierarchy
and reachability information naturally by relying on a nonlinear transformation that operates on the core reachability
and implicit hierarchy within such graphs. Subsequently, the
methodology levers a factorization-based approach to generate two embedding vectors for each node within the graph,
to capture the asymmetric transitivity. Extensive experiments
show that our framework consistently and significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines on three diverse realworld tasks: link prediction, and question difficulty estimation and expert finding in online forums like Stack Exchange.
Particularly, our framework can support inductive embedding
learning for newly posted questions (unseen nodes during
training), and therefore can properly route and assign these
kinds of questions to experts in CQAs.

Introduction
Community Question Answering services (CQAs) such as
Stack Exchange and Yahoo! Answers are examples of social
media sites, with their usage being examples of an important type of computer supported cooperative work in practice. In recent years, the usage of CQAs has seen a dramatic
increase in both the frequency of questions posted and general user activity. This, in turn, has given rise to several interesting problems ranging from expertise estimation to question difficulty estimation, and from automated question routing to incentive mechanism design on such CQAs (Fang et
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

265

https://stackoverflow.com/help/tagging

