The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Incorporating Semantic Similarity with
Geographic Correlation for Query-POI Relevance Learning
Ji Zhao,1 Dan Peng,1 Chuhan Wu,1,2 Huan Chen,1 Meiyu Yu,1 Wanji Zheng,1
Li Ma,1 Hua Chai,1 Jieping Ye,1 Xiaohu Qie1
1

2

Didi Chuxing, Beijing, China
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Missouri, Columbia, USA
{zhaojijet, pengdan, chenhuan, yumeiyu, zhengwanji}@didiglobal.com
{malimarey, chaihua, yejieping, tiger.qie}@didiglobal.com
cwdg9@mail.missouri.edu
Abstract

There has been a large amount of literature on information
retrieval, especially on Query-Document semantic matching. Traditional approaches conduct matching in term level
(e.g., Okapi Best Matching (BM25) (?)) or latent space (e.g.,
Partial Least Square (PLS) (?)). The latent model bridges
the semantic gap between words by reducing the matching
dimensionality and correlating semantically similar terms,
and thus outperforms the term level one. Along with the
success of deep learning in speech recognition, computer
vision, and natural language processing, studies on deep semantic matching models are also making great progress. For
example, the Deep Structured Semantic Model (DSSM) (?)
takes in bag of letter-trigrams of a query and a document,
projects sentences to low-dimensional latent space, and measures the relevance as cosine similarity of their semantic vectors. Another example is the Convolutional Neural Network
Architecture-I (ARC-I) (?), which uses a convolutionalpooling structure to extract both local word-level features
and global sentence-level features for matching. Compared
to the traditional approaches, these deep models are able to
represent deep semantic structures of the queries and the
documents.
While current relevance models mainly judge documents
based on the semantic similarity scores, they are subject to
inherent limitations due to the simple representation of relevance, and thus cannot handle the increasing complexity of
Query-POI matching puzzle in POI retrieval.
Specifically, with the global deployment of the ridehailing services, the POI retrieval solutions are facing more
and more complex queries. Here, the textual complexity
comes from: (1) incomplete queries and queries of variable
lengths; (2) mixed keyboard inputs (e.g., English+Spanish,
English+Chinese, Chinese Characters+Pinyin Alphabets);
and (3) various compositions and orders of the terms in the
query. A robust Query-POI relevance model has the ability
to manage these cases.
In this paper, we aim to design a robust Query-POI relevance model for effective POI retrieval for on-demand ridehailing services. Different from the existing models that
quantify the relevance of a Query-POI pair by single-field
semantic similarity, we capture and represent multi-field and
local&global semantic features to measure the semantic sim-

Point-of-interest (POI) retrieval that searches for relevant destination locations plays a significant role in on-demand ridehailing services. Existing solutions to POI retrieval mainly
retrieve and rank POIs based on their semantic similarity
scores. Although intuitive, quantifying the relevance of a
Query-POI pair by single-field semantic similarity is subject to inherent limitations. In this paper, we propose a novel
Query-POI relevance model for effective POI retrieval for ondemand ride-hailing services. Different from existing relevance models, we capture and represent multi-field and local&global semantic features of a Query-POI pair to measure
the semantic similarity. Besides, we observe a hidden correlation between origin-destination locations in ride-hailing scenarios, and propose two location embeddings to characterize
the specific correlation. By incorporating the geographic correlation with the semantic similarity, our model achieves better performance in POI ranking. Experimental results on two
real-world click-through datasets demonstrate the improvements of our model over state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Point-of-interest (POI) retrieval arises with the popularity of
location based services, and has attracted considerable interest from both academic and industrial fields. Generally
speaking, it searches a POI database to obtain a list of relevant destination locations when a user inputs a query. For
online taxicab platforms like Didi, Lyft, and Uber, POI retrieval plays a significant role in providing on-demand ridehailing services, since the retrieval results directly impact
the success or failure of rides as well as long-term user experience. Besides, two particular conditions in ride-hailing
scenarios further set extremely high standards for the quality of retrieval: (1) due to the limited sizes of smartphone
screens, the mobile Apps can display only a few (e.g., ≤ 10)
top ranked POIs, and the users capture much less (e.g., ≤ 3)
POIs at first glance; and (2) unlike searching for food or hotels, ride-hailing users usually have definite destinations in
mind, and rarely click other candidate POIs. Quickly and
precisely retrieving the expected POI remains challenging.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1270

