The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SAM-Net: Integrating Event-Level and
Chain-Level Attentions to Predict What Happens Next
Shangwen Lv,1,2 Wanhui Qian,1,2 Longtao Huang,1* Jizhong Han,1 Songlin Hu1,2
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{lvshangwen, qianwanhui, huanglongtao, hanjizhong, husonglin}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

X walk to restaurant

Scripts represent knowledge of event sequences that can help
text understanding. Script event prediction requires to measure the relation between an existing chain and the subsequent
event. The dominant approaches either focus on the effects
of individual events, or the influence of the chain sequence.
However, only considering individual events will lose much
semantic relations within the event chain, and only considering the sequence of the chain will introduce much noise. With
our observations, both the individual events and the event segments within the chain can facilitate the prediction of the subsequent event. This paper develops self attention mechanism
to focus on diverse event segments within the chain and the
event chain is represented as a set of event segments. We utilize the event-level attention to model the relations between
subsequent events and individual events. Then, we propose
the chain-level attention to model the relations between subsequent events and event segments within the chain. Finally,
we integrate event-level and chain-level attentions to interact
with the chain to predict what happens next. Comprehensive
experiment results on the widely used New York Times corpus demonstrate that our model achieves better results than
other state-of-the-art baselines by adopting the evaluation of
Multi-Choice Narrative Cloze task.

X walk to restaurant

X wait in line
X order food
Event
Segment

X read menu
X order food

X make payment

Event
Segment

X make payment
X take food
Individual
Event

X take food
X be seated

X eat food

X eat food
X leave restaurant
X leave restaurant
(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Script for restaurant visiting. An event segment is
a part of the script and it can have various lengths of events.
The event segment can be continuous or discontinuous.
them. Script systems can support many understanding applications , such as automated storytelling (Swanson and Gordon 2008) or inference of missing events (Chambers and Jurafsky 2008), etc.
Our work follows a recent line of script learning. Early
scripts were manually engineered for specific domains and
time-consuming to construct (Schank and Abelson 1977).
Chambers and Jurafsky (2008) described methods of automatically learning scripts from large text corpus. Following
their works, many researchers focused on statistical methods
to learn scripts, such as PMI (Chambers and Jurafsky 2008)
or skip-grams (Balasubramanian et al. 2013), etc. However,
they relied on count-based methods to model event pair relations and suffered from sparsity issues.
There is another line of works which introduces event embedding to tackle the sparsity problems. Granroth-Wilding
and Clark (2016) adopted word embeddings (Mikolov et al.
2013) to represent the verb and its arguments in an event.
They adopted a Siamese Network instead of PMI to calculate the relation score between subsequent events and individual events within the chain. Pichotta and Mooney (2016a)
supported that individual events models were incapable of

Introduction
When people encode information into natural language, they
usually assume that readers are able to seamlessly make
inferences based on commonsense knowledge. For example, given an event “Smith entered a restaurant”, people
can make a number of probable inferences: he got seated,
he read the menu, he ordered food, and so on. Such commonsense knowledge is called scripts (Schank and Abelson
1977), which is intuitive to human readers and usually omitted in the context. This brings great challenges to automatically understand language texts for machines because machines have no extra information to infer other events within
the chain (Modi 2016). Figure 1 shows a restaurant visiting
script.
A script system constructs the structure of abstract events
and involves the actions and the entities that participate in
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Correspondence to Longtao Huang.

6802

