The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Inverse Abstraction of Neural Networks Using Symbolic Interpolation
∗

Sumanth Dathathri,1 Sicun Gao,2 Richard M. Murray1
1

Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology
2
Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego

Abstract

lates to being able to propagate sets of the network outputs backwards through individual neural layers (as realvalued functions), eventually to the input domain. However,
this is in principle harder than direct constraint solving, because of the requirement of representing and manipulating
high-dimensional geometric shapes that often do not have
polynomial-size representations. Thus, the important question is how to efficiently compute approximate representations (abstractions) of such pre-image sets, so that they are
both compact and precise enough for enabling formal analysis, interpretation and knowledge/policy extraction.
In this paper, we develop algorithms for computing symbolic abstractions of pre-images of neural networks. We
bypass the difficulty of representing the exact pre-images,
by maintaining both overapproximations and underapproximations that can be compactly represented as symbolic
constraints. We leverage a recent algorithm for computing
symbolic interpolants (Albarghouthi and McMillan 2013),
where an extension of Farkas’ lemma is used to learn interpolants that have simple structures. The techniques are applicable because the concepts that are learned by neural networks are often simple (Ba and Caruana 2014). We exploit
the network structures and propagate pre-images of subsets
of the output space through each layer to the input space.
We enhance scalability of the algorithms on piecewise-linear
neural networks by designing heuristics for the specific symbolic forms of the abstractions.
In experiments, we focus on knowledge/policy analysis and extraction for two control environments: cart-pole
and swimmer. We show that for the multilayer perceptron
(MLP) network policies trained through standard reinforcement learning algorithms, we can extract knowledge in the
form of compact abstractions. For cart-pole, the extracted
policy achieves a perfect score. Using the extracted policy
we are able to formally verify/falsify certain complex safety
properties. For swimmer, we show how high torque outputs
are mapped to a compact representation in the input space.
We believe these techniques will be important for analyzing
learning-enabled components in control applications.

Neural networks in real-world applications have to satisfy
critical properties such as safety and reliability. The analysis of such properties typically requires extracting information through computing pre-images of the network transformations, but it is well-known that explicit computation
of pre-images is intractable. We introduce new methods for
computing compact symbolic abstractions of pre-images by
computing their overapproximations and underapproximations through all layers. The abstraction of pre-images enables formal analysis and knowledge extraction without affecting standard learning algorithms. We use inverse abstractions to automatically extract simple control laws and compact representations for pre-images corresponding to unsafe
outputs. We illustrate that the extracted abstractions are interpretable and can be used for analyzing complex properties.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have significant potential as a key building
block of intelligent systems. However, characterizing the exact behaviors of complex neural networks is an extremely
difficult task, which poses a major challenge to their use
in safety-critical systems. Recent work on verifying neural networks such as (Zakrzewski 2001; Bunel et al. 2018;
Katz et al. 2017) has focused on developing faster algorithms for validating or falsifying formal properties of whole
neural networks directly through their encoding as constraint
satisfaction problems. These approaches are designed for
generating counter-examples to (or for verifying) specific
properties for piecewise-linear neural networks. An alternative approach for analysis is to decompose the large networks and perform the analysis in a modular way, which
is a standard practice in software program analysis (Hoare
1969). Such decomposition often provides more information than simple monolithic analysis and enables us to verify
complex properties in a tractable manner. A crucial task for
enabling such modular analysis is that we must be able to
represent and manipulate pre-images of programs, or computable functions in general. On neural networks, this trans∗

Correspondence: sdathath@caltech.edu. The work is supported by DARPA Assured Autonomy, NSF CNS-1830399 and the
VeHICaL project (NSF grant #1545126).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Work Model Extraction: There has been recent
work in extracting verifiable and explainable models from
trained networks. In this direction, (Bastani, Pu, and SolarLezama 2018) introduce an imitation learning-based ap3437

