The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Optimal Projection Guided Transfer Hashing for Image Retrieval
Ji Liu, Lei Zhang∗
Learning Intelligence & Vision Essential Group
School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, China
jiliu@cqu.edu.cn, leizhang@cqu.edu.cn

Target Domain Xt

Abstract

Hashing codes

Recently, learning to hash has been widely studied for image retrieval thanks to the computation and storage efficiency
of binary codes. For most existing learning to hash methods, sufficient training images are required and used to learn
precise hashing codes. However, in some real-world applications, there are not always sufficient training images in the
domain of interest. In addition, some existing supervised approaches need a amount of labeled data, which is an expensive process in terms of time, labor and human expertise.
To handle such problems, inspired by transfer learning, we
propose a simple yet effective unsupervised hashing method
named Optimal Projection Guided Transfer Hashing (GTH)
where we borrow the images of other different but related domain i.e., source domain to help learn precise hashing codes
for the domain of interest i.e., target domain. Besides, we propose to seek for the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
solution of the hashing functions of target and source domains
due to the domain gap. Furthermore, an alternating optimization method is adopted to obtain the two projections of target
and source domains such that the domain hashing disparity is
reduced gradually. Extensive experiments on various benchmark databases verify that our method outperforms many
state-of-the-art learning to hash methods. The implementation details are available at https://github.com/liuji93/GTH.

Knowledge

0

1

1

0

0

1

1

0

Wt
Ws

Hashing codes
Source Domain Xs

Figure 1: Overview of our GTH. The images from the relevant but different source domain are used to help learn hashing codes for target domain where there are insufficient images that can be used to learn effective hashing codes.

pervised methods need a large number of labeled images to
learn hashing codes. It is well-known that it takes a lot of
time, labor and human expertise to tag images. On the other
hand, they assume that the distributions of training and testing data are similar, which may not hold in many real-world
applications such as cross pose and cross camera cases, etc.
To handle the above problems, inspired by transfer learning, we propose a simple yet effective Optimal Projection
Guided Transfer Hashing (GTH) method in this paper. Due
to the distribution disparity of source and target domains,
we propose to learn two hashing projections for target and
source domains respectively in our GTH. Moreover, the
knowledge from source domain can be easily used to promote target domain to learn precise hashing codes. In transfer hashing, it is important to guarantee similar images between target and source domains have similar hashing codes.
In our GTH, we assume that similar images between target
and source domains should mean small discrepancy between
hashing projections. To this end, we let the hashing projection (functions) of target domain close to the hashing projection of source domain.
It is easy to adopt minimizing l2 or l1 loss between the two
hashing projections of source and target domains directly.
In other words, in the term of maximum likelihood estima-

Introduction
In recent years, learning to hash algorithms have been proposed to handle the large-scale information retrieval problems in machine learning, computer vision, and big data
communities (Wang et al. 2017b). The main goal of hashing techniques is to encode documents, images, and videos
to a set of compact binary codes that preserve the feature
similarity/dissimilarity in Hamming space. As a result, there
will be less storage cost and faster computational speed by
using binary features.
However, most existing learning to hash methods are
faced with two problems. On one hand, most existing learning to hash methods usually require a large amount of data
instances to learn a set of binary hashing codes. However,
in some real-world applications, for a domain of interest,
i.e., the target domain, the data instances may not be sufficient enough to learn a precise hashing model. Some suCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8754

