The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Short Text Classification with Knowledge Powered Attention
Jindong Chen,1,2 Yizhou Hu,1 Jingping Liu,1 Yanghua Xiao,1,3,4,5* Haiyun Jiang1
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
CETC Big Data Research Institute Co.,Ltd., Guizhou, China
3
Shanghai Institute of Intelligent Electronics & Systems, Shanghai, China
4
Shuyan Technology, Shanghai, China
5
Alibaba Group, Zhejiang, China
{chenjd16, huyz15, jpliu17, shawyh, jianghy16}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

Lee, and Vaithyanathan 2002). Researchers develop effective features from many different aspects such as knowledge base and the results of dependency parsing. The explicit model is interpretable and easy to understand for human beings. However, the explicit representation usually ignores the context of short text and cannot capture deep semantic information.
In terms of implicit representation, a short text is usually
mapped to an implicit space and represented as a dense vector (Mikolov et al. 2013). The implicit model is good at capturing syntax and semantic information in short text based
on deep neural networks. However, it ignores important semantic relations such as isA and isPropertyOf that exist in
Knowledge Bases (KBs). Such information is helpful for the
understanding of short texts, especially when dealing with
previously unseen words. For example, given a short text S1:
“Jay grew up in Taiwan”, the implicit model may treat Jay
as a new word and cannot capture that Jay is a singer
which is beneficial to classify the short text into the class
entertainment.
In this paper, we integrate explicit and implicit representation of short texts into a unified deep neural network model.
We enrich the semantic representation of short texts with the
help of explicit KBs such as YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and
Weikum 2008) and Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008). This
allows the model to retrieve knowledge from an external
knowledge source that is not explicitly stated in the short
text but relevant for classification. As the example shown
in S1, the conceptual information as a kind of knowledge
is helpful for classification. Therefore, we utilize isA relation and associate each short text with its relevant concepts
in KB by conceptualization1 . Afterwards we incorporate the
conceptual information as prior knowledge into deep neural
networks.
Although it may seem intuitive to simply integrate conceptual information into a deep neural network, there are
still two major problems. First, when conceptualizing the
short text, some improper concepts are easily introduced due
to the ambiguity of entities or the noise in KBs. For example, in the short text S2: “Alice has been using Apple for
more than 10 years”, we acquire the concepts fruit and

Short text classification is one of important tasks in Natural Language Processing (NLP). Unlike paragraphs or documents, short texts are more ambiguous since they have not
enough contextual information, which poses a great challenge for classification. In this paper, we retrieve knowledge
from external knowledge source to enhance the semantic representation of short texts. We take conceptual information
as a kind of knowledge and incorporate it into deep neural
networks. For the purpose of measuring the importance of
knowledge, we introduce attention mechanisms and propose
deep Short Text Classification with Knowledge powered Attention (STCKA). We utilize Concept towards Short Text (CST) attention and Concept towards Concept Set (C-CS) attention to acquire the weight of concepts from two aspects.
And we classify a short text with the help of conceptual information. Unlike traditional approaches, our model acts like
a human being who has intrinsic ability to make decisions
based on observation (i.e., training data for machines) and
pays more attention to important knowledge. We also conduct extensive experiments on four public datasets for different tasks. The experimental results and case studies show that
our model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, justifying the effectiveness of knowledge powered attention.

Introduction
Short text classification is one of important ways to understand short texts and is useful in a wide range of applications including sentiment analysis (Wang et al. 2014),
dialog system (Lee and Dernoncourt 2016) and user intent understanding (Hu et al. 2009). Compared with paragraphs or documents, short texts are more ambiguous since
they have not enough contextual information, which poses a
great challenge for short text classification. Existing methods (Gabrilovich and Markovitch 2007; Wang et al. 2014;
2014) for short text classification can be mainly divided into
two categories: explicit representation and implicit representation (Wang and Wang 2016).
For explicit representation, a short text is represented as
a sparse vector where each dimension is an explicit feature,
corresponding to syntactic information of the short text including n-gram, POS tagging and syntactic parsing (Pang,

1
Conceptualization refers to the process of retrieving the conceptual information of short text from KBs.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6252

