The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On-Line Learning of Linear Dynamical
Systems: Exponential Forgetting in Kalman Filters
Mark Kozdoba,1 Jakub Marecek,2 Tigran Tchrakian,2 Shie Mannor1
1

Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, 2 IBM Research, Ireland
markk@technion.ac.il, jakub.marecek@ie.ibm.com,tigran@ie.ibm.com, shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract

to a convex problem, which avoids the issues brought by
the non-convex nature of the likelihood function. The convexification allows for on-line algorithms, which are typically fast and simple. A crucial advance of these recent approaches is the guarantee that the predictions of the convexified, improper-learning algorithm are at least as good as the
predictions of the proper one. One therefore avoids the long
learning times and issues related to non-convexity associated
with the classical algorithms, while maintaining the statistical performance.
Leading examples of this approach (Anava et al. 2013;
Liu et al. 2016; Hazan, Singh, and Zhang 2017) utilise
a framework of regret bounds (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi
2006) to provide guarantees on the performance of the convexifications. In this framework, one considers a sequence
of observations Yt , with or without additional assumptions.
After observing Y0 , . . . , Yt , an algorithm for improper learning produces a forecast Ŷt+1 of the next observation. Then,
roughly speaking, one shows that the sum of errors of the
forecast thus produced is close to the sum of errors of the
best model (in hindsight) from within a certain class. It is
said that the algorithm competes against a certain class.
In this paper, we take several steps towards developing guarantees for an algorithm, which competes against
Kalman filters. Specifically, we ask what conditions make
it possible to model the predictions of Kalman filter as a
regression of a few past observations? We show that for a
natural, large, and well-known class of LDSs, the observable LDSs, the dependence of Kalman filter on the past decays exponentially if the process noise of the LDS is nondegenerate. Consequently, predictions of such LDS can be
modeled as auto-regressions. In addition, we show that at
least some non-degeneracy of the process noise is necessary
for the exponential decay. We provide an example with no
process noise, where the dependence on the past does not
converge exponentially.
Next, based on the decay results, we give an on-line algorithm for time-series prediction and prove regret bounds
for it. The algorithm makes predictions in the form ŷt+1 =
Ps−1
s
i=0 θi (t)Yt−i , where Yt are observations, and θ(t) ∈ R
is the vector of auto-regression (AR) coefficients, which is
updated by the algorithm in an on-line manner.
For any LDS L, denote by fL,t+1 the predicted value of
Yt+1 by Kalman filter corresponding to L, given Yt , . . . , Y0 .

The Kalman filter is a key tool for time-series forecasting
and analysis. We show that the dependence of a prediction of
Kalman filter on the past is decaying exponentially, whenever
the process noise is non-degenerate. Therefore, Kalman filter
may be approximated by regression on a few recent observations. Surprisingly, we also show that having some process
noise is essential for the exponential decay. With no process
noise, it may happen that the forecast depends on all of the
past uniformly, which makes forecasting more difficult.
Based on this insight, we devise an on-line algorithm for improper learning of a linear dynamical system (LDS), which
considers only a few most recent observations. We use our decay results to provide the first regret bounds w.r.t. to Kalman
filters within learning an LDS. That is, we compare the results
of our algorithm to the best, in hindsight, Kalman filter for a
given signal. Also, the algorithm is practical: its per-update
run-time is linear in the regression depth.

Introduction
Linear Dynamical Systems (LDS) are a key standard tool in
modeling and forecasting time series, with an exceedingly
large number of applications. In forecasting with an LDS,
typically one learns the parameters of the LDS first, using
a maximum likelihood principle, and then uses Kalman filter to generate predictions. The two features that seem to
contribute the most to the success of LDS in practice are
the ability of LDS to model a wide range of behaviors, and
the recursive nature of Kalman filter, which allows for fast,
real-time forecasts via a constant-time update of the previous
estimate. On the other hand, a major difficulty with LDSs
is that the process of learning system parameters, via expectation maximization (EM) or direct likelihood optimization, may be time consuming and prone to getting stuck
in local maxima. We refer to (Anderson and Moore 1979;
West and Harrison 1997; Hamilton 1994; Chui and Chen
2017) for book-length introductions.
Recently, there has been an interest in alternative, improper learning approaches, where one approximates the
predictions of LDSs by a linear function of a few past observations. The advantage of such approaches is that it convexifies the problem, i.e., learning the linear function amounts
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4098

