The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Lifted Proximal Operator Machines
Jia Li, Cong Fang, Zhouchen Lin∗
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, P. R. China
jiali.gm@gmail.com; fangcong@pku.edu.cn; zlin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Hazan, and Singer 2011), RMSProp (Dauphin, de Vries, and
Bengio 2015), and Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014). SGD and
its variants use a few training samples to estimate the full gradient, making the computational complexity of each iteration
small. Moreover, the estimated gradients have noise, which is
helpful for escaping saddle points (Ge et al. 2015). However,
they have some drawbacks as well. One major problem is the
vanishing or blow-up gradient issue, where the magnitudes of
gradients decrease or increase exponentially with the number
of layers. This causes slow or unstable convergence, especially in very deep networks. This flaw can be remitted by
using non-saturating activation functions, such as rectified
linear unit (ReLU), and modified network architectures, such
as ResNet (He et al. 2016). However, the fundamental problem remains. Also, their parameters are difficult to tune (e.g.,
learning rates and convergence criteria) (Le et al. 2011). Furthermore, they cannot deal with non-differentiable activation
functions directly (e.g., binarized neural networks (Hubara et
al. 2016)) and do not allow parallel weight updates across the
layers (Le et al. 2011). For more on the limitations of SGD,
please refer to (Taylor et al. 2016) and (Le et al. 2011).

We propose a new optimization method for training feedforward neural networks. By rewriting the activation function
as an equivalent proximal operator, we approximate a feedforward neural network by adding the proximal operators to
the objective function as penalties, hence we call the lifted
proximal operator machine (LPOM). LPOM is block multiconvex in all layer-wise weights and activations. This allows
us to use block coordinate descent to update the layer-wise
weights and activations. Most notably, we only use the mapping of the activation function itself, rather than its derivative,
thus avoiding the gradient vanishing or blow-up issues in gradient based training methods. So our method is applicable to
various non-decreasing Lipschitz continuous activation functions, which can be saturating and non-differentiable. LPOM
does not require more auxiliary variables than the layer-wise
activations, thus using roughly the same amount of memory as
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) does. Its parameter tuning
is also much simpler. We further prove the convergence of
updating the layer-wise weights and activations and point out
that the optimization could be made parallel by asynchronous
update. Experiments on MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets testify
to the advantages of LPOM.

The drawbacks of SGD motivate research on alternative
training methods for DNNs. Recently, training a feed-forward
neural network is formulated as a constrained optimization
problem, where the network activations are introduced as auxiliary variables and the network configuration is guaranteed
by layer-wise constraints (Carreira-Perpinan and Wang 2014).
It breaks the dependency among the nested functions into
equality constraints, so many standard optimization methods can be utilized. Some methods of this type of approach
were studied and they differed in how to handle the equality constraints. Carreira-Perpinan and Wang (2014) approximated the equality constraints via quadratic penalties and
alternately optimized network weights and activations. Zeng
et al. (2018) introduced one more block of auxiliary variables
per layer and also approximated the equality constraints via
quadratic penalties. Inspired by alternating direction method
of multiplier (ADMM) (Lin, Liu, and Su 2011), Taylor et
al. (2016) and Zhang, Chen, and Saligrama (2016) used the
augmented Lagrangian approach to obtain exact enforcement
of the equality constraints. However, the two methods involved the Lagrange multipliers and nonlinear constraints,
thus were more memory demanding and more difficult in
optimization. Motivated by the fact that the ReLU activa-

Introduction
Feed-forward deep neural networks (DNNs) are cascades of
fully connected layers and there are no feedback connections.
In recent years, with the advances in hardware and dataset
sizes, feed-forward DNNs have become standard in many
tasks, such as image recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012), speech recognition (Hinton et al. 2012), natural
language understanding (Collobert et al. 2011), and building
the Go game learning system (Silver et al. 2016).
For several decades, training a DNN is accomplished by
optimizing a highly nonconvex and nested function of the network weights. The predominant method for training DNNs is
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Rumelhart, Hinton, and
Williams 1986), whose effectiveness has been demonstrated
by the successes of DNNs in various real-world applications.
Recently, many variants of SGD have been proposed, which
use adaptive learning rates and momentum terms, e.g., Nesterov momentum (Sutskever et al. 2013), AdaGrad (Duchi,
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4181

