The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Complex Unitary Recurrent Neural Networks Using Scaled Cayley Transform
Kehelwala D. G. Maduranga, Kyle E. Helfrich, Qiang Ye
Mathematics Department, University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY, 40508, United States
{kdgmaduranga,kyle.helfrich,qye3}@uky.edu

Abstract

tion is retained or discarded such as the Long Short-Term
Memory networks (LSTMs) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
1997) and Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) (Cho et al. 2014).
More recently, several architectures have been proposed that
maintain a unitary recurrent weight matrix. The unitary evolution RNN (uRNN) architecture proposed by (Arjovsky,
Shah, and Bengio 2016) maintains a unitary matrix by using a product of simple unitary matrices. The full-capacity
uRNN (Wisdom et al. 2016) maintains a general unitary matrix by optimizing along a gradient descent direction on the
Stiefel manifold. The tunable efficient unitary neural network (EURNN) by (Jing et al. 2016) constructs the unitary
matrix using a product of complex rotation matrices. For additional work with unitary RNNs and complex valued networks, see (Hyland and Gunnar 2017), (Jing et al. 2017),
(Vorontsov et al. 2017), (Wolter and Yao 2018) and (Trabelsi et al. 2018). There have also been several architectures
that maintain an orthogonal recurrent weight matrix. The orthogonal RNN (oRNN) by (Mhammedi et al. 2017) uses a
product of Householder reflection matrices while the scaled
Cayley orthogonal RNN (scoRNN) architecture parameterizes the recurrent weight matrix by a skew-symmetric matrix
and a diagonal matrix through the Cayley transform (Helfrich, Willmott, and Ye 2018). Compared with other unitary/orthogonal RNNs, the scoRNN architecture has a simple parameterization that has been shown to be advantageous
in (Helfrich, Willmott, and Ye 2018). The exploding or vanishing gradient problem has also been examined in (Henaff,
Szlam, and LeCun 2017) and (Le, Jaitly, and Hinton 2015).

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been successfully
used on a wide range of sequential data problems. A well
known difficulty in using RNNs is the vanishing or exploding
gradient problem. Recently, there have been several different RNN architectures that try to mitigate this issue by maintaining an orthogonal or unitary recurrent weight matrix. One
such architecture is the scaled Cayley orthogonal recurrent
neural network (scoRNN) which parameterizes the orthogonal recurrent weight matrix through a scaled Cayley transform. This parametrization contains a diagonal scaling matrix consisting of positive or negative one entries that can not
be optimized by gradient descent. Thus the scaling matrix is
fixed before training and a hyperparameter is introduced to
tune the matrix for each particular task. In this paper, we develop a unitary RNN architecture based on a complex scaled
Cayley transform. Unlike the real orthogonal case, the transformation uses a diagonal scaling matrix consisting of entries
on the complex unit circle which can be optimized using gradient descent and no longer requires the tuning of a hyperparameter. We also provide an analysis of a potential issue of the
modReLU activiation function which is used in our work and
several other unitary RNNs. In the experiments conducted,
the scaled Cayley unitary recurrent neural network (scuRNN)
achieves comparable or better results than scoRNN and other
unitary RNNs without fixing the scaling matrix.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been successfully
used on a wide range of sequential data problems. A main
difficulty when training RNNs using a gradient descent
based optimizer is the vanishing or exploding gradient problem (Bengio, Simard, and Frasconi 1994). The exploding
gradient problem refers to the large growth of gradients as
they propagate backwards through time and the vanishing
gradient problem occurs when the gradients tend toward
zero. The exploding gradient case will cause the trainable
parameters to vary drastically during training, resulting in
unstable performance. For the vanishing gradient case, training will progress slowly, if at all.
A range of different architectures have been proposed to
address this problem. Currently, the most common architectures involve gating mechanisms that control when informa-

In this paper, we address a difficulty of scoRNN.
The scoRNN parameterization of the orthogonal recurrent
weight matrix contains a diagonal matrix consisting of ±1
on the diagonal. These discrete parameters are used to define
the scaling matrix, which may critically affect performance,
and can not be optimized by gradient descent. Thus scoRNN
introduces a tunable hyperparameter that controls the number of negative ones on the diagonal. This hyperparameter is
tuned for each particular task for optimal results. This causes
the scaling matrix to remain fixed during training. We propose a method to overcome this difficulty by using a unitary
recurrent weight matrix parameterized by a skew-Hermitian
matrix and a diagonal scaling matrix through the scaled Cayley transform, where the entries of the diagonal matrix lie on
the complex unit circle and have the form eiθ . This param-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4528

