The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Scalable and Efficient Pairwise
Learning to Achieve Statistical Accuracy
Bin Gu,1 Zhouyuan Huo,2 Heng Huang1,2∗
1

2

JDDGlobal.com
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
gubin3@jd.com, zhouyuan.huo@pitt.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract

traditional machine learning problems grows linearly in the
size of samples. However, as mentioned above, pairwise loss
functions depend on pair of samples. Thus, the pairwise
learning algorithms need to handle the challenge raised by
the big volume of data samples in the sense that, the size
of pairs of samples grows quadratically in term of the size
of samples. If the training set has n samples, we will have
n2 possible pairs of samples which make it challenging to
design a scalable and efficient pairwise learning algorithm.
Existing pairwise learning algorithms have mainly utilized the techniques of online learning and stochastic optimization to address the challenge of the quadratic growth
of the size of sample pairs. Specifically, Lin et al. (2017)
used the typical online learning framework (Cesa-Bianchi,
Conconi, and Gentile 2004) to implement pairwise learning
whose space and time complexities are O(T d) and O(T 2 d)
respectively, where d is the dimensionality and T is the iteration number. Kar et al. (2013) proposed an improved online algorithm for pairwise learning by utilizing a buffer of
a fixed size s to update the gradients, whose space and time
complexities are O(sd) and O(sdT ) respectively. Boissier
et al. (2016) introduced an improved online algorithm for
linear pairwise learning with the space and time complexities as O(d2 ) and O(T d2 ) respectively, by incrementally
updating the gradients. Gao et al. (2013) used the similar
strategy to implement AUC maximization. Ying, Wen, and
Lyu (2016) reformulated the AUC maximization problem as
a saddle point problem, and proposed a stochastic optimization algorithm with the space and time complexities as O(d)
and O(T d) respectively. We summarize these representative
pairwise learning algorithms in Table 1.
We compare the pairwise learning algorithms from three
points of view, i.e., generality, complexity, and convergence
rate. For generality, we consider the generalities w.r.t. solved
problems, pairwise loss functions, and hypothesis functions.
For complexity, we consider the complexities w.r.t. space and
time. From Table 1, we find that the online algorithm of
(Kar et al. 2013) has the best generality and convergence
rate in the existing pairwise learning algorithms. However,
its space and time complexities are related to a buffer size
s and achieving better generalization performance requires
a larger s. Thus, the online algorithm of (Kar et al. 2013)
is still not scalable and efficient enough. Although the SOLAM algorithm (Ying, Wen, and Lyu 2016) has the best

Pairwise learning is an important learning topic in the machine learning community, where the loss function involves
pairs of samples (e.g., AUC maximization and metric learning). Existing pairwise learning algorithms do not perform
well in the generality, scalability and efficiency simultaneously. To address these challenging problems, in this paper,
we first analyze the relationship between the statistical accuracy and the regularized empire risk for pairwise loss. Based
on the relationship, we propose a scalable and efficient adaptive doubly stochastic gradient algorithm (AdaDSG) for generalized regularized pairwise learning problems. More importantly, we prove that the overall computational cost of
AdaDSG is O(n) to achieve the statistical accuracy on the
full training set with the size of n, which is the best theoretical result for pairwise learning to the best of our knowledge.
The experimental results on a variety of real-world datasets
not only confirm the effectiveness of our AdaDSG algorithm,
but also show that AdaDSG has significantly better scalability
and efficiency than the existing pairwise learning algorithms.

Introduction
Many machine learning problems, such as AUC maximization (Zhao et al. 2011; Gao et al. 2013) or equivalently bipartite ranking (Agarwal and Niyogi 2009; Rejchel 2012), metric learning (Jin, Wang, and Zhou 2009;
Weinberger and Saul 2009; Ying and Li 2012) and multiple kernel learning (Kumar et al. 2012), consider the pairwise loss function on a pair of samples (x, y) and (x0 , y 0 )
of the form of L(f, (x, y), (x0 , y 0 )). For example, Gao et
al. (2013) considered the least square pairwise loss function
(1 − (f (x) − f (x0 )))2 for AUC maximization, where y and
y 0 are with different labels. This important learning scenario
is called as pairwise learning. The aim of pairwise learning
is to find a hypothesis function minimizing the expected risk
E(x,y) E(x0 ,y0 ) L(f, (x, y), (x0 , y 0 )).
The scalability and efficiency have been the notorious
bottlenecks of pairwise learning. Traditional univariate loss
functions only depend on one sample. The problem size for
∗

Corresponding Author. Z. Huo, H. Huang were partially supported by U.S. NSF IIS 1836945, IIS 1836938, DBI 1836866, IIS
1845666, IIS 1852606, IIS 1838627, IIS 1837956.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3697

