The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CircConv: A Structured Convolution with Low Complexity
Siyu Liao, Bo Yuan
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University
siyu.liao@rutgers.edu, bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu

Abstract

(Wen et al. 2016; Feng and Darrell 2015). Nowadays, consider 1) convolutional layers consume most of the computational processing in DNNs and 2) many state-of-theart DNNs, such as ResNet (He et al. 2016) and Inception
(Szegedy et al. 2015), use very few fully-connected layers
that only contain a small portion of parameters of the entire models (e.g. less than 5% parameters for fully-connected
layers in ResNet-152), the reduction on computational cost
and numbers of parameters of convolutional layers become
very essential.
Technical preview and advantages. In this paper we
propose to impose the circulant structure to the construction of convolutional layers shown in Figure 1, yielding
low-computation-complexity, low-space-cost circulant convolutional layers (CircConvs) and the corresponding circulant CNNs. Different from prior convolutional layer-oriented
compression approaches that are based on the unstructured
tensors, the model-size reduction in this paper results from
the use of circulant tensors (Rezghi and Eldén 2011): The
weight tensors for convolutional layers, which were original unstructured, are now constructed in the circulant format, thereby leading to substantial reduction in computational cost and numbers of parameters. In short, the proposed
approach brings the following advantages:
1) It reduces the space cost of the convolutional layers
because of the inherent spatial regularity of circulant tensors,
thereby resulting in high compression ratios for the overall
network model sizes.
2) It saves the computation of the convolutional layers
by leveraging the fast circulant tensor-specific multiplication
algorithm, and hence greatly reduces the computational cost
of the entire networks.
3) It enables the improved accuracy for the corresponding circulant CNNs as compared with the similar-size noncirculant CNNs. In other words, the benefits of model-size
reduction resulting from using circulant convolutional layers
can translate to the increase of accuracy.
4) The circulant structure can be imposed by either training from scratch or re-training from a pre-trained noncirculant model, thereby making circulant CNNs very flexible for different training environments.
We conduct extensive experiments on circulant CNNs
and the results show that the proposed circulant structureimposing approach can effectively reduce the model sizes

Deep neural networks (DNNs), especially deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), have emerged as the powerful technique in various machine learning applications. However, the
large model sizes of DNNs yield high demands on computation resource and weight storage, thereby limiting the practical deployment of DNNs. To overcome these limitations,
this paper proposes to impose the circulant structure to the
construction of convolutional layers, and hence leads to circulant convolutional layers (CircConvs) and circulant CNNs.
The circulant structure and models can be either trained from
scratch or re-trained from a pre-trained non-circulant model,
thereby making it very flexible for different training environments. Through extensive experiments, such strong structureimposing approach is proved to be able to substantially reduce the number of parameters of convolutional layers and
enable significant saving of computational cost by using fast
multiplication of the circulant tensor.

Introduction
Large-scale deep neural networks (DNNs), especially deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have achieved extraordinary success in various artificial intelligence applications such as image recognition, video analysis, etc.
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016;
Karpathy et al. 2014). However, the large model sizes of
DNNs make themselves both computation-intensive and
memory-intensive, thereby potentially hindering the expected widespread deployment of DNNs in many latencysensitive resource-constrained applications.
To address these limitations, many approaches (Han,
Mao, and Dally 2015; Gong et al. 2014; Wen et al. 2016;
Feng and Darrell 2015) have been proposed to reduce the
computational cost and/or memory footprint of DNNs. In
general, those existing efforts can be roughly categorized as
two types: fully-connected layer-oriented reduction, such as
connection pruning (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015)1 , weight
clustering (Gong et al. 2014), and convolutional layeroriented reduction, such as low rank approximation (Jaderberg, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014), sparsity regularization
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
It can also bring reduction for convolutional layers to some
degree. But the most reduction in the number of parameters is
achieved on fully-connected layers.

4287

