The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-view Information-theoretic Co-clustering for Co-occurrence Data
Peng Xu,† Zhaohong Deng,†* Kup-Sze Choi,‡ Longbing Cao,§ Shitong Wang†
†
School of Digital Media, Jiangnan University, China
Center of Smart Health, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
§
Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
pengxujnu@163.com, dzh666828@aliyun.com, thomasks.choi@polyu.edu.hk, longbing.cao@uts.edu.au, wxwangst@aliyun.com
‡

Abstract

greement refer to consistency and complementary information among views respectively. It is crucial to get a right
balance in leveraging the agreement and disagreement.
Excessive excavation of the agreement would loss the
complementary information among views and overemphasis on the disagreement would reduce the benefits from the
common information extracted from the views. They can
both degrade the algorithms (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013). Most
of existing algorithms tackled the problems from the aspect
of collaborative strategies of multiple views, such as coregularization (Kumar and Rai 2011), co-training (Kumar
and Iii 2011) and multi-kernel learning (Guo et al. 2014),
while neglected the characteristics of the datasets. Therefore, the existing multi-view clustering algorithms do not
take full advantage of the characteristics of certain multiview datasets, such as the sample-feature co-occurrence.
*
Co-occurrences widely exist in categorical data (Wang
et al. 2011), natural language processing (Hotho et al.
2005), computer vision (Tsai 2012), and information retrieval (Rasiwasia et al. 2010), such as the text represented
with bag of words model, the images represented with feature histograms, etc. The elements of co-occurring matrices
(rows for samples and columns for features) can be viewed
as the frequency or counts of a certain feature occurred in a
certain sample. A basic problem for the co-occurrence
analysis is co-clustering (two-sided clustering): simultaneous clustering of the samples and features. For the cooccurrences, two-sided clustering can perform more effectively than one-sided clustering (Dhillon and Guan 2003).
Thus, in addition to the collaborated strategies of multiple
views, two-sided clustering should be considered as well
for the co-occurring data with multiple views.
To meet the above challenges, a novel method multiview information-theoretic co-clustering (MV-ITCC) is
proposed in the paper. The proposed method is based on
information-theoretic co-clustering (ITCC), which is a
two-sided clustering algorithm and it formalizes the clus-

Multi-view clustering has received much attention recently.
Most of the existing multi-view clustering methods only focus on one-sided clustering. As the co-occurring data elements involve the counts of sample-feature co-occurrences,
it is more efficient to conduct two-sided clustering along the
samples and features simultaneously. To take advantage of
two-sided clustering for the co-occurrences in the scene of
multi-view clustering, a two-sided multi-view clustering
method is proposed, i.e., multi-view information-theoretic
co-clustering (MV-ITCC). The proposed method realizes
two-sided clustering for co-occurring multi-view data under
the formulation of information theory. More specifically, it
exploits the agreement and disagreement among views by
sharing a common clustering results along the sample dimension and keeping the clustering results of each view
specific along the feature dimension. In addition, the mechanism of maximum entropy is also adopted to control the
importance of different views, which can give a right balance in leveraging the agreement and disagreement. Extensive experiments are conducted on text and image multiview datasets. The results clearly demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method.

Introduction
With advances and development in multimedia, tremendous amount of unlabeled data with multiple attribute sets
are generated on the Internet every day. They are called
multi-view or multi-modal datasets (Ngiam et al. 2011).
They are very common in real life, e.g., a webpage containing hyperlink-text and page-text, a document represented by multiple languages, or an image extracted with
different feature descriptors (Li, Yang, and Zhang 2016).
The multi-view clustering is the most important method
to deal with the unlabeled multi-view data. The foremost
problem in multi-view clustering is how to exploit the
agreement and disagreement among views simultaneously
(Li, Yang, and Zhang 2016). Here the agreement and disaCopyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

*

379

Corresponding author

