The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Quantifying Uncertainties in Natural Language Processing Tasks
Yijun Xiao, William Yang Wang
University of California, Santa Barbara
{yijunxiao,william}@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract

With advancement of modern machine learning algorithms
and systems, they are applied in various applications that, in
some scenarios, impact human wellbeing. Many of such algorithms learn black-box mappings between input and output. If the overall performance is satisfactory, these learned
mappings are assumed to be correct and are used in real-life
applications. It is hard to quantify how confident a certain
mapping is with respect to different inputs. These deficiencies cause many AI safety and social bias issues with the
most notable example being failures of auto-piloting systems. We need systems that can not only learn accurate mappings, but also quantify confidence levels or uncertainties
of their predictions. With uncertainty information available,
many issues mentioned above can be effectively handled.
There are many situations where uncertainties arise when
applying machine learning models. First, we are uncertain about whether the structure choice and model parameters can best describe the data distribution. This is referred to as model uncertainty, also known as epistemic uncertainty. Bayesian neural networks (BNN) (Buntine and
Weigend 1991; Denker and Lecun 1991; MacKay 1992;
1995; Neal 2012) is one approach to quantify uncertainty associated with model parameters. BNNs represent all model
weights as probability distributions over possible values instead of fixed scalars. In this setting, learned mapping of
a BNN model must be robust under different samples of

weights. We can easily quantify model uncertainties with
BNNs by, for example, sampling weights and forward inputs through the network multiple times. Quantifying model
uncertainty using a BNN learns potentially better representations and predictions due to the ensemble natural of BNNs.
It is also showed in (Blundell et al. 2015) that it is beneficial for exploration in reinforcement learning (RL) problems
such as contextual bandits.
Another situation where uncertainty arises is when collected data is noisy. This is often the case when we rely
on observations and measurements to obtain the data. Even
when the observations and measurements are precise, noises
might exist within the data generation process. Such uncertainties are referred to as data uncertainties in this paper
and is also called aleatoric uncertainty (Der Kiureghian and
Ditlevsen 2009). Depending on whether the uncertainty is
input independent, data uncertainty is further divided into
homoscedastic uncertainty and heteroscedastic uncertainty.
Homoscedastic uncertainty is the same across the input
space which can be caused by systematic observation noise.
Heteroscedastic uncertainty, on the contrary, is dependent on
the input. For example, when predicting the sentiment of a
Yelp review, single-word review “good” is possible to have
3, 4 or 5-star ratings while a lengthened review with strong
positive emotion phrases is definitely a 5-star rating. In the
rest of the paper, we also refer to heteroscedastic uncertainty
as input-dependent data uncertainty.
Recently, there are increasing number of studies investigating the effects of quantifying uncertainties in different
applications (Kendall, Badrinarayanan, and Cipolla 2015;
Gal and Ghahramani 2016b; Kendall and Gal 2017; Zhu and
Laptev 2017). In this paper, we focus on exploring the benefits of quantifying both model and data uncertainties in the
context of various natural language processing (NLP) tasks.
Specifically, we study the effects of quantifying model uncertainty and input-dependent data uncertainty in sentiment
analysis, named entity recognition, and language modeling
tasks. We show that there is a potential performance increase
when including both uncertainties in the model. We also analyze the characteristics of the quantified uncertainties.
The main contributions of this work are:

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. We mathematically define model and data uncertainties
via the law of total variance;

Reliable uncertainty quantification is a first step towards
building explainable, transparent, and accountable artificial
intelligent systems. Recent progress in Bayesian deep learning has made such quantification realizable. In this paper, we
propose novel methods to study the benefits of characterizing
model and data uncertainties for natural language processing
(NLP) tasks. With empirical experiments on sentiment analysis, named entity recognition, and language modeling using
convolutional and recurrent neural network models, we show
that explicitly modeling uncertainties is not only necessary to
measure output confidence levels, but also useful at enhancing model performances in various NLP tasks.

Introduction

7322

