The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SAT-Based Explicit LTLf Satisfiability Checking∗
Jianwen Li, Kristin Y. Rozier

Geguang Pu, Yueling Zhang

Moshe Y. Vardi

Iowa State University
Ames, IA, USA
{jianwen,kyrozier}@iastate.edu

East China Normal University
Shanghai, China
{ggpu,ylzhang}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Rice University
Houston, TX, USA
vardi@cs.rice.edu

Abstract

“classical” solution to this problem is to reduce it to the
LTL satisfiability problem (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013).
The advantage of this approach is that the LTL satisfiability problem has been studied for at least a decade, and
many mature tools are available, cf. (Rozier and Vardi 2007;
2010). Thus, LTLf satisfiability checking can benefit from
progress in LTL satisfiability checking. There is, however,
an inherent drawback that an extra cost has to be paid when
checking LTL formulas, as the tool searches for a “lasso” (a
lasso consists of a finite path plus a cycle, representing an infinite trace), whereas models of LTLf formulas are just finite
traces. Based on this motivation, (Li et al. 2014) presented
a tableau-style algorithm for LTLf satisfiability checking.
They showed that the dedicated tool, Aalta-finite, which conducts an explicit-state search for a satisfying trace, outperforms extant tools for LTLf satisfiability checking.
The conclusion of a dedicated solver being superior to
LTLf satisfiability checking from (Li et al. 2014), seems
to be out of date by now because of the recent dramatic
improvement in propositional SAT solving, cf. (Malik and
Zhang 2009). On one hand, SAT-based techniques have led
to a significant improvement on LTL satisfiability checking, outperforming the tableau-based techniques of Aaltafinite (Li et al. 2014). (Also, the SAT-based tool ltl2sat for
LTLf satisfiability checking outperforms Aalta-finite on particular benchmarks (Fionda and Greco 2016).) On the other
hand, SAT-based techniques are now dominant in symbolic
model checking (Cavada et al. 2014; Vizel, Weissenbacher,
and Malik 2015). Our preliminary evaluation indicates that
LTLf satisfiability checking via SAT-based model checking (Bradley 2011; Een, Mishchenko, and Brayton 2011) or
via SAT-based LTL satisfiability checking (Li et al. 2015)
both outperform the tableau-based tool Aalta-finite. Thus,
the question raised initially in (Rozier and Vardi 2007) needs
to be re-opened with respect to LTLf satisfiability checking:
is it best to reduce to SAT-based model checking or develop
a dedicated SAT-based tool?
Inspired by (Li et al. 2015), we present an explicit-state
SAT-based framework for LTLf satisfiability. We construct
the LTLf transition system by utilizing SAT solvers to compute the states explicitly. Furthermore, by making use of
both satisfiability and unsatisfiability information from SAT
solvers, we propose a conflict-driven algorithm, CDLSC,
for efficient LTLf satisfiability checking. We show that by

We present a SAT-based framework for LTLf (Linear Temporal Logic on Finite Traces) satisfiability checking. We use
propositional SAT-solving techniques to construct a transition
system for the input LTLf formula; satisfiability checking is
then reduced to a path-search problem over this transition
system. Furthermore, we introduce CDLSC (Conflict-Driven
LTLf Satisfiability Checking), a novel algorithm that leverages information produced by propositional SAT solvers from
both satisfiability and unsatisfiability results. Experimental
evaluations show that CDLSC outperforms all other existing approaches for LTLf satisfiability checking, by demonstrating an approximate four-fold speed-up compared to the
second-best solver.

Introduction
Linear Temporal Logic over Finite Traces, or LTLf , is a formal language gaining popularity in the AI community for
formalizing and validating system behaviors. While standard Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) is interpreted on infinite traces (Pnueli 1977), LTLf is interpreted over finite
traces (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013). While LTL is typically used in formal-verification settings, where we are interested in nonterminating computations, cf. (Vardi 2007),
LTLf is more attractive in AI scenarios focusing on finite
behaviors, such as planning (Bacchus and Kabanza 1998;
De Giacomo and Vardi 1999; Calvanese, De Giacomo, and
Vardi 2002; Patrizi et al. 2011; Camacho et al. 2017), plan
constraints (Bacchus and Kabanza 2000; Gabaldon 2004),
and user preferences (Bienvenu, Fritz, and McIlraith 2006;
2011; Sohrabi, Baier, and McIlraith 2011). Due to the wide
spectrum of applications of LTLf in the AI community (De
Giacomo, Masellis, and Montali 2014), it is worthwhile
to study and develop an efficient framework for solving
LTLf -reasoning problems. Just as propositional satisfiability checking is one of the most fundamental propositional
reasoning tasks, LTLf satisfiability checking is a fundamental task for LTLf reasoning.
Given an LTLf formula, the satisfiability problem asks
whether there is a finite trace that satisfies the formula. A
∗
A full report is at http://temporallogic.org/research/AAAI19/.
Geguang Pu and Kristin Y. Rozier are corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2946

