The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Structured Two-Stream Attention Network for Video Question Answering
Lianli Gao,1 Pengpeng Zeng,1 Jingkuan Song,1 Yuan-Fang Li,2 Wu Liu,3 Tao Mei,3 Heng Tao Shen1∗
1

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 Monash University 3 JD AI Research
lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn, {is.pengpengzeng,jingkuan.song}@gmail.com, {liuwu,tmei}@live.com, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

Abstract

interaction and tourist assistance. However, it is a challenging task, as it is required to understand both language and
vision content to consider necessary commonsense and semantic knowledge, and to finally make reasoning to obtain
the correct answer.
Image QA, which aims to correctly answer a question
about an image, has achieved great progress recently. Most
existing methods for image QA use the attention mechanism
(Antol et al. 2015), and they can be divided into two main
types: visual attention and question attention. The former attention focuses on the most relevant regions to correctly answer a question by exploring their relationships, which addresses “where to look”. The latter attention attends to specific words in the question about visual information, which
addresses “what words to listen to”. Some works jointly perform visual attention and question attention (Lu et al. 2016).
In comparison, video QA is more challenging than image
QA, as videos contain both appearance and motion information. The main challenges to video QA are threefold: first,
a method needs to consider long-range temporal structures
without missing important information; second, the influence of video background needs to be minimized to localize the correspond video instances; third, segmented information and text information need to be well fused. Therefore, we need more sophisticated video understanding techniques that can understand frame-level visual information
and the temporal coherence during the progression of the
video. Video QA models also requires reasoning ability on
spatial and long-range temporal structures of both video and
text to infer an accurate answer.
Attention mechanisms has also been adopted for video
QA, including spatial-temporal attention (Jang et al. 2017)
and co-memory attention (Gao et al. 2018a). Temporal attention learns which frames in a video to attend to, which
is captured as whole-video features. Co-memory proposes
a co-memory attention mechanism: an appearance attention
model to extract useful information from spatial features,
and a motion attention model to extract useful cues from optical flow features. It concatenates the attended spatial and
temporal features to predict the final results.
We observe that answering some questions in video QA
requires focusing on many frames, which are equally important (e.g., How many times does the man step?). Using only current attention mechanisms, and hence whole-

To date, visual question answering (VQA) (i.e., image QA
and video QA) is still a holy grail in vision and language
understanding, especially for video QA. Compared with image QA that focuses primarily on understanding the associations between image region-level details and corresponding
questions, video QA requires a model to jointly reason across
both spatial and long-range temporal structures of a video as
well as text to provide an accurate answer. In this paper, we
specifically tackle the problem of video QA by proposing a
Structured Two-stream Attention network, namely STA, to
answer a free-form or open-ended natural language question
about the content of a given video. First, we infer rich longrange temporal structures in videos using our structured segment component and encode text features. Then, our structured two-stream attention component simultaneously localizes important visual instance, reduces the influence of background video and focuses on the relevant text. Finally, the
structured two-stream fusion component incorporates different segments of query and video aware context representation
and infers the answers. Experiments on the large-scale video
QA dataset TGIF-QA show that our proposed method significantly surpasses the best counterpart (i.e., with one representation for the video input) by 13.0%, 13.5%, 11.0% and 0.3
for Action, Trans., TrameQA and Count tasks. It also outperforms the best competitor (i.e., with two representations) on
the Action, Trans., TrameQA tasks by 4.1%, 4.7%, and 5.1%.

Introduction
Recently, tasks involving vision and language have attracted
considerable interests. Those include captioning (Gu et al.
2018; Chen et al. 2018; Song et al. 2017; 2018a) and visual question answering (Antol et al. 2015; Gao et al. 2015;
Ren, Kiros, and Zemel 2015b; Song et al. 2018b; Gao et al.
2018b). The task of captioning is to generate natural language descriptions of an image or a video. On the other
hand, visual question answering (VQA) (i.e., image QA and
video QA) aims to provide the correct answer to a question
regard to a given image/video. It has been regarded as an
important Turing test to evaluate the intelligence of a machine (Lu et al. 2018a). The VQA problem plays a significant role in various applications, including human-machine
∗

Heng Tao Shen and Jingkuan Song are corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6391

