The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving Image Captioning with Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets
Chen Chen, Shuai Mu, Wanpeng Xiao, Zexiong Ye, Liesi Wu, Qi Ju
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China 518000
{beckhamchen, harrymou, wanpengxiao, joeyye, henrylwu, damonju}@tencent.com

Abstract

tion, namely a bias exposure problem (Bengio et al. 2015),
which creates a mismatch between training and testing —
since at test-time, the model uses the previously generated
words from the model distribution to predict the next word
while directly uses ground-truth during training.
In order to address the exposure bias issue, many
works incorporated reinforcement learning (RL) into the
training stage to directly optimize language metrics such
as BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002), METEOR (Banerjee
and Lavie 2005), ROUGE (Lin 2004), CIDEr (Vedantam,
Lawrence Zitnick, and Parikh 2015) and SPICE (Anderson
et al. 2016). A policy-gradient (Sutton et al. 2000)-based
RL method was first employed in image captioning, such
as REINFORCE with a baseline (Rennie et al. 2017) and
Monte-Carlo rollouts (Liu et al. 2017). Then, the so-called
actor-critic RL algorithm was applied in (Ren et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2017), which trains a second “critic” network to
estimate the expected future reward during the intermediate
state when generating each word given the policy of an actor
network.
Recently, the most popular generative model–generative
adversarial nets (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014)–has
achieved great success in computer vision tasks. But unlike the deterministic continuous mapping from random vectors to the image domain, many NLP tasks are discrete domain generation issues. Inspired by the idea of reinforcement learning, a SeqGAN algorithm (Yu et al. 2017) was
proposed to bypass the generator differentiation problem
by directly performing the gradient policy update and successfully applied the result to text and music generation.
In (Dai et al. 2017) and (Shetty et al. 2017), the authors conducted the first study that explores the use of conditional
GANs (Mirza and Osindero 2014) or adversarial training in
combination with an approximate Gumbel sampler in generating image descriptions. However, what these papers concern about most is naturalness and diversity of descriptions
while sacrificing the fidelity, which results in much lower
language metrics scores compared with other image captioning algorithms.
In order to achieve high evaluation scores over objective
automatic metrics, many prior works chose to directly optimize one metric (BLEU, CIDEr, SPICE, etc.) or combination of them. However, optimizing one metric cannot ensure
consistent improvements over all metrics. Therefore, in or-

In this paper, we propose a novel conditional-generativeadversarial-nets-based image captioning framework as an
extension of traditional reinforcement-learning (RL)-based
encoder-decoder architecture. To deal with the inconsistent
evaluation problem among different objective language metrics, we are motivated to design some “discriminator” networks to automatically and progressively determine whether
generated caption is human described or machine generated.
Two kinds of discriminator architectures (CNN and RNNbased structures) are introduced since each has its own advantages. The proposed algorithm is generic so that it can
enhance any existing RL-based image captioning framework
and we show that the conventional RL training method is just
a special case of our approach. Empirically, we show consistent improvements over all language evaluation metrics for
different state-of-the-art image captioning models. In addition, the well-trained discriminators can also be viewed as
objective image captioning evaluators.

1

Introduction

Generating natural language descriptions of given images,
known as image captioning, has attracted great academic
and industrial interest since it can be widely used in imagetext cross-searching, early childhood education and eyehandicapped people assistance. Compared with other computer vision tasks, e.g. image classification, object detection
and semantic segmentation, image captioning is a more challenging and comprehensive task — as it requires a fine-grain
understanding of image objects as well as their attributes and
relationships. Therefore, image captioning can be viewed as
an interdisciplinary research domain of computer vision and
natural language processing (NLP).
Inspired by the successful application of the encoderdecoder paradigm in neural machine translation (NTM) with
RNNs, some pioneer works (Mao et al. 2014; Vinyals et al.
2015) creatively proposed to replace an RNN with a CNN to
encode image features. Since then, the CNN-RNN structure
has become a standard configuration of image captioning algorithms. Most prior works used maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) for training. However, as pointed out in (Ranzato et al. 2015), this approach suffers from error accumulaCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8142

