The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Multi-Task Communication
with Message Passing for Sequence Learning
Pengfei Liu,†‡ Jie Fu,‡∗ Yue Dong,‡]∗ Xipeng Qiu,† Jackie Chi Kit Cheung‡]
†

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai Insitute of Intelligent Electroics & Systems
‡
MILA ] McGill University
{pfliu14,xpqiu}@fudan.edu.cn, jie.fu@polymtl.ca,yue.dong2@mail.mcgill.ca,jcheung@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
D
A

We present two architectures for multi-task learning with neural sequence models. Our approach allows the relationships
between different tasks to be learned dynamically, rather than
using an ad-hoc pre-defined structure as in previous work. We
adopt the idea from message-passing graph neural networks,
and propose a general graph multi-task learning framework
in which different tasks can communicate with each other in
an effective and interpretable way. We conduct extensive experiments in text classification and sequence labelling to evaluate our approach on multi-task learning and transfer learning. The empirical results show that our models not only outperform competitive baselines, but also learn interpretable
and transferable patterns across tasks.

B

C

D
C
A

(a) Flat Structure

B

(b) Hierarchical Structure

A

B

A

B

C

D

C

D

(c) Graph Structure

Introduction

Figure 1: Different topology structures for multi-task learning. Each blue circle represents a task (A, B, C, D), while the
red box denotes a virtual node, which stores shared information and facilitates communication. The boldness of the
line indicates the strength of the relationships. The directed
edges define the direction of information flow. For example,
in sub-figure (b), task C receives information from task A,
but not vice versa.

Neural multi-task learning models have driven state-of-theart results to new levels in a number of language processing tasks, ranging from part-of-speech (POS) tagging (Yang,
Salakhutdinov, and Cohen 2016, Søgaard and Goldberg
2016), parsing (Peng, Thomson, and Smith 2017, Guo et al.
2016), text classification (Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2016, Liu,
Qiu, and Huang 2017) to machine translation (Luong et al.
2015, Firat, Cho, and Bengio 2016).
Multi-task learning utilizes the correlation between related tasks to improve the performance of each task. In practice, existing work often models task relatedness by simply
defining shared common parameters over some pre-defined
task structures. Figure 1-(a,b) shows two typical pre-defined
topology structures which have been popular. A flat structure
(Collobert and Weston 2008) assumes that all tasks jointly
share a hidden space, while a hierarchical structure (Søgaard
and Goldberg 2016, Hashimoto et al. 2017) specifies a partial order of the direction of information flow between tasks.
There are two major limitations to the above approaches.
First, static pre-defined structures represent a strong assumption about the nature of the interaction between tasks, restricting the model’s capacity to make use of shared information. For example, the structure in 1(a) does not allow
the model to explicitly learn the strength of relatedness between tasks. This restriction prevents the model from fully

utilizing and handling the complexity of the data (Li and
Tian 2015). Note that the strength of relatedness between
tasks is itself not static but subject to change, depending
on the data samples at hand. Second, these models are not
interpretable to researchers and system developers, meaning that we learn little about what kinds of patterns have
been shared besides the parameters themselves. Previous
non-neural-network models (Bakker and Heskes 2003, Kim
and Xing 2010, Chen et al. 2010) have demonstrated the importance of learning inter-task relationships for multi-task
learning. However, there is little work giving an in-depth
analysis in the neural setting.
The above issues motivate the following research questions: 1) How can we explicitly model complex relationships
between different tasks? 2) Can we design models that learn
interpretable shared structures?
To address these questions, we propose to model the relationships between language processing tasks using a graph
structure, in which each task is regarded as a node. We take

∗

These two authors contributed equally
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4360

