The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Verifying Robustness of Gradient Boosted Models
Gil Einziger, Maayan Goldstein, Yaniv Sa’ar, Itai Segall
Nokia, Bell Labs
gilein@bgu.ac.il, {maayan.goldstein, yaniv.saar, itai.segall}@nokia-bell-labs.com

Abstract
Gradient boosted models are a fundamental machine learning
technique. Robustness to small perturbations of the input is
an important quality measure for machine learning models,
but the literature lacks a method to prove the robustness of
gradient boosted models.
This work introduces V ERI GB, a tool for quantifying the robustness of gradient boosted models. V ERI GB encodes the
model and the robustness property as an SMT formula, which
enables state of the art verification tools to prove the model’s
robustness. We extensively evaluate V ERI GB on publicly
available datasets and demonstrate a capability for verifying
large models. Finally, we show that some model configurations tend to be inherently more robust than others.

1

Figure 1: Example of the lack of robustness in a gradient
boosted model trained over a traffic signs dataset. In the first
row, an “80 km/h speed limit” sign is misclassified as a “30
km/h speed limit”. In the second row, a “turn left” sign is
misclassified as “ahead only”. Observe in the third column
(delta, computed as the difference in pixel values of the two
images) that the applied changes are barely visible to the
naked eye (delta of +/-3 in the range of 256 values per pixel
per color). The fourth column highlights the modified pixels.

Introduction

Gradient boosted models are fundamental in machine learning and are among the most popular techniques in practice.
They are known to achieve good accuracy with relatively
small models, and are attractive in numerous domains ranging from computer vision to transportation (Viola and Jones
2001; Yang et al. 2015; Caruana and Niculescu-Mizil 2006;
Freund and Schapire 1997; Chapelle and Chang 2010;
Zhang and Haghani 2015). They are easy to use as they do
not require normalization of input features, and they support custom loss functions as well as classification and regression. Finally, the method has a solid theoretical grounding (Mason et al. 1999).
Machine learning models are often vulnerable to adversarial perturbations, which may cause catastrophic failures
(e.g., by misclassification of a traffic sign). Specifically, Figure 1 exemplifies that gradient boosted models are indeed
vulnerable to such perturbations. Thus, identifying which
models are robust to such manipulations and which are not
is critical. Indeed, numerous works suggested training techniques that increase the robustness (Leistner et al. 2009;
Sun, Todorovic, and Li 2007). However, there is currently
no method to formally verify gradient boosted models. Furthermore, it is not clear how the configuration parameters of
such models affect their robustness. These knowledge gaps
make it challenging to guarantee the reliability of gradient
boosted solutions.

In the last couple of decades, formal methods successfully
increased the reliability of numerous software and hardware systems. Such success gave rise to diverse verification
methods such as model checking, termination analysis, and
abstract interpretation. Formal methods are especially appealing in situations where the cost of mistakes is exceptionally high. Examples include mission-critical solutions
as well as mass-produced hardware. Unfortunately, machine
learning models are fundamentally different from traditional
software artifacts, and we cannot directly use existing verification techniques for machine learning models. The research community already started addressing the problem
for neural network models (Pulina and Tacchella 2010;
Katz et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2017; Gehr et al. 2018;
Narodytska et al. 2018). Here we focus on an area that has
not been covered so far – verification of robustness of gradient boosted models.
The main contribution of this work is the V ERI GB tool
for verifying the robustness of gradient boosted models.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2446

