The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Video Imprint Segmentation for Temporal Action Detection in Untrimmed Videos
Zhanning Gao,1,2 Le Wang,1∗ Qilin Zhang,3 Zhenxing Niu,2 Nanning Zheng,1 Gang Hua4
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 HERE Technologies, 4 Microsoft Cloud and AI

Abstract

ral boundaries and action categories without proposal generation (Lin, Zhao, and Shou 2017; Buch et al. 2017), dense
per-frame labeling to refine the temporal boundaries from
action proposals (Shou et al. 2017; Yeung et al. 2016). However, they all represent videos as a sequence of frames or
snippets, which inevitably incurs the variable lengths input
difficulty, especially for large-scale datasets.
A simpler alternative is proposed in this paper as the “temporal Detection By spatial Segmentation” (DBS) framework, which circumvents the variable lengths input difficulty. As illustrated in Figure 1, temporal action detection
is recast into spatial semantic segmentation with the video
imprint representation (Gao et al. 2017b; 2018), by aligning
video frames into a fixed-size tensor feature. Such representation captures statistical characteristics while suppressing
redundancies. In addition, video imprint representation preserves the local spatial layout across multiple frames, which
justifies the spatial segmentation step with a fully convolutional network (FCN). Each segmented area corresponds
to a certain action category. Finally, the segmentation score
maps are reversely projected back to the video space, and
converted to dense temporal prediction labels, which refine
the temporal action boundaries proposals.
The video imprint representation directly assembles and
aligns the convolutional neural network (CNN) features to
the same fixed-size tensor maps, which allows the direct application of the same FCN segmentation network without
modification. In addition, with precisely captured temporal
correlations, the imprint representation keeps multiple action instances of the same category spatially proximate in
the imprint representation feature map, which makes the action detection process more effective and efficient.
Another major advantage of the DBS framework is the simultaneous detection of relevant spatial regions inside each
frame and per-frame temporal predictions. This is made
possible due to preserved local spatial layout in the video
imprint. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate our
DBS framework on two challenging datasets, i.e., the THUMOS’14 (Jiang et al. 2014) dataset and the ActivityNet
dataset (Heilbron et al. 2015). Experimental results show
that the DBS method achieves state-of-the-art performance.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We
first discuss related work about temporal action detection,
semantic segmentation and video imprint generation. Then,

We propose a temporal action detection by spatial segmentation framework, which simultaneously categorize actions and temporally localize action instances in untrimmed
videos. The core idea is the conversion of temporal detection task into a spatial semantic segmentation task. Firstly,
the video imprint representation is employed to capture the
spatial/temporal interdependences within/among frames and
represent them as spatial proximity in a feature space. Subsequently, the obtained imprint representation is spatially segmented by a fully convolutional network. With such segmentation labels projected back to the video space, both temporal action boundary localization and per-frame spatial annotation can be obtained simultaneously. The proposed framework is robust to variable lengths of untrimmed videos, due
to the underlying fixed-size imprint representations. The efficacy of the framework is validated in two public action detection datasets.

Introduction
The prevalence of camera phones and video sharing social
media has contributed to the dramatic increase of videos on
the Internet. Majority of such videos may contain multiple
action instances with cluttered background. Such videos are
referred to as untrimmed videos, and temporal action detection on untrimmed videos has drawn significant attention
recently (Oneata, Verbeek, and Schmid 2014a; Shou, Wang,
and Chang 2016; Zhao et al. 2017).
Temporal action detection requires simultaneous action
classification and localization of temporal boundaries, i.e.,
the start and end frame of each action instance. Many recent
methods (Shou, Wang, and Chang 2016; Singh and Cuzzolin 2016; Wang, Qiao, and Tang 2014; Dai et al. 2017;
Gao, Yang, and Nevatia 2017) leverage image based object detection such as the R-CNN variants (Girshick 2015;
Girshick et al. 2014; Ren et al. 2017; Xu, Das, and Saenko
2017) with the “detection by classification” scheme. The
major limitation of such methods is their incapability of providing dense per-frame predictions.
To overcome such limitation, several alternative methods
have been proposed, including joint prediction of the tempo∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8328

