The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Joint Dynamic Pose Image and Space Time
Reversal for Human Action Recognition from Videos
Mengyuan Liu,1,2 Fanyang Meng,3 Chen Chen,4 Songtao Wu5
1

Tencent Research, 2 School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School
4
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
5
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
nkliuyifang@gmail.com fymeng@pkusz.edu.cn chenchen870713@gmail.com csstwu@szu.edu.cn
H+W

Abstract

F

…

Human action recognition aims to classify a given video
according to which type of action it contains. Disturbance
brought by clutter background and unrelated motions makes
the task challenging for video frame-based methods. To solve
this problem, this paper takes advantage of pose estimation to
enhance the performances of video frame features. First, we
present a pose feature called dynamic pose image (DPI), which
describes human action as the aggregation of a sequence of
joint estimation maps. Different from traditional pose features
using sole joints, DPI suffers less from disturbance and provides richer information about human body shape and movements. Second, we present attention-based dynamic texture
images (att-DTIs) as pose-guided video frame feature. Specifically, a video is treated as a space-time volume, and DTIs
are obtained by observing the volume from different views.
To alleviate the effect of disturbance on DTIs, we accumulate joint estimation maps as attention map, and extend DTIs
to attention-based DTIs (att-DTIs). Finally, we fuse DPI and
att-DTIs with multi-stream deep neural networks and late
fusion scheme for action recognition. Experiments on NTU
RGB+D, UTD-MHAD, and Penn-Action datasets show the effectiveness of DPI and att-DTIs, as well as the complementary
property between them.

W

…

H+W

…

1

DPI (14 Channels)

5

H

F

…

…

…

…

…

…

Video

Head (1)

Hand (5)

Hand (8)

Foot (14)

F

…
H+W

14

…

…

H+W

8
F

F

Joint Estimation Maps

Feature Maps

Figure 1: Dynamic pose image (DPI) for action description
from a video. All generated images are colored to facilitate
observation.
video frames bring new problems, including unrelated motions and motion blur. We focus on decreasing the effect from
clutter background and unrelated motions. In other words,
we intend to recognize actions from complex scenes using
unfixed cameras. Without assuming the camera is stable, common background modeling (Monnet et al. 2003) can barely
work against camera movements. Besides, background modeling cannot distinguish human movements from unrelated
motions, e.g., “waving tree” and “moving car”. An alternative
way is to use human detection (Dalal and Triggs 2005) to
extract human region from the scenes. While, the detected
human regions still contain background. What’s worse, human detection methods may concur detection failure and
mismatch whole human body region.
Recent development of human pose estimation enables the
usage of human pose for solving above mentioned problem.
The general pipeline of human pose estimation includes the
inference of joint estimation maps and the extraction of joint
locations. The location of a joint is defined as the position
with maximum value on the joint estimation map. Compared
with joint location, the joint estimation map contains richer
information about the distribution of body parts. Therefore,
we use joint estimation map instead of joint location for
further robust feature extraction.
We present dynamic pose image (DPI) to describe human
action as the aggregation of joint estimation maps, which is
shown in Fig. 1. Suppose we use pose estimation method to
estimate human body as 14 joint estimation maps. Given a
video, we apply pose estimation on each video frame, leading
to 14 channels of new sequences. Each new sequence denotes

Introduction
Human action recognition (HAR) is an active topic in the
field of artificial intelligence (Liu and Yuan 2018), (Wang
et al. 2018). This task has a wide range of applications in
human-robot interaction and intelligent video surveillance.
HAR can be divided into image-based HAR and videobased HAR. Single image can barely distinguish similar human actions, e.g., “sitting down” and “standing up”. It is more
common and natural to analyze human action using videos,
as human action is actually a sequence of sub-movements.
According to the type of human action, HAR can also be
categorized into “human body action”, “hand gesture”, and
“group action”. We focus on “human body action”, and simplify this term as “action”.
Action recognition from videos remains challenging for
two reasons. First, each video frame concurs traditional problems in image analysis, such as clutter background, illumination variation, and low resolution. Second, motions among
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8762

