The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On the Distortion Value of the Elections with Abstention
Mohammad Ghodsi,∗† Mohamad Latifian,∗ Masoud Seddighin∗
∗

Sharif University of Technology, † Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM) – School of CS
ghodsi@sharif.edu, {latifian, mseddighin}@ce.sharif.edu

Abstract

optimal candidate, and under the plurality voting rule candidate R is the winner. Thus, the distortion value is
0.51(0.5 − ε) + 0.49 · 1
≃ 3.
0.51(0.5 + ε)

In Spatial Voting Theory, distortion is a measure of how good
the winner is. It is proved that no deterministic voting mechanism can guarantee a distortion better than 3, even for simple
metrics such as a line. In this study, we wish to answer the
following question: how does the distortion value change if
we allow less motivated agents to abstain from the election?
We consider an election with two candidates and suggest an
abstention model, which is a more general form of the abstention model proposed by Kirchgässner (2003). We define the
concepts of the expected winner and the expected distortion
to evaluate the distortion of an election in our model. Our
results fully characterize the distortion value and provide a
rather complete picture of the model.

1

ε

R

}

L

49%

51%

Figure 1: An example with distortion value 3.
The example of Figure 1 shows the lower-bound of 3 on
the distortion value. However, it seems unrealistic in some
ways. Although the voters located near the point 0.5 are
closer to R, they have a very low incentive to vote for R,
since their costs for both candidates are almost equal. On
the other hand, agents located at 0 have a strong motivation
to vote for L. In fact, if voters are allowed to abstain (which
is a natural assumption in many real-world elections, especially in large elections), we expect L to be the winner rather
than R.
In this study, our goal is to tackle this problem: how does
the distortion value change if we allow less motivated agents
to abstain from voting?

Introduction

The goal in Social Choice Theory is to design mechanisms
that aggregate agents’ preferences into a collective decision.
Voting is a well-studied method for aggregating preferences
which has numerous applications in multi-agent systems.
Roughly, a voting mechanism takes the preferences of the
agents over a set of alternatives as input and selects one of
the alternatives as the winner.
One approach to estimate the quality of a voting mechanism is to use the utilitarian view which assumes that each
agent has cost over the alternatives. For example, spatial
models, locate the voters and the alternatives in a finite metric space M, and the cost of alternative X for voter vi is
equal to their distance. Considering these costs, the optimal candidate is defined to be the candidate that minimizes
the social cost. Ideally, we would like the optimal candidate
to be the winner; however, since voting mechanisms only
take the ordinal preferences of voters, it is reasonable to expect that the winner is not always optimal. The question then
arises: how good is the winner, i.e., what is the worst-case
ratio of the social cost of the winner to the social cost of the
optimal candidate? This ratio is called the distortion value of
a voting mechanism. It is known that no deterministic voting
mechanism can guarantee a distortion better than 3, even for
simple metrics such as a line. To see this, consider the example shown in Figure 1. In this example, candidate L is the

1.1

Abstention

Scientists have long studied the factors affecting participation in an election. In particular, Wolfinger and Rosenstone
(1999) argue that better educated and more informed voters participate with a higher probability, or Lijphart (1997)
discusses that the voters on the left side of the political spectrum participate less frequently than the ones on the right.
Similarly, the decision to vote may rely on variables such
as income level or the sense of civic duty (Wolfinger and
Rosenstone 1980).
Traditionally, both game theoretic and decision theoretic
models of turnout have been proposed. In the heart of most
of these models lies the assumption that there are costs for
voting 1 . These costs include the costs of collecting and pro1
There are other decision theoretic explanations of abstention
that do not rely on costs, e.g., see (1997).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1981

