Exploiting Class Learnability in Noisy Data
Matthew Klawonn

Eric Heim

James Hendler

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Dept. of Computer Science
Troy, NY 12180
klawom@rpi.edu

Air Force Research Laboratory
Information Directorate
Rome, NY 13441
eric.heim.1@us.af.mil

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Dept. of Computer Science
Troy, NY 12180
hendler@cs.rpi.edu

Abstract
In many domains, collecting sufficient labeled training data
for supervised machine learning requires easily accessible but
noisy sources, such as crowdsourcing services or tagged Web
data. Noisy labels occur frequently in data sets harvested via
these means, sometimes resulting in entire classes of data on
which learned classifiers generalize poorly. For real world
applications, we argue that it can be beneficial to avoid training on such classes entirely. In this work, we aim to explore
the classes in a given data set, and guide supervised training
to spend time on a class proportional to its learnability. By
focusing the training process, we aim to improve model generalization on classes with a strong signal. To that end, we
develop an online algorithm that works in conjunction with
classifier and training algorithm, iteratively selecting training
data for the classifier based on how well it appears to generalize on each class. Testing our approach on a variety of
data sets, we show our algorithm learns to focus on classes
for which the model has low generalization error relative to
strong baselines, yielding a classifier with good performance
on learnable classes.

Many state of the art machine learning models require
large amounts of data to avoid overfitting. In constructing
large scale data sets, one often turns to accessible sources
that can quickly provide vast amounts of data, including
crowdsourcing and Webly supervised learning (scraping data
and labels from the Web). Such processes frequently result in
data that is noisy. For example, consider a data set of images
and tags scraped from Flickr, intended to be used as training
data for an image tagger. Tags on Flickr are assigned by users
of the site without restriction, and the assignment of tags
can range from the very literal to the abstract (see Figure 1
for an example). When attempting to learn an image tagger,
training on noisy classes is potentially harmful to model
performance on classes with strong signal. Rather than try to
achieve moderate performance on all classes at the expense
of those with strong signal, the classifier designer may want
to avoid noisy classes entirely. With this in mind, in order to
develop an accurate classifier in the presence of noisy classes,
we hypothesize that not all classes ought to be treated equally
during training. Rather, it may be beneficial to focus training
on classes for which the model appears capable of achieving a

Figure 1: Example of labeled Flickr images. The common
features of the “Cat” images suggest that a low generalization
error can be achieved for this class, and thus that classifier
training may benefit from spending more time on “Cat” images than “Fun” images.

low generalization error. We call this characteristic of classes
appearing in the data set learnability.
To this end, we seek to develop an algorithm that uses the
concept of learnability to focus the training of a classifier on
specific classes. Our expectation is that training the model
only on instances from learnable classes will yield a more
accurate classifier for classes with a strong relationship between instance and label. In this work we propose an online
algorithm that acts in concert with the stochastic learning
algorithm used to train a classifier. Our algorithm assesses
which of the classes are most effective in training the model,
and then selects instances from those classes to use in update
steps for the classifier. We pose this learning scheme as a
Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB, bandit) problem. By doing so,

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4082

