The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hierarchical Macro Strategy Model for
MOBA Game AI
Bin Wu
Tencent AI Lab
benbinwu@tencent.com

Abstract

There are four major aspects that make RTS games much
more difficult compared to GO: 1) Computational complexity. The computational complexity in terms of action
space or state space of RTS games can be up to 1020,000 ,
while the complexity of GO is about 10250 (OpenAI 2018b).
2) Multi-agent. Playing RTS games usually involves multiple agents. It is crucial for multiple agents to coordinate
and cooporate. 3) Imperfect information. Different to GO,
many RTS games make use of fog of war (Vinyals et al.
2017) to increase game uncertainty. When the game map
is not fully observable, it is essential to consider gaming
among one another. 4) Sparse and delayed rewards. Learning upon game rewards in GO is challenging because the
rewards are usually sparse and delayed. RTS game length
could often be larger than 20,000 frames, while each GO
game is usually no more than 361 steps.
To master RTS games, players need to have strong skills
in both macro strategy operation and micro level execution. In recent study, much attention and attempts have
been put to micro level execution (Vinyals et al. 2017;
Tian et al. 2017; Synnaeve and Bessiere 2011; Wender and
Watson 2012). So far, Dota2 AI developed by OpenAI using reinforcement learning, i.e., OpenAI Five, has made the
most advanced progress (OpenAI 2018a). OpenAI Five was
trained directly on micro level action space using proximal policy optimization algorithms along with team rewards
(Schulman et al. 2017). OpenAI Five has shown strong
teamfights skills and coordination comparable to top professional Dota2 teams during a demonstration match held
in The International 2018 (DOTA2 2018). OpenAI’s approach did not explicitly model macro strategy and tried
to learn the entire game using micro level play. However,
OpenAI Five was not able to defeat professional teams due
to weakness in macro strategy management (Vincent 2018;
Simonite 2018).
Related work has also been done in explicit macro strategy operation, mostly focused on navigation. Navigation
aims to provide reasonable destination spots and efficient
routes for agents. Most related work in navigation used influence maps or potential fields (DeLoura 2001; Hagelbäck
and Johansson 2008; do Nascimento Silva and Chaimowicz 2015). Influence maps quantify units using handcrafted
equations. Then, multiple influence maps are fused using
rules to provide a single-value output to navigate agents.

The next challenge of game AI lies in Real Time Strategy
(RTS) games. RTS games provide partially observable gaming environments, where agents interact with one another in
an action space much larger than that of GO. Mastering RTS
games requires both strong macro strategies and delicate micro level execution. Recently, great progress has been made
in micro level execution, while complete solutions for macro
strategies are still lacking. In this paper, we propose a novel
learning-based Hierarchical Macro Strategy model for mastering MOBA games, a sub-genre of RTS games. Trained
by the Hierarchical Macro Strategy model, agents explicitly
make macro strategy decisions and further guide their micro
level execution. Moreover, each of the agents makes independent strategy decisions, while simultaneously communicating with the allies through leveraging a novel imitated crossagent communication mechanism. We perform comprehensive evaluations on a popular 5v5 Multiplayer Online Battle
Arena (MOBA) game. Our 5-AI team achieves a 48% winning rate against human player teams which are ranked top
1% in the player ranking system.

Introduction
Light has been shed on artificial general intelligence after
AlphaGo defeated world GO champion Lee Seedol (Silver
et al. 2016). Since then, game AI has drawn unprecedented
attention from not only researchers but also the public. Game
AI aims much more than robots playing games. Rather,
games provide ideal environments that simulate the real
world. AI researchers can conduct experiments in games,
and transfer successful AI ability to the real world.
Although AlphaGo is a milestone to the goal of general
AI, the class of problems it represents is still simple compared to the real world. Therefore, recently researchers have
put much attention to real time strategy (RTS) games such
as Defense of the Ancients (Dota) (OpenAI 2018a) and StarCraft (Vinyals et al. 2017; Tian et al. 2017), which represents
a class of problems with next level complexity. Dota is a famous set of science fiction 5v5 Multiplayer Online Battle
Arena (MOBA) games. Each player controls one unit and
cooperate with four allies to defend allies’ turrets, attack enemies’ turrets, collect resources by killing creeps, etc. The
goal is to destroy enemies’ base.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1206

