The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Learning Generalized Temporal Abstractions across Both Action and Perception
Khimya Khetarpal
School of Computer Science, McGill University
Mila - Reasoning and Learning Lab
Montreal, Quebec

Introduction

Theme 1: Learning Temporal Abstractions
with Interest Functions

Reinforcement Learning (RL) involves a decision-making
agent learning to achieve goals, while dealing with uncertainty and limited data about its environment (Sutton and
Barto 1998). The goal in a RL problem is indicated by an
external reward signal provided by the environment with
which the agent is interacting. The agent learns what to do
– how to map situations to actions so as to maximize the
cumulative expected reward over time.

The options framework (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999)
enables an agent’s trajectory to be analyzed in both through
the lens of discrete-time transitions or through SMDP-style
transitions. Recent research has demonstrated that options
can be learned automatically, end-to-end, for a given task
(Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017). Unfortunately, this can result in degenerate solutions, with either one option being
used for the entire task, or option duration collapsing to single time steps. This type of degenerate solution is potentially
due to a simplifying assumption used in the option-critic:
that all options are available in all states.
In order to learn options that represent specialized and
meaningful skills for lifelong learning, we revisit the idea of
an initiation set, used in the options framework, but through
a formulation that is more amenable to learning. We introduce the notion of interest functions Iω : S −→ IR. The
interest function Iω (s) is indicative of the availability of an
option ω in state s. The idea is inspired by human visual attention: while we engage in any task, each skill employed is
specialized in attending to only certain states. For example, a
skill such as ‘stop if the traffic light is red’ is only applicable
in states in which a traffic light is present.
We define interest functions in the options framework as
follows. The state-value function is defined as:
X
VΩ (s) =
πIω,z (ω|s)QΩ,θ (s, ω)
(1)

The RL problem specification is defined more formally in
terms of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). In a MDP, the
state observed and the action taken at time-step t determine
the distribution of the state and the immediate reward at time
t + 1. This allows learning fine-grain courses of action. One
could however, learn much more rapidly by abstracting away
the myriad of details and considering actions of longer duration, which generate longer-range transitions. This serves as
a motivation for learning temporal abstractions in the framework of RL. Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL)
methods aim to find closed-loop policies which have a temporal extent, and can then be used instead (or in addition to)
one-step actions. Semi-Markov decision processes (SMDPs)
provide a generalized framework for HRL methods, by allowing the amount of time between two decision points to
be a random variable (Puterman 1994).
Learning temporal abstractions which are partial solutions
to a task and could be reused for other similar or even more
complicated tasks is intuitively an ingredient which can help
agents to plan, learn and reason efficiently at multiple resolutions of perceptions and time. Just like humans acquire
skills and build on top of already existing skills to solve
more complicated tasks, AI agents should be able to learn
and develop skills continually, hierarchically and incrementally over time. In my research, I aim to answer the following
question: How should an agent efficiently represent, learn
and use knowledge of the world in continual tasks? My work
builds on the options framework, but provides novel extensions driven by this question.

ω

where QΩ,θ is the option-value function parameterized by θ,
and the probability of an option being sampled in a given
state is defined as:
.X
πIω,z (ω|s) = Iω,z (s)πΩ,θ (ω|s)
Iω,z (s)πΩ,θ (ω|s)
ω

(2)
Here, Iω,z (s) is the interest function parameterized by z.
The agent initially would consider that all options are available everywhere. As learning progresses, we expect that the
emerging options will be specialized over different state regions. Starting with the option-value function, we can derive
the interest function gradient, obtaining the following result:
Theorem 1. Given a set of Markov options with stochastic, differentiable interest functions Iω,z , the gradient of the

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9890

