The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Fidelity Automatic
Hyper-Parameter Tuning via Transfer Series Expansion ∗
Yi-Qi Hu,1,2 Yang Yu,1 Wei-Wei Tu,2 Qiang Yang,3 Yuqiang Chen,2 Wenyuan Dai2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
4Paradigm Inc., Beijing, China
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
{huyq,yuy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, tuweiwei@4paradigm.com
Abstract

problem (Feurer et al. 2015). Some derivative-free optimization methods (Liu et al. 2006; Bergstra and Bengio 2012;
Shahriari et al. 2015; Hansen, Müller, and Koumoutsakos
2003; Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011; Munos 2011;
Bergstra et al. 2011; Yu, Qian, and Hu 2016) have been applied to solve this problem successfully. Further more, some
open-source tools (Feurer et al. 2015; Thornton et al. 2013)
based on those methods make application of AutoML easier.
Despite of the preliminary success on AutoML applications, derivative-free optimization still suffers low efficiency issue. Without gradient, derivative-free optimization
explores search space by evaluating samples. But evaluations on AutoML are extremely expensive with k-fold cross
validation as criterion. For limited time consuming, a small
number of evaluations makes it impossible to get a good
enough model configuration. Some previous works (Lindauer and Hutter 2018; Hu, Yu, and Zhou 2018) were proposed to reduce the evaluation requirement of derivative-free
optimization. On the other hand, some methods were proposed to make evaluations cheaper. One of the most popular
method is multi-fidelity optimization (March and Willcox
2012; Fernández-Godino et al. 2016). It decreases total evaluation cost by combing many cheap low-fidelity evaluations
and few expensive high-fidelity evaluations. Multi-fidelity
optimization has been deeply studied on surrogate model optimization such as Bayesian optimization (Huang et al. 2006;
Kandasamy et al. 2016; 2017). Few works (Sen, Kandasamy,
and Shakkottai 2018) involve other optimization methods.
In this paper, we propose a general framework to extend
multi-fidelity optimization to any derivative-free optimization methods. It should be noticed that AutoML follows
multi-fidelity setting naturally by evaluating model configuration on small data subset. But evaluation on a part of
dataset is badly biased. Thus, it is necessary to fix the biases
for low-fidelity evaluations. In this work we propose to learn
a predictor Φ to fix the bias with some observations of low
and high-fidelity evaluations. Because of high cost, lack of
high-fidelity observations makes it hard to learn the predictor. To tackle this issue, we propose Transfer Series Expansion (TSE) method. TSE linearly combines a series of base
predictors to Ψ. The base predictors can be obtained from
down-scaled and experienced tasks. Because base predictors
contain meta knowledge, they can be even transfered among
different AutoML problems. From experiments on Light-

Automatic machine learning (AutoML) aims at automatically
choosing the best configuration for machine learning tasks.
However, a configuration evaluation can be very time consuming particularly on learning tasks with large datasets. This
limitation usually restrains derivative-free optimization from
releasing its full power for a fine configuration search using many evaluations. To alleviate this limitation, in this paper, we propose a derivative-free optimization framework for
AutoML using multi-fidelity evaluations. It uses many lowfidelity evaluations on small data subsets and very few highfidelity evaluations on the full dataset. However, the lowfidelity evaluations can be badly biased, and need to be corrected with only a very low cost. We thus propose the Transfer Series Expansion (TSE) that learns the low-fidelity correction predictor efficiently by linearly combining a set of base
predictors. The base predictors can be obtained cheaply from
down-scaled and experienced tasks. Experimental results on
real-world AutoML problems verify that the proposed framework can accelerate derivative-free configuration search significantly by making use of the multi-fidelity evaluations.

Introduction
Machine learning is an important subfield of artificial intelligence which discovers knowledge via experience. During
the past decades, machine learning has achieved great successes in many applications, e.g., computer vision (Bradski
1998), recommender system (Broder 2008), financial market analysis (Ball 2013), and so on. But the model configuration with best performance has to be customized for
different learning problems. And it crucially relies on human machine learning experts. Lack of machine learning expert limits the range of machine learning applications. Automatic machine learning (AutoML) is proposed to choose
model configuration without any human participation. Recently, AutoML is often considered as the combined algorithm selection and hyper-parameter optimization (CASH)
∗
This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFB1001903), NSFC (61876077), Jiangsu
SF (BK20160066), and Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel
Software Technology and Industrialization. Yang Yu is the corresponding author. This work is partially done when Yi-Qi Hu was
an intern in 4Paradigm Inc.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3846

