The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Consensus in Opinion Formation Processes in Fully Evolving Environments
Vincenzo Auletta

Angelo Fanelli

Diodato Ferraioli

University of Salerno, Italy.
auletta@unisa.it

CNRS, (UMR-6211), France.
angelo.fanelli@unicaen.fr

University of Salerno, Italy.
dferraioli@unisa.it

Abstract

Granovetter (Granovetter 1978) and the papers of DeGroot
(DeGroot 1974) and Lehrer-Wagner (Lehrer and Wagner
1981) on consensus. In the last decades this line of research
received great attention and several models have been proposed for describing the process of opinion formation and
diffusion (see (Easley and Kleinberg 2010; Jackson 2008;
Shakarian et al. 2015) for detailed surveys). Many works
model the social influence by simply considering agents
that follow the majority (Berger 2001; Feldman et al. 2014;
Tamuz and Tessler 2013; Mossel, Neeman, and Tamuz 2014;
Auletta, Ferraioli, and Greco 2018).
A classical model that describes how opinions form in a
social context has been proposed in (DeGroot 1974) (in the
following denoted as DG model). Here, each agent has an
opinion on a specific issue of interest. The process is iterative with discrete time and at each round each agent updates
her opinion to a weghted sum of all the opinions expressed
by her neighbors (including herself). The author gives necessary and sufficient conditions on the structure of the graph
describing the social relationships among the agents under
which the proposed dynamics converges to a consensus.
A different model, that takes into account both the innate beliefs and the public opinions of the agents, has been
proposed in (Friedkin and Johnsen 1990) (in the following denoted as FJ model). They assume that each agent
has a (innate) belief and a publicly expressed opinion and
these two elements are not necessarily the same. The process of formation and expression of the opinions proceeds
in rounds: at each round all the agents make an averaging
between their personal beliefs and the opinions expressed
by agents with whom they have social relationships. The
trade-off between the innate belief and the social pressure
of the opinions expressed by her neighbours is weighted by
the agent’s stubbornness level, that is, the scaling factor used
to counterbalance the cost that the agent incurs for disagreeing with the society and the cost she incurs for disagreeing
with her innate belief. (Bindel, Kleinberg, and Oren 2011)
prove that this repeated averaging process can be interpreted
as a best-response play in a naturally defined game that leads
to a unique equilibrium. (Ghaderi and Srikant 2014) determine the convergence time of this process to a stable state.
Variations of the FJ model have been studied by (Fotakis,
Palyvos-Giannas, and Skoulakis 2016), that assume agents
update their opinions by consulting only a small (possibly

(Friedkin and Johnsen 1990) modeled opinion formation
in social networks as a dynamic process which evolves in
rounds: at each round each agent updates her expressed opinion to a weighted average of her innate belief and the opinions
expressed in the previous round by her social neighbors. The
stubbornness level of an agent represents the tendency of the
agent to express an opinion close to her innate belief.
Motivated by the observation that innate beliefs, stubbornness levels and even social relations can co-evolve together
with the expressed opinions, we present a new model of opinion formation where the dynamics runs in a co-evolving environment. We assume that agents’ stubbornness and social
relations can vary arbitrarily, while their innate beliefs slowly
change as a function of the opinions they expressed in the
past. We prove that, in our model, the opinion formation dynamics converges to a consensus if reasonable conditions on
the structure of the social relationships and on how the personal beliefs can change are satisfied. Moreover, we discuss
how this result applies in several simpler (but realistic) settings.

Introduction
It is well known that how individuals form their opinions and
how they express them in a social context is strongly influenced by their social relations. For example, social pressure
can suggest an individual to hide her personal (unpopular)
belief and publicly express an opinion that is more conform
to the opinions expressed by the majority of her neighbours.
On the other hand, she can be firmly tied to her personal belief and not willing to deviate from it, whatever the opinions
expressed by her friends are.
Thus, the formation of the opinions in a social context can
be modelled as a dynamic process, where opinions publicly
expressed by individuals depend on both their personal innate beliefs and on the opinions expressed by other individuals they interact with. Understanding how opinions form,
how they diffuse in a social network and how the network
can influence this process is a fundamental issue both for
the Artificial Intelligence and Social Science communities.
The study of opinion diffusion in social networks dates
back to 70s, with the seminal paper on Threshold Model by
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6022

