The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Agent Path Finding for Large Agents ∗
Pavel Surynek

Jiaoyang Li

Faculty of Information Technology
CS Department
Czech Technical University
Univ. of Southern California
pavel.surynek@fit.cvut.cz
jiaoyanl@usc.edu

Abstract

Hang Ma
T. K. Satish Kumar
Sven Koenig
CS Department
Univ. of Southern California

2008), office robots (Veloso et al. 2015), aircraft-towing vehicles (Morris et al. 2016), video game characters (Ma et al.
2017) and many other domains.
Numerous optimal MAPF algorithms have been developed in recent years, including reduction-based algorithms
(Yu and LaValle 2013a; Erdem et al. 2013; Surynek et
al. 2016), A*-based algorithms (Standley 2010; Wagner
and Choset 2011; Goldenberg et al. 2014) and dedicated
search-based algorithms (Sharon et al. 2013; 2015; Boyarski et al. 2015; Felner et al. 2018). See (Ma et al. 2016a;
Felner et al. 2017) for complete surveys.
Although previous MAPF algorithms have found some
real-world applications (Hönig et al. 2016), they are based
on one simplistic assumption that limits their applicability.
This assumption is to ignore the shape of agents and consider them as point agents, which occupy exactly one point
at any time. In reality, agents are geometric in nature with
definite shapes. Therefore, they typically occupy a set of
points at any time. We refer to such agents as large agents.
MAPF algorithms can be applied to large agents by lowering the resolution of discretization of the environment. However, this degrades their performance and thus their practical
applicability.
To address these concerns, we formally study Multi-Agent
Path Finding for Large Agents (LA-MAPF) which takes into
consideration the shapes of agents. This consideration also
addresses the case where agents have to maintain a safety
distance from each other since a virtual boundary can now
be defined for each agent. Intuitively, LA-MAPF is harder to
solve than MAPF since it is a generalization of MAPF and
agents are more likely to collide with each other.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we formalize the LA-MAPF problem. In Section 3, we solve LA-MAPF by a straightforward adaption
of a state-of-the-art search-based MAPF solver, ConflictBased Search (CBS) (Sharon et al. 2015), and analyze its
poor performance. In Section 4, we present a new algorithm,
called Multi-Constraint CBS (MC-CBS), that improves CBS
by adding multiple constraints in a high-level node expansion. We propose three different approaches to choose such
constraints as well as a special constraint representation for
regular shaped agents. In Section 5, we explain how to compute heuristics for the high-level search of MC-CBS. In Section 6, we compare the performances of adapted CBS, vari-

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) has been widely studied
in the AI community. For example, Conflict-Based Search
(CBS) is a state-of-the-art MAPF algorithm based on a twolevel tree-search. However, previous MAPF algorithms assume that an agent occupies only a single location at any
given time, e.g., a single cell in a grid. This limits their applicability in many real-world domains that have geometric
agents in lieu of point agents. Geometric agents are referred
to as “large” agents because they can occupy multiple points
at the same time. In this paper, we formalize and study LAMAPF, i.e., MAPF for large agents. We first show how CBS
can be adapted to solve LA-MAPF. We then present a generalized version of CBS, called Multi-Constraint CBS (MCCBS), that adds multiple constraints (instead of one constraint) for an agent when it generates a high-level search
node. We introduce three different approaches to choose
such constraints as well as an approach to compute admissible heuristics for the high-level search. Experimental results show that all MC-CBS variants outperform CBS by up
to three orders of magnitude in terms of runtime. The best
variant also outperforms EPEA* (a state-of-the-art A*-based
MAPF solver) in all cases and MDD-SAT (a state-of-the-art
reduction-based MAPF solver) in some cases.

1

Ariel Felner
SISE Department
Ben-Gurion University
felner@bgu.ac.il

Introduction

In robotics and computer games, one has to find collisionfree paths for multiple agents operating in a common environment. This has led to the study of Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) in the AI community, where we are required to
find a path for each agent from its given start vertex to its
given goal vertex on a given graph such that no two agents
collide with each other at any given time. MAPF can be applied to warehouse robots (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz
∗
The research at the University of Southern California was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grant numbers 1409987, 1724392, 1817189 and 1837779 as well as a gift
from Amazon. The research was also supported by the United
States-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) under grant
number 2017692 and the Czech Science Foundation (GACR) under
grant number 19-17966S. The views and conclusions contained in
this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of
the sponsoring organizations, agencies or the U.S. government.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7627

