The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Testing of Uniform Samplers∗†
Sourav Chakraborty

Kuldeep S. Meel

Indian Statistical Institute
Kolkata

School of Computing
National University of Singapore

1

Abstract

Introduction

Recent years have seen an unprecedented adoption of artificial intelligence (AI) in a wide variety of applications ranging from medical diagnosis, automobile industry, security to
aircraft collision avoidance. Such an unprecedented proliferation owes to the ability of modern AI-based systems to
almost match human or surpass human abilities for several
complex tasks. Probabilistic reasoning is a key component
of such modern artificial intelligence systems. The usage of
AI-based systems in domains where the decisions can have
significant consequential effects on our lives has highlighted
the need for verification and testing of AI systems (Seshia,
Sadigh, and Sastry 2016). The modern AI systems significantly differ from traditional systems in their ability to learn
and usage of probabilistic reasoning. In traditional verification, a trace of execution of a program is sufficient to prove
existence of a bug. Such is not the case for AI systems whose
behavior is inherently probabilistic. This has led to the call
of development of randomized formal methods for synthesis, verification, and testing of AI systems. In this paper, we
focus on a core component employed in the construction of
modern AI systems: sampling from a discrete distribution
specified by a probabilistic model.
The sampling techniques based on Monte Carlo Markov
Chain (MCMC) techniques are employed to sample from the
posterior distribution represented by the probabilistic model
under consideration (Jerrum and Sinclair 1996). The correctness of such sampling methods requires that the underlying Markov Chain mixes properly (Jerrum and Sinclair
1996). Since mixing times of the underlying Markov Chains
are often exponential, several heuristics have been proposed
over the years. While the heuristics would not provide theoretical guarantees of mixing in polynomial time, such techniques tend to behave well in practice. On the other end
of the spectrum of lie a wide spectrum of approaches such
as variational inference (Jordan et al. 1999), rejection sampling (Gilks and Wild 1992), importance sampling (Neal
2001), hashing-based techniques (Chakraborty, Meel, and
Vardi 2013; Ermon et al. 2013b; Chakraborty et al. 2015a),
and the like.
Given the computational intractability of sampling (Koller and Friedman 2009), the implementation
of different paradigms often resort to the usage of heuristics (Koller and Friedman 2009). The widespread usage of

Recent years have seen an unprecedented adoption of artificial intelligence in a wide variety of applications ranging
from medical diagnosis, automobile industry, security to aircraft collision avoidance. Probabilistic reasoning is a key
component of such modern artificial intelligence systems.
Sampling techniques form the core of the state of the art probabilistic reasoning systems.
The divide between the existence of sampling techniques that
have strong theoretical guarantees but fail to scale and scalable techniques with weak or no theoretical guarantees mirrors the gap in software engineering between poor scalability
of classical program synthesis techniques and billions of programs that are routinely used by practitioners. One bridge
connecting the two extremes in the context of software engineering has been program testing. In contrast to testing for
deterministic programs, where one trace is sufficient to prove
the existence of a bug, in case of samplers one sample is typically not sufficient to prove non-conformity of the sampler
to the desired distribution. This makes one wonder whether
it is possible to design testing methodology to test whether a
sampler under test generates samples close to a given distribution.
The primary contribution of this paper is an affirmative
answer to the above question when the given distribution
is a uniform distribution: We design, to the best of our
knowledge, the first algorithmic framework, Barbarik, to test
whether the distribution generated is ε−close or η−far from
the uniform distribution. In contrast to the sampling techniques that require an exponential or sub-exponential number
of samples for sampler whose support can be represented by
n bits, Barbarik requires only O(1/(η − ε)4 ) samples. We
present a prototype implementation of Barbarik and use it to
test three state of the art uniform samplers over the support
defined by combinatorial constraints. Barbarik can provide a
certificate of uniformity to one sampler and demonstrate nonuniformity for the other two samplers.

∗

The author list has been sorted alphabetically by last name;
this should not be used to determine the extent of authors’ contributions.
†
An extended version of the paper along with open source tool
is available at https://github.com/meelgroup/barbarik
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7777

