The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Counting and Sampling from Markov Equivalent DAGs Using Clique Trees
AmirEmad Ghassami,1 Saber Salehkaleybar,2 Negar Kiyavash,3 Kun Zhang4
1

Department of ECE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
Electrical Engineering Department, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
3
Departments of ECE and ISE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
4
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
1
ghassam2@illinois.edu, 2 saleh@sharif.edu, 3 kiyavash@illinois.edu, 4 kunz1@cmu.edu
2

Abstract

ability distribution (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000;
Pearl 2009). However, a DAG representation of a set of conditional independencies in most cases is not unique. This
restricts the learning of the structure to the Markov equivalences of the underlying DAG. The set of Markov equivalent
DAGs is referred to as a Markov equivalence class (MEC).
A MEC is commonly represented by a mixed graph called
essential graph, which can contain both directed and undirected edges (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000).
In general, there is no preference amongst the elements of
MEC, as they all represent the same set of conditional independencies. Therefore, for a given dataset (or a joint probability distribution), the size of the MEC, i.e., the number
of its elements, can be seen as a metric for the causal complexity of the underlying structure–this complexity indicates
how many interventional experiments or how much additional information (e.g., knowledge about the causal mechanisms) is needed to further fully learn the DAG structure,
which was only partially recovered from mere observation.
For the general problem of enumerating MECs, Steinsky
proposed recursive enumeration formulas for the number
of labelled essential graphs, in which the enumeration parameters are the number of vertices, chain components, and
cliques (Steinsky 2013). This approach is not focused on a
certain given MEC. For the problem of finding the size of
a given MEC, an existing solution is to use Markov chain
methods (He et al. 2013; Bernstein and Tetali 2017). According to this method, a Markov chain is constructed over
the elements of the MEC whose properties ensure that the
stationary distribution is uniform over all the elements. The
rate of convergence and computational issues hinders practical application of Markov chain methods. Recently, an exact
solution for finding the size of a given MEC was proposed
(He, Jia, and Yu 2015), in which the main idea was noting
that subclasses of the MEC with a fixed unique root variable
partition the class. The authors show that there are five types
of MECs whose sizes can be calculated with five formulas,
and for any other MEC, it can be partitioned recursively into
smaller subclasses until the sizes of all subclasses can be
calculated from the five formulas. An accelerated version of
the method in (He, Jia, and Yu 2015) is proposed in (He and
Yu 2016), which is based on the concept of core graphs.
In this paper, we propose a new counting approach, in
which the counting is performed on the clique tree represen-

A directed acyclic graph (DAG) is the most common graphical model for representing causal relationships among a set of
variables. When restricted to using only observational data,
the structure of the ground truth DAG is identifiable only
up to Markov equivalence, based on conditional independence relations among the variables. Therefore, the number
of DAGs equivalent to the ground truth DAG is an indicator
of the causal complexity of the underlying structure–roughly
speaking, it shows how many interventions or how much additional information is further needed to recover the underlying DAG. In this paper, we propose a new technique for
counting the number of DAGs in a Markov equivalence class.
Our approach is based on the clique tree representation of
chordal graphs. We show that in the case of bounded degree
graphs, the proposed algorithm is polynomial time. We further demonstrate that this technique can be utilized for uniform sampling from a Markov equivalence class, which provides a stochastic way to enumerate DAGs in the equivalence
class and may be needed for finding the best DAG or for
causal inference given the equivalence class as input. We also
extend our counting and sampling method to the case where
prior knowledge about the underlying DAG is available, and
present applications of this extension in causal experiment
design and estimating the causal effect of joint interventions.

1

Introduction

A directed acyclic graph (DAG) is a commonly used graphical model to represent causal relationships among a set of
variables (Pearl 2009). In a DAG representation, a directed
edge X → Y indicates that variable X is a direct cause of
variable Y relative to the considered variable set. Such a representation has numerous applications in fields ranging from
biology (Sachs et al. 2005) and genetics (Zhang et al. 2013)
to machine learning (Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017;
Koller and Friedman 2009).
The general approach to learning a causal structure is
to use statistical data from variables to find a DAG, which
is maximally consistent with the conditional independencies estimated from data. This is due to the fact that under
Markov property and faithfulness assumption, d-separation
of variables in a DAG is equivalent to conditional independencies of the variables in the underlying joint probCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3664

