The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CheXpert: A Large Chest Radiograph Dataset
with Uncertainty Labels and Expert Comparison
Jeremy Irvin,1,* Pranav Rajpurkar,1,* Michael Ko,1 Yifan Yu,1
Silviana Ciurea-Ilcus,1 Chris Chute,1 Henrik Marklund,1 Behzad Haghgoo,1
Robyn Ball,2 Katie Shpanskaya,3 Jayne Seekins,3 David A. Mong,3
Safwan S. Halabi,3 Jesse K. Sandberg,3 Ricky Jones,3 David B. Larson,3
Curtis P. Langlotz,3 Bhavik N. Patel,3 Matthew P. Lungren,3,† Andrew Y. Ng1,†
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2
Department of Medicine, Stanford University
3
Department of Radiology, Stanford University
*
Equal contribution
†
Equal contribution
{jirvin16, pranavsr}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Large, labeled datasets have driven deep learning methods
to achieve expert-level performance on a variety of medical
imaging tasks. We present CheXpert, a large dataset that contains 224,316 chest radiographs of 65,240 patients. We design a labeler to automatically detect the presence of 14 observations in radiology reports, capturing uncertainties inherent in radiograph interpretation. We investigate different approaches to using the uncertainty labels for training convolutional neural networks that output the probability of these observations given the available frontal and lateral radiographs.
On a validation set of 200 chest radiographic studies which
were manually annotated by 3 board-certified radiologists, we
find that different uncertainty approaches are useful for different pathologies. We then evaluate our best model on a test set
composed of 500 chest radiographic studies annotated by a
consensus of 5 board-certified radiologists, and compare the
performance of our model to that of 3 additional radiologists
in the detection of 5 selected pathologies. On Cardiomegaly,
Edema, and Pleural Effusion, the model ROC and PR curves
lie above all 3 radiologist operating points. We release the
dataset to the public as a standard benchmark to evaluate performance of chest radiograph interpretation models.1

Model
0.03
0.11
0.11

No Finding

Edema
0.03

0.05

Pleural Effusion

0.27

Fracture

Lung Opacity
0.00

Cardiomegaly

Pleural Other

Support Devices
0.05

0.01

Enlarged Cardiom.

Pneumothorax

0.49

0.05

Atelectasis

Consolidation
Pneumonia

0.06

Lesion
0.10

0.04

Figure 1: The CheXpert task is to predict the probability of
different observations from multi-view chest radiographs.

Introduction
Chest radiography is the most common imaging examination globally, critical for screening, diagnosis, and management of many life threatening diseases. Automated chest radiograph interpretation at the level of practicing radiologists
could provide substantial benefit in many medical settings,
from improved workflow prioritization and clinical decision
support to large-scale screening and global population health
initiatives. For progress, there is a need for labeled datasets
that (1) are large, (2) have strong reference standards, and (3)
provide expert human performance metrics for comparison.

In this work, we present CheXpert (Chest eXpert), a large
dataset for chest radiograph interpretation. The dataset consists of 224,316 chest radiographs of 65,240 patients labeled
for the presence of 14 common chest radiographic observations. We design a labeler that can extract observations from
free-text radiology reports and capture uncertainties present
in the reports by using an uncertainty label.
The CheXpert task is to predict the probability of 14 different observations from multi-view chest radiographs (see
Figure 1). We pay particular attention to uncertainty labels
in the dataset, and investigate different approaches towards

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://stanfordmlgroup.github.io/competitions/chexpert

590

