The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Sequence-to-Sequence Reinforcement Learning
for Constraint Solving with Constraint-Based Local Search
Helge Spieker
Simula Research Laboratory
P.O. Box 134
1325 Lysaker, Norway
helge@simula.no
Abstract

individual solution strategies and to decide which parts of
the search space to explore, instead of adapting to the strategy behind the solution labels, as in supervised learning.
In constraint modeling, a domain expert explicitly models
a problem in terms of constraints, variables, their domains,
and, in case of optimization, an objective function. Such a
constraint model can be described as a function, that takes a
set of instance parameters as an input, and, with the help of a
constraint solver, solves the instance for which then the solution is returned as a set of output variables, i.e. the assigned
variables. Following this definition of a constraint problem,
the process of constraint solving is framed as a structured
sequence-to-sequence (S2S) problem with bandit feedback,
that is, a reward is only received after the full solution to the
problem instance is predicted.

This paper proposes a framework for solving constraint problems with reinforcement learning (RL) and sequence-tosequence recurrent neural networks. We approach constraint
solving as a declarative machine learning problem, where for
a variable-length input sequence a variable-length output sequence has to be predicted. Using randomly generated instances and the number of constraint violations as a reward
function, a problem-specific RL agent is trained to solve the
problem. The predicted solution candidate of the RL agent is
verified and repaired by CBLS to ensure solutions, that satisfy the constraint model. We introduce the framework and its
components and discuss early results and future applications.

Introduction
We approach constraint solving with reinforcement learning (RL) and sequence-to-sequence neural networks. The
goal of this approach is to build problem-specific machine
learning models, that are able to support solving problems
as they occur in constraint programming (CP). Dedicated
constraint solvers are highly optimized, still, searching for
good or even optimal solutions often is time-consuming due
to large search spaces that have to be traversed. Here, an argument for machine learning are the shorter inference times
compared to the solving times of constraint solvers.
Data-driven constraint solving is difficult to approach by
supervised learning for two main reasons. First, it is computationally expensive to generate a sufficiently large training
corpus for constraint problems, as it requires to solve each
problem instance to generate the optimal labels. Second, supervised training potentially leads the model to closely imitate the solutions found by the solver used to build the training set (Bello et al. 2017). Especially if an instance has multiple optima, training only on one solution limits generalization to an individual problem-solving strategy.
These limitations are overcome by RL, where only a
scalar reward is necessary as feedback for training. Computing this reward, which formed by the number of constraint
violations and the objective value of the solution candidate,
is easier to compute than an optimal or high-quality solution.
Learning from rewards additionally allows the agent to find

Method
It might not be practical to deploy only a RL-trained model,
as it is undesirable to receive unfeasible solutions for practical use cases, and feasibility of the solution can not be guaranteed. However, we propose to combine the RL agent with
a constraint-based local search (CBLS) solver (Hentenryck
and Michel 2009). In that way, every predicted solution can
be checked for feasibility and, if necessary, be repaired via
local search techniques while obeying the constraints of the
problem. In case of an unsatisfiable instance, this is detected
by the CBLS component, too. Also, it would be possible to
give the solver additional time to find an improved solution
starting from the predicted solution.
This hybrid framework (as shown in Figure 1) combines
the advantages of RL-based constraint solving while guaranteeing feasible solutions through the CBLS solver, which
can allow to handle larger problem instances and reduce total solving time than each technique alone. In this paper, we
describe the design of the RL agent within the framework.
Model The COP to be solved by the agent is described
as a S2S problem with variable lengths inputs and outputs.
Each individual problem instance is described by instance
parameters, which form the input to the agent. The solution
is again a sequence, containing the assigned values for each
variable. Our method is based on advantage actor-critic RL
(A2C) (Mnih et al. 2016) for S2S. The architecture and algorithm have been previously introduced for machine translation with human feedback (Nguyen, Daumé III, and Boyd-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10037

