The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

The Pure Price of Anarchy of Pool Block Withholding Attacks in Bitcoin Mining
Colleen Alkalay-Houlihan, Nisarg Shah
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{colleen,nisarg}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

newly generated Bitcoins (fixed reward), as well as fees for
the transactions included in the block. In our work, we only
consider the fixed Bitcoin rewards or, equivalently, assume
that transaction fees per block are fixed. The process of generating new blocks is called mining and participants in this
process are called miners.
The difficulty of mining is dynamically adjusted so that a
new block is mined every ten minutes in expectation. Due to
the vast amounts of computational resources currently being
expended on Bitcoin mining, an individual miner has a very
small probability of being the first one to generate a block,
and thus may need to wait many months or years before
receiving a positive reward. Although the expected reward
from mining is still positive, the variance from mining individually is unacceptably high. As a result, miners form mining pools. Each member of a mining pool looks for proofs
of work on behalf of the pool, and the Bitcoins awarded for
a block mined by any member of the mining pool are shared
amongst all members of the pool.
In a decentralized system such as Bitcoin, it is not possible
for pool managers to know the true computational power of a
miner, so miners send pool managers partial solutions, called
shares, to allow the pool managers to estimate their computational power. The generally accepted principle is that miners’ reward should be somewhat in proportion to their true
computational power expended, though there are many different mining pool reward structures; see Rosenfeld (2011)
for a thorough review. It is not possible for an invidividual
miner in the pool to steal a solution and claim it for himself, since the input for any solution includes the destination
wallet for the Bitcoin rewards for that block. Changing the
destination for the rewards would cause the hash of the original input to no longer be a valid solution.
Some mining pools are open, i.e., they allow any miner
to join or leave the pool at will. Eyal (2015) demonstrated
that open mining pools may have an incentive to perform
pool block withholding attacks on each other. In this attack,
a pool uses some of its miners to infiltrate the other pools.
These miners perform work in the other pools, and release
shares in order to obtain a portion of the rewards generated
by these other pools, but never release a full solution. While
a pool sacrifices some of its computational power in the attack, Eyal showed that the rewards obtained from the other
pools can potentially compensate for the loss and increase

Bitcoin, a cryptocurrency built on the blockchain data structure, has generated significant academic and commercial interest. Contrary to prior expectations, recent research has
shown that participants of the protocol (the so-called “miners”) are not always incentivized to follow the protocol. We
study the game induced by one such attack – the pool block
withholding attack – in which mining pools (groups of miners) attack other mining pools. We focus on the case of
two pools attacking each other, with potentially other mining
power in the system.
We show that this game always admits a pure Nash equilibrium, and its pure price of anarchy, which intuitively measures how much computational power can be wasted due to
attacks in an equilibrium, is at most 3. We conjecture, and
prove in special cases, that it is in fact at most 2. Our simulations provide compelling evidence for this conjecture, and
show that players can quickly converge to the equilibrium by
following best response strategies.

1

Introduction

There has been significant interest in Bitcoin ever since it
was first proposed by the pseudonymous Satoshi Nakamoto
in 2008 (Nakamoto 2008). In recent years, popular fascination with Bitcoin has increased in tandem with its price.
Bitcoin was originally proposed as a decentralized cryptocurrency that at last presented a compelling solution to the
double-spending problem. Bitcoin is built on a data structure
called the blockchain, which is a global distributed ledger
that stores relevant information on all historical transactions
in the system. Blocks that are sufficiently far back from the
leading edge of the blockchain are considered immutable.
Anyone can join or leave the Bitcoin system at any time,
so Bitcoin is secured against attacks on the ledger through
a proof of work system. Significant computational resources
must be expended in order for a new block to be generated,
through randomly guessing at nonces that, combined with
other fixed and time-stamped input, result in a hashed output that satisfies certain criteria. Since there are electricity
and hardware costs associated with generating these proofs
of work (solutions), participants who generate a successful solution are rewarded with a predetermined number of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1724

