The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Where to Go Next: A Spatio-Temporal
Gated Network for Next POI Recommendation
∗

∗

Pengpeng Zhao,1 Haifeng Zhu,1 Yanchi Liu,2 Jiajie Xu,1 Zhixu Li,1
+
Fuzhen Zhuang,3 Victor S. Sheng,4 Xiaofang Zhou5
1
2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
Rutgers University, USA 3 Key Lab of IIP of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), ICT, CAS, Beijing, China
4
University of Central Arkansas, USA 5 The University of Queensland, Australia
ppzhao@suda.edu.cn, hfzhu@stu.suda.edu.cn, yanchi.liu@rutgers.edu, {zhixuli, xujj}@suda.edu.cn,
zhuangfuzhen@ict.ac.cn, ssheng@uca.edu, zxf@itee.uq.edu.au

Abstract
wi

w1 w2 w3 w4

Next Point-of-Interest (POI) recommendation is of great
value for both location-based service providers and users.
However, the state-of-the-art Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) rarely consider the spatio-temporal intervals between
neighbor check-ins, which are essential for modeling user
check-in behaviors in next POI recommendation. To this end,
in this paper, we propose a new Spatio-Temporal Gated Network (STGN) by enhancing long-short term memory network, where spatio-temporal gates are introduced to capture
the spatio-temporal relationships between successive checkins. Specifically, two pairs of time gate and distance gate
are designed to control the short-term interest and the longterm interest updates, respectively. Moreover, we introduce
coupled input and forget gates to reduce the number of parameters and further improve efficiency. Finally, we evaluate
the proposed model using four real-world datasets from various location-based social networks. The experimental results
show that our model significantly outperforms the state-ofthe-art approaches for next POI recommendation.

pi

(a) Language Modeling

p2

p4

p1 p2

p3

p4

(b) Next Basket RS

pi

p1

p3

(c) Next POI RS

Figure 1: wi in (a) represents the i-th word. In (b), pi represents the i-th item and 4t is time interval between two
neighbor items. In (c), 4d further represents distance interval between two successive check-ins.
In the literature, approaches like latent factor model and
Markov chain have been widely applied for sequential data
analysis and recommendation. Rendle et al.(2010) proposed
Factorizing Personalized Markov Chain (FPMC), which
bridges matrix factorization and Markov chains together,
for next-basket recommendation. Cheng et al.(2013) extended FPMC to embed personalized Markov chain and user
movement constraint for next POI recommendation. He et
al.(2016) proposed a unified tensor-based latent model to
capture the successive check-in behavior by exploring the latent pattern-level preference for each user. Recently, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been successfully employed to model sequential data and become state-of-the-art
methods. Hidasi et al.(2015) focused on RNN solutions for
session-based recommendation task, where no user id exists,
and recommendations are made on short session data. Zhu
et al.(2017) proposed a variant of Long-Short Term Memory
network (LSTM), called Time-LSTM, to equip LSTM with
time gates to model time intervals for next item recommendation.
However, none of the above recommendation methods
considers both time intervals and geographical distances between neighbor items, which makes next POI recommenda-

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid growth of locationbased social network services, such as Foursquare, Facebook Places, Yelp and so on. These services have attracted
many users to share their locations and experiences with
massive amounts of geo-tagged data accumulated, e.g., 55
million users generated more than 10 billion check-ins on
Foursquare until December 2017. These online footprints
(or check-ins) provide an excellent opportunity to understand users’ mobile behaviors. For example, we can analyze
and predict where a user will go next based on historical
footprints. Moreover, such analysis can benefit POI holders
to predict the customer arrival in the next time period.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Corresponding author
+
Fuzhen Zhuang is also with University of CAS, Beijing,
China

5877

