The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Validation of Growing Knowledge Graphs by Abductive Text Evidences
Jianfeng Du,† Jeff Z. Pan,‡ Sylvia Wang,‡ Kunxun Qi,† Yuming Shen,‡ Yu Deng§
†

‡

Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou 510420, P.R.China
Department of Computing Science, The University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 3UE, UK
§
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
jfdu@gdufs.edu.cn, jeff.z.pan@abdn.ac.uk, sylviawangfr@hotmail.com,
kunxunqi@foxmail.com, ymshen2002@163.com, dengy@us.ibm.com
Abstract

One is the logic-based category. Given a logical theory
formalizing the schema of the knowledge graph, a new triple
can be naturally explained by a set of triples that are already in the knowledge graph under the logical theory. But
the coverage of this mechanism is limited. To explain more
triples, we can employ logic-based abduction (Eiter and Gottlob 1995), i.e. explain a new triple by a set of triples that are
possibly not in the knowledge graph. However, in this mechanism we need to prove the existence of the absent triples.
For example, given a logical theory made up of a single rule
∀x, y, z : Father(x, y) ∧ Father(y, z) → Grandfather(x, z),
the new triple hTom, Grandfather, Timi can be explained by
{hTom, Father, ei, he, Father, Timi} for some entity e under the logical theory. But to get a complete proof, we need
to explain why hTom, Father, ei and he, Father, Timi exist.
It shows that logic-based abduction improves the coverage
for new triples but may require extra validations.
The other category of explanations, called text evidences,
are text-based. A text evidence for a triple hh, r, ti is a sentence window composed by several consecutive sentences
that explain why h and t have the directed relation r. However, this explanation mechanism is only applied to new
triples explainable by consecutive sentences. Consider the
aforementioned example. If there is no sentence window
mentioning both Tom and Tim, hTom, Grandfather, Timi
cannot be explained. It shows that purely text-based explanations have a rather low coverage for new triples.
We consider combining the above two categories to resolve limitations therein. There are two research problems
about this combination — one on the way to combine logical information and text information, and the other on the
way to present the explanations.
For the first problem, we propose a new category of
explanations, called abductive text evidences, to combine
logical information and text information. Given a logical
theory, a knowledge graph and a text corpus, an abductive text evidence for a new triple τ is a set of pairs
{(τi , wi )}1≤i≤n for τi a triple and wi a sentence window
in the text corpus, such that appending {τi }1≤i≤n to the
knowledge graph makes τ entailed under the logical theory, while wi explains to some degree the existence of τi
for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. The set {τi }1≤i≤n is actually an abductive explanation for τ under the logical theory in logicbased abduction (Eiter and Gottlob 1995). The usage of ab-

This paper proposes a validation mechanism for newly added
triples in a growing knowledge graph. Given a logical theory, a knowledge graph, a text corpus, and a new triple to
be validated, this mechanism computes a sorted list of explanations for the new triple to facilitate the validation of it,
where an explanation, called an abductive text evidence, is
a set of pairs of the form (triple, window) where appending
the set of triples on the left to the knowledge graph enforces
entailment of the new triple under the logical theory, while
every sentence window on the right which is contained in the
text corpus explains to some degree why the triple on the left
is true. From the angle of practice, a special class of abductive text evidences called TEP-based abductive text evidence
is proposed, which is constructed from explanation patterns
seen before in the knowledge graph. Accordingly, a method
for computing the complete set of TEP-based abductive text
evidences is proposed. Moreover, a method for sorting abductive text evidences based on distantly supervised learning
is proposed. To evaluate the proposed validation mechanism,
four knowledge graphs with logical theories are constructed
from the four great classical masterpieces of Chinese literature. Experimental results on these datasets demonstrate the
efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed mechanism.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs have been widely used in many applications recently. A knowledge graph is a directed graph with
vertices labeled by entities and edges labeled by relations. It
can be treated as a set of triples of the form hh, r, ti, where
h is the head entity (simply head), r the relation and t the
tail entity (simply tail). In order to widen the applicability, knowledge graphs need to grow with the increasing data
nowadays. There exist some common approaches to enlarging knowledge graphs such as knowledge graph completion.
Knowledge graph completion aims to enlarge a knowledge
graph with those new triples that are predicted by a learnt
model and pass the manual validation. However, manual validation of triples is laborious and error prone. Thus it calls
for automatic methods for explaining the existence of new
triples to assist the validation of new triples.
There are two categories of traditional explanations that
can be used to prove the existence of new triples.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2784

