The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
via Minimax Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
Shihui Li,† Yi Wu,‡ Xinyue Cui,§ Honghua Dong,§ Fei Fang,† Stuart Russell‡
†

‡

Carnegie Mellon University, {shihuil,feifang}@cmu.edu
University of California, Berkeley, {jxwuyi,russell}@eecs.berkeley.edu
§
Tsinghua University, {cuixy14,dhh14}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

ity issue: as training progresses, each agent’s policy is changing and therefore the environment becomes non-stationary
from the perspective of any individual agent (in a way that is
not explainable by changes in the agent’s own policy). This
non-stationary problem can cause significant problems when
directly applying the single agent DRL algorithms, for example, the variance of the policy gradient can be exponentially
large when the number of agents increases (Lowe et al. 2017).
To handle this instability issue, recent works, such as the
counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients (Foerster et al.
2017) and the Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (MADDPG) (Lowe et al. 2017), proposed to utilized a
centralized critic within the actor-critic learning framework
to reduce the variance of policy gradient.
Despite the fact that using a centralized critic stabilizes
training, the learned policies can still be brittle and sensitive to its training partners and converge to a poor local
mode. This is particularly severe for competitive environments: when the opponents alter their policies during testing,
the performance of the learned policies can be drastically
worse (Lazaridou, Peysakhovich, and Baroni 2016). Hence,
a robust policy becomes desirable in multi-agent setting: a
well-trained agent should be able behave well in testing when
competing against opponents even with strategies different
from its training partners.
In this work, we focus on robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning with continuous action spaces and propose a novel
algorithm, MiniMax Multi-agent Deep Deterministic Policy
Gradient (M3DDPG). M3DDPG is a minimax extension1 of
the MADDPG algorithm (Lowe et al. 2017). Its core idea is
that during training, we force each agent to behave well even
when its training opponents response in the worst way.
Our major contributions are summarized as follow:

Despite the recent advances of deep reinforcement learning
(DRL), agents trained by DRL tend to be brittle and sensitive
to the training environment, especially in the multi-agent scenarios. In the multi-agent setting, a DRL agent’s policy can
easily get stuck in a poor local optima w.r.t. its training partners – the learned policy may be only locally optimal to other
agents’ current policies. In this paper, we focus on the problem
of training robust DRL agents with continuous actions in the
multi-agent learning setting so that the trained agents can still
generalize when its opponents’ policies alter. To tackle this
problem, we proposed a new algorithm, MiniMax Multi-agent
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (M3DDPG) with the following contributions: (1) we introduce a minimax extension of
the popular multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm (MADDPG), for robust policy learning; (2) since the
continuous action space leads to computational intractability
in our minimax learning objective, we propose Multi-Agent Adversarial Learning (MAAL) to efficiently solve our proposed
formulation. We empirically evaluate our M3DDPG algorithm
in four mixed cooperative and competitive multi-agent environments and the agents trained by our method significantly
outperforms existing baselines.

1. Introduction
Most real-world problems involve interactions between multiple agents and the complexity of problem increases significantly when the agents co-evolve together. Thanks to
the recent advances of deep reinforcement learing (DRL)
on single agent scenarios, which led to successes in playing Atari game (Mnih et al. 2015), playing go (Silver
et al. 2016) and robotics control (Levine et al. 2016), it
has been a rising trend to adapt single agent DRL algorithms to multi-agent learning scenarios and many works
have shown great successes on a variety of problems, including automatic discovery of communication and language (Sukhbaatar, Fergus, and others 2016; Mordatch
and Abbeel 2017), multiplayer games (Peng et al. 2017a;
OpenAI 2018), traffic control (Wu et al. 2017) and the analysis of social dilemmas (Leibo et al. 2017).
The critical challenge when adapting classical single agent
DRL algorithms to multi-agent setting is the training instabil-

• We introduce the minimax approach to robust multi-agent
DRL and propose a novel minimax learning objective
based on the MADDPG algorithm;
• In order to efficiently optimize the minimax learning objective, we propose an end-to-end learning approach, Multiagent Adversarial Learning (MAAL), which is inspired by
1

In fact, we are dealing with gains, i.e., maximizing each agent’s
accumulative reward, so the “minimax” here is essentially “maximin”. We keep the term “minimax” to be consistent with literature.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4213

