The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A General Planning-Based
Framework for Goal-Driven Conversation Assistant
Zhuoxuan Jiang,1 Jie Ma,1 Jingyi Lu,2∗ Guangyuan Yu,3∗ Yipeng Yu,1 Shaochun Li1
1

IBM Research - China, Beijing, China
2
Cornell University, New York, USA
3
Rice University, Houston, USA
{jzxjiang, bjmajie, yuyyp, lishaoc}@cn.ibm.com, jl3663@cornell.com, guangyuan.yu@rice.edu
Restaurant
Agent

Abstract
We propose a general framework for goal-driven conversation assistant based on Planning methods. It aims to rapidly
build a dialogue agent with less handcrafting and make the
more interpretable and efficient dialogue management in various scenarios. By employing the Planning method, dialogue
actions can be efficiently defined and reusable, and the transition of the dialogue are managed by a Planner. The proposed framework consists of a pipeline of Natural Language
Understanding (intent labeler), Planning of Actions (with a
World Model), and Natural Language Generation (learned by
an attention-based neural network). We demonstrate our approach by creating conversational agents for several independent domains.

Conversational
Assistant

Interaction

NLU

NLG

AI Planning
& Learning

Planner

Model Learning
for Utterance
(online learning)

Actions

Dynamic
World Model

World Model
Analyzer

World Model

Historical Data

Figure 1: Architecture of the Framework

Introduction
With the popularity of intelligent assistants, today more and
more human affairs can be transferred to the assistants. For
example, in the tedious and simple task of restaurant reservation, the user gives the assistant with restaurant information,
preferred time slots and the number of persons, and then the
assistant could make calls to the restaurants and book a table through conversations. We regard this kind of assistants
which can help their users to complete missions with goals
as Conversational Assistant. In the example mentioned before, the time point and number of persons are the goals.
Traditionally, each turn of a task-oriented dialogue system
is built as a pipeline which receives an utterance as input
from users and then outputs a response (Peng et al. 2017).
The pipeline usually includes: Natural Language Understanding (NLU), Dialogue State Tracking, Dialogue Policy
Selection, and Natural Language Generation (NLG) (Zhao
and Eskenazi 2016). In practice, it is difficult to integrate
the goals with the state tracking and policy selection components without thorough handcrafting, especially in a general framework. Because the goals are important information
for specific task to influence the key dialogue management.
On the other hand, studies of end-to-end methods are rising
recently (Wen et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017). Although these
methods need little slot filling for handcrafting, the certainty

and interpretability of deep neural network are still questioned in practical applications (Chen et al. 2017).
In this paper, we propose a general framework for building the goal-driven conversational assistants which support
various domains. Considering that the AI planning method
is suitable to general goal-based tasks (Ghallab, Nau, and
Traverso 2016), and the method can be clearly explained
for each dialogue action, we integrate the AI planning
with NLU and NLG components to constitute the whole
planning-based framework for conversation. Noted that the
world model required by the planning method is unavoidably task-specific and we show a general methodology that
can rapidly build the model. We demonstrate the proposed
framework in two different domains: restaurant reservation
and financial products sales.

System Overview
As depicted in Figure 1, the proposed framework includes
several core modules such as NLU (intent labeler), AI Planning, World Model and generative model learning for NLG.

Natural Language Understanding
In order to understand the opposite utterance, we should define several intents for a specific task. To facilitate this process, IBM Watson AI cloud platform 1 is leveraged. Only

∗

This work was done when Jingyi Lu and Guangyuan Yu were
interns at IBM Research - China.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9857

https://www.ibm.com/watson/ai-assistant/

