The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Challenges in the Automatic Analysis of Students’ Diagnostic Reasoning
Claudia Schulz,* Christian M. Meyer, Iryna Gurevych
Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing (UKP) Lab
Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany
http://famulus-project.de

Abstract

Fischer et al. (2014) suggest to capture and analyse diagnostic – and more generally scientific – reasoning in terms
of eight epistemic activities: problem identification, questioning, hypothesis generation (HG), construction and redesign
of artefacts, evidence generation (EG), evidence evaluation
(EE), drawing conclusions (DC), and communicating and
scrutinising. While educational psychologists can manually
identify and analyse these activities to give feedback regarding students’ diagnostic reasoning, automatic methods for
epistemic activity analysis are required to scale this up.
We tackle this task by creating the first cross-domain corpus of epistemic activities in diagnostic reasoning.1 Our corpus consists of 1,200 anonymised German texts written by
medical students and pre-service teachers (henceforth called
“teacher students”) while diagnosing, respectively, the cause
of a patient’s symptoms and the reason underlying the signs
of motivational problems or learning difficulties of a pupil.
We annotated all texts with HG, EG, EE, and DC, the main
epistemic activities used in diagnostic reasoning texts (Lenzer
et al. 2017; Ghanem et al. 2016). Figure 1 shows an example
from the teaching domain: A student first generates evidence,
evaluates it, and draws an initial conclusion. This is followed
by the generation of a hypothesis about two potential developmental disorders, the evaluation of further evidence, and
the drawing of a final conclusion.
Our corpus and task formalization has three characteristics
that raise three major challenges for AI methods aiming to
automatically identify epistemic activities: (C1) Epistemic
activities are bound to neither token nor sentence level, but
may constitute arbitrary spans. (C2) The distinction of similar epistemic activities, such as hypothesis generation and
drawing conclusions, is highly challenging. (C3) Epistemic
activities may be nested or overlapping. We argue that a mere
overall performance measure is not adequate for complex
tasks such as epistemic activity identification and propose
three challenge-specific metrics, each measuring how well an
automatic identification method tackles this challenge. Our
evaluation of various state-of-the-art recurrent neural network
architectures reveals that current techniques are unable to adequately address these challenges (particularly C2 and C3),
which cannot be deduced from an overall performance score.

Diagnostic reasoning is a key component of many professions.
To improve students’ diagnostic reasoning skills, educational
psychologists analyse and give feedback on epistemic activities used by these students while diagnosing, in particular,
hypothesis generation, evidence generation, evidence evaluation, and drawing conclusions. However, this manual analysis
is highly time-consuming. We aim to enable the large-scale
adoption of diagnostic reasoning analysis and feedback by
automating the epistemic activity identification. We create the
first corpus for this task, comprising diagnostic reasoning selfexplanations of students from two domains annotated with
epistemic activities. Based on insights from the corpus creation and the task’s characteristics, we discuss three challenges
for the automatic identification of epistemic activities using AI
methods: the correct identification of epistemic activity spans,
the reliable distinction of similar epistemic activities, and the
detection of overlapping epistemic activities. We propose a
separate performance metric for each challenge and thus provide an evaluation framework for future research. Indeed, our
evaluation of various state-of-the-art recurrent neural network
architectures reveals that current techniques fail to address
some of these challenges.

1

Introduction

Diagnostic reasoning is a crucial skill in many professions:
Physicians determine a patient’s disease based on clinical
tests, teachers recognise behavioural disorders in children
based on observations, and engineers debug errors in machines or programs based on their analyses of log files or
sensor data. To become competent employees in these professions, students thus need to actively engage with their
own diagnostic reasoning behaviour to understand the importance, structure, and validity of their reasoning. However,
even if diagnostic reasoning skills are taught as part of the
curriculum, it is rarely possible for instructors to give extensive feedback regarding each student’s reasoning process.
Therefore, our vision is to automatically analyse and evaluate
students’ diagnostic reasoning by means of innovative educational AI applications, which facilitate teaching and fostering
diagnostic skills at large scale.
* New affiliation: Babylon Health, London, UK
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Code and data available at https://github.com/UKPLab/
aaai19-diagnostic-reasoning

6974

