The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MVPNet: Multi-View Point Regression Networks
for 3D Object Reconstruction from A Single Image
Jinglu Wang,† Bo Sun,‡∗ Yan Lu†
Microsoft Research, ‡ Peking University
{jinglwa, v-bosu, yanlu}@microsoft.com
†

Abstract

GT surface

In this paper, we address the problem of reconstructing an object’s surface from a single image using generative networks.
First, we represent a 3D surface with an aggregation of dense
point clouds from multiple views. Each point cloud is embedded in a regular 2D grid aligned on an image plane of a
viewpoint, making the point cloud convolution-favored and
ordered so as to fit into deep network architectures. The point
clouds can be easily triangulated by exploiting connectivities
of the 2D grids to form mesh-based surfaces. Second, we propose an encoder-decoder network that generates such kind
of multiple view-dependent point clouds from a single image by regressing their 3D coordinates and visibilities. We
also introduce a novel geometric loss that is able to interpret discrepancy over 3D surfaces as opposed to 2D projective planes, resorting to the surface discretization on the constructed meshes. We demonstrate that the multi-view point
regression network outperforms state-of-the-art methods with
a significant improvement on challenging datasets.

2D Projection

GT 1-VPC

GT MVPC

N Views
Triangulate

Lift to 3D
2D grid

3D mesh

(a) Multi-View Point Clouds (MVPC)

Geometric Loss

𝑥
𝑦
𝑧
𝑣

Input image

Predicted MVPC

View N

MVPNet

Lift to 3D

View 2

View 1

Predicted 1-VPC
Triangulate

(b) Multi-View Point Network (MVPNet)

Figure 1: (a) A surface is represented by MVPC. Each pixel
in a 1-VPC stores the backprojected surface point (x, y, z)
from this pixel and its visibility v. The stored 3D points are
triangulated according to the 2D grid on the image plane
and their normals are shown to indicate surface orientation.
(b) Given an RGB image, the MVPNet generates a set of
1-VPCs and their union forms the predicted MVPC. The geometric loss measures discrepancy between predicted and
groundtruth MVPC.

Introduction
3D object reconstruction from a single RGB image is an inherently ill-posed problem as many configurations of shape,
texture, lighting, and camera can give rise to the same observed image. Recently, the advanced deep learning models allow for the rethinking of this task as generating realistic samples from underlying distributions. Regular representations are favored by deep convolutional neural networks for dense data sampling, weight sharing, etc. Although meshes are the predominant representations for 3D
geometries, their irregular structures are not easy for encoding and decoding. Most extant deep nets (Choy et al. 2016;
Tulsiani et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2017;
Girdhar et al. 2016) employ 3D volumetric grids. However,
they suffer from high computational complexity for dense
sampling. A few recent methods (Fan, Su, and Guibas 2017;
Diamanti, Mitliagkas, and Guibas 2017) advocate the unordered point cloud representation. The unordered property
requires additional computation to establish a one-to-one
mapping for point pairs. It often yields sparse results because of costly mapping algorithms.

In order to depict dense and detailed surfaces, we introduce an efficient and expressive view-based representation inspired by recent studies on multi-view projections (Kalogerakis et al. 2017; Soltani et al. 2017; Shin,
Fowlkes, and Hoiem 2018). In particular, we propose to represent a surface by dense point clouds visible from multiple
viewpoints. The arrangement of viewpoints are configured
to cover most of the surface. The multi-view point clouds
(MVPC) are illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). Each point cloud is
stored in a 2D grid embedded in a viewpoint’s image plane.
A 1-view point cloud (1-VPC) looks like a depth map, but
each pixel stores the 3D coordinates and visibility information rather than the depth of the backprojected surface point
from this pixel. The backprojection transformation offers a

∗

The work was done when Bo Sun was an intern at MSR.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8949

