The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

N E VAE: A Deep Generative Model for Molecular Graphs
Bidisha Samanta∗

Abir De

Gourhari Jana

IIT Kharagpur
bidisha@iitkgp.ac.in

MPI-SWS
ade@mpi-sws.org

IIT Kharagpur
gour2015hari@iitkgp.ac.in

Pratim Kumar Chattaraj

Niloy Ganguly

Manuel Gomez Rodriguez

IIT Kharagpur
pkc@chem.iitkgp.ernet.in

IIT Kharagpur
niloy@cse.iitkgp.ac.in

MPI-SWS
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org

Abstract

consists of representing molecules using a domain specific
textual representation—SMILES strings—and then leveraging deep generative models for text generation for molecule
design. Unfortunately, SMILE strings do not capture the
structural similarity between molecules and, moreover, a
molecule can have multiple SMILES representations. As a
consequence, the generated molecules lack in terms of diversity and validity, as shown in Tables 1–2 and Figure 3.
The second strategy (Simonovsky and Komodakis 2018;
Jin, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2018) consists of representing
molecules using molecular graphs, rather than SMILES representations, and then developing deep generative models
for molecular graphs, in which atoms correspond to nodes
and bonds correspond to edges. However, current generative
models for molecular graphs share one or more of the following limitations, which preclude them from realizing all
their potential: (i) they can only generate (and be trained on)
molecules with the same number of atoms while, in practice,
molecules having similar properties often come with a different number of atoms and bonds; (ii) they are not invariant
to permutations of their node labels, however, graphs remain
isomorphic under permutation of their node labels; (iii) their
training procedure suffers from a quadratic complexity with
respect to the number of nodes in the graph, which make
it difficult to leverage a sizeable number of large molecules
during training; and, (iv) they generate molecular graphs by
combining a small set of molecular graphlets (or subgraphs).
The above shortcomings constrain the diversity of the generated molecules, as shown in Table 1 and Figure 3.

Deep generative models have been praised for their ability
to learn smooth latent representation of images, text, and audio, which can then be used to generate new, plausible data.
However, current generative models are unable to work with
molecular graphs due to their unique characteristics—their
underlying structure is not Euclidean or grid-like, they remain isomorphic under permutation of the nodes labels, and
they come with a different number of nodes and edges. In this
paper, we propose NeVAE, a novel variational autoencoder
for molecular graphs, whose encoder and decoder are specially designed to account for the above properties by means
of several technical innovations. In addition, by using masking, the decoder is able to guarantee a set of valid properties in the generated molecules. Experiments reveal that our
model can discover plausible, diverse and novel molecules
more effectively than several state of the art methods. Moreover, by utilizing Bayesian optimization over the continuous
latent representation of molecules our model finds, we can
also find molecules that maximize certain desirable properties more effectively than alternatives.

Introduction
Drug design aims to identify (new) molecules with a set of
specified properties, which in turn results in a therapeutic
benefit to a group of patients. However, drug design is still a
lengthy, expensive, difficult, and inefficient process with low
rate of new therapeutic discovery (Paul et al. 2010), in which
candidate molecules are produced through chemical synthesis or biological processes. In the context of computeraided drug design (Merz, Ringe, and Reynolds 2010), there
is a great interest in developing automated, machine learning techniques to discover sizeable numbers of plausible, diverse and novel candidate molecules in the vast (1023 −1060 )
and unstructured molecular space (Polishchuk, Madzhidov,
and Varnek 2013). In recent years, there has been a flurry of
work devoted to developing deep generative models for automatic molecule design (Dai et al. 2018; Kusner et al. 2017;
Gómez-Bombarelli et al. 2016; Simonovsky and Komodakis
2018; Jin, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2018), which has predominantly followed two strategies. The first strategy (Dai et al.
2018; Kusner et al. 2017; Gómez-Bombarelli et al. 2016)

In this paper, we develop NeVAE, a deep generative
model for molecular graphs based on variational autoencoders that overcomes the above shortcomings. To do so,
it relies on several technical innovations, which distinguish
us from previous work (Dai et al. 2018; Kusner et al. 2017;
Gómez-Bombarelli et al. 2016; Simonovsky and Komodakis
2018; Jin, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2018):
(i) Our probabilistic encoder learns to aggregate information (e.g., atom and bond features) from a different number of hops away from a given atom and then map this
aggregate information into a continuous latent space,
as in inductive graph representation learning (Hamilton,

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

∗

1110

This work was partially done during B. Samanta’s internship at MPI-SWS.

