The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Concept Induction for Description Logics
Md Kamruzzaman Sarker, Pascal Hitzler
Data Semantics (DaSe) Laboratory,
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering,
Wright State University
{sarker.3, pascal.hitzler}@wright.edu

often approximate, i.e., they will not satisfy O |= S(a) for
all a ∈ P , but for as many as possible, and will not satisfy
O 6|= S(b) for all b ∈ N , but for as many as possible.
Concept Induction is traditionally studied with methods derived from Inductive Logic Programming, and an
overview of corresponding results and systems can be found
in (Lehmann et al. 2014). The most mature and recent system for this type of Concept Induction we are aware of
is DL-Learner, as presented in (Bühmann, Lehmann, and
Westphal 2016) and based on the algorithms from (Lehmann
and Hitzler 2010; Lehmann et al. 2011). Concept Induction
has been employed for ontology engineering, in particular
in the context of ontology and knowledge graph refinement,
see e.g. (Lehmann and Bühmann 2010; Paulheim 2017) and
the use case descriptions in (Bühmann, Lehmann, and Westphal 2016). Another recent use case in the context of explaining deep learning systems was described in (Sarker et
al. 2017).
However, while DL-Learner is an excellent and very useful system, its algorithm – which comes with theoretical correctness results (Lehmann and Hitzler 2010) – has major
performance issues in some scenarios, such as the one described in (Sarker et al. 2017). In fact, it was the application
need for scalability exposed through our experiments in the
scenario from (Sarker et al. 2017) which primarily prompted
the investigations which we report herein. The key problem
is that in a single execution, the DL-Learner system will
make a significant number of external calls to a description
logic reasoner. While the latter have become rather efficient
in recent years, the accumulated time needed, in particular
if the input ontologies are large, can be prohibitive for the
use of the approach. For example, as we will report in the
evaluation section, for the scenario described in (Sarker et
al. 2017) a single run of DL-Learner can easily take over
two hours, while the scenario easily necessitates thousands
of such runs.
In this paper, we follow the idea that in some scenarios
such as the one mentioned, it may be prudent to give up
some completeness guarantees, and to instead focus on execution speed. In the approach which we describe herein, we
do in fact invoke a description logic reasoner only once for
each run of our algorithm. The reasoner computes a materialization of facts in term of class memberships of individuals
to atomic classes, and this materialization is used through-

Abstract
Concept Induction refers to the problem of creating complex
Description Logic class descriptions (i.e., TBox axioms) from
instance examples (i.e., ABox data). In this paper we look
particularly at the case where both a set of positive and a set of
negative instances are given, and complex class expressions
are sought under which the positive but not the negative examples fall. Concept induction has found applications in ontology engineering, but existing algorithms have fundamental performance issues in some scenarios, mainly because a
high number of invokations of an external Description Logic
reasoner is usually required. In this paper we present a new
algorithm for this problem which drastically reduces the number of reasoner invokations needed. While this comes at the
expense of a more limited traversal of the search space, we
show that our approach improves execution times by up to
several orders of magnitude, while output correctness, measured in the amount of correct coverage of the input instances,
remains reasonably high in many cases. Our approach thus
should provide a strong alternative to existing systems, in particular in settings where other systems are prohibitively slow.

Introduction
With the rise of the Web Ontology Language OWL (Hitzler et al. 11 December 2012), description logics have become the leading paradigm for the representation of ontologies (Hitzler, Krötzsch, and Rudolph 2010). The knowledge
acquisition bottleneck, in the form of acquisition of description logic knowledge bases, thus becomes an issue also for
the field of ontology engineering and applications. Ontology
Learning is a term often used for this in the Semantic Web
context, and a relatively recent overview of the many facets
of this subfield can be found in (Lehmann and Völker 2014).
In this paper, we study one of the subproblems of ontology learning, commonly known as Concept Induction or
Concept Learning. Generally speaking, this problem can be
described as one of generating complex description logic
class expressions S from a given description logic knowledge base (or ontology) O and sets P and N of instances,
understood as positive and negative examples, such that
O |= S(a) for all a ∈ P , and O 6|= S(b) for all b ∈ N . In a
practical ontology engineering process, solutions sought are
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3036

