The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SEGAN: Structure-Enhanced Generative Adversarial Network for
Compressed Sensing MRI Reconstruction
Zhongnian Li, Tao Zhang, Peng Wan, Daoqiang Zhang∗
College of Computer Science and Technology,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
{zhongnianli,dqzhang}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are powerful tools
for reconstructing Compressed Sensing Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (CS-MRI). However most recent works lack exploration of structure information of MRI images that is crucial for clinical diagnosis. To tackle this problem, we propose
the Structure-Enhanced GAN (SEGAN) that aims at restoring
structure information at both local and global scale. SEGAN
defines a new structure regularization called Patch Correlation Regularization (PCR) which allows for efficient extraction of structure information. In addition, to further enhance
the ability to uncover structure information, we propose a
novel generator SU-Net by incorporating multiple-scale convolution filters into each layer. Besides, we theoretically analyze the convergence of stochastic factors contained in training process. Experimental results show that SEGAN is able
to learn target structure information and achieves state-of-theart performance for CS-MRI reconstruction.

(a)

reconstructing task is essentially under-determined and priori knowledge is absolutely necessary to obtain a unique solution. Among those priori knowledges, sparsity is the most
effective and widely applied characteristic (Goldstein and
Osher 2009; Lai et al. 2016) and the performance of reconstruction is guaranteed in theory (Candès and Wakin 2008).
Although sparsity assumption achieves many successes in
various applications, the hypothesis still has a great deal of
limitations (e.g., structure sparse, etc.) (Jia, Lu, and Yang
2012). To address the problems resulting from the sparsity assumption, deep learning based models are introduced
for CS-MRI reconstruction which only requires pairwise
under-sampled images and the corresponding full-sampled
ones (Shen, Wu, and Suk 2017; Schlemper et al. 2017;
Hammernik et al. 2017). Generally, the objective function of
traditional deep network based model is composed of Minimal Squared Error (MSE) and certain kinds of regularizations. For Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) based
models, cost function is built on the divergence between the
distribution of generated images and that of real ones(Goodfellow et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2017a; Quan, Nguyenduc, and
Jeong 2018).
Howerver, both kinds of loss functions can not explicitly quantify structure correlation. Note that, for MRI reconstruction task, structure information consists in corre-

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a promising technique for disease diagnosis. The biggest advantage of MRI
is no risk of radiation that is inevitable in other medical
imaging techniques, such as Computed Tomography (CT).
However, for patients, lengthy scan process still causes
discomfort unavoidably (Hollingsworth 2015). To shorten
MRI acquisition time, Compressed Sensing (CS) (Candès,
Romberg, and Tao 2006; Candès and Wakin 2008) has
been applied to MRI sampling and reconstruction (Lustig,
Donoho, and Pauly 2007). With the assumption of signals
sparsity, CS reconstructs MRI images from under-sampled
signals. The relationship between under-sampled MRI and
full-sampled MRI can be linearly formulated as follows,
y = Ax + ξ

(c)

Figure 1: Comparision of MRI images with different types
of structure similarity, all with Mean Squared Error (MSE)=
73. (a) Original image. (b) salt-pepper impulsive noise contaminated image. (c) Blurred image. Although two images
have the same MSE value, the structure similarity of third
image is lower than second image. Human vision system
might feel more comfortable with second image in medical
diagnosis.

Introduction

m

(b)

(1)
N

where the vector y ∈ C is observed vector and x ∈ C is
raw data. Matrix A is the under-sampled Fourier encoding
matrix and ξ is noise vector. The objective of compressed
sensing MRI (CS-MRI) is to recover x from y. The challenge arises from the under-sampled cases m ≪ N . Clearly,
∗

This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 61876082, 61861130366, 61703301,
61473149 ).
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1012

