The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Poll-Confident Voters in Iterative Voting
Anaëlle Wilczynski
Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL, CNRS, LAMSADE, Paris, France
anaelle.wilczynski@lamsade.dauphine.fr

Abstract

and Rosenschein 2014; Meir 2015), the information function approach which assumes that only a given type of information is communicated to the voters (Endriss et al. 2016;
Reijngoud and Endriss 2012), or the partial orders approach
where the voters consider a set of possible profiles according to partial votes (Conitzer, Walsh, and Xia 2011;
Dey, Misra, and Narahari 2016). The most part of these
works considers a risk-averse behavior, in the sense that the
voters manipulate if they are sure that their deviation does
not produce a worse outcome. Even if it appears as a rational behavior, it does not really capture the behavior of real
voters who might actually manipulate even if they are not
guaranteed to obtain at least a better outcome in any case.
We argue that the voters adopt an elementary behavior regarding the information they dispose of. Inspired by political
elections, we assume that the voters have two sources of information: the public opinion polls and the social networks.
Opinion polls punctuate the election campaign in many
countries, and represent an important part of the election
process. Many studies aim at understanding how they affect voting (Brams 1982; Forsythe et al. 1993; Fredén 2017).
Concerning social networks (Easley and Kleinberg 2010;
Jackson 2008), they occupy an increasingly important place
in our lives. For a particular citizen, they constitute a tool
to have an idea of the population opinions, even if this
vision can be biased. The social networks are a natural
channel for acquiring information in context of uncertainty
in voting (Chopra, Pacuit, and Parikh 2004; Clough 2007;
Sina et al. 2015; Tsang and Larson 2016).
In a context where the polls offer a large part of the information available to the voters, a natural question is: what
happens if the polling institute does not say the truth about
the scores of the candidates? In fact, can the polling institute manipulate the election? This question is related to the
problem of election control (Faliszewski and Rothe 2016),
i.e., how an external agent can influence and manipulate the
election. While usually this agent manipulates by adding /
deleting candidates or votes, or even links of a social network (Sina et al. 2015), we suppose that the polling institute
may lie during the communication of the results.
We investigate an iterative voting model where the voters trust the results of an opinion poll and have all the same
prior assumption about the distribution of the votes, which
is given by the poll. The voters update this belief about the

This article deals with strategic voting under incomplete information. We propose a descriptive model, inspired by political elections, where the information about the vote intentions of the electorate comes from public opinion polls and a
social network, modeled as a graph over the voters. The voters are assumed to be confident in the poll and they update
the communicated results with the information they get from
their relatives in the social network. We consider an iterative
voting model based on this behavior and study the associated
“poll-confident” dynamics. In this context, we ask the question of manipulation by the polling institute.

Introduction
Strategic voting occurs in many scenarios, principally in political elections. Voters may manipulate, by not revealing
their true preferences in the ballot they submit, in order to
avoid an unfortunate outcome. Although one would desire
to prevent this behavior, no voting rule is immune to voter
manipulation (Gibbard 1973; Satterthwaite 1975), leading
to consider other ways to grasp strategic voting, via for instance game-theoretical analysis. Manipulation in voting is
commonly modeled as a strategic game where the players
are voters, assumed to be rational, who look for the appropriate ballot to obtain the best possible outcome in the election,
according to their preferences. Iterative voting (Meir 2017)
is an iterated version of this game where the voters deviate
by rounds. The deviations can be interpreted as the responses
to a succession of polls, or as the description of changes in
voting intentions considering tactical voting strategies.
The players are traditionally assumed to know all the others’ vote. However, this assumption appears highly unrealistic, especially for political elections where the set of voters is
actually very large. From this observation, an important literature begins to develop in order to face with uncertainty in
voting. Several approaches can be enumerated: the Bayesian
approach assuming that the voters think in terms of probabilities over the possible voting profiles (Myerson and Weber 1993; Hazon et al. 2008), the knowledge-based approach
via modal logic frameworks (Chopra, Pacuit, and Parikh
2004; Van Ditmarsch, Lang, and Saffidine 2012), the localdominance approach with uncertainty thresholds (Meir, Lev,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2205

