The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Framework to Coordinate Segmentation and Recognition
Wei Huang,1 Huimin Yu,1,2∗ Weiwei Zheng,1 Jing Zhang1
1

College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
The State Key Laboratory of CAD and CG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
{huangwayne28, yhm2005, 3090102748, zj9301}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
A novel coordination framework between the segmentation
and the recognition is proposed, to conduct the two tasks collaboratively and iteratively. To accomplish the cooperation,
objects are expressed in two aspects: shape and appearance,
which are learned and leveraged as constraints to the segmentation so that the object segmentation mask will be consistent
with the object regions in the image and the knowledge we
have. For the shape, a bottom-top-bottom pathway is built using an encoder-decoder network with capsule neurons, where
the encoder extracts the features of the shape that used for
recognition and the decoder generates reference shapes according to these features and the recognition result. During
this procedure, capsule neurons can parse the existence of
the object and cope with the interference in the segmentation. The appearance knowledge is utilized in another pathway to assist the segmentation processing. Both the shape and
appearance information are dependent on the recognition result, thus allowing the classifier to convey object information
to the segmenter. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our framework and model in collaboratively segmenting
and recognizing objects that can be recognized using their
shapes/shape-patterns.

Figure 1: Scheme of coordination between segmentation and
recognition. The bottom-up and top-down pathways form
an encoder-decoder structure. Other priors may also involve
within it.
We believe this perspective of joint segmentation and
recognition is worth exploration. Nevertheless, few researchers (George et al. 2017) ever attempted to combine
them in object level, despite the effort in semantic segmentation in pixel-level. Therefore, we focus on the cooperation
of segmentation and recognition, and put forward with a coordination framework between them, which we hope will
bring a novel view to the joint tasks and both tasks can be
benefitted from the coordination.
The collaboration between the two tasks requires two
pathways: a bottom-up inference procedure to extract features of segmented objects for recognition, and a top-down
one which works like a generator, to provide object information (shape, appearance, etc.) from the classifier to the
segmenter, according to the prediction and the features. Two
pathways comprise an encoder-decoder structure, and the
framework of the coordination can be abstracted as Fig.1.

Introduction
There has been great progress in fundamental computer vision tasks like fore-/background segmentation and recognition during the past years. In most researches, segmentation
and recognition are two separate tasks that have few interactions. The result is that, the segmentation does not necessarily produce a object that can be recognized, and the
interpretability of the recognition procedure is not ensured:
whether the feature used for recognition truly counts for the
present object (e.g., it can be used for reconstructing or generating the object). While for humans, the two tasks are connected to some degree (Vecera and Farah 1997). It’s more
like a chicken-and-egg problem, where recognition depends
on the target segmented out. Segmentation, in turn, count on
an understanding of the object. During this procedure, the
recognition process has to offer the prior information and
knowledge of objects to assist the segmenter.

To estabish such a framework, one of the keys is to properly express of the knowledge about objects. Objects can
be decomposed into two aspects : (a) shape, describing the
global silhouette of the object and (b) appearance (color, texture, etc.), characterizing the local regions inside the silhouette. 1 Many objects have a specific or unique shape or shape
pattern that can be recognized. It is much easier to deal with
and recognize an object based on its shape than the appear1

∗

We use shape to represent both the basic shapes, circle, square
and etc., and the complex shapes that are composed of these basic
shapes. The latter is also referred to as shape pattern in this paper.

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8473

