The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Optimal and Fair Decision
Trees for Non-Discriminative Decision-Making
Sina Aghaei, Mohammad Javad Azizi, Phebe Vayanos
CAIS Center for Artificial Intelligence in Society
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90007
{saghaei,azizim,phebe.vayanos}@usc.edu

Abstract

Disparate treatment consists of rules explicitly imposing different treatment to individuals that are similarly situated and
that only differ in their protected characteristics. Disparate
impact on the other hand does not explicitly use sensitive attributes to decide treatment but implicitly results in systematic
different handling of individuals from protected groups.
In recent years, machine learning (ML) techniques, in
particular supervised learning approaches such as classification and regression, routinely assist or even replace human
decision-making. For example, they have been used to make
product recommendations (Finley 2016) and to guide the production of entertainment content (Kumar et al. 2018). More
recently, such algorithms are increasingly being used to also
assist socially sensitive decision-making. For example, they
can help inform the decision to give access to credit, benefits,
or public services (Byrnes 2016), they can help support criminal sentencing decisions (Rudin 2013), and assist screening
decisions for jobs/college admissions (Miller 2015).
Yet, these automated data-driven tools may result in discriminative decision-making, causing disparate treatment
and/or disparate impact and violating moral and ethical standards. First, this may happen when the training dataset is
biased so that the “ground truth” is not available. Consider
for example the case of a dataset wherein individuals belonging to a particular group have historically been discriminated
upon (e.g., the dataset of a company in which female employees are never promoted although they perform equally well to
their male counterparts who are, on the contrary, advancing
their careers; in this case, the true merit of female employees –the ground truth– is not observable). Then, the machine
learning algorithm will likely uncover this bias (effectively
encoding endemic prejudices) and yield discriminative decisions (e.g., recommend male hires). Second, machine learning algorithms may yield discriminative decisions even when
the training dataset is unbiased (i.e., even if the “ground truth”
is available). This is the case if the errors made by the system affect individuals belonging to a category or minority
differently. Consider for example a classification algorithm
for breast cancer detection that has far higher false negative
rates for Blacks than for Whites (i.e., it fails to detect breast
cancer more often for Blacks than for Whites). If used for
decision-making, this algorithm would wrongfully recommend no treatment for more Blacks than Whites, resulting
in racial unfairness. In the literature, there have been a lot

In recent years, automated data-driven decision-making systems have enjoyed a tremendous success in a variety of fields
(e.g., to make product recommendations, or to guide the production of entertainment). More recently, these algorithms are
increasingly being used to assist socially sensitive decisionmaking (e.g., to decide who to admit into a degree program or
to prioritize individuals for public housing). Yet, these automated tools may result in discriminative decision-making in
the sense that they may treat individuals unfairly or unequally
based on membership to a category or a minority, resulting
in disparate treatment or disparate impact and violating both
moral and ethical standards. This may happen when the training dataset is itself biased (e.g., if individuals belonging to a
particular group have historically been discriminated upon).
However, it may also happen when the training dataset is unbiased, if the errors made by the system affect individuals
belonging to a category or minority differently (e.g., if misclassification rates for Blacks are higher than for Whites). In
this paper, we unify the definitions of unfairness across classification and regression. We propose a versatile mixed-integer
optimization framework for learning optimal and fair decision trees and variants thereof to prevent disparate treatment
and/or disparate impact as appropriate. This translates to a
flexible schema for designing fair and interpretable policies
suitable for socially sensitive decision-making. We conduct
extensive computational studies that show that our framework
improves the state-of-the-art in the field (which typically relies
on heuristics) to yield non-discriminative decisions at lower
cost to overall accuracy.

1

Introduction

Discrimination refers to the unfair, unequal, or prejudicial
treatment of an individual or group based on certain characteristics, often referred to as protected or sensitive, including
age, disability, ethnicity, gender, marital status, national origin, race, religion, and sexual orientation. Most philosophical,
political, and legal discussions around discrimination assume
that discrimination is morally and ethically wrong and thus
undesirable in our societies (Altman 2016).
Broadly speaking, one can distinguish between two types
of discrimination: disparate treatment (aka direct discrimination) and disparate impact (aka indirect discrimination).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1418

