The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Surveys without Questions: A Reinforcement Learning Approach
Atanu R Sinha,∗†1 Deepali Jain,∗‡1 Nikhil Sheoran,1 Sopan Khosla,1 Reshmi Sasidharan2
1

Adobe Research, India
2
Adobe, India
atr@adobe.com, jaindeepali@google.com,{sheoran, skhosla, rsasidha}@adobe.com

Abstract

surprising in the ‘new’ online world where so many rules
have been rewritten. To be sure, avenues for survey have
evolved from emails and links to pop-ups while browsing.
That said, regardless of how surveys are conducted, firms
rely upon asking questions of customers to obtain ratings
of satisfaction and experience with online interactions. Unfortunately, very few customers respond. With increasingly
common pop-up surveys reporting response from less than
one percent of customers in our data, the sampling bias is apparent. Our proposed approach, applied on clickstream data
collected by sites for every visitor, provides proxy-ratings
of online interaction experience for one hundred percent
customers, without asking questions. Henceforth, we use
customer-rating for numerical feedback obtained through
surveys, and proxy-rating for derived-feedback computed
from clickstream data. We address three major deficiencies
of surveys: (i) Customer ratings obtained from very few respondents comprise the basis on which all customers’ ratings for online interactions are inferred. The difference in
ratings between the small percent who rate and the large majority of customers who do not is difficult to account and often ignored. (ii) Surveys constitute a blunt instrument since
a customer’s rating cannot be tied back to her specific online
interactions; instead, relates to all past interactions. E.g., if a
customer performs a sequence of 10 click actions at which
time the survey appears and she responds, that rating cannot be tied back to specific click action(s); but, relates to the
whole sequence of 10 actions. (iii) Even for the few customers whose ratings are known, a survey is a one-time,
snapshot rating since the same customer may not respond
more often even if surveyed. Hence, survey ratings do not
capture dynamics of online interaction experience over time.
We posit that all three deficiencies can be overcome by considering customers’ choice of browsing actions in a decision
theoretic manner, using Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton 1988) and interpreting the value function in a new way.
We show that RL can facilitate drawing rich insights about
individual customers and specific site interactions, which extends RL research (Sutton and Barto 2017) in a new direction.

The ‘old world’ instrument, survey, remains a tool of choice
for firms to obtain ratings of satisfaction and experience that
customers realize while interacting online with firms. While
avenues for survey have evolved from emails and links to
pop-ups while browsing, the deficiencies persist. These include - reliance on ratings of very few respondents to infer about all customers’ online interactions; failing to capture a customer’s interactions over time since the rating is a
one-time snapshot; and inability to tie back customers’ ratings to specific interactions because ratings provided relate
to all interactions. To overcome these deficiencies we extract
proxy ratings from clickstream data, typically collected for
every customer’s online interactions, by developing an approach based on Reinforcement Learning (RL). We introduce
a new way to interpret values generated by the value function of RL, as proxy ratings. Our approach does not need
any survey data for training. Yet, on validation against actual survey data, proxy ratings yield reasonable performance
results. Additionally, we offer a new way to draw insights
from values of the value function, which allow associating
specific interactions to their proxy ratings. We introduce two
new metrics to represent ratings - one, customer-level and
the other, aggregate-level for click actions across customers.
Both are defined around proportion of all pairwise, successive actions that show increase in proxy ratings. This intuitive customer-level metric enables gauging the dynamics of
ratings over time and is a better predictor of purchase than
customer ratings from survey. The aggregate-level metric allows pinpointing actions that help or hurt experience. In sum,
proxy ratings computed unobtrusively from clickstream, for
every action, for each customer, and for every session can offer interpretable and more insightful alternative to surveys.

1

Introduction

With all the changes on the frontiers of the online world,
one thing remains the same. An old-world instrument, survey, is still a tool of choice for firms obtaining ratings from
customers about their degree of satisfaction and level of experience with online interactions on firms’ websites. To obtain customer ratings, the relentless use of surveys may be
∗

Co-lead authors
Corresponding author
‡
Performed this work at Adobe Research, now at Google AI
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Consider an e-commerce platform. A customer types
search words, applies filters, performs clicks to get specific product information and dives into details on few products. She may add to cart and may end up purchasing. Our

†

257

