The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving Hypernymy Prediction via Taxonomy Enhanced Adversarial Learning
Chengyu Wang,1 Xiaofeng He,1∗ Aoying Zhou2
1

School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, East China Normal University
2
School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University
chywang2013@gmail.com, xfhe@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, ayzhou@dase.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

2018)), distributional approaches leverage the distributional
representations of terms to predict hypernymy. For example,
several unsupervised hypernymy measures predict whether
there exists a hypernymy relation between two terms (Santus et al. 2014; Kiela et al. 2015). Other works employ supervised algorithms to predict hypernymy (Roller, Erk, and
Boleda 2014; Weeds et al. 2014). In these methods, each
pair of terms is represented as an embedding vector related
to the two terms, which is further fed into an SVM or logistic regression classifier to make the prediction. Additionally, Shwartz et al. (2016) combine pattern based and distributional methods to improve the performance by using
an integrated network. Because hypernymy relations are regarded to be asymmetric and transitive in most studies, several recent approaches aim at learning hypernymy embeddings of terms to capture such properties (Yu et al. 2015;
Luu et al. 2016; Nguyen et al. 2017). These term embeddings are more task-oriented for predicting hypernymy.
We observe that these methods may have three potential
limitations: (i) few methods have fully exploited knowledge
in both Web-scale taxonomies and text corpora. For example, Luu et al. (2016) and Nguyen et al. (2017) use the limited number of hypernymy relations in WordNet concept
hierachy. Yu et al. (2015) leverage hypernymy relations in
Probase (Wu et al. 2012) but do not exploit word embeddings learned from text corpora, which contain rich contextual knowledge of words. (ii) Hypernymy and other semantic relations (e.g., meronymy, co-hyponymy) are usually difficult to distinguish for distributional methods (Weeds et al.
2014). The process of how a term is mapped to its hypernyms or non-hypernyms in the embedding space is not directly modeled. Hence, distributional methods are likely to
suffer from the lexical memorization problem (Levy et al.
2015). (iii) Tasks related to hypernymy prediction can be either supervised or unsupervised. It is unclear how large the
taxonomies can benefit these tasks in a unified framework.
In this paper, we propose a Taxonomy Enhanced Adversarial Learning (TEAL) framework for hypernymy prediction. The basic idea is to employ large taxonomies to learn
how a term projects to its hypernyms and non-hypernyms in
the embedding space. We first propose an unsupervised measure U-TEAL to distinguish hypernymy with other semantic relations based on a word embedding projection network
distantly trained over the taxonomy. To address supervised

Hypernymy is a basic semantic relation in computational linguistics that expresses the “is-a” relation between a generic
concept and its specific instances, serving as the backbone
in taxonomies and ontologies. Although several NLP tasks
related to hypernymy prediction have been extensively addressed, few methods have fully exploited the large number
of hypernymy relations in Web-scale taxonomies.
In this paper, we introduce the Taxonomy Enhanced Adversarial Learning (TEAL) for hypernymy prediction. We first
propose an unsupervised measure U-TEAL to distinguish hypernymy with other semantic relations. It is implemented
based on a word embedding projection network distantly
trained over a taxonomy. To address supervised hypernymy
detection tasks, the supervised model S-TEAL and its improved version, the adversarial supervised model AS-TEAL,
are further presented. Specifically, AS-TEAL employs a coupled adversarial training algorithm to transfer hierarchical
knowledge in taxonomies to hypernymy prediction models.
We conduct extensive experiments to confirm the effectiveness of TEAL over three standard NLP tasks: unsupervised
hypernymy classification, supervised hypernymy detection
and graded lexical entailment. We also show that TEAL can
be applied to non-English languages and can detect missing
hypernymy relations in taxonomies.

Introduction
Hypernymy (“is-a”) is a basic semantic relation in computational linguistics, expressing the “is-a” relation between a
generic concept (hypernym) and its specific instances (hyponyms), such as state-Hawaii, country-United States, etc.
The accurate prediction of hypernymy is vital for various downstream NLP applications, such as taxonomy construction (Wu et al. 2012), textual entailment (Vulic et al.
2017), knowledge base construction (Mahdisoltani, Biega,
and Suchanek 2015), etc.
In the literature, pattern based methods and distributional
approaches are two major paradigms to harvest hypernymy
relations from texts (Wang, He, and Zhou 2017). Unlike
pattern based methods which rely more on lexical pattern
matching (such as Hearst patterns (Roller, Kiela, and Nickel
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7128

