The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Data Fine-Tuning
Saheb Chhabra, Puspita Majumdar, Mayank Vatsa, Richa Singh

Y-axis

Abstract

Y-axis

IIIT-Delhi, India
{sahebc, pushpitam, mayank, rsingh}@iiitd.ac.in

In real-world applications, commercial off-the-shelf systems
are utilized for performing automated facial analysis including face recognition, emotion recognition, and attribute prediction. However, a majority of these commercial systems act
as black boxes due to the inaccessibility of the model parameters which makes it challenging to fine-tune the models for
specific applications. Stimulated by the advances in adversarial perturbations, this research proposes the concept of Data
Fine-tuning to improve the classification accuracy of a given
model without changing the parameters of the model. This
is accomplished by modeling it as data (image) perturbation
problem. A small amount of “noise” is added to the input with
the objective of minimizing the classification loss without affecting the (visual) appearance. Experiments performed on
three publicly available datasets LFW, CelebA, and MUCT,
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed concept.

Model
Fine-tuning

Class 1

𝜙(W’X+b’)

Class 1

Class 2

Class 2

(a)

𝜙(WX+b)

(b)

X-axis

X-axis

Y-axis

Data
Fine-tuning
𝜙(WZ+b)
Pre-trained model’s
decision boundary
Class 1

Fine-tuned model’s
decision boundary

Class 2

Introduction
With the advancements in machine learning (specifically
deep learning), ready to use Commercial Off-The-Shelf
(COTS) systems are available for automated face analysis, such as face recognition (Ding and Tao 2018), emotion
recognition (Fan et al. 2016), and attribute prediction (Hand,
Castillo, and Chellappa 2018). However, often times the details of the model are not released which makes it difficult
to update it for any other task or datasets. This renders the
model’s effectiveness as a black-box model only. To illustrate this, let X be the input data for a model with weights
W and bias b. This model can be expressed as:

(c)

X-axis

Figure 1: Illustration of model fine-tuning and data finetuning: (a) represents the data distribution with two classes.
(b) represents Model Fine-tuning where the model’s decision boundary shifts corresponding to the input data, and
(c) represents Data Fine-tuning where the input data shifts
corresponding to model’s decision boundary (best viewed in
color).

best of our knowledge, this is the first work towards data
fine-tuning to enhance the performance of a given black box
system. As shown in Figure 1, the proposed data fine-tuning
adjusts the input data X whereas, in the model fine-tuning
approach (MFT), the parameters (W, b) are adjusted for optimal classification.
Mathematically, model fine-tuning is:

φ(WX + b)
(1)
If the source of the model is available, model fine-tuning
is used to update the parameters. However, as mentioned
above, in black box scenarios, the model parameters, W and
b cannot be modified, as the user does not have access to the
model.
“Can we enhance the performance of a black-box system
for a given dataset?” To answer this question, in this research, we present a novel concept termed as Data Finetuning (DFT), wherein the input data is adjusted corresponding to the model’s unseen decision boundary. To the

MFT

φ(WX + b) −−→ φ(W0 X + b0 )

(2)

and data fine-tuning can be written as:

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

DFT

φ(WX + b) −−→ φ(WZ + b)
8223

(3)

