The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Contextualized Non-Local Neural Networks for Sequence Learning
Pengfei Liu,†‡ Shuaichen Chang, Xuanjing Huang,† Jian Tang,‡ Jackie Chi Kit Cheung‡]
†

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai Insitute of Intelligent Electronics & Systems
‡
MILA & ] McGill University & The Ohio State University
{pfliu14,xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn, chang.1692@osu.edu,jian.tang@hec.ca,jcheung@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Recently, a large number of neural mechanisms and models
have been proposed for sequence learning, of which selfattention, as exemplified by the Transformer model, and
graph neural networks (GNNs) have attracted much attention. In this paper, we propose an approach that combines
and draws on the complementary strengths of these two methods. Specifically, we propose contextualized non-local neural networks (CN3 ), which can both dynamically construct a
task-specific structure of a sentence and leverage rich local
dependencies within a particular neighbourhood.
Experimental results on ten NLP tasks in text classification,
semantic matching, and sequence labelling show that our proposed model outperforms competitive baselines and discovers task-specific dependency structures, thus providing better
interpretability to users.

Challenges

Bias

G.

T.

Ours

Com-Structure
Con-Representation

Non-local
Local

×
X

X
×

X
X

Table 1: Com-Structure denotes “complicated structures of sentences” while Con-Representation denotes
“contextualized representations of words”. G. and T.
represent graph neural network and Transformer respectively. The first two columns shows main challenges for sentence learning and corresponding required bias: Non-local
bias: dependencies can be built with any neighbor (Baerman
2015, Wang et al. 2017). Local bias: local dependencies
exist over adjacent word (Baerman 2015, Futrell 2017). The
last three columns list comparison of typical sequence learning approaches for incorporating local and non-local bias.

Introduction

While GNNs are capable of learning local contextual information flexibly by encoding attribute features (Battaglia et
al. 2018), it is less clear how to effectively utilize GNNs for
sequence learning, since there is no single structural representation of a sentence that is well suited to all tasks.
A common choice is to use the syntactic dependencies between words in a sentence to determine the sentential graph
structure, which reduces the model to a tree-structured neural network (Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015). Inspired by
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), we aim to improve upon
this fixed structure by learning a task-dependent graphical
representation, which should better capture the dependencies that matter for the end task.
In this paper, we draw from both lines of research and propose a model which can benefit from their complementary
strengths. On the one hand, the success of Transformer motivates us to explore dynamic “GRAPH” construction. Rather
than defining a hard-coded graph for the sentence, we incorporate non-local bias into GNNs, learning the sentence structure dynamically on different tasks. On the other hand, the
advantage of the graph neural network framework itself is to
provide rich local information by encoding node or edge attributes, which can make up for the deficiency in Transformer.
Consequently, we propose a contextualized non-local networks by extending self-attention (Transformer) to GNNs,
which support highly flexible representations in two ways.
First, the representations of attributes (feature encodings of

Learning the representation of sequences is a fundamental
task, which requires deep understanding of both the complex structure of sentences (Biber, Conrad, and Reppen
1998) and the contextualized representation of words (Peters et al. 2018). Recent successful approaches replace the
classical compositional functions in neural networks (i.e.
CNNs or RNNs) with mechanisms based on self-attention,
of which the most effective model is the Transformer, having achieved state-of-the-art performance on machine translation (Vaswani et al. 2017) and parsing (Kitaev and Klein
2018). The success of Transformer can be attributed to its
non-local structure bias, in which dependencies between any
pair of words can be modelled (Baerman 2015, Wang et al.
2017). This property allows it to dynamically learn both
the syntactic and semantic structures of sentences (Vaswani
et al. 2017). Despite its success, the lack of local bias (local dependencies that exist over adjacent words (Baerman
2015, Futrell 2017)) limits its capacity for learning contextualized representations of words1 .
In contrast to Transformer, another line of work aims
to model sequences with graph neural networks (GNNs).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our experiments also show that Transformer performs worse
than the models with local bias, especially on sequence labeling
tasks.

6762

