The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Interpretable Predictive Modeling for Climate Variables with Weighted Lasso
Sijie He,1 Xinyan Li,1 Vidyashankar Sivakumar,1 Arindam Banerjee1
1

Depertment of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
Minneapolis, MN 55455
hexxx893@umn.edu, lixx1166@umn.edu, sivak017@umn.edu, banerjee@cs.umn.edu

Abstract

and Renwick 1998), shallow neural networks (Steinhaeuser,
Chawla, and Ganguly 2011b), etc. From a climate science
perspective, parsimony in variable selection leads to more
interpretable models helping climate scientists gain a better
understanding of the underlying relationships between climate variables. Still, there are difficulties in explaining the
relationships due to the variable selection inconsistency of
Lasso and the high spatial correlation among SST variables.
In this paper, inspired by the adaptive Lasso (Zou 2006),
we propose a weighted ℓ1 regularized model suitable for
spatial problems since it encourages the estimator to pick
spatially contiguous SST covariates. The weighted ℓ1 regularizer penalizes different components of regression coefficients∑θ differently and is mathematically defined by
p
R(θ) = i=1 wi |θi |, where wi is the weight for component
i. Lower the weight, lower is the penalization on the corresponding covariates and consequently more are the chances
they will be nonzero. Note that, adaptive Lasso is weighted
Lasso, where the weights are chosen to be inversely proportional to the estimated coefficients from estimator like
ordinary least squares (OLS). For the problem we consider,
we propose the weights on ocean locations are directly proportional to their distance from the land location thus penalizing faraway ocean regions more, which is consistent
with domain knowledge in climate science. We show that
the weighted Lasso, in contrast to Lasso, gives more interpretable results which conform to the observations of nearby
ocean locations having the most effect on land temperature.
We perform extensive comparison of the weighted Lasso
with baselines on data from 3 different Earth System Models
(ESMs) (Taylor, Stouffer, and Meehl 2012). First, comparisons between weighted Lasso and Lasso shows that they
achieve similar predictive performance, but weighted Lasso
is considerably more interpretable in terms of variable selection. Second, somewhat surprisingly, we illustrate that
weighted Lasso persistently outperforms Deep nets which
form the state-of-the-art in many other application areas
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016;
LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015); weighted Lasso is also illustrated to have superior performance over gradient boosted
trees (Chen and Guestrin 2016) and PCR (Jolliffe 2011). We
also present a detailed analysis of the poor performance of
Deep nets and report results on a variety of settings such as
number of layers, number of hidden units, mini-batch size,

An important family of problems in climate science focus
on finding predictive relationships between various climate
variables. In this paper, we consider the problem of predicting monthly deseasonalized land temperature at different locations worldwide based on sea surface temperature (SST).
Contrary to popular belief on the trade-off between (a) simple interpretable but inaccurate models and (b) complex accurate but uninterpretable models, we introduce a weighted
Lasso model for the problem which yields interpretable results while being highly accurate. Covariate weights in the
regularization of weighted Lasso are pre-determined, and
proportional to the spatial distance of the covariate (sea surface location) from the target (land location). We establish finite sample estimation error bounds for weighted Lasso, and
illustrate its superior empirical performance and interpretability over complex models such as deep neural networks (Deep
nets) and gradient boosted trees (GBT). We also present a detailed empirical analysis of what went wrong with Deep nets
here, which may serve as a helpful guideline for application
of Deep nets to small sample scientific problems.

Introduction
Over the past decade climate datasets with improved spatial resolutions have become available. While such datasets
come from a mix of real observations and physics based
models, recent years have seen considerable interest in applying machine learning techniques for predictive modeling
of climate variables of interest. Such models have the potential to aid a better understanding of the impact of climate
change and attribution of observed events as well as guide
decision/policy making in a variety of domains such as agricultural planning, water resource management, and extreme
weather events (O’Brien et al. 2006).
We consider one such problem in climate science of
identifying predictive relationships between ocean sea surface temperature (SST) and land temperature (Steinhaeuser,
Chawla, and Ganguly 2011a). Recent work has shown
sparse modeling techniques like Lasso (Chatterjee et al.
2012) tend to better capture predictive relationships between
SST and land climate compared to more traditional methods like principal component regression (PCR) (Francis
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1385

