The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Found in Translation: Learning Robust Joint
Representations by Cyclic Translations between Modalities
Hai Pham,* Paul Pu Liang,* Thomas Manzini, Louis-Philippe Morency, Barnabás Póczos
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
{htpham,pliang,tmanzini,morency,bapoczos}@cs.cmu.edu

Bimodal Cyclic Translations

Abstract

Joint Representation
Language Modality

Multimodal sentiment analysis is a core research area that studies speaker sentiment expressed from the language, visual, and
acoustic modalities. The central challenge in multimodal learning involves inferring joint representations that can process and
relate information from these modalities. However, existing
work learns joint representations by requiring all modalities
as input and as a result, the learned representations may be
sensitive to noisy or missing modalities at test time. With the
recent success of sequence to sequence (Seq2Seq) models in
machine translation, there is an opportunity to explore new
ways of learning joint representations that may not require
all input modalities at test time. In this paper, we propose
a method to learn robust joint representations by translating
between modalities. Our method is based on the key insight
that translation from a source to a target modality provides a
method of learning joint representations using only the source
modality as input. We augment modality translations with a
cycle consistency loss to ensure that our joint representations
retain maximal information from all modalities. Once our
translation model is trained with paired multimodal data, we
only need data from the source modality at test time for final
sentiment prediction. This ensures that our model remains
robust from perturbations or missing information in the other
modalities. We train our model with a coupled translationprediction objective and it achieves new state-of-the-art results
on multimodal sentiment analysis datasets: CMU-MOSI, ICTMMMO, and YouTube. Additional experiments show that our
model learns increasingly discriminative joint representations
with more input modalities while maintaining robustness to
missing or perturbed modalities.

forward

Visual Modality

forward

Today was a great day!
backward

backward

Sentiment Prediction

Trimodal Cyclic Translations
Language Modality

forward

forward

backward

backward

Visual Modality

Today was a great day!

Acoustic Modality
Joint Representation

Sentiment Prediction

Figure 1: Learning robust joint representations via multimodal cyclic translations. Top: cyclic translations from a
source modality (language) to a target modality (visual). Bottom: the representation learned between language and vision
are further translated into the acoustic modality, forming the
final joint representation. In both cases, the joint representation is then used for sentiment prediction.
joint representations from additional information present in
the visual and acoustic modalities. This research field has
become known as multimodal sentiment analysis and extends
the conventional text-based definition of sentiment analysis to a multimodal environment. For example, (Kaushik,
Sangwan, and Hansen 2013) explore the additional acoustic
modality while (Wöllmer et al. 2013) use the language, visual, and acoustic modalities present in monologue videos
to predict sentiment. This push has been further bolstered
by the advent of multimodal social media platforms, such as
YouTube, Facebook, and VideoLectures which are used to express personal opinions on a worldwide scale. The abundance
of multimodal data has led to the creation of multimodal
datasets, such as CMU-MOSI (Zadeh et al. 2016) and ICTMMMO (Wöllmer et al. 2013), as well as deep multimodal
models that are highly effective at learning discriminative
joint multimodal representations (Liang, Zadeh, and Morency
2018; Tsai et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2017). Existing prior work
learns joint representations using multiple modalities as input (Liang et al. 2018; Morency, Mihalcea, and Doshi 2011;
Zadeh et al. 2016). However, these joint representations also

Introduction
Sentiment analysis is an open research problem in machine
learning and natural language processing which involves identifying a speaker’s opinion (Pang, Lee, and Vaithyanathan
2002). Previously, text-only sentiment analysis through
words, phrases, and their compositionality can be found to
be insufficient for inferring sentiment content from spoken
opinions (Morency, Mihalcea, and Doshi 2011), especially in
the presence of rich nonverbal behaviors which can accompany language (Shaffer 2018). As a result, there has been a
recent push towards using machine learning methods to learn
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

* Equal contributions

6892

