The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

AutoSense Model for Word Sense Induction
Reinald Kim Amplayo, Seung-won Hwang, Min Song
Yonsei University
{rktamplayo, seungwonh, min.song}@yonsei.ac.kr

Senses of cold

Abstract
Word sense induction (WSI), or the task of automatically discovering multiple senses or meanings of a word, has three
main challenges: domain adaptability, novel sense detection,
and sense granularity flexibility. While current latent variable
models are known to solve the first two challenges, they are
not flexible to different word sense granularities, which differ
very much among words, from aardvark with one sense, to
play with over 50 senses. Current models either require hyperparameter tuning or nonparametric induction of the number of senses, which we find both to be ineffective. Thus,
we aim to eliminate these requirements and solve the sense
granularity problem by proposing AutoSense, a latent variable model based on two observations: (1) senses are represented as a distribution over topics, and (2) senses generate pairings between the target word and its neighboring
word. These observations alleviate the problem by (a) throwing garbage senses and (b) additionally inducing fine-grained
word senses. Results show great improvements over the stateof-the-art models on popular WSI datasets. We also show that
AutoSense is able to learn the appropriate sense granularity
of a word. Finally, we apply AutoSense to the unsupervised
author name disambiguation task where the sense granularity problem is more evident and show that AutoSense is evidently better than competing models. We share our data and
code here: https://github.com/rktamplayo/AutoSense.

Senses of play

Figure 1: Three senses of the noun cold and six of 17 senses
of the noun play in WordNet. Sense granularity problem
refers to the inflexibility of the model to the different number
of senses different words may have (i.e. 3 vs. 17).

task similar to the WSI is the unsupervised author name disambiguation (UAND) task (Song et al. 2007), where it aims
to automatically find different authors, instead of words,
with the same name.
In this paper, we consider a latent variable modeling approach to WSI problem as it is proven to be more effective than other approaches (Chang, Pei, and Chen 2014;
Komninos and Manandhar 2016). Specifically, we look into
methods based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei,
Ng, and Jordan 2003), a topic modeling method that automatically discovers the topics underlying a set of documents using Dirichlet priors to infer the multinomial distribution over words and topics. LDA naturally answers
two of the three main problems mentioned above, i.e. (C1)
and (C2), of the WSI task (Brody and Lapata 2009). However, it is not flexible with regards to (C3), or the sense
granularity problem, as it requires the users to specify
the number of senses: Current systems (Wang et al. 2015;
Chang, Pei, and Chen 2014) required to set the number of
senses to a small number (set to 3 or 5 in the literature) to
get a good accuracy, however many words may have a large
number of senses, e.g. play in Figure 1.
To this end, we propose a latent variable model called

Introduction
Word sense induction (WSI) is the task where given an ambiguous target word (e.g. cold) and texts where the word is
used, we automatically discover its multiple senses or meanings (e.g. (1) nose infection, (2) absence of heat, etc.). We
show examples of words with multiple senses and example
usage in a text1 in Figure 1. It is distinct from its similar
supervised counterpart, word sense disambiguation (WSD)
(Stevenson and Wilks 2003), because WSI models should
consider the following challenges due to its unsupervised
nature: (C1) adaptability to new domains, (C2) ability to
detect novel senses, and (C3) flexibility to different word
sense granularities (Jurgens and Klapaftis 2013). Another
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
All sense meanings are copied from WordNet: http://
wordnetweb.princeton.edu/perl/webwn

6212

