The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Ontology-Mediated Query Answering over Log-Linear Probabilistic Data
Stefan Borgwardt

İsmail İlkan Ceylan, Thomas Lukasiewicz

Faculty of Computer Science
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
stefan.borgwardt@tu-dresden.de

Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
ismail.ceylan@cs.ox.ac.uk
thomas.lukasiewicz@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

probabilistic logic programming (PLP). All these models can
encode commonsense knowledge, but they are based on the
closed-domain assumption (CDA) that requires the set of relevant objects to be finite, and known at design-time, which is
not always an easy condition to be met.

Large-scale knowledge bases are at the heart of modern
information systems. Their knowledge is inherently uncertain, and hence they are often materialized as probabilistic
databases. However, probabilistic database management systems typically lack the capability to incorporate implicit background knowledge and, consequently, fail to capture some
intuitive query answers. Ontology-mediated query answering is a popular paradigm for encoding commonsense knowledge, which can provide more complete answers to user
queries. We propose a new data model that integrates the
paradigm of ontology-mediated query answering with probabilistic databases, employing a log-linear probability model.
We compare our approach to existing proposals, and provide
supporting computational results.

1

Other proposals that can encode commonsense knowledge
while allowing an open domain include PLP with function
symbols (Sato and Kameya 1997; De Raedt, Kimmig, and
Toivonen 2007), the probabilistic programming language
BLOG (Milch et al. 2005), and ontology-based approaches
(Jung and Lutz 2012; Borgwardt, Ceylan, and Lukasiewicz
2017). The latter are further distinguished from the rest by
the open-world assumption, i.e., they do not interpret the
absence of facts as the negation of these facts; this means that
the incomplete nature of the PKB is respected.

Introduction

We build on the rich tradition of ontology languages, and
propose a robust data model, based on log-linear probability
distributions, for reasoning in PKBs. We assume the database
given as a set of facts with associated weights, which is then
interpreted as a log-linear model. Our inspiration comes from
MLNs, which are expressive probabilistic-logical models that
use log-linear distributions. As in MLNs, we restrict the probability distribution to the known objects, but additionally use
first-order semantics over arbitrary, possibly infinite domains,
whereby we achieve open-world, open-domain reasoning.

Advances in automated knowledge base construction have led
to successful systems, such as DeepDive (Shin et al. 2015),
NELL (Mitchell et al. 2015), and Google’s Knowledge Vault
(Dong et al. 2014). They extract structured knowledge from
multiple sources, through a chain of statistical techniques,
and produce probabilistic knowledge bases (PKBs). The basic data model underlying these systems is given by probabilistic databases (PDBs) (Suciu et al. 2011); see recent
surveys focusing on PKBs (Van den Broeck and Suciu 2017;
Borgwardt, Ceylan, and Lukasiewicz 2018).

We briefly summarize this paper’s main contributions. We
introduce a new data model for ontology-mediated query
answering over probabilistic data, based on log-linear probability distributions. We compare it to existing data models,
including MLNs and PDBs, and highlight the semantic differences. We then show that reasoning in our model can be
reduced (via polynomial rewriting techniques) to inference
in MLNs, or PDBs. These results are significant given the
expressive nature of our formalism. As a consequence of the
above reductions, a whole host of computational complexity
results from previous models carry over to the new probabilistic data model. We conclude by describing a new approach
to learn the weights for our model, based on the principle of
maximum entropy, to establish the connection with existing
PKBs. This is independent of the other results, however; in
principle, we could use any other weight learning method.

PKBs are inherently incomplete, which makes reasoning
more challenging. One common way to alleviate incompleteness is to encode commonsense knowledge, in the form of
logical theories, to allow for deductions that go beyond existing facts in the knowledge base. Unifying first-order logic
(FOL) and probability is an old endeavor in artificial intelligence (Halpern 2003); there is a vast literature on models
with such capabilities. Here, we confine ourselves to more recent proposals with a special emphasis on large-scale PKBs.
Statistical relational models are concise, and lifted representations of probabilistic graphical models (Getoor and
Taskar 2007). Well-known examples include Markov logic
networks (MLNs) (Richardson and Domingos 2006), relational Bayesian networks (Jaeger 1997), and approaches to
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

All proofs can be found at tu-dresden.de/inf/lat/papers.
2711

