The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

What if We Simply Swap the Two Text Fragments?
A Straightforward yet Effective Way to Test the Robustness of
Methods to Confounding Signals in Nature Language Inference Tasks
Haohan Wang,1 Da Sun,2 Eric P. Xing3
1

Language Technologies Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
School of Information Science, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3
Machine Learning Department, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
{haohanw, epxing}@cs.cmu.edu
• E: P → H
• C: P → ¬ H
• N: P ⊥ H
where → stands for implication, ¬ stands for negation, and
we use ⊥ to denote that there is no clear relation between P
and H.
The essential part of this paper lies in the fact that for any
two propositions A and B, we have:
• (A → B) ⊥ (B → A)
• (A → ¬ B) ⇐⇒ (B → ¬ A)
• (A ⊥ B) ⇐⇒ (B ⊥ A)
In simpler words, swapping A and B will retain the → ¬
relation and ⊥ relation, but not → relation. Therefore, we
can simply evaluate an NLI predictive model by swapping
the premise and hypothesis in testing data set with the argument: If a model can truly predict inference relationship between pairs of text fragments, it should report
comparable accuracy between the original test set and
swapped test set for contradiction pairs and neutral pairs,
and lower accuracy in swapped test set for entailment
pairs. If we do not observe such an accuracy pattern, it is
very likely that the evaluated NLI predictive model is questionable despite its impressive performance. One may argue
that the label may not necessarily preserve for neutral pairs
after swapping, we explain in the Discussion section later.
This work is inspired by several recent works that have
observed the statistical irregularities of constructed NLI data
sets. For example, Gururangan et al. (2018) noticed that during the data construction phase, the workers create a heuristic to generate hypothesis with minimum risks of being
wrong, which lead to the fact that there are different distributions of words for different labels, and a powerful model
can easily bypass the semantic information of the texts and
predict the label with reasonable accuracy. The similar phenomenon has been observed by Poliak et al. (2018), who
noticed that a model could infer the NLI label with only
hypotheses, and proposed a hypothesis-only baseline. Recently, Naik et al. (2018) also noticed that the machine learning models might exploit the idiosyncrasies in the construction of the data set in predicting NLI labels and proposed

Abstract
Nature language inference (NLI) task is a predictive task of
determining the inference relationship of a pair of natural
language sentences. With the increasing popularity of NLI,
many state-of-the-art predictive models have been proposed
with impressive performances. However, several works have
noticed the statistical irregularities in the collected NLI data
set that may result in an over-estimated performance of these
models and proposed remedies. In this paper, we further investigate the statistical irregularities, what we refer as confounding factors, of the NLI data sets. With the belief that
some NLI labels should preserve under swapping operations,
we propose a simple yet effective way (swapping the two text
fragments) of evaluating the NLI predictive models that naturally mitigate the observed problems. Further, we continue
to train the predictive models with our swapping manner and
propose to use the deviation of the model’s evaluation performances under different percentages of training text fragments to be swapped to describe the robustness of a predictive model. Our evaluation metrics leads to some interesting
understandings of recent published NLI methods. Finally, we
also apply the swapping operation on NLI models to see the
effectiveness of this straightforward method in mitigating the
confounding factor problems in training generic sentence embeddings for other NLP transfer tasks.

Natural Language Inference (NLI) task is testing the ability of a computational model to understand the natural language by the evaluation of a three-way classification for two
fragments of natural language texts (Bowman et al. 2015).
The two fragments, namely premise (P) and hypothesis (H),
are labeled in three different categories (i.e. entailment (E),
neutral (N), and contradiction (C)) based on their entailment
relation. More specifically, we can have:
• E: H is definitely true given P
• C: H is definitely not true given P
• N : H may or may not be true given P
Formally, we could rewrite the natural language described
linguistic entailment relation into propositional logic as following:
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7136

