A Task in a Suit and a Tie: Paraphrase Generation with Semantic Augmentation∗
Su Wang,1 Rahul Gupta,2 Nancy Chang,2 Jason Baldridge2
The University of Texas at Austin1
Google AI Language2
shrekwang@utexas.edu; {grahul, ncchang, jasonbaldridge}@google.com

Abstract

Source

Sue sold her car to Bob.

Paraphrasing is rooted in semantics. We show the effectiveness of transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) for paraphrase
generation and further improvements by incorporating PropBank labels via a multi-encoder. Evaluating on MSCOCO
and WikiAnswers, we find that transformers are fast and effective, and that semantic augmentation for both transformers and LSTMs leads to sizable 2-3 point gains in BLEU,
METEOR and TER. More importantly, we find surprisingly
large gains on human evaluations compared to previous models. Nevertheless, manual inspection of generated paraphrases
reveals ample room for improvement: even our best model
produces human-acceptable paraphrases for only 28% of captions from the CHIA dataset (Sharma et al. 2018), and it fails
spectacularly on sentences from Wikipedia. Overall, these results point to the potential for incorporating semantics in the
task while highlighting the need for stronger evaluation.

A

Sue sold her auto to Bob.
Sue sold Bob her car.
Bob was sold a car by Sue.

B

C

Bob bought a vehicle from Sue.
Bob bought Sue’s car (from her).
Bob paid Sue for her automobile.
Sue let Bob buy her auto.
Sue gave Bob a good deal on her Honda.
Bob got a bargain on Sue’s Honda.

Table 1: Paraphrases of a source sentence with increasing
syntactic and semantic variability: (A) mild lexical and syntactic variation; (B) moderate lexical and syntactic variation
plus perspective shifting; (C) even more lexical and syntactic variation, with greater semantic license.

Introduction
Paraphrasing is at its core a semantic task: restate one phrase
s as another s0 with approximately the same meaning. Highprecision, domain-general paraphrase generation can benefit many natural language processing tasks (Madnani and
Dorr 2010). For example, paraphrases can help diversify responses of dialogue assistants (Shah et al. 2018), augment
machine translation training data (Fader, Zettlemoyer, and
Etzioni 2014) and extend coverage of semantic parsers (Berant and Liang 2014). But what makes a good paraphrase?
Whether two phrases have “the same” meaning leaves much
room for interpretation. As Table 1 illustrates, paraphrases
can involve lexical and syntactic variation with differing degrees of semantic fidelity. Should a paraphrase yield precisely the same inferences as the original? Should it refer
to the same entities, in similar ways, with the same detail?
How much lexical overlap between paraphrases is desirable?
Much prior work on paraphrasing addresses these questions directly by exploiting linguistic knowledge, including handcrafted rules (McKeown 1983), shallow linguistic features (Zhao et al. 2009) and syntactic and semantic
information (Kozlowski, McCoy, and Vijay-Shanker 2003;
Ellsworth and Janin 2007). These systems, while difficult to

scale and typically restricted in domain, nonetheless produce
paraphrases that are qualitatively close to what humans expect. For example, Ellsworth and Janin (2007)’s rule-based
system uses frame semantic information (Fillmore 1982) to
paraphrase I want your opinion as Your opinion is desired,
where the two sentences evoke the D ESIRING frame from
different perspectives.
Many recent paraphrase generation systems sidestep explicit questions of meaning, focusing instead on implicitly
learning representations by training deep neural networks
(see next section) on datasets containing paraphrase pairs.
This is essentially the same approach as modern sequenceto-sequence machine translation (MT), another intrinsically
semantic task for which deep learning on large-scale end-toend data has yielded large gains in quality. Unlike machine
translation, however, the training data currently available is
much smaller and more domain-specific for paraphrasing.
Despite incremental improvements on automatically scored
metrics, the paraphrasing quality of state-of-the-art systems
fall far short of what’s needed for most applications.
This work investigates a combination of these two approaches. Can adding structured linguistic information to
large-scale deep learning systems improve the quality and
generalizability of paraphrase generation while remain-

∗

Work done while the first author was an intern at Google AI.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7176

