The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

How Many Pairwise Preferences Do We Need to Rank a Graph Consistently?
Aadirupa Saha

Rakesh Shivanna

Chiranjib Bhattacharyya

Department of CSA
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
aadirupa@iisc.ac.in

Google Brain, Mountain View
rakeshshivanna@google.com

Department of CSA and Robert Bosch
Center for Cyberphysical Systems
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
chiru@iisc.ac.in

ordering) of set of n items on a graph, given some partial
information of the relative ordering of the item pairs.
It is well known from the standard results of classical
sorting algorithms, for any set of n items associated to an unknown deterministic ordering, say σ ∗n , and given the learner
has access to only preferences of the item pairs, in general
one requires to observe Ω(n log n) actively selected pairs
(where the learner can choose which pair to observe next) to
obtain the true underlying ranking σ ∗n ; whereas, with random
selection of pairs, it could be as bad as Ω(n2 ).
Related Work. Over the years, numerous attempts have been
made to improve the above sample complexities by imposing
different structural assumptions on the set of items or the underlying ranking model. In active sampling setting, (Jamieson
and Nowak 2011) gives a sample complexity of O(d log2 n),
provided the true ranking is realizable in a d-dimensional
embedding; (Braverman and Mossel 2008) and (Ailon 2012)
proposed a near optimal recovery with sample complexity
of O(n log n) and O(npoly(log n)) respectively, under noisy
permutation and tournament ranking model. For the nonactive (random) sampling setting, (Wauthier, Jordan, and
Jojic 2013) and (Negahban, Oh, and Shah 2012) gave a sample complexity bound of O(n log n) under noisy permutation
(with O(log n) repeated sampling) and Bradley-Terry-Luce
(BTL) ranking model. Recently, (Rajkumar and Agarwal
2016) showed a recovery guarantee of O(nr log n), given the
preference matrix is rank r under suitable transformation.
However, existing literature on sample complexity
for graph based ranking problems is sparse, where it goes
without saying that the underlying structural representation
of the data is extremely relevant in various real-world applications where the edge connections model item similarities e.g.
In social network, connection among friends can be modelled
as a graph, or in recommender systems, movies under same
the genre should lie in close neighbourhood. It is important
to note that a relational graph is different from imposing item
dependencies through feature representations and much more
practical, since side information of exact features may not
even be available to the learner as required in the latter case.
Furthermore, the only few algorithmic contributions made
on the problem of ranking on graphs – (Page et al. 1998;
He et al. 2017; Del Corso and Romani 2016; Hsu et al. 2017)
have not explored their theoretical performance. (Agarwal
2010; 2008) proposed an SVM-rank based algorithm, with

Abstract
We consider the problem of optimal recovery of true ranking
of n items from a randomly chosen subset of their pairwise
preferences. It is well known that without any further assumption, one requires a sample size of Ω(n2 ) for the purpose. We
analyze the problem with an additional structure of relational
graph G([n], E) over the n items added with an assumption of
locality: Neighboring items are similar in their rankings. Noting the preferential nature of the data, we choose to embed not
the graph, but, its strong product to capture the pairwise node
relationships. Furthermore, unlike existing literature that uses
Laplacian embedding for graph based learning problems, we
use a richer class of graph embeddings—orthonormal representations—that includes (normalized) Laplacian as its special
case. Our proposed algorithm, Pref-Rank, predicts the underlying ranking using an SVM based approach using the chosen
embedding of the product graph, and is the first to provide
statistical consistency on two ranking losses: Kendall’s tau
and Spearman’s footrule, with a required sample complexity
2
of O(n2 χ(Ḡ)) 3 pairs, χ(Ḡ) being the chromatic number of
the complement graph Ḡ. Clearly, our sample complexity is
smaller for dense graphs, with χ(Ḡ) characterizing the degree
of node connectivity, which is also intuitive due to the locality
4
5
assumption e.g. O(n 3 ) for union of k-cliques, or O(n 3 ) for
random and power law graphs etc.—a quantity much smaller
than the fundamental limit of Ω(n2 ) for large n. This, for the
first time, relates ranking complexity to structural properties
of the graph. We also report experimental evaluations on different synthetic and real-world datasets, where our algorithm
is shown to outperform the state of the art methods.

1

Introduction

The problem of ranking from pairwise preferences has
widespread applications in various real-world scenarios e.g.
web search (Page et al. 1998; Kleinberg 1999), gene classification, recommender systems (Theodoridis, Kotropoulos,
and Panagakis 2013), image search (Geng, Yang, and Hua
2009) and more. Its of no surprise why the problem is so well
studied in various disciplines of research, be that computer
science, statistics, operational research or computational biology. In particular, we study the problem of ranking (or
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
A full version of this paper is available at http://arxiv.org/abs/
1811.02161

4830

