The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Regular Boardgames
Jakub Kowalski, Maksymilian Mika, Jakub Sutowicz, Marek Szykuła
Institute of Computer Science, University of Wrocław, Wrocław, Poland
jko@cs.uni.wroc.pl, mika.maksymilian@gmail.com, jakubsutowicz@gmail.com, msz@cs.uni.wroc.pl

Abstract

language used to encode game rules will be sound. For practical reasons, the language should be both easy to process
by a computer and human-readable, so conciseness and simplicity are in demand. Finally, the defined domain has to be
broad enough to provide an appropriate level of challenge.
Existing languages. METAGAME is based on Dawson’s
Theory of Movements (Dickins 1971) that formalizes types
of piece behavior in chess-like games. It contains a large
number of predefined keywords describing allowed piece
rules, including exceptional ones like promotions or possessing captured pieces. Despite that, METAGAME’s expressiveness remains very limited and it cannot encode some
core mechanics of chess or shogi (e.g. castling, en passant).
Ludi system was designed solely for the sake of procedural generation of games from a restricted domain (Browne
and Maire 2010). The underlying GGP language is based on
a broad set of predefined concepts, which makes designing a
potential player a laborious task. It describes in a high-level
manner a rich family of combinatorial games (which, however, does not include e.g. the complete rules of chess).
Simplified Boardgames (Björnsson 2012) describes
chess-like games using regular expressions to encode movement of pieces. It overcomes some of the METAGAME’s
limitations and does not require extended vocabulary. However, as allowed expressions are simplistic and applied only
to one piece at once, it cannot express any non-standard
behavior (e.g. promotions or piece addition). Actually, the
rules of almost all popular board games (except breakthrough) cannot be fully expressed in this language.
GDL (Love et al. 2006), used in IGGPC, can describe any
turn-based, finite, and deterministic n-player game with perfect information. It is a high-level, strictly declarative language, based on Datalog (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995).
GDL does not provide any predefined functions. Every predicate encoding the game structure like a board or a card deck,
or even arithmetic operators, must be defined explicitly from
scratch. This makes game descriptions long and hard to understand, and their processing is computationally very expensive, as it requires logic resolution. In fact, many games
expressible in GDL could not be played by any program at
a decent level or would be unplayable at all due to computational cost. For instance, features like longest ride in checkers or capturing in go are difficult and inefficient to implement. Thus, in such cases, only simplified rules are encoded.

We propose a new General Game Playing (GGP) language
called Regular Boardgames (RBG), which is based on the
theory of regular languages. The objective of RBG is to join
key properties as expressiveness, efficiency, and naturalness
of the description in one GGP formalism, compensating certain drawbacks of the existing languages. This often makes
RBG more suitable for various research and practical developments in GGP. While dedicated mostly for describing
board games, RBG is universal for the class of all finite deterministic turn-based games with perfect information. We establish foundations of RBG, and analyze it theoretically and
experimentally, focusing on the efficiency of reasoning. Regular Boardgames is the first GGP language that allows efficient encoding and playing games with complex rules and
with large branching factor (e.g. amazons, arimaa, large chess
variants, go, international checkers, paper soccer).

Introduction
Since 1959, when the famous General Problem Solver was
proposed (Newell, Shaw, and Simon 1959), a new challenge
for the Artificial Intelligence has been established. As an alternative for the research trying to solve particular humancreated games, like chess (Campbell, Hoane, and Hsu 2002),
checkers (Schaeffer et al. 2007), or go (Silver et al. 2016),
this new challenge aims for creating less specialized algorithms able to operate on a large domain of problems.
In this trend, the General Game Playing (GGP) domain was introduced in (Pitrat 1968). Using games as a
testbed, GGP tries to construct universal algorithms that
perform well in various situations and environments. Pell’s
METAGAMER program from 1992 was able to play and
also to generate a variety of simplistic chess-like games (Pell
1992). The modern era of GGP started in 2005, with the annual International General Game Playing Competition (IGGPC) announced by Stanford’s Logic Group (Genesereth,
Love, and Pell 2005). Since that time, GGP became a wellestablished domain of AI research consisting of multiple domains and competitions (Świechowski et al. 2015).
The key of every GGP approach is a well-defined domain
of games (problems) that programs are trying to play (solve).
Such a class of games should be properly formalized, so the
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1699

