The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MotionTransformer: Transferring Neural Inertial Tracking between Domains
Changhao Chen,1 Yishu Miao,1 Chris Xiaoxuan Lu,1 Linhai Xie,1
Phil Blunsom,1,2 Andrew Markham,1 Niki Trigoni1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
2
DeepMind
firstname.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

the task of turning inertial measurements into pose and odometry estimates is hugely complicated by the fact that different
placements (e.g. carrying a smartphone in a pocket or in the
hand) and orientations lead to significantly different inertial
data in the sensor frame. It is clearly infeasible to collect
labelled data from every possible attachment, as this requires
specialized motion capture systems e.g. VICON and a high
degree of effort. In this paper, therefore, we propose a robust
generative adversarial network for sequence domain transformation which is able to directly learn inertial tracking in
unlabelled domains without using any paired sequences.
Prevailing inertial tracking methods, e.g. Strapdown Inertial Navigation System (SINS) (Savage 1998) and Pedestrian Dead Reckoning (PDR) (Xiao et al. 2015), are mostly
based on delicate handcrafted models. These model-based approaches can obtain plausible achievements in general scenarios, but their lack of generalisation ability yields poor performance in the complex real world applications. Recent work
in neural inertial tracking (Chen et al. 2018a) has demonstrated that deep neural networks are capable of extracting
high level motion representations (displacement and heading
angle) from raw IMU sequence data, and providing accurate
trajectories. However, the data-driven method that requires
substantial labeled data for training, and a model trained on
a single domain-specific dataset may not generalise well to
new domains (Tzeng et al. 2017). As shown in Figure 1, the
uncertainties of phone placements, the corresponding motion
dynamics, and the projection of gravity significantly alter
the inertial measurements acquired from different domains
(sensor frames) while the actual trajectories in the navigation
frame are identical.
We note that it is possible to train end-to-end deep neural networks when presented with large amounts of labelled
data. The question becomes, how can we generalize to an
arbitrary attachment in the absence of labels or a paired/timesynchronized sequence? Although from the observation the
raw inertial data for each domain is very different, and the
resulting odometry trajectories are also unrelated to one another, the underlying statistical distribution of odometry pose
updates, if derived from a common agent (e.g. human motion), must be similar. Our intuition is to decompose the
raw inertial data into a domain-invariant semantic representation, learning to discard the domain-specific motion sequence
transformation.

Inertial information processing plays a pivotal role in egomotion awareness for mobile agents, as inertial measurements
are entirely egocentric and not environment dependent. However, they are affected greatly by changes in sensor placement/orientation or motion dynamics, and it is infeasible to
collect labelled data from every domain. To overcome the challenges of domain adaptation on long sensory sequences, we
propose MotionTransformer - a novel framework that extracts
domain-invariant features of raw sequences from arbitrary
domains, and transforms to new domains without any paired
data. Through the experiments, we demonstrate that it is able
to efficiently and effectively convert the raw sequence from a
new unlabelled target domain into an accurate inertial trajectory, benefiting from the motion knowledge transferred from
the labelled source domain. We also conduct real-world experiments to show our framework can reconstruct physically
meaningful trajectories from raw IMU measurements obtained
with a standard mobile phone in various attachments.

Introduction
Egomotion awareness plays a vital role in developing perception, cognition, and motor control for mobile agents through
their own sensory experiences (Agrawal, Carreira, and Malik
2015). Inertial information processing, a typical egomotion
awareness process operating in the human vestibular system (Cullen 2012) contributes to a wide range of daily activities. Modern micro-electro-mechanical (MEMS) inertial measurements units (IMUs) are analogously able to sense angular
and linear accelerations - they are small, cheap, energy efficient and widely employed in smartphones, robots and drones.
Unlike other commonly used sensor modalities, such as GPS,
radio and vision, inertial measurements are completely egocentric and as such are far less environment dependent e.g.
they work equally well in an unlit underground tunnel as in
open spaces. Developing accurate inertial tracking is thus of
key importance for robot/pedestrian navigation and for selfmotion estimation (Harle 2013). In the emergency scenarios,
it can help track firefighters and other first-responders to enhance the safety and efficiency of their operations without
the need of any bespoke positioning infrastructure. However,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8009

