The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Understanding VAEs in Fisher-Shannon Plane
Huangjie Zheng,1 Jiangchao Yao,1,2 Ya Zhang,1 Ivor W. Tsang,2 Jia Wang1
1

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 University of Technology Sydney
{zhj865265, sunarker, ya zhang, jiawang}@sjtu.edu.cn, ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au

Abstract

Vincent 2013), VAEs target to learn latent codes that are
sufficiently encoded with information about the input by
qφ (z|x). Several variants of VAEs (Van Oord, Kalchbrenner, and Kavukcuoglu 2016; Van den Oord et al. 2016;
Chen et al. 2017; Zhao, Song, and Ermon 2017) have been
developed based on above two perspectives in recent years.
In recent studies, it has been reported that VAEs are difficult to balance between the representation learning and likelihood maximizing. For instance, the latent variable generated by the encoder is approximately ignored when the
decoder is too expressive (Bowman et al. 2015). As discussed in (Alemi et al. 2018), the evidence lower bound
(ELBO) lacks a measure in the quality of the representation, since the KL divergence DKL (qφ (z|x)||p(z)) only controls the way VAE encodes a representation. Several studies
in VAEs (Chen et al. 2017; Zhao, Song, and Ermon 2017)
have attempted to improve the balance between the learned
representation quality and ELBO maximization on the basis
of information theory. A Shannon entropy-based constraint
is introduced to assess the quality of representation learning when optimizing the ELBO, so as to guarantee that sufficient information of the observation flows into the latent
code. For example, (Phuong et al. 2018) optimized ELBO
plus a mutual information regularizer to explicitly control
the information stored in latent codes. Although it is useful
to consider mutual information (a member of Shannon family) in VAE encoding for representation learning, how these
information quantities affect VAEs has not yet been theoretically analyzed so far. Besides, previous works mainly leverage the Shannon information, which usually suffers from the
intractability in computing, yielding an approximation surrogate (Phuong et al. 2018).
In information theory, the uncertainty property (Dembo,
Cover, and Thomas 1991; Vignat and Bercher 2003) has
revealed a trade-off between Fisher information and Shannon information, which quantify the uncertainty associated
with distribution modeling and the entropy in the predicted
values of variables respectively (Rosso, Olivares, and Plastino 2015). Fisher-Shannon (FS) information plane (Vignat
and Bercher 2003) is proposed to analyze the complementarity between Fisher information and Shannon information.
In this paper, based on the uncertainty property, we attempt
to investigate VAEs in FS information plane, which illustrates a novel insight to perform a theoretical analysis with

In information theory, Fisher information and Shannon information (entropy) are respectively used to quantify the uncertainty associated with the distribution modeling and the uncertainty in specifying the outcome of given variables. These
two quantities are complementary and are jointly applied to
information behavior analysis in most cases. The uncertainty
property in information asserts a fundamental trade-off between Fisher information and Shannon information, which
enlightens us the relationship between the encoder and the decoder in variational auto-encoders (VAEs). In this paper, we
investigate VAEs in the Fisher-Shannon plane, and demonstrate that the representation learning and the log-likelihood
estimation are intrinsically related to these two information
quantities. Through extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments, we provide with a better comprehension of VAEs
in tasks such as high-resolution reconstruction, and representation learning in the perspective of Fisher information and
Shannon information. We further propose a variant of VAEs,
termed as Fisher auto-encoder (FAE), for practical needs to
balance Fisher information and Shannon information. Our
experimental results have demonstrated its promise in improving the reconstruction accuracy and avoiding the noninformative latent code as occurred in previous works.

Introduction
The common latent variable models fit pθ (x, z) =
pθ (z)pθ (x|z) in order to model the data x with a latent variable z as representation. Variational Autoencoders (VAEs)
(Kingma and Welling 2014), recently as one of the most
popular latent variable models, maximize the evidence lower
bound (ELBO) in an encoding/decoding mechanism.


L= E
E [log pθ (x|z)] − DKL (qφ (z|x)||p(z))
x∼data z∼qφ

where pθ (x|z) and qφ (z|x) are encoder and decoder implemented with neural networks parameterized by θ, φ; DKL denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence. The learning targets
of VAEs may be interpreted in the following two perspectives. In the perspective of variational optimization (Cremer, Li, and Duvenaud 2018), VAEs aim to learn a proper
model by maximum likelihood with pθ (x|z). In the perspective of representation learning (Bengio, Courville, and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5917

