The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Probabilistic Derivation of LASSO and L12-Norm Feature Selections
Di Ming,a Chris Ding,a Feiping Nieb
a

b

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, TX 76019, USA
Centre for OPTical Imagery Analysis and Learning, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian 710072, China
initialdiming@yahoo.com, chqding@uta.edu, feipingnie@gmail.com

Abstract

tures via aforementioned algorithms. Thus, mRMR (Peng,
Long, and Ding 2005) is proposed to maximize relevance
and minimize redundancy simultaneously, which can effectively overcome the shortage of previous methods and further improve the practical performance. On the contrary,
wrapper-type methods such as SVM-RFE (Guyon et al.
2002) are dependent on a specific classifier to iteratively
search the best feature subset, but which has highly expensive computational cost and potential overfitting risk.
Recently, sparse coding based methods (also called embedded methods) become popular in study of feature selection. This approach combines the advantages of abovementioned two kinds of methods. The sparse model tries to
find a compromise between loss and sparsity-induced regularization, e.g., the classic Lasso (Tibshirani 1996) using
`1 -norm constraint, also known as sparse coding in dictionary learning. To remove redundant noise features, `1 -SVM
(Zhu et al. 2003) is introduced to generate sparse solution for
two-class feature selection. On the other hand, in multi-task
setting, researchers (Argyriou, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2008),
(Liu, Ji, and Ye 2009), (Nie et al. 2010), (Gui et al. 2017) focus on designing a collaborative model to select class-shared
features via `2,1 -norm, which is first proposed in (Ding et al.
2006) as rotational invariant `1 -norm for purpose of robust
subspace factorization. Similarly, `1,∞ -norm (Quattoni et al.
2009) is proposed to build a set of jointly sparse models,
by means of `1 -ball projection (Duchi et al. 2008). Besides,
sparse coding based method is applied to other domains,
such as sparse subspace learning (Gui et al. 2012), sparse
representation based classification (Lu et al. 2013),etc.

LASSO and `2,1 -norm based feature selection had achieved
success in many application areas. In this paper, we first derive LASSO and `1,2 -norm feature selection from a probabilistic framework, which provides an independent point of
view from the usual sparse coding point of view. From here,
we further propose a feature selection approach based on the
probability-derived `1,2 -norm. We point out some inflexibility in the standard feature selection that the feature selected
for all different classes are enforced to be exactly the same
using the widely used `2,1 -norm, which enforces the joint
sparsity across all the data instances. Using the probabilityderived `1,2 -norm feature selection, allowing certain flexibility that the selected features do not have to be exactly same
for all classes, the resulting features lead to better classification on six benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Feature selection is one of important tasks of machine
learning. Selecting useful set of features could improve
many learning algorithms such as classification, regression,
etc. In today’s big data environment, many data has highdimensions, e.g., biology datasets with around 10k features/genes (Bolón-Canedo et al. 2014) are commonplace.
Selecting a subset of features reduces the data sizes and,
more importantly, simplifies the interpretation of machine
learning results, with many applications in gene-expression
analysis (Dudoit, Fridlyand, and Speed 2002), proteomic
biomarkers discovery (Saeys, Inza, and Larrañaga 2007),
molecular cancer prediction (Gao and Church 2005).
Feature selection has been widely investigated in many
applications with great assistance to practical performance.
The main focus in the literature is on the supervised learning,
which evaluates the relevance between features and class
labels. The evaluation metric divides feature selection algorithms into three main categories (Guyon and Elisseeff
2003), which are filter, wrapper, embedded methods. Independent of any specific models, filter-type methods such
as F-statistic (Ding and Peng 2003) and ReliefF (RobnikŠikonja and Kononenko 2003) can quickly select features
which are most correlated with class labels. However, redundant features are usually present in the subset of selected fea-

A Probabilistic View of LASSO
The `1 based LASSO and the closely related `1,2 -norm feature selection are, in some sense, a prescription using sparse
coding. In this paper, we show they can be derived from a
probability framework, thus provides a strong probabilistic
foundation.
In this paper, we propose to use the probability-derived
`1,2 -norm feature selection. In this approach, features selected from different classes are not vigorously enforced to
be exactly same.
However, most of popular feature selection methods aim
at searching features across all the data instances with joint
sparsity, which then enforces the selected features to be ex-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4586

