The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Manifold-Valued Image Generation
with Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Nets
Zhiwu Huang,† Jiqing Wu,† Luc Van Gool†‡
†

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland ‡ VISICS, KU Leuven, Belgium
{zhiwu.huang, jwu, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract

color spaces. Since such HSV/CB spaces are more adapted
to human color perception than the RGB space, many works
like (Bergmann et al. 2014; Bergmann and Weinmann 2015;
Bansal and Tatu 2015; Bergmann and Weinmann 2016;
Bacák et al. 2016; Laus et al. 2017) have studied that the
image processing models based on HSV/CB components
can surpass the competitors developed in the RGB space.
Analogously, for a better understanding of color semantics, producing HSV/CB images in an unsupervised manner
would be a good alternative for the regular image generation over the RGB space. Another good application is for
diffusion-tensor magnetic resonance imaging (DT-MRI). In
many DT-MRI works like (Pennec, Fillard, and Ayache 2006;
Arsigny et al. 2007; Hasan et al. 2011; Jayasumana et al.
2013; Priya and Nair 2015), DT images are generally processed on the Riemannian manifold of symmetric positive
definite 3 × 3 matrices SPD(3). In practice, researchers often
have a severe lack of DT images for better analysis. Hence,
generating photo-realistic DT images would have a high potential to benefit this field.
With the motivation in mind, we focus on generative modeling over manifold-valued images. In general, it proposes
new challenges. One of the most important issues is the
generalization of the classic distribution distance to manifolds, while the other major challenge is the exploration on
the manifold setting of the regular GAN objective. To address the first issue, we leverage the well-studied optimal
transport (OT) theory (Fathi and Figalli 2010; Loeper 2011;
De Philippis and Figalli 2014; Fitschen, Laus, and Schmitzer
2017) on manifolds to introduce a new Wasserstein distance
on complete manifolds. By adopting the proposed Wasserstein distance, we exploit a new model of Wasserstein GANs
(Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Gulrajani et al. 2017;
Wei et al. 2018) for manifold-valued image generation. Without loss of generality, we take three typical types of manifoldvalued images for study, and suggest the proposed manifoldaware Wasserestein GAN approach to produce plausible samples residing on such manifolds. In summary, the paper gives
rise to two original contributions:

Generative modeling over natural images is one of the most
fundamental machine learning problems. However, few modern generative models, including Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Nets (WGANs), are studied on manifold-valued images that are frequently encountered in real-world applications. To fill the gap, this paper first formulates the problem of
generating manifold-valued images and exploits three typical
instances: hue-saturation-value (HSV) color image generation, chromaticity-brightness (CB) color image generation,
and diffusion-tensor (DT) image generation. For the proposed
generative modeling problem, we then introduce a theorem of
optimal transport to derive a new Wasserstein distance of data
distributions on complete manifolds, enabling us to achieve a
tractable objective under the WGAN framework. In addition,
we recommend three benchmark datasets that are CIFAR-10
HSV/CB color images, ImageNet HSV/CB color images, UCL
DT image datasets. On the three datasets, we experimentally
demonstrate the proposed manifold-aware WGAN model can
generate more plausible manifold-valued images than its competitors.

Introduction
Building generative models of natural images has been a fundamental problem in machine learning. Such generative models are expected to estimate the probability distributions over
the natural images. One of the most striking techniques is the
family of generative adversarial networks (GANs) such as
(Goodfellow et al. 2014; Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015;
Zhao, Mathieu, and LeCun 2016; Mao et al. 2017). The stateof-the-art GANs like (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017;
Gulrajani et al. 2017; Wei et al. 2018; Miyato et al. 2018) are
good at approximating the distributions of Euclidean-valued
(or real-valued) images implicitly by optimizing Wasserstein
distance between the distributions of generated images and
real images under an adversarial training framework.
While the GAN techniques have made great success for
real-valued image generation, they are rarely applied to
manifold-valued images that are of much interest in a variety of applications. For example, one of the most popular applications is processing phase-valued images, whose
data live on either the Cycle S1 or the Sphere S2 , in huesaturation-value (HSV) and chromaticity-brightness (CB)

• To the best of our knowledge, this paper proposes the
novel problem of unsupervised manifold-valued image
generation for the first time in the existing literature.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We generalize the Wasserestein GAN methodology to the
3886

