The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Block Belief Propagation for Parameter Learning in Markov Random Fields
You Lu

Zhiyuan Liu

Bert Huang

Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
you.lu@vt.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado Boulder
Boulder, CO
zhiyuan.liu@colorado.edu

Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
bhuang@vt.edu

Abstract

network into several small blocks. At each iteration of learning, it selects a block and computes its marginals. It approximates the gradient with a mix of the updated and the previous marginals, and it updates the parameters of interest with
this gradient.

Traditional learning methods for training Markov random
fields require doing inference over all variables to compute
the likelihood gradient. The iteration complexity for those
methods therefore scales with the size of the graphical models. In this paper, we propose block belief propagation learning (BBPL), which uses block-coordinate updates of approximate marginals to compute approximate gradients, removing
the need to compute inference on the entire graphical model.
Thus, the iteration complexity of BBPL does not scale with
the size of the graphs. We prove that the method converges
to the same solution as that obtained by using full inference
per iteration, despite these approximations, and we empirically demonstrate its scalability improvements over standard
training methods.

Related Work
Many methods have been developed to learn MRFs. In this
section, we cover only the BP-based methods.
Mean-field variational inference and belief propagation
(BP) approximate the partition function with non-convex
entropies, which break the convexity of the original partition function. In contrast, convex BP (Globerson and
Jaakkola 2007; Heskes 2006; Schwing et al. 2011; Wainwright, Jaakkola, and Willsky 2005; Wainwright 2006) provides a strongly convex upper bound for the partition function. This strong convexity has also been theoretically shown
to be beneficial for learning (London, Huang, and Getoor
2015). Thus, our BBPL method uses convex BP to approximate the partition function.
Regarding inference, some methods are developed to accelerate computations of the beliefs and messages. Stochastic BP (Noorshams and Wainwright 2013) updates only one
dimension of the messages at each inference iteration, so
its iteration complexity is much lower than traditional BP.
Distributed BP (Schwing et al. 2011; Yin and Gao 2014)
distributes and parallelizes the computation of beliefs and
messages on a cluster of machines to reduce inference time.
Sparse-matrix BP (Bixler and Huang 2018) uses sparsematrix products to represent the message-passing indexing,
so that it can be implemented on modern hardware. However, to learn MRF parameters, we need to run these inference algorithms for many iterations on the whole network
until convergence at each parameter update. Thus, these
methods are still impacted by the network size.
Regarding learning, many learning frameworks have been
proposed to efficiently learn MRF parameters. Some approaches use neural networks to directly estimate the messages (Lin et al. 2015; Ross et al. 2011). Methods that truncate message passing (Domke 2011; 2013; Stoyanov, Ropson, and Eisner 2011) redefine the loss function in terms
of the approximate inference results obtained after message
passing is truncated to a small number of iterations. These
methods can be inefficient because they require running in-

Introduction
Markov random fields (MRFs) and conditional random
fields (CRFs) are powerful classes of models for learning
and inference of factored probability distributions (Koller
and Friedman 2009; Wainwright and Jordan 2008). They
have been widely used in tasks such as structured prediction (Taskar, Guestrin, and Koller 2004) and computer
vision (Nowozin and Lampert 2011). Traditional training
methods for MRFs learn by maximizing an approximate
maximum likelihood. Many such methods use variational inference to approximate the crucial partition function.
With MRFs, the gradient of the log likelihood with respect
to model parameters is the marginal vector. With CRFs, it
is the expected feature vector. These identities suggest that
each iteration of optimization must involve computation of
the full marginal vector, containing the estimated marginal
probabilities of all variables and all dependent groups of
variables. In some applications, the number of variables can
be massive, making traditional, full-inference learning too
expensive in practice. This problem limits the application of
MRFs in modern data science tasks.
In this paper, we propose block belief propagation learning (BBPL), which alleviates the cost of learning by computing approximate gradients with inference over only a small
block of variables at a time. BBPL first separates the Markov
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4448

