The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Optimal Discrete Online Hashing with Balanced Similarity
Mingbao Lin,1 Rongrong Ji,1,2∗ Hong Liu,1 Xiaoshuai Sun,1 Yongjian Wu,3 Yunsheng Wu3
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Department of Cognitive Science,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, Tencent Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd, China
lmbxmu@stu.xmu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, lynnliu.xmu@gmail.com,
xiaoshuaisun.hit@gmail.com, {littlekenwu, simonwu}@tencent.com
Abstract

are simultaneously updated in order to renew codes of the
existing data.
In principle, OH aims to analyze the streaming data while
preserving structure of the existing dataset1 . In the literature, several recent works have been proposed to handle OH.
The representative works include, but not limited to, OKH
(Huang, Yang, and Zheng 2013), SketchHash (Leng et al.
2015), AdaptHash (Fatih and Sclaroff 2015), OSH (Fatih,
Bargal, and Sclaroff 2017), FROSH (Chen, King, and Lyu
2017) and MIHash (Fatih et al. 2017). However, the performance of OH is still far from satisfactory for real-world applications. We attribute it to two open issues, i.e., updating
imbalance and optimization inefficiency.
In terms of the updating imbalance, the existing OH
schemes update hash functions solely based on the newly
coming data batch, without investigating the correlation between such new data and the existing dataset. To that effect, an asymmetric graph can be constructed to preserve
similarity between the new data and the existing dataset as
shown in Fig.1. Under online setting, the similarity matrix
is usually sparse and unbalanced, i.e., data-imbalance phenomenon, since most image pairs are dissimilar and only a
few are similar. The updating imbalance issue, if not well
addressed, might cause the learned binary codes ineffective
for both the new data and the existing data, and hence lead
to severe performance degeneration for OH schemes.
In terms of the optimization inefficiency, the existing
OH schemes still rely on the traditional relaxation (Gong
and Lazebnik 2011; Datar et al. 2004; Jiang and Li 2015;
Liu et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2018) over the approximated continuous space to learn hash functions, which often makes the
produced hash functions less effective, especially when the
code length increases (Liu et al. 2014; Shen et al. 2015b).
Despite the recent advances in direct discrete optimizations
in offline hashing (Ji et al. 2017; Jiang and Li 2018) with discrete cyclic coordinate descent (DCC) (Shen et al. 2015b),
such discrete optimizations can not be directly applied to
online case that contains serious data-imbalance problem,
since the optimization heavily relies on the dissimilar pairs,
and thus lose the information of similar pairs.

When facing large-scale image datasets, online hashing
serves as a promising solution for online retrieval and prediction tasks. It encodes the online streaming data into compact binary codes, and simultaneously updates the hash functions to renew codes of the existing dataset. To this end, the
existing methods update hash functions solely based on the
new data batch, without investigating the correlation between
such new data and the existing dataset. In addition, existing
works update the hash functions using a relaxation process
in its corresponding approximated continuous space. And it
remains as an open problem to directly apply discrete optimizations in online hashing. In this paper, we propose a
novel supervised online hashing method, termed Balanced
Similarity for Online Discrete Hashing (BSODH), to solve
the above problems in a unified framework. BSODH employs
a well-designed hashing algorithm to preserve the similarity between the streaming data and the existing dataset via
an asymmetric graph regularization. We further identify the
“data-imbalance” problem brought by the constructed asymmetric graph, which restricts the application of discrete optimization in our problem. Therefore, a novel balanced similarity is further proposed, which uses two equilibrium factors
to balance the similar and dissimilar weights and eventually
enables the usage of discrete optimizations. Extensive experiments conducted on three widely-used benchmarks demonstrate the advantages of the proposed method over the stateof-the-art methods.

Introduction
With the increasing amount of image data available on
the Internet, hashing has been widely applied to approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search (Wang et al. 2016;
2018). It aims at mapping real-valued image features to compact binary codes, which merits in both low storage and efficient computation on large-scale datasets. One promising direction is online hashing (OH), which has attracted increasing attentions recently. Under such an application scenario,
data are often fed into the system via a streaming fashion,
while traditional hashing methods can hardly accommodate
this configuration. In OH, the online streaming data is encoded into compact binary codes, while the hash functions

1

∗

The streaming data is usually in a small batch, which can be
processed easily to pursue a better tradeoff among computation,
storage, and accuracy.

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8722

