The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DeepSTN+: Context-Aware Spatial-Temporal Neural Network for Crowd Flow
Prediction in Metropolis
Ziqian Lin,∗ Jie Feng,∗ Ziyang Lu, Yong Li,† Depeng Jin
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{linzq14,feng-j16,zy-lu15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,{liyong07,jindp}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Crowd flow prediction is of great importance in a wide range
of applications from urban planning, traffic control to public
safety. It aims to predict the inflow (the traffic of crowds entering a region in a given time interval) and outflow (the traffic
of crowds leaving a region for other places) of each region in
the city with knowing the historical flow data. In this paper,
we propose DeepSTN+, a deep learning-based convolutional
model, to predict crowd flows in the metropolis. First, DeepSTN+ employs the ConvPlus structure to model the longrange spatial dependence among crowd flows in different regions. Further, PoI distributions and time factor are combined
to express the effect of location attributes to introduce prior
knowledge of the crowd movements. Finally, we propose an
effective fusion mechanism to stabilize the training process,
which further improves the performance. Extensive experimental results based on two real-life datasets demonstrate the
superiority of our model, i.e., DeepSTN+ reduces the error of
the crowd flow prediction by approximately 8%∼13% compared with the state-of-the-art baselines.

Figure 1: The dotted red line indicates inflow while the solid
blue line indicates outflow. The curve line illustrates it’s a
distant movement while the straight line represents it’s a
movement of close range. (5, C) is the center of the city
while (1, F ) locates in the suburban area.

Introduction
Spatial-temporal prediction is of great importance in a wide
range of applications from urban planning, traffic control to
public safety. In these applications, the government needs
to forecast the crowd flows in the Eve celebrations to avoid
potential catastrophic stampede; ride-sharing platforms like
Uber are able to predict the travel demand around the city
to provide better service for both consumers and drivers. In
this paper, we study one of the classic problems of spatialtemporal prediction: crowd flow prediction.
As Figure 1 presents, crowd flow prediction (Zhang et al.
2016) is to predict the inflow (the total traffic of crowds entering a region in a given interval) and outflow (the total traffic of crowds leaving a region for other places during a given
time interval) of each region in the city with knowing the
historical flow information. Recently, to address this problem, deep learning-based models (Zhang et al. 2016; Zhang,
Zheng, and Qi 2017; Zonoozi et al. 2018) are proposed,
which achieve promising performance. Deep-ST (Zhang et

al. 2016) is the first model to use a convolutional network
to capture the spatial relations. Further, ST-ResNet (Zhang,
Zheng, and Qi 2017) is proposed by replacing the general
convolution operation with an advanced residual framework.
By combining the pyramidal ConvGRU model with periodic
representations, Periodic-CRN (Zonoozi et al. 2018) is designed to model the periodic nature of crowd flows explicitly.
Nevertheless, existing approaches are still inefficient and
inaccurate in practice due to the following three shortcomings:
1) Failing to capture long-range spatial dependence
among regions. Due to the advanced transportation systems
in the modern cities, people can quickly go anywhere in a
short time by subway or taxi. Hence, long-range spatial relations between regions play an increasingly important role
in crowd movements. Existing works (Zhang et al. 2016;
Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017) use multi-layers convolutional
network to model them. However, they can only capture the
neighbor spatial dependence step by step, but fail to capture

∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1020

