The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Reinforcement Learning via Past-Success Directed Exploration
Xiaoming Liu, Zhixiong Xu,* Lei Cao, Xiliang Chen, Kai Kang
College of Command and Control Engineering, Army Engineering University
No. 1 Guang Hua Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China, 210007
lxm.nj@foxmail.com xu.nj@foxmail.com caolei.nj@foxmail.com 383618393@qq.com 36442181@qq.com

posed method was combined into two different types of
representative reinforcement learning algorithms for testing, and the empirical evidence show that PSE-Softmax
exploration strategy indeed improves the performance of
reinforcement learning algorithms with basic exploration
strategies.

Abstract
The balance between exploration and exploitation has always been a core challenge in reinforcement learning. This
paper proposes “past-success exploration strategy combined
with Softmax action selection”(PSE-Softmax) as an adaptive control method for taking advantage of the characteristics of the online learning process of the agent to adapt exploration parameters dynamically. The proposed strategy is
tested on OpenAI Gym with discrete and continuous control
tasks, and the experimental results show that PSE-Softmax
strategy delivers better performance than deep reinforcement learning algorithms with basic exploration strategies.

Methodology
Previously Value-Difference Based Exploration combined
with Softmax action selection (VDBE-Softmax) (Tokic and
Palm. 2011) takes advantage of the value difference produced during learning process as a measure of the agent’s
uncertainty about the environment to adapt exploration
parameters online, which has been proved to lead to statistically-significant improvement in bandit problems. However, one of drawbacks of those exploration strategies is
that they have to record exploration parameters for each
state, it’s inefficient when encountered with large-scale
continuous state or action space. We propose a novel and
generic method called PSE-Softmax, which adapts the exploration parameter dynamically according to the immediate rewards and the average discounted rewards during the
interaction between the agent and environment.
The core idea of PSE-Softmax method is to bias exploration by the amount and rate of success the agent has in
reaching the goal state, which we called past-success directed exploration. On the one hand, when the agent receives reward at an increasing rate, it should exploits more.
On the other hand, when the agent stops receiving reward
because of a change in the environment, exploration should
again increase.
The overall framework of past-success directed deep reinforcement learning is shown in Figure 1, which combines
past-success directed exploration module with deep reinforcement learning, besides, PSE-Softmax exploration
strategy can also be applied to solve both discrete and continuous control tasks.

Introduction
The goal of reinforcement learning (RL) is to maximize the
cumulative rewards during the ongoing interaction between
the agent and the environment. The agent begins with no
knowledge about the environment until it takes a sequence
of actions to explore and learn from experience, which
means that the agent can hardly maximize the cumulative
reward unless it has sufficiently explored the environment.
This leads to a fundamental trade-off of exploration versus
exploitation (Tang et al. 2017).
In this paper, we proposes a novel and simple pastsuccess directed exploration strategy called PSE-Softmax
exploration strategy, which combines past-success directed
exploration strategy and Softmax action selection method.
Our proposed method not only utilizes the characteristics
of the agent’s online learning process to tune the exploration parameter dynamically, but also selects potential optimal action more accurately to guide the process of learning. Moreover, PSE-Softmax exploration strategy can also
be applied to solve both discrete and continuous control
tasks.
We evaluated the proposed method on OpenAI Gym
with both discrete and continuous control tasks. Our pro-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9979

