The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Syntax-Aware Neural Semantic Role Labeling∗
Qingrong Xia,1 Zhenghua Li,1 Min Zhang,1 Meishan Zhang,2 Guohong Fu,2 Rui Wang,3 Luo Si3
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Heilongjiang University, China, 3 Alibaba Group, China
1
kirosummer.nlp@gmail.com, {zhli13, minzhang}@suda.edu.cn
2
mason.zms@gmail.com, ghfu@hotmail.com, 3 {masi.wr, luo.si}@alibaba-inc.com
Root

Abstract

root

Semantic role labeling (SRL), also known as shallow semantic parsing, is an important yet challenging task in NLP. Motivated by the close correlation between syntactic and semantic structures, traditional discrete-feature-based SRL approaches make heavy use of syntactic features. In contrast,
deep-neural-network-based approaches usually encode the
input sentence as a word sequence without considering the
syntactic structures. In this work, we investigate several previous approaches for encoding syntactic trees, and make a
thorough study on whether extra syntax-aware representations are beneficial for neural SRL models. Experiments on
the benchmark CoNLL-2005 dataset show that syntax-aware
SRL approaches can effectively improve performance over
a strong baseline with external word representations from
ELMo. With the extra syntax-aware representations, our approaches achieve new state-of-the-art 85.6 F1 (single model)
and 86.6 F1 (ensemble) on the test data, outperforming the
corresponding strong baselines with ELMo by 0.8 and 1.0, respectively. Detailed error analysis are conducted to gain more
insights on the investigated approaches.

nn

nsubj

. Haag
Ms.
A0

punct
dobj

plays
V

Elianti
A1

.
O

Figure 1: Example of dependency and SRL structures.

semantic head of the manually annotated span (Surdeanu et
al. 2008).
This work follows the span-based formulation. Formally,
given an input sentence w = w1 ...wn and a predicative word
prd = wp (1 ≤ p ≤ n), the task is to recognize the semantic roles of prd in the sentence, such as A0, A1, AM-ADV,
etc. We denote the whole role set as R. Each role corresponds to a word span of wj ...wk (1 ≤ j ≤ k ≤ n). Taking
Figure 1 as an example,“Ms. Hag” is the A0 role of the predicate “plays”.
In the past few years, thanks to the success of deep
learning, researchers has proposed effective neural-networkbased models and improved SRL performance by large margins (Zhou and Xu 2015; He et al. 2017; Tan et al. 2018).
Unlike traditional discrete-feature-based approaches that
make heavy use of syntactic features, recent deep-neuralnetwork-based approaches are mostly in an end-to-end fashion and give little consideration of syntactic knowledge.
Intuitively, syntax is strongly correlative with semantics.
Taking Figure 1 as an example, the A0 role in the SRL structure is also the subject (marked by nsubj) in the dependency
tree, and the A1 role is the direct object (marked by dobj).
In fact, the semantic A0 or A1 argument of a verb predicate
are usually the syntactic subject or object interchangeably
according to the PropBank annotation guideline.
In this work, we investigate several previous approaches
for encoding syntactic trees, and make a thorough study on
whether extra syntax-aware representations are beneficial
for neural SRL models. The four approaches, Tree-GRU,
Shortest Dependency Path (SDP), Tree-based Position Feature (TPF), and Pattern Embedding (PE), try to encode useful syntactic information in the input dependency tree from
different perspectives. Then, we use the encoded syntaxaware representation vectors as extra input word representa-

Introduction
Semantic role labeling (SRL), also known as shallow semantic parsing, is an important yet challenging task in NLP.
Given an input sentence and one or more predicates, SRL
aims to determine the semantic roles of each predicate,
i.e., who did what to whom, when and where, etc. Semantic knowledge has been proved informative in many downstream NLP applications, such as question answering (Shen
and Lapata 2007; Wang et al. 2015), text summarization
(Genest and Lapalme 2011; Khan, Salim, and Jaya Kumar 2015), and machine translation (Liu and Gildea 2010;
Gao and Vogel 2011).
Depending on how the semantic roles are defined, there
are two forms of SRL in the community. The span-based
SRL follows the manual annotations in the PropBank
(Palmer, Gildea, and Kingsbury 2005) and NomBank (Meyers et al. 2004) and uses a continuous word span to be a semantic role. In contrast, the dependency-based SRL fulfills
a role with a single word, which is usually the syntactic or
∗

Zhenghua Li is the corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7305

