The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Non-Autoregressive Machine Translation with Auxiliary Regularization
Yiren Wang,1∗ Fei Tian,2 Di He,3 Tao Qin,2 ChengXiang Zhai,1 Tie-Yan Liu2
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China
1
{yiren,czhai}@illinois.edu
2
{fetia, taoqin, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com
3
di he@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

Therefore, during the inference process, we have to sequentially translate each target-side word one by one, which substantially hampers the inference efficiency of NMT systems.
To alleviate the latency of inference brought by autoregressive decoding, recently the community has turned to
Non-Autoregressive Translation (NAT) systems (Gu et al.
2018; Lee, Mansimov, and Cho 2018; Kaiser et al. 2018).
A basic NAT model has the same encoder-decoder architecture as the autoregressive translation (AT) model, except
that the sequential dependency within the target side sentence is omitted. In this way, all the tokens can be generated in parallel, and the inference speed is thus significantly boosted. However, it comes at the cost that the translation quality is largely sacrificed since the intrinsic dependency within the natural language sentence is abandoned. To
mitigate such performance degradation, previous work has
tried different ways to insert intermediate discrete variables
to the basic NAT model, so as to incorporate some lightweighted sequential information into the non-autoregressive
decoder. The discrete variables include the autoregressively
generated latent variables (Kaiser et al. 2018), and the fertility information brought by a third-party word alignment
model (Gu et al. 2018). However, leveraging such discrete
variables not only brings additional difficulty for optimization, but also slows down the translation by introducing extra
computational cost for producing such discrete variables.
In this paper, we propose a new solution to the problem
that does not rely on any discrete variables and makes little revision to the basic NAT model, thus retaining most of
the benefit of an NAT model. Our approach was motivated
by the following result we obtained from carefully analyzing the key issues existed in the basic NAT model. We empirically observed that the two types of translation errors
frequently made by the basic NAT model are: 1) repeated
translation, where the same token is generated repeatedly at
consecutive time steps; 2) incomplete translation, where the
semantics of several tokens/sentence pieces from the source
sentence are not adequately translated. Both issues suggest
that the decoder hidden states in NAT model, i.e., the hidden states output in the topmost layer of the decoder, are of
low quality: the repeated translation shows that two adjacent
hidden states are indistinguishable, leading to the same tokens decoded out, while the incomplete translation reflects
that the hidden states in the decoder are incomplete in repre-

As a new neural machine translation approach, NonAutoregressive machine Translation (NAT) has attracted attention recently due to its high efficiency in inference. However, the high efficiency has come at the cost of not capturing
the sequential dependency on the target side of translation,
which causes NAT to suffer from two kinds of translation errors: 1) repeated translations (due to indistinguishable adjacent decoder hidden states), and 2) incomplete translations
(due to incomplete transfer of source side information via the
decoder hidden states). In this paper, we propose to address
these two problems by improving the quality of decoder hidden representations via two auxiliary regularization terms in
the training process of an NAT model. First, to make the hidden states more distinguishable, we regularize the similarity
between consecutive hidden states based on the corresponding target tokens. Second, to force the hidden states to contain
all the information in the source sentence, we leverage the
dual nature of translation tasks (e.g., English to German and
German to English) and minimize a backward reconstruction
error to ensure that the hidden states of the NAT decoder are
able to recover the source side sentence. Extensive experiments conducted on several benchmark datasets show that
both regularization strategies are effective and can alleviate
the issues of repeated translations and incomplete translations
in NAT models. The accuracy of NAT models is therefore
improved significantly over the state-of-the-art NAT models
with even better efficiency for inference.

Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) based on deep neural
networks has gained rapid progress over recent years (Cho et
al. 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Wu et al. 2016;
Vaswani et al. 2017; Hassan et al. 2018). NMT systems are
typically implemented in an encoder-decoder framework,
in which the encoder network feeds the representations of
source side sentence x into the decoder network to generate the tokens in target sentence y. The decoder typically
works in an auto-regressive manner: the generation of the tth token yt follows a conditional distribution P (yt |x, y<t ),
where y<t represents all the generated tokens before yt .
∗
The work was done when the author was an intern at Microsoft
Research Asia.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5377

