Subspace Selection via DR-Submodular Maximization on Lattices
So Nakashima,1,2 Takanori Maehara2
1

The University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
so nakashima@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, takanori.maehara@riken.jp

Abstract

In general, the subspace selection problem is a non-convex
continuous optimization problem; hence it is hopeless to obtain a provable approximate solution. On the other hand, such
solution can be obtained efficiently in some special cases.
The most important example is the principal component analysis. Let L(Rd ) be the set of all the subspaces of Rd , F be
the subspaces with dimension of at most k, and f : L → R
be the function defined by
X
f (X) =
kΠX ui k2
(1.2)

The subspace selection problem seeks a subspace that maximizes an objective function under some constraint. This problem includes several important machine learning problems
such as the principal component analysis and sparse dictionary
selection problem. Often, these problems can be (exactly or
approximately) solved using greedy algorithms. Here, we are
interested in why these problems can be solved by greedy algorithms, and what classes of objective functions and constraints
admit this property.
In this study, we focus on the fact that the set of subspaces
forms a lattice, then formulate the problems as optimization
problems on lattices. Then, we introduce a new class of functions on lattices, directional DR-submodular functions, to characterize the approximability of problems. We prove that the
principal component analysis, sparse dictionary selection problem, and these generalizations are monotone directional DRsubmodularity functions. We also prove the “quantum version”
of the cut function is a non-monotone directional DR submodular function. Using these results, we propose new solvable
feature selection problems (generalized principal component
analysis and quantum maximum cut problem), and improve
the approximation ratio of the sparse dictionary selection problem in certain instances.
We show that, under several constraints, the directional DRsubmodular function maximization problem can be solved
efficiently with provable approximation factors.

1

i∈I

where {ui }i∈I ⊂ Rd is the given data and ΠX is the projection to subspace X. Then, problem (1.1) with these L(Rd ),
F, and f defines the principal component analysis problem.
As we know, the greedy algorithm, which iteratively selects a
new direction ai ∈ Rd that maximizes the objective function,
gives the optimal solution to problem (1.1). Another important problem is the sparse dictionary selection problem. Let
V ⊆ Rd be a set of vectors, called a dictionary. For a subset
S ⊆ V , we denote by span(S) the subspace spanned by S.
Let L(V ) = {span(S) : S ⊆ V } be the subspaces spanned
by a subset of V , and F be the subspaces spanned by at most
k vectors of V . Then, the problem (1.1) with these L(V ), F,
and f in (1.2) defines the sparse dictionary selection problem. The problem is in general difficult to solve (Natarajan
1995); however, the greedy-type algorithms, e.g., orthogonal
matching pursuit, yield provable approximation guarantees
depending on the mutual coherence of V .
In this study, we are interested in the following research
question:

Introduction

Background and motivation The subspace selection problem involves seeking a good subspace from data. Mathematically, the problem is formulated as follows. Let L be a family
of subspaces of Rd , F ⊆ L be a set of feasible subspaces,
and f : L → R be an objective function. Then, the task is to
solve the following optimization problem.
maximize f (X)
subject to X ∈ F.

Why the principal component analysis and the sparse
dictionary selection problem can be solved by the greedy
algorithms? What classes of objective functions and
constraints have the same property?

(1.1)

Existing approach Several researchers have considered
this research question (see Related Work below). One successful approach is employing submodularity. Let V ⊆ Rd
be a (possibly infinite) set of vectors. We define F : 2V → R
by F (S) = f (span(S)). If this function satisfies the submodularity, F (S) + F (T ) ≥ F (S ∪ T ) + F (S ∩ T ), or some its
approximation variants, we obtain a provable approximation
guarantee of the greedy algorithm (Krause and Cevher 2010;

This problem is a kind of feature selection problem, and
contains several important machine learning problems such
as the principal component analysis and sparse dictionary
selection problem.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4618

