The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

How Similar Are Two Elections?
Piotr Faliszewski,1 Piotr Skowron,2 Arkadii Slinko,3 Stanisław Szufa,4 Nimrod Talmon5
1

AGH University, Kraków, Poland, 2 University of Warsaw, Poland, 3 University of Auckland, New Zealand
4
Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland, 5 Ben-Gurion University, Be’er Sheva, Israel
faliszew@agh.edu.pl, p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl, a.slinko@auckland.ac.nz,
stanislaw.szufa@doctoral.uj.edu.pl, talmonn@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

votewise manner (Elkind, Faliszewski, and Slinko 2012), assuming that both elections include the same candidates and
the same voters (even if the voters have changed their preference orders in one of the elections). In contrast to that line
of work, we extend the distance between preference orders
to whole elections in a way that respects both anonymity
and neutrality. Namely, we ask if, via appropriate renaming
of candidates and reordering voters, it is possible to bring
a given election within some small votewise distance of another given one. We will refer to these problems as the dI SOMORPHISM D ISTANCE problems, where d is the distance (over preference orders) that we use.
As a consequence, when d is the swap distance, dI SOMORPHISM D ISTANCE generalizes the problem of finding a Kemeny ranking (roughly speaking, finding a Kemeny ranking is equivalent to finding the smallest swapbased isomorphism distance between the given election
and a “constant” one, where all the votes are identical).
We note that approximate G RAPH I SOMORPHISM problems are also studied in the literature (Arvind et al. 2012;
Grohe, Rattan, and Woeginger 2018); in spirit, they are very
similar to our problems, but they differ on the technical level.

We introduce the E LECTION I SOMORPHISM problem and a
family of its approximate variants, which we refer to as dI SOMORPHISM D ISTANCE (d-ID) problems (where d is a
metric between preference orders). We show that E LECTION
I SOMORPHISM is polynomial-time solvable, and that the dI SOMORPHISM D ISTANCE problems generalize various classic rank-aggregation methods (e.g., those of Kemeny and Litvak). We establish the complexity of our problems (including
their inapproximability) and provide initial experiments regarding the ability to solve them in practice.

1

Introduction

We introduce the E LECTION I SOMORPHISM problem and a
family of its approximate variants, which measure the degree
of similarity between two elections by using distances over
preference orders. We study the complexity of problems that
emerge from this idea and seek efficient algorithms for them.
We consider the ordinal model of elections, where each
voter submits a preference order that ranks all the candidates from the most to the least desirable one. In the E LEC TION I SOMORPHISM problem we are given two elections,
E and E 0 , both with the same numbers of candidates and
the same numbers of voters, and we ask if it is possible to
transform one into the other by renaming candidates and reordering voters. While this problem is similar in spirit to the
famous G RAPH I SOMORPHISM problem (whose complexity
status remains elusive; see the report of Babai et al. (2015)
and further discussion on Babai’s home page (2017) for
recent progress on the problem), the structure of elections
with ordinal ballots is such that it is very easy to provide a
polynomial-time algorithm for E LECTION I SOMORPHISM.
On the other hand, for approval-based elections E LECTION
I SOMORPHISM is at least as hard as G RAPH I SOMORPHISM
(a graph can be encoded as an approval election in a simple
way; we consider ordinal elections only).
We are also interested in approximate variants of the
E LECTION I SOMORPHISM problem, which turn out to define distances over elections. In the distance rationalizability
framework, the distances between elections are obtained by
extending distances over preference orders to elections in a

Motivation. Formalizing the concept of an isomorphism
between elections allows us to classify domains of preference orders. In particular, for a given number of candidates,
all maximal single-peaked domains are isomorphic, whereas
this is not always the case for maximal single-crossing domains (see Section 3). Furthermore, the d-I SOMORPHISM
D ISTANCE problems allow for a principled way of performing classification, clustering, and other common tasks related to distances, over the space of elections. We give three
more specific domains of application:
Choosing Elections to Evaluate Algorithms On. There is
a growing body of work in computational social choice
that provides experimental analyses of elections (see,
e.g., the works of Narodytska and Walsh (2014), Aziz
et al. (2015), Caragiannis et al. (2017), and Bredereck et
al. (2017)), often using the PrefLib database (Mattei and
Walsh 2013). Designing convincing experiments, however, requires care. For example, we should not simply use
all the elections available in PrefLib, because the results
would be biased toward the type of elections that happens to be most popular there. Currently researchers often

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1909

