The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fast Iterative Combinatorial Auctions via Bayesian Learning
Gianluca Brero

Sébastien Lahaie

Sven Seuken

University of Zurich
brero@ifi.uzh.ch

Google Research
slahaie@google.com

University of Zurich
seuken@ifi.uzh.ch

Abstract

and business modeling on the part of the bidders (Kwasnica
et al., 2005; Milgrom and Segal, 2013; Bichler, Hao, and
Adomavicius, 2017). Large spectrum auctions, for example,
can easily take more than 100 bidding rounds.1 To lower
the number of rounds, in practice many CAs use aggressive
price updates (e.g., increasing prices by 5% to 10% every
round), which can lead to low allocative efficiency (Ausubel
and Baranov, 2017). Thus, the design of iterative CAs that
are highly efficient but also converge in a small number of
rounds still remains a challenging problem.

Iterative combinatorial auctions (CAs) are often used in multibillion dollar domains like spectrum auctions, and speed of
convergence is one of the crucial factors behind the choice
of a specific design for practical applications. To achieve
fast convergence, current CAs require careful tuning of the
price update rule to balance convergence speed and allocative efficiency. Brero and Lahaie (2018) recently introduced
a Bayesian iterative auction design for settings with singleminded bidders. The Bayesian approach allowed them to incorporate prior knowledge into the price update algorithm,
reducing the number of rounds to convergence with minimal
parameter tuning. In this paper, we generalize their work to
settings with no restrictions on bidder valuations. We introduce a new Bayesian CA design for this general setting which
uses Monte Carlo Expectation Maximization to update prices
at each round of the auction. We evaluate our approach via
simulations on CATS instances. Our results show that our
Bayesian CA outperforms even a highly optimized benchmark
in terms of clearing percentage and convergence speed.

1

1.1

Machine Learning in Auction Design

AI researchers have studied this problem from multiple angles. One early research direction has been to employ machine learning (ML) techniques in preference elicitation (Lahaie and Parkes, 2004; Blum et al., 2004). In a related thread
of research, Brero, Lubin, and Seuken (2017, 2018) integrated ML into a CA design, but they used value queries
instead of demand queries (prices).
In recent work, Brero and Lahaie (2018) proposed a
Bayesian price-based iterative CA that integrates prior knowledge over bidders’ valuations to achieve fast convergence
and high allocative efficiency. In their design, the auctioneer maintains a model of the buyers’ valuations which is
updated and refined as buyers bid in the auction and reveal
information about their values. The valuation model is used
to compute prices at each round to drive the bidding process
forward. However, their design has two substantial limitations: (i) it only works with single-minded bidders (i.e., each
bidder is only interested in one bundle), and (ii) it only allows for Gaussian models of bidder valuations (even if other
models are more suitable and accurate). These limitations are
fundamental, because their design relies on both assumptions
to obtain an analytical form for the price update rule.
Similarly to Brero and Lahaie (2018), Nguyen and Sandholm (2014, 2016) studied different ways to determine prices
in reverse auctions based on probabilistic knowledge on bidders’ values. However, in contrast to the setting studied by
Brero and Lahaie (2018), in these papers bidders’ valuations
were not combinatorial, and the auctioneer was allowed to
propose personalized prices to each bidder.

Introduction

In a combinatorial auction (CA), a seller puts multiple indivisible items up for sale among several buyers who place bids on
packages of items. By placing multiple package bids, a buyer
can express complex preferences where items are complements, substitutes, or both. CAs have found widespread applications, including for spectrum license allocation (Cramton,
2013), the allocation of TV advertising slots (Goetzendorf et
al., 2015), and industrial procurement (Sandholm, 2013).
Practical auctions often employ iterative designs, giving
rise to iterative combinatorial auctions, where bidders interact with the auctioneer over the course of multiple rounds.
A well-known example is the combinatorial clock auction
(CCA) which has been used by many governments around
the world to conduct their spectrum auctions, and it has generated more than $20 Billion in revenue since 2008 (Ausubel
and Baranov, 2017). The CCA consists of two phases: an
initial clock phase used for price discovery, followed by a
sealed-bid phase where bidders can place additional bids.
One of the key desiderata for a CA is its speed of convergence because each round can involve costly computations

1
See for example: https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/smt-gst.nsf/eng/
sf11085.html

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1820

