The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Better Fine-Tuning via Instance Weighting for Text Classification
Zhi Wang,1∗ Wei Bi,2† Yan Wang,2 Xiaojiang Liu2
1

Department of Control and Systems Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
heyuanmingong@gmail.com, {victoriabi, brandenwang, kieranliu}@tencent.com

Abstract

category is to transfer the source domain corpora (i.e., outdomain data), which detects instances that are close to the
target domain (i.e., pseudo in-domain data), then trains a
model using the augmented set including the in-domain and
the pseudo in-domain data (Wang et al., 2017a,b). Such approaches involve the search of the pseudo in-domain data
from a potentially very large source domain and repeatedly re-train the model using the augmented data, thus the
computational efficiency may be problematic. Moreover, the
scoring function to select the pseudo in-domain data often
needs to be designed for each task specifically. Thus, a more
popular class of approaches is to transfer the model parameters, which pre-trains a model using the source corpus and
then fine-tune the parameters on the target domain (Kim et
al., 2015; McCann et al., 2017). It enables a fast and efficient
adaptation to the target domain without repeatedly accessing
or processing the large source dataset. Considering these superiorities, we study the fine-tuning method in this paper.
Most previous literature on fine-tuning a pre-trained
model focuses on how to pre-train a set of parameters that
can help the target task most. For example, Pennington,
Socher, and Manning (2014) pre-trained the popular GloVe
by leveraging the statistical information on the nonzero elements in a word-word co-occurrence matrix. Howard and
Ruder (2018) pre-trained a language model using the long
short-term memory network and used it to initialize the first
layer of the target classifier. Based on a set of pre-trained
parameters, existing methods directly apply standard optimization algorithms such as SGD or Adam (Sutskever et al.,
2013; Kingma and Ba, 2014) for fine-tuning on the target
domain. 1 However, these optimization algorithms are originally designed for randomly initialized DNN models.
In this work, we propose an Instance Weighting based
Fine-tuning (IW-Fit) method, which revises the fine-tuning
stage to improve the classification accuracy on the target
domain when a pre-trained model from the source domain
is given. The idea of our method is illustrated in Figure 1.
At each fine-tuning epoch, we will assign dynamic weights
to target instances to accomplish two goals: 1) identify and
learn the specific knowledge of the target domain effec-

Transfer learning for deep neural networks has achieved great
success in many text classification applications. A simple
yet effective transfer learning method is to fine-tune the pretrained model parameters. Previous fine-tuning works mainly
focus on the pre-training stage and investigate how to pretrain a set of parameters that can help the target task most.
In this paper, we propose an Instance Weighting based Finetuning (IW-Fit) method, which revises the fine-tuning stage to
improve the final performance on the target domain. IW-Fit
adjusts instance weights at each fine-tuning epoch dynamically to accomplish two goals: 1) identify and learn the specific knowledge of the target domain effectively; 2) well preserve the shared knowledge between the source and the target domains. The designed instance weighting metrics used
in IW-Fit are model-agnostic, which are easy to implement
for general DNN-based classifiers. Experimental results show
that IW-Fit can consistently improve the classification accuracy on the target domain.

Introduction
Text classification is one of the fundamental tasks in Natural Language Processing (NLP) with many important applications such as sentiment analysis (Landeiro and Culotta, 2016; Xu et al., 2017; Zhang, Huang, and Zhao,
2018), information extraction (Angeli, Premkumar, and
Manning, 2015), and topic labeling (Wang and Manning,
2012). Deep Neural Network (DNN) based classifiers have
achieved state-of-the-art performance on many text classification tasks (Cao et al., 2017; Yang, Salakhutdinov, and Cohen, 2017; Zhang, Barzilay, and Jaakkola, 2017). However,
two limitations generally exist when these methods are used
in practice: a) Classifiers are often trained from scratch; b)
A large annotated dataset is often required (Lu et al., 2014;
Howard and Ruder, 2018). To overcome these limitations,
transfer learning is usually applied by transferring knowledge learned on a large source domain to help the classification task on the target domain.
In general, there are mainly two categories of approaches
for transfer learning on DNN-based text classifiers. The first
∗

1
Some work fixed part of/all the pre-trained parameters and
only updated other model parameters to prevent overfitting (Johnson and Zhang, 2017; Felbo et al., 2017), which can be seen as a
special case of the fine-tuning methods.

Work done when Zhi Wang was interning at Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

7241

