The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Sparse Reject Option Classifier Using Successive Linear Programming
Kulin Shah, Naresh Manwani
Machine Learning Lab, KCIS
IIIT, Hyderabad-500032

Abstract

da Rocha Neto et al. 2011) to text categorization (Fumera,
Pillai, and Roli 2003) to crowd sourcing (Li et al. 2017) etc.
Reject option classifier can be viewed as combination of
a classifier and a rejection function. The rejection region
impacts the proportion of examples that are likely to be rejected, as well as the proportion of predicted examples that
are likely to be correctly classified. An optimal reject option classifier is the one which minimizes the rejection rate
as well as the mis-classification rate on the predicted examples.
Let X ⊆ Rn be the feature space and Y be the label space.
For binary classification, we use Y = {+1, −1}. Examples
(x, y) are generated from unknown joint distribution D on
the product space X × Y. A typical reject option classifier is
defined using a decision surface (f (x) = 0) and bandwidth
parameter ρ (determines rejection region) as follows:

In this paper, we propose an approach for learning sparse reject option classifiers using double ramp loss Ldr . We use DC
programming to find the risk minimizer. The algorithm solves
a sequence of linear programs to learn the reject option classifier. We show that the loss Ldr is Fisher consistent. We also
show that the excess risk of loss Ld is upper bounded by excess risk of Ldr . We derive the generalization error bounds
for the proposed approach. We show the effectiveness of the
proposed approach by experimenting it on several real world
datasets. The proposed approach not only performs comparable to the state of the art, it also successfully learns sparse
classifiers.

1

Introduction

Standard classification tasks focus on building a classifier
which predicts well on future examples. The overall goal
is to minimize the number of mis-classifications. However,
when the cost of mis-classification is very high, a generic
classifier may still suffer from very high risk. In such cases
it makes more sense not to classify high risk examples. This
choice given to the classifier is called reject option. Hence,
the classifiers which can also reject examples are called reject option classifiers. The rejection also has its cost but it is
very less compared to the cost of mis-classification.
For example, making a poor decision based on the diagnostic reports can cost huge amount of money on further treatments or it can be cost of a life (da Rocha Neto
et al. 2011). If the reports are ambiguous or some rare
symptoms are seen which are unexplainable without further investigation, then the physician might choose not to
risk misdiagnosing the patient. In this case, he might instead choose to perform further medical tests, or to refer
the case to an appropriate specialist. Reject option classifier
may also be found useful in financial services (Rosowsky
and Smith 2013). Consider a banker looking at a loan application of a customer. He may choose not to decide on the
basis of the information available, and ask for a credit bureau score or further recommendations from the stake holders. Reject option classifiers have been used in wide range of
applications from healthcare (Hanczar and Dougherty 2008;

hρ (f (x)) = 1.I{f (x)>ρ} + 0.I{|f (x)|≤ρ} − 1.I{f (x)<−ρ}
(1)
A reject option classifier can be viewed as two parallel surfaces and the area between them as rejection region. The
goal is to determine both f and ρ simultaneously. The performance of a reject option classifier is measured using Ld
loss function defined as:
Ld (yf (x), ρ) = 1.I{yf (x)<−ρ} + d.I{|f (x)|≤ρ}

(2)

where d is the cost of rejection. If d = 0, then f (.) will
always reject. If d ≥ 0.5, then f (x) will never reject, since
the cost of random labeling is 0.5. Thus, d is chosen in the
range (0, 0.5). hρ (f (x)) (described in equation. 1) has been
shown to be infinite sample consistent with respect to the
generalized Bayes classifier (Yuan and Wegkamp 2010). A
reject option classifier is learnt by minimizing the risk which
is the expectation of Ld with respect to the joint distribution
D. The risk under Ld is minimized by generalized Bayes
discriminant fd∗ (x) (Chow 1970), which is
fd∗ (x) = 1.I{η(x)>1−d} + 0.I{d≤η(x)≤1−d} − 1.I{η(x)<d}
(3)
where η(x) = P (y = 1|x). However, in general we do
not know D. But, we have the access to a finite set of examples drawn from D called training set. We find the reject
option classifier by minimizing the empirical risk. Minimizing the empirical risk under Ld is computationally hard. To
overcome this problem, convex surrogates of Ld have been

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4870

