The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

FLEX: Faithful Linguistic Explanations for Neural Net Based Model Decisions
Sandareka Wickramanayake, Wynne Hsu, Mong Li Lee
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
{sandaw, whsu, leeml}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Explaining the decisions of a Deep Learning Network is imperative to safeguard end-user trust. Such explanations must
be intuitive, descriptive, and faithfully explain why a model
makes its decisions. In this work, we propose a framework
called FLEX (Faithful Linguistic EXplanations) that generates post-hoc linguistic justifications to rationalize the decision of a Convolutional Neural Network. FLEX explains a
model’s decision in terms of features that are responsible for
the decision. We derive a novel way to associate such features to words, and introduce a new decision-relevance metric
that measures the faithfulness of an explanation to a model’s
reasoning. Experiment results on two benchmark datasets
demonstrate that the proposed framework can generate discriminative and faithful explanations compared to state-ofthe-art explanation generators. We also show how FLEX can
generate explanations for images of unseen classes as well as
automatically annotate objects in images.

(a) Laysan Albatross

(b) California Gull

Figure 1: Saliency maps of sample images from CUB.

and Park et al. (Park et al. 2018) take into consideration the
class labels to generate linguistic descriptions. They adapt a
neural image captioning model and condition the model not
only on image features but also on the predicted class and
train their language generator using the visual descriptions
provided by human. However, the explanations generated by
their approach may not necessarily reflect the model’s actual
reasoning (Kim et al. 2017). This is evident as their generated explanation for an image may mention features that are
not even visible in the image. Figure 2 shows two birds with
different poses. The same explanation is generated by Hendrick’s model for these two birds even though black streaks
are not visible on the crown of the bird in Figure 2(b).

Introduction
Despite the remarkable performance of Deep Neural Network (DNN) in many applications, its opaque nature has
hindered its usability in the real world (Caruana et al. 2015).
Post-hoc interpretation techniques such as visualizations and
linguistic descriptions aim to provide explanations for DNN
model decisions (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016).
Visualizations indicate which regions/pixels of the input
have significantly influenced a model’s decision. Figure 1
shows GradCAM (Selvaraju et al. 2016) visual explanations
for the decisions of fine-grained bird classification model
in (Gao et al. 2016). GradCAM reveals that for these images,
it is the region around the bird’s head that has influenced the
predicted bird categories the most. However, these visualizations do not reveal which aspects of the bird’s head region
(be it the beak’s shape or color, eye ring, or eye color) are
responsible for differentiating the different species of birds.
On the other hand, linguistic descriptions such as “The
bird in Figure 1(a) is a Laysan Albatross because of its long
thick hooked bill, and the dark shading on its face.” provide
specific details which are important for understanding the
classification especially when variations among the different
classes are subtle. Hendricks et al. (Hendricks et al. 2016)

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Same explanation “This is an Le Conte Sparrow
because this is a small brown bird with black streaks on its
crown” for different images irrespective of whether the features are visible.
In addition, we observe that a model may make its decision using features different from that used by human. Figure 3(a) shows an image of a ‘Cardinal’. The feature that human uses to distinguish this type of bird is its “black cheek
patch” (Reed et al. 2016). The model’s confidence that the

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2539

