The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Beyond RNNs: Positional Self-Attention
with Co-Attention for Video Question Answering
Xiangpeng Li,1 Jingkuan Song,1∗ Lianli Gao,1 Xianglong Liu,2
Wenbing Huang,3 Xiangnan He,4 Chuang Gan5
1

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, 2 Beihang University, 3 Tecent AI lab, 4 National University of Singapore, 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{xiangpengli.cs, jingkuan.song}@gmail.com, lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn, xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn,
hwenbing@126.com, ganchuang1990@gmail.com, xiangnanhe@gmail.com
Abstract

2018a; Yang et al. 2016; Teney et al. 2017; Xiong, Merity,
and Socher 2016; Kim, Jun, and Zhang 2018b) and video
question-answering (Jang et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2018a;
Wang et al. 2018; Zeng et al. 2017). Compared with
image-based question-answering, video question-answering
is more challenging. Given a question, a video QA model is
required to locate and explore a sequence of frames to firstly
recognize a set of specific objects and activities and secondly
identify the relationship between objects and the relationship between objects and actions. In artificial intelligence,
the above two steps are usually conducted independently.
Previous visual question-answering models (Kim, Jun,
and Zhang 2018a; Yang et al. 2016; Teney et al. 2017;
Xiong, Merity, and Socher 2016; Jang et al. 2017; Gao et
al. 2018a; Wang et al. 2018) are primarily based on RNNs,
especially Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997; Song et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2017)
and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), which have good performance on modeling sequential data and potential to solve the
gradient vanishing problem. For instance, Jang et al. (Jang
et al. 2017) proposed a two-staged LSTM to encode both
video frames and question information for answer prediction. Gao et al. (Gao et al. 2018a) extended a dynamic memory network to form a new motion-appearance co-memory
network. In these models, LSTM is an essential part for
catching data dependencies. However, experimental results
(Vaswani et al. 2017) demonstrated that LSTM has weakness in modeling the long range dependencies and it cannot
ensure data encoding to be conducted in parallel. Therefore,
the training may be time-consuming, especially for encoding long sequential data (e.g., a text paragraph). To solve this
problem, Vaswani et al. (Vaswani et al. 2017) proposed an
attention mechanism, named Self-Attention, to replace traditional RNNs for machine translation. The proposed attention mechanism incorporated external information to assist
a model to assign different weights to data items based on
their importance. Experimental results demonstrate its effective role in catching long range dependencies, and it reaches
a new state-of-the-art performance for machine transition.
In this work, we introduce a simple yet interpretable network named Positional Self-Attention with Co-Attention
(PSAC) for video question-answering. It consists of two positional self-attention blocks to replace LSTM for modeling
data dependencies, and a video-question co-attention block

Most of the recent progresses on visual question answering are based on recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with attention. Despite the success, these models are often timeconsuming and having difficulties in modeling long range
dependencies due to the sequential nature of RNNs. We propose a new architecture, Positional Self-Attention with Coattention (PSAC), which does not require RNNs for video
question answering. Specifically, inspired by the success of
self-attention in machine translation task, we propose a Positional Self-Attention to calculate the response at each position by attending to all positions within the same sequence,
and then add representations of absolute positions. Therefore,
PSAC can exploit the global dependencies of question and
temporal information in the video, and make the process of
question and video encoding executed in parallel. Furthermore, in addition to attending to the video features relevant
to the given questions (i.e., video attention), we utilize the
co-attention mechanism by simultaneously modeling “what
words to listen to” (question attention). To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work of replacing RNNs with selfattention for the task of visual question answering. Experimental results of four tasks on the benchmark dataset show
that our model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
on three tasks and attains comparable result on the Count task.
Our model requires less computation time and achieves better
performance compared with the RNNs-based methods. Additional ablation study demonstrates the effect of each component of our proposed model.

1

Introduction

In recent years, breaking the semantic gap of vision and language is a hot topic in artificial intelligence. A lot of research
achievements are made centering on computer vision (CV)
and natural language processing (NLP), especially for the
task of visual question-answering (VQA) (Gao et al. 2018b;
2018a; Yang et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2017; Anderson et al.
2017; Palangi et al. 2018; Song et al. 2018). It is still a critical challenge towards machine intelligence, but its achievement can be beneficial for various real-life applications.
In general, we can divide the VQA task into two categories: image question-answering (Kim, Jun, and Zhang
∗

Jingkuan Song is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8658

