The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Disjunctive Normal Form for Multi-Agent
Modal Logics Based on Logical Separability
Liangda Fang,1 Kewen Wang,2 Zhe Wang,2 Ximing Wen3
1

Department of Computer Science, Jinan University, China
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Australia
3
Guangdong Institute of Public Administration, Guangzhou, China
fangld@jnu.edu.cn, {k.wang,zhe.wang}@griffith.edu.au, wenxim@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

2

Abstract

and the action preconditions. If a normal form is defined
such that its entailment check, bounded conjunction and forgetting are tractable, then both progression and entailment
check in the normal form are tractable (Bienvenu, Fargier,
and Marquis 2010). As a result, in the normal form, an effective search algorithm is obtained. In the case of propositional logic, a normal form can be disjunctive normal form
(DNF), conjunctive normal form (CNF) or prime implicate.
Usually, a planner based on DNF is faster than those based
on CNF and prime implicate (To, Pontelli, and Son 2011;
To, Son, and Pontelli 2011). This is due to the fact that,
in propositional logic, DNF possesses tractable entailment
check, bounded conjunction and forgetting, but CNF and
prime implicate do not (Darwiche and Marquis 2002).
Thus, in order to develop effective search algorithms to
multi-agent epistemic planning, researchers aimed to develop suitable DNF-like normal forms for multi-agent modal
logics such that major reasoning tasks, such as bounded
conjunction, forgetting and entailment check, are tractable.
Such a disjunctive normal form, named S5-DNF, is defined
for modal logic S5 but only for the single-agent case (Bienvenu, Fargier, and Marquis 2010). When this DNF is extended to multi-agent modal logics, both entailment and forgetting will not be tractable any longer. Two other normal
forms, cover disjunctive normal forms (CDNFs) (ten Cate et
al. 2006) and prime implicate normal forms (PINFs) (Bienvenu 2008), have been introduced for description logic
ALC, a syntactic variant of the multi-agent modal logic
Kn . However, these two normal forms have some shortcomings. CDNF is relatively less compact, that is, the CDNF
representation is exponential large for some simple formulas. Bounded conjunction for PINF is intractable and in
the worst case a compiled formula in PINF is double exponentially large. In addition, Moss (2007) introduced a
canonical form of modal formulas for Kn and Dn . While
modal formulas can be equivalently transformed into Moss’
canonical form, the complexity of the transformation is nonelementary. Hence, Moss’ canonical formulas are not a practical normal form for epistemic planning.
In this paper, we first formulate the notion of logic separability in multi-agent modal logic, which was originally investigated for first-order logic (Levesque 1998). Informally,
a conjunction φ of formulas is logically separable w.r.t. a
form of reasoning if the reasoning for φ can be reduced to

Modal logics are primary formalisms for multi-agent systems
but major reasoning tasks in such logics are intractable, which
impedes applications of multi-agent modal logics such as automatic planning. One technique of tackling the intractability is to identify a fragment called a normal form of multiagent logics such that it is expressive but tractable for reasoning tasks such as entailment checking, bounded conjunction
transformation and forgetting. For instance, DNF of propositional logic is tractable for these reasoning tasks. In this paper, we first introduce a notion of logical separability and then
define a novel disjunctive normal form SDNF for the multiagent logic Kn , which overcomes some shortcomings of existing approaches. In particular, we show that every modal formula in Kn can be equivalently casted as a formula in SDNF,
major reasoning tasks tractable in propositional DNF are also
tractable in SDNF, and moreover, formulas in SDNF enjoy
the property of logical separability. To demonstrate the usefulness of our approach, we apply SDNF in multi-agent epistemic planning. Finally, we extend these results to three more
complex multi-agent logics Dn , K45n and KD45n .

1

Introduction

It is crucial for an intelligent agent system to be capable
of representing and reasoning about high-order knowledge
in the multi-agent setting. A general representative framework for these scenarios is multi-agent modal logics. However, some important reasoning tasks, including satisfiability checking and forgetting, are intractable in such logics
(Halpern and Moses 1992; Bienvenu 2009). The intractability results impede applications of multi-agent modal logics,
e.g., multi-agent epistemic planning (Kominis and Geffner
2015; Huang et al. 2017).
Traditionally, the forward search algorithm is effective for
agent planning (Bryce, Kambhampati, and Smith 2006), in
which the search is performed in the space of knowledge
bases (KBs) proceeding forward from the initial KB towards
a goal KB entailing the goal formula. Two types of reasoning
tasks are essential to the search algorithm, namely, progression and entailment check. The progression updates KBs according to the action effects while the entailment check is
needed to decide if the current KB entails the goal formula
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2817

