The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On the Role of Syntactic Graph Convolutions
for Identifying and Classifying Argument Components
Gaku Morio, Katsuhide Fujita
Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology
2-24-16, Nakacho, Koganei, Tokyo, Japan. +81423887003.
morio@katfuji.lab.tuat.ac.jp, katfuji@cc.tuat.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper focuses on fundamental research that combines
syntactic knowledge with neural studies, which utilize syntactic information in argument component identification and
classification (AC-I/C) tasks in argument mining (AM). The
following are our paper’s contributions: 1) We propose a way
of incorporating a syntactic GCN into multi-task learning
models for AC-I/C tasks. 2) We demonstrate the valid effectiveness of our proposed syntactic GCN in fair experiments in
some datasets. We also found that syntactic GCNs are promising for lexically independent scenarios. Our code in the experiments is available for reproducibility.1

Figure 1: Our syntactic GCN with MTL. Red arrows show
the opposite convolution, and blue arrows show the along
convolution.

Introduction

sults show that GCN improved the AC-I/C tasks for some
datasets.

Argument mining (AM) is an emerging discipline that focuses on extracting claims and premises and infers their
structures from discourses. There are two fundamental
tasks in AM: argument component identification and argument component classification (AC-I/C) (Stab and Gurevych
2017). AC-I focuses on the separation of argumentative
and non-argumentative text units and the identification
of argument component boundaries. AC-C classifies argument components into different types, such as claims and
premises.
Recent several years have seen the technical advances of
neural AM. Most recent studies on AC-I/C tasks employ
word knowledge (i.e., word embeddings and recurrent neural networks), while syntactic knowledge also should play
an important role for AC-I/C tasks. This insight is derived
from the fact that syntactic knowledge is robust for context
independent argument component classifications (Lippi and
Torroni 2015). However, to the best of our knowledge, few
studies have been proposed that utilize syntactic information
in AC-I/C tasks for neural techniques.
Hence, this paper focuses on fundamental research that
combines syntactic knowledge with neural studies. We propose a syntactic graph convolutional network (GCN) for
AC-I/C tasks. We conducted fair experiments with our
model and existing models to show the genuine effectiveness of GCNs. After combining LSTMs and CRFs, our re-

Problem Settings
Our study focuses on two key problem settings. First, ACI/C tasks are considered sequence tagging problems. We predict token-level BIO tags (AC-I) and argument component
types (AC-C). In other words, each input token has a gold
label: {(b, t) | b ∈ {B, I, O}, t ∈ T ypes}, where b denotes whether the current token is non-argumentative (O)
or whether it begins (B) or continues (I) a component; t is
the component type, i.e., claim (C), premise (P ), or nonargumentative (N ).
Second, we provide multi-task learning (MTL), which
improves the performance of the AM problem. This paper
uses a state-of-the-art MTL (Schulz et al. 2018), which employs bi-directional LSTM (BiLSTM) and conditional random field (CRF) layers, namely, a BLC. All of the BiLSTM
parameters are shared by all the tasks, and an independent
CRF layer is provided for each subtask (AC-I and AC-C).

Syntactic Graph Convolutional Networks
We propose a BLC-based model with a syntactic GCN (Figure 1). First, the BiLSTM encodes each token by concatenating both of the forward and backward states of the LSTMs.
A context-aware representation of a token is produced: hi =
→ ←
−
−
hi ◦ hi . Second, the encoded token representation produced
in the BiLSTM is fed into our syntactic GCN, which is based
on dependency convolution (Marcheggiani and Titov 2017).
Given each hidden state hi from BiLSTM, GCN calculates a

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/EdoFrank/GCNArgMining

9997

