The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

A Fast Machine Learning Workflow for Rapid
Phenotype Prediction from Whole Shotgun Metagenomes
Anna Paola Carrieri*

Will PM Rowe∗

Martyn Winn

Edward O. Pyzer-Knapp†

IBM Research UK
Sci-Tech Daresbury
Warrington, UK.

Scientific Computing Dept.
STFC Daresbury Lab.
Warrington, UK.

Scientific Computing Dept.
STFC Daresbury Lab.
Warrington, UK.

IBM Research UK
Sci-Tech Daresbury
Warrington, UK.
epyzerk3@uk.ibm.com

Abstract

Metagenomics: study of the genetic material of microorganisms constituting the microbiome.
Read: inferred sequence of nucleotides corresponding to all
or part of a single DNA fragment, as measured in a sequencing experiment.
Whole metagenome shotgun sequencing: sequencing of
the total genetic material of a microbial community.
Taxonomy: the process of naming and classifying organisms into groups within a larger system, according to their
similarities.
Marker genes: gene families that can be used to quantify
taxonomic diversity.
OTUs - Operational Taxonomy Units: cluster of microorganisms grouped by sequence similarity of a specific marker
gene (such as 16S rRNA) and representing a taxon.

Research on the microbiome is an emerging and crucial
science that finds many applications in healthcare, food
safety, precision agriculture and environmental studies. Huge
amounts of DNA from microbial communities are being sequenced and analyzed by scientists interested in extracting
meaningful biological information from this big data. Analyzing massive microbiome sequencing datasets, which embed the functions and interactions of thousands of different
bacterial, fungal and viral species, is a significant computational challenge. Artificial intelligence has the potential for
building predictive models that can provide insights for specific cutting edge applications such as guiding diagnostics
and developing personalised treatments, as well as maintaining soil health and fertility. Current machine learning workflows that predict traits of host organisms from their commensal microbiome do not take into account the whole genetic material constituting the microbiome, instead basing the
analysis on specific marker genes. In this paper, to the best
of our knowledge, we introduce the first machine learning
workflow that efficiently performs host phenotype prediction
from whole shotgun metagenomes by computing similaritypreserving compact representations of the genetic material.
Our workflow enables prediction tasks, such as classification
and regression, from Terabytes of raw sequencing data that do
not necessitate any pre-prossessing through expensive bioinformatics pipelines. We compare the performance in terms of
time, accuracy and uncertainty of predictions for four different classifiers. More precisely, we demonstrate that our ML
workflow can efficiently classify real data with high accuracy,
using examples from dog and human metagenomic studies,
representing a step forward towards real time diagnostics and
a potential for cloud applications.

Introduction
A research objective of great interest in the last decade is to
be able to understand the structure, organization, and functionality of the microbiome and how this affects, and is
affected by, the environment that surrounds it. The microbiome is made up of the whole genetic material and interactions of a community of micro-organisms (bacteria, archaea,
viruses or fungi) that live in a natural environment. The environment could be an entire organism (e.g. a human being or
a mouse), part of it (e.g. the intestine, the skin or the mouth)
or a natural habitat (e.g. water or soil).
Trillions of microbes have evolved and continue to live in
the human body and can play a positive or negative role in
determining the well-being of individuals. An imbalance in
the microbial community can lead to the development and
progression of various diseases, such as infections, respiratory diseases, metabolic and even psychological illnesses
(e.g. depression and anxiety).
Understanding the relationship between microbial communities and the health or disease state of individuals can
help with designing effective targeted treatments focused
on re-balancing the microbiome. On the other hand, microorganisms residing and interacting in the soil perform important processes such as support of the plant growth and cycling of carbon and other nutrients (Jansson and Hofmockel
2018). Many beneficial functions carried out by the soil microbiome are currently threatened due to changing climate,
soil degradation and poor land management practices. Un-

Glossary
Phenotype: observable characteristics of an organism resulting from the interaction of its gene products with the environment.
Microbiome: collective genomes of a microbial community
inhabiting a particular environment such as a surface of the
human body.
∗

These authors contributed equally to the work
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

9434

