The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

What Should I Learn First: Introducing
LectureBank for NLP Education and Prerequisite Chain Learning
Irene Li, Alexander R. Fabbri, Robert R. Tung, Dragomir R. Radev
Department of Computer Science, Yale University
{irene.li,alexander.fabbri,robert.tung,dragomir.radev}@yale.edu

Abstract

new concept such as POS tagging. In order to fully understand this concept, he or she should have an understanding of
prerequisite concepts such as Viterbi Algorithm and Markov
Models, as well as the prerequisites for these concepts: Dynamic Programming Bayes Theorem and Probabilities. Although many search engines can provide relevant documents
or learning resources, most of the results are based on relevancy and semantics while few have the ability to provide
a reasonable list based on a path to learning a new concept.
Additionally, we might want to recommend the corresponding learning materials such as lecture files for each of the
concepts. Thus, for educational purposes, we aim to learn
the prerequisite relations of each concept pair and eventually
apply them in a search engine. Given a query concept word
or phrase, the search engine would provide the study materials corresponding to the prerequisites of the query concept.
Recent work has focused on extracting and learning concept dependencies from scientific corpora including the
ACL Anthology (Bird et al. 2008) as well as from online
courses (Gordon et al. 2016; Pan et al. 2017a; Liu et al.
2016). On the other hand, we are more interested in learning materials such as blogs, surveys and papers, and in this
paper, we focus on lecture files, which are usually wellorganized and contain a focused topic. We manually collected lecture files by inspection of the file contents and
annotated each lecture file according to a taxonomy of 305
topics. We used our LectureBank corpus and a recently published corpus TutorialBank (Fabbri et al. 2018) as training
data. We annotated prerequisite relations for each concept
pair from a list of 208 concepts provided in (Fabbri et al.
2018). These 208 concepts differ in granularity and scope
from the 305 taxonomy topics; they consist of topics for
which one could conceivably write a survey and are thus neither too fine-grained or large in scope. Similarly to (Pan et al.
2017a), we focus on learning embedded representations of
the concepts. We test the effectiveness of standard classifiers
as well as the recently introduced neural link-prediction approaches of Variational(Kipf and Welling 2016b) and vanilla
Graph Autoencoders (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018) to discover
prerequisite relations.
Our main contributions are the following. First, we introduce our LectureBank dataset with 1,352 English lecture files (51,939 slides) classified according to an existing taxonomy. The dataset can be used directly as study

Recent years have witnessed the rising popularity of Natural
Language Processing (NLP) and related fields such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML). Many online courses and resources are available even for those without a strong background in the field. Often the student is curious about a specific topic but does not quite know where
to begin studying. To answer the question of “what should
one learn first,”we apply an embedding-based method to learn
prerequisite relations for course concepts in the domain of
NLP. We introduce LectureBank, a dataset containing 1,352
English lecture files collected from university courses which
are each classified according to an existing taxonomy as well
as 208 manually-labeled prerequisite relation topics, which
is publicly available 1 . The dataset will be useful for educational purposes such as lecture preparation and organization
as well as applications such as reading list generation. Additionally, we experiment with neural graph-based networks
and non-neural classifiers to learn these prerequisite relations
from our dataset.

Introduction
As more and more online courses and resources are becoming accessible to the general public, researching advanced
topics has become more feasible. A large amount of educational material is available online, although it is not structured in an organized way. (Margolis and Laurence 1999)
suggested that concepts are one of the most fundamental
constructs and that having an order for learning and organizing them is essential for acquiring new knowledge. To be
able to capture the concept organization and dependencies
for NLP, we study the problem of building concept prerequisite chains. We treat each concept as a single vertex, and
learn the dependencies to ultimately build a concept graph
as in (Gordon et al. 2016). We define a prerequisite to be
the directed dependency between two vertices. Once prerequisite relations among concepts are learned, these relations
can be used for downstream tasks and applications such as
generating reading lists for readers based on a query as well
as curriculum planning (Gordon et al. 2017).
Imagine the scenario in Figure 1 in which a student has
some basic knowledge of NLP but wants to learn a specific
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/Yale-LILY/LectureBank

6674

