The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Smooth Deep Image Generator from Noises
Tianyu Guo,1,2,3 Chang Xu,2 Boxin Shi,4 Chao Xu,1,3 Dacheng Tao2
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, China
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Peking University, China
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of EECS, Peking University, China
tianyuguo@pku.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn,
xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au
2

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have demonstrated
a strong ability to fit complex distributions since they were
presented, especially in the field of generating natural images.
Linear interpolation in the noise space produces a continuously changing in the image space, which is an impressive
property of GANs. However, there is no special consideration
on this property in the objective function of GANs or its derived models. This paper analyzes the perturbation on the input of the generator and its influence on the generated images.
A smooth generator is then developed by investigating the
tolerable input perturbation. We further integrate this smooth
generator with a gradient penalized discriminator, and design
smooth GAN that generates stable and high-quality images.
Experiments on real-world image datasets demonstrate the
necessity of studying smooth generator and the effectiveness
of the proposed algorithm.

(a) Interpolation image shows blur and distorted images.

(b) Smooth interpolation shows clear and high-quality images.

Figure 1: Interpolation images generated from WGAN-GP
(Gulrajani et al. 2017) (a) and the proposed smooth GAN
(b).

Introduction
Deep generative models have attracted increasing attention
from researchers, especially in the task of natural image
generation. Representative techniques include Variational
Auto-Encoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013), PixelCNN (van den Oord et al. 2016), and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014)
translate Gaussian inputs into natural images by discovering the equilibrium within a max-min game. The generator in vanilla GANs is to transform noisy vectors into images, while the discriminator aims to distinguish the generated samples from real samples. Convincing images generated from noisy vectors through GANs could be employed to
augment image datasets, which would alleviate the shortage
of training data in some tasks. Moreover, image-to-image
translation (Chen et al. 2018; 2019) based on GANs also
gets its popularity.
However, vanilla GANs have flaws in its stability, and
we have seen many promising works to alleviate this problem by modifying the network frameworks or proposing improved loss functions (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015;
Nguyen et al. 2017; Karras et al. 2017; Mao et al. 2017;
Berthelot, Schumm, and Metz 2017a; Arjovsky, Chintala,

and Bottou 2017; Gulrajani et al. 2017). Besides, a considerable body of work has been conducted to arbitrarily manipulate generated images according to different factors, e.g.,
the category, illumination, and style (Chen et al. 2016). Beyond meaningless noise input in GANs, interpretable features can be discovered by investigating label information
in conditional GANs (Mirza and Osindero 2014), exploring
the mutual information between elements of input in infoGAN (Chen et al. 2016) or leveraging the discriminator on
latent space in AAE (Makhzani et al. 2015).
Noise vector inputs for GANs can be taken as lowdimensional representations of images. As widely accepted
in representation learning, the closeness of two data points
is supposed to be preserved before and after transformation. Most of these improved GANs methods implicitly assume that the generator would translate linear interpolation
in the input noise space to semantic interpolation in the output image space (Bojanowski et al. 2017). Although this
kind of experimental result showing interesting visual effects attracts readers’ attention, the quality of images generated through interpolations could be very noisy and fragile,
and some of these images would look obviously unnatural

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3731

