The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Differential Networks for Visual Question Answering
Chenfei Wu, Jinlai Liu, Xiaojie Wang, Ruifan Li
Center for Intelligence Science and Technology
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{wuchenfei, liujinlai, xjwang, rfli}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

Question: What
color is the dress
that the tallest bear
is wearing?

1

Differential
Networks

RCNN

GRU

Fusion

Differential
Networks

The task of Visual Question Answering (VQA) has emerged
in recent years for its potential applications. To address the
VQA task, the model should fuse feature elements from both
images and questions efficiently. Existing models fuse image
feature element vi and question feature element qi directly,
such as an element product vi qi . Those solutions largely ignore the following two key points: 1) Whether vi and qi
are in the same space. 2) How to reduce the observation
noises in vi and qi . We argue that two differences between
those two feature elements themselves, like (vi − vj ) and
(qi − qj ), are more probably in the same space. And the difference operation would be beneficial to reduce observation
noise. To achieve this, we first propose Differential Networks
(DN), a novel plug-and-play module which enables differences between pair-wise feature elements. With the tool of
DN, we then propose DN based Fusion (DF), a novel model
for VQA task. We achieve state-of-the-art results on four publicly available datasets. Ablation studies also show the effectiveness of difference operations in DF model.

Answer: pink

Introduction

Given an image and a related question, the Visual Question Answering (VQA) task requires the machine to determine the correct answer. From an application perspective,
VQA improves human-computer interaction ability and can
be applied to many scenarios such as smart home management systems and private virtual assistant (Kafle and Kanan
2017b). From a research perspective, VQA requires a joint
understanding of images and questions, and can be considered as a component of Visual Turing Test (Malinowski and
Fritz 2014). As a result, VQA has recently emerged as a
challenging task and received more and more interest from
researchers.
The basic framework of existing VQA models consists of
three stages. First, the image and the question are encoded
respectively. Second, the encoded image and question feature elements are fused. Third, the fused results are classified to derive the answer. Among them, the “fusion” in
the second step is the key. Therefore, most studies focus on
this point. Initially, linear models are used to fuse image and
question feature elements (Yang et al. 2016; Lu et al. 2016;

Figure 1: DN-based Fusion (DF) model for Visual Question
Answering. The image and question feature elements are fed
into the Differential Networks (DN) and then fused to derive
the answer.

Li and Jia 2016; Nam, Ha, and Kim 2017). However, simple linear operations cannot bring fine-grained fusions between feature elements. Recently, bilinear models are used
to model the fusion between image and question feature elements (Fukui et al. 2016; Kim et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2017;
Ben-younes et al. 2017).
Note that the fusion in both linear and bilinear models are
between the feature elements themselves, such as vi qi for
linear models and vi qj for bilinear models. However, for the
VQA problem, we argue that the fusion based on the difference between feature elements, like (vi −vj )(qi −qj ), would
be more reasonable. This can be seen from two perspectives.
For one thing, since vi and qi are from different modalities,
it is unreasonable to fuse them directly. By contrast, after the
difference operation, information from both modalities goes

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8997

