The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Election with Bribed Voter Uncertainty: Hardness and Approximation Algorithm
Lin Chen,1 Lei Xu,2 Shouhuai Xu,3 Zhimin Gao,1 Weidong Shi1
1 Department of Computer Science, University of Houston, TX, USA
2 Conduent Labs, NC, USA
3 Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio, TX, USA

chenlin198662@gmail.com, xuleimath@gmail.com, shouhuai.xu@utsa.edu, gao@kell.vin, larryshi@ymail.com

Abstract

uncertainty can also be incurred by an incomplete set of candidates (e.g., additional candidates may be added), as shown
by Chevaleyre et al. (2010); Xia, Lang, and Monnot (2011);
Baumeister, Roos, and Rothe (2011). The other exception
is the investigation of uncertainty incurred by complete but
probabilistic inputs. For example, Wojtas and Faliszewski
(2012) introduced an election model in which voters or candidates may have some probabilities of no-show, either because the communication network is not reliable or because
voters inherently behave as such.
Bribery. Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra
(2009) introduced the bribery problem in which a briber
(or attacker) attempts to make a designated candidate win
by paying a (monetary) bribe to some voters. Once bribed,
a voter will vote for the candidate designated by the attacker. This problem has received a considerable amount of
attention; see, e.g., Lin (2010); Brelsford et al. (2008); Xia
(2012); Faliszewski et al. (2015); Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra (2011); Faliszewski et al. (2009);
Parkes and Xia (2012); Chen et al. (2018a). Most studies in this context consider deterministic models, but researchers have started investigating the issue of uncertainty
in this context as well. For example, Erdelyi, Hemaspaandra,
and Hemaspaandra (2014) considered the bribery problem
with uncertain voting rules; Mattei et al. (2015) considered
the bribery problem with uncertain information, Erdélyi et
al. (2009) considered uncertainty in the lobbying problem,
which is related to, but different from, the bribery problem.
New problem: Election with Bribed Voter Uncertainty
(BVU). We observe that in the context of the bribery problem, there is an inherent uncertainty that has not been considered in the literature: The vote of a bribed voter may
or may not be counted, either because a bribed voter may
choose not to cast its vote in fear of being caught, or because a bribed voter is indeed caught and therefore its vote
is discarded. In this setting, each voter is associated with a
price of being bribed as well as a probability that its vote
is not counted upon taking a bribe. The goal of the attacker
is to bribe a subset of voters such that the total bribing cost
does not exceed a given budget, while the probability that a
designated candidate wins the election is maximized.
The importance of understanding bribed voter uncertainty
cannot be overestimated. This is because, even with the proliferation of anonymous and unregulated cryptocurrencies

Bribery in election (or computational social choice in general) is an important problem that has received a considerable
amount of attention. In the classic bribery problem, the briber
(or attacker) bribes some voters in attempting to make the
briber’s designated candidate win an election. In this paper,
we introduce a novel variant of the bribery problem, “Election
with Bribed Voter Uncertainty” or BVU for short, accommodating the uncertainty that the vote of a bribed voter may or
may not be counted. This uncertainty occurs either because a
bribed voter may not cast its vote in fear of being caught, or
because a bribed voter is indeed caught and therefore its vote
is discarded. As a first step towards ultimately understanding and addressing this important problem, we show that it
does not admit any multiplicative O(1)-approximation algorithm modulo standard complexity assumptions. We further
show that there is an approximation algorithm that returns a
solution with an additive-ε error in FPT time for any fixed ε.

Introduction
In multiagent systems, election (or voting) is an important
mechanism for collective decision-making. This importance
has led to extensive investigations of various aspects of election. Indeed, the field of computational social choice investigates algorithmic and computational complexity aspects of
this mechanism (see, e.g., the book by Brandt et al. (2016)).
In this paper, we focus on two important aspects of election
that have received an extensive amount of attention but are
still not fully understood: uncertainty and bribery.
Uncertainty. Most studies in election investigated deterministic models and did not consider uncertainty, which is however often encountered in real-world scenarios. There are
two exceptions. One exception is the investigation of uncertainty from the perspective of the possible winner. In
this perspective, the input is incomplete and the problem is
to determine if it is possible to extend the incomplete input to make a designated candidate win or lose. The uncertainty can be incurred by voters’ incomplete preference lists,
as shown by Konczak and Lang (2005); Xia and Conitzer
(2011); Betzler and Dorn (2010); Baumeister and Rothe
(2012); Betzler, Hemmann, and Niedermeier (2009). The
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2572

