The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Solving Integer Quadratic
Programming via Explicit and Structural Restrictions
Eduard Eiben,1 Robert Ganian,2 Dušan Knop,3 Sebastian Ordyniak4
1

Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway
Algorithms and Complexity group, Vienna University of Technology, Austria
3
Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Faculty IV, TU Berlin, Germany
4
Algorithms group, University of Sheffield, UK
eduard.eiben@uib.no, rganian@gmail.com, dusan.knop@gmail.com, sordyniak@gmail.com
2

that occur in the instance (Lokshtanov 2015)1 . It is important to note that the above results consider the total number
of variables which occur in the instance, i.e., including variables which do not occur in the objective function.
The aim of this work is to obtain an understanding of the
fine-grained complexity of IQP, and notably to map the conditions under which this notoriously difficult problem becomes tractable. In principle, there are two prominent kinds
of properties which could potentially be exploited to solve
IQP efficiently:
1. Explicit properties of the instance, notably bounding the
domain and/or the coefficients;
2. Structural properties of the instance, aimed at capturing
the interactions between variables and/or constraints.
So far, the tractability of IQP has been explored primarily through the lens of the explicit properties listed above,
but we are not aware of many results which would exploit the latter, structural properties. This contrasts with
the recent developments for ILP, which saw the introduction of several new algorithms and lower bounds that take
into account the specific properties of variable-variable and
variable-constraint interactions in instances (Ganian, Ordyniak, and Ramanujan 2017; Dvořák et al. 2017; Ganian and
Ordyniak 2018; Eiben et al. 2018; Jansen and Kratsch 2015;
Koutecký, Levin, and Onn 2018). In all of these works,
the authors captured the way variables interacted with each
other via constraints through suitably defined graph representations, and the primary research question was to identify
natural properties of these graphs (formalized via a structural parameter—an integer k) which allow an instance of
size n to be solved in time f (k) · nO(1) for some computable
function k. Note that this goal represents a stronger and more
fine-grained notion of tractability than merely polynomialtime solvability for each fixed value of k; in particular, algorithms with running time of this form are called fixedparameter algorithms and are central to the parameterized
complexity paradigm (Cygan et al. 2013; Niedermeier 2006;
Flum and Grohe 2006; Downey and Fellows 2013).

Abstract
We study the parameterized complexity of Integer Quadratic
Programming under two kinds of restrictions: explicit restrictions on the domain or coefficients, and structural restrictions on variable interactions. We argue that both kinds of
restrictions are necessary to achieve tractability for Integer
Quadratic Programming, and obtain four new algorithms for
the problem that are tuned to possible explicit restrictions
of instances that we may wish to solve. The presented algorithms are exact, deterministic, and complemented by appropriate lower bounds.

Introduction
Integer Quadratic Programming (IQP) is a powerful
paradigm for solving computationally intractable optimization problems. Indeed, the use of IQP encodings has found
numerous applications in artificial intelligence for settings
which are not well-suited to the simpler Integer Linear Programming (ILP) paradigm, with examples including Energy Disaggregation (Shaloudegi et al. 2016), Game Theory (Aziz et al. 2018; Iwashita et al. 2016) and Matching (Wang and Ling 2016).
In spite of the close connection between the problems, IQP—i.e., the task of maximizing a quadratic function over integer variables subject to linear constraints—
is known to be a substantially more difficult problem than
ILP. For instance, while maximizing a linear function over
unconstrained integer variables is a trivial task, already
this initial problem becomes NP-hard when we consider
quadratic functions—even if the domains of the variables are
Boolean (Murty and Kabadi 1987). It is a major open problem whether there exists a polynomial time algorithm for
IQP over a constant number of variables, i.e., whether one
can generalize Lenstra’s celebrated result (Lenstra, Jr. 1983)
on ILP to the quadratic setting. Until recently, the problem
was not even known to be in NP (Del Pia, Dey, and Molinaro 2017) and the first polynomial-time algorithm for IQP
over two variables was given in 2014 (Del Pia and Weismantel 2014). In 2015, Lokshtanov made substantial progress in
this direction by obtaining an analogue of Lenstra’s algorithm for IQP when additionally restricting the coefficients

1

We remark that Lokshtanov’s paper is, as of this time, only
a preprint. That being said, the result is well known by now
and considered to be correct, and has already been accepted and
used in published papers by leading researchers (Aziz et al. 2018;
Crampton et al. 2017)

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1477

