The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Argumentation for Explainable Scheduling
Kristijonas Čyras, Dimitrios Letsios, Ruth Misener, Francesca Toni
Imperial College London, London, UK

Abstract

Queries
Optimization Solver Solution Argumentation

Mathematical optimization offers highly-effective tools for
finding solutions for problems with well-defined goals, notably scheduling. However, optimization solvers are often
unexplainable black boxes whose solutions are inaccessible
to users and which users cannot interact with. We define a
novel paradigm using argumentation to empower the interaction between optimization solvers and users, supported by
tractable explanations which certify or refute solutions. A solution can be from a solver or of interest to a user (in the
context of ’what-if’ scenarios). Specifically, we define argumentative and natural language explanations for why a schedule is (not) feasible, (not) efficient or (not) satisfying fixed
user decisions, based on models of the fundamental makespan
scheduling problem in terms of abstract argumentation frameworks (AFs). We define three types of AFs, whose stable
extensions are in one-to-one correspondence with schedules
that are feasible, efficient and satisfying fixed decisions, respectively. We extract the argumentative explanations from
these AFs and the natural language explanations from the argumentative ones.

1

ArgOpt: Explainable Scheduling Layers

User

Explanations

Figure 1: ArgOpt produces explanations about solutions
generated by an optimization solver to the makespan
scheduling problem. Argumentation is an intermediate layer
between the optimization solver and the user. The optimization solver passes the computed solution to the argumentation layer. The user interacts with the argumentation layer to
obtain argumentative and natural language explanations.

et al. 2004). But nursing personnel, hospital managers, or
patients may inquire about the fairness or optimality of the
schedule and possible changes. Further, when unexpected
events occur, e.g. staff illness or an unusually high influx
of patients, feasible schedules must be recovered (Moz and
Vaz Pato 2007). We take the first steps towards enabling
users to interact with, and obtain explanations from, optimal
scheduling in general and nurse rostering in particular.
This paper proposes a novel paradigm (that we call ArgOpt) for explaining why a solution is (not) good by leveraging abstract argumentation (AA) as an intermediate layer
between the user and optimization software. Argumentation is highly suitable for explaining reasoning and decisions (Moulin et al. 2002; Atkinson et al. 2017) with argumentative explanations proposed in various settings, see
e.g. (Garcı́a et al. 2013; Fan and Toni 2015; Čyras et al.
2018; Zeng et al. 2018). We show how AA offers computational optimization an accessible knowledge representation tool, namely AA frameworks (AFs), for modeling optimization problems. These AFs are constructed automatically given a scheduling problem instance and possibly fixed
user decisions, allow formal explanation definitions and enable efficient generation of natural language explanations.
Figure 1 illustrates ArgOpt.
What makes an optimization solution good? A good solution should (i) be feasible, (ii) be efficient (ideally optimal),
and (iii) satisfy fixed (user) decisions. ArgOpt introduces a
toolkit realizing these needs and dealing with a number of
the relevant challenges. A good explanation should be efficiently attainable, combine few causal relationships and ad-

Introduction

Computational optimization empowers effective decision
making. Given a mathematical optimization model with
well-defined numerical variables, objective function(s), and
constraints, a solver generates an efficient and ideally optimal solution. If the model and solver are correct, then implementing the optimal solution can have major benefits. But
how can we explain the optimal solutions to a user? Currently, solvers express necessary and sufficient optimality
conditions with formal mathematics, so users often consider
the optimization solver as an unexplainable black box.
Explainable scheduling is a critical application (Sacchi
et al. 2015) and our test bed for explainable optimization.
Consider the fundamental makespan scheduling problem, a
discrete optimization problem for effective resource allocation (Graham 1969). This problem arises in for example
nurse rostering where staff of different skill qualification categories, e.g. Registered Nurse, Nurse’s Aide, need to be assigned to shifts (Warner and Prawda 1972). In the planning
period, staff are scheduled, e.g. for the next 4 weeks (Burke
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2752

