The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Metric Learning by Online Soft Mining and Class-Aware Attention
Xinshao Wang,1,2 Yang Hua,1 Elyor Kodirov,2 Guosheng Hu,1,2 Neil M. Robertson1,2
1

School of Electronics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queen’s University Belfast, UK
2
Anyvision Research Team, UK
{xwang39, y.hua, n.robertson}@qub.ac.uk, {elyor, guosheng.hu}@anyvision.co

Abstract

deep metric learning methods have been proposed: doubletbased methods with contrastive loss (Oh Song et al. 2016;
Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006; Shi et al. 2016; Yuan,
Yang, and Zhang 2017), triplet-based methods with triple
loss (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015; Wang et
al. 2014; Chechik et al. 2010; Hoffer and Ailon 2015;
Cui et al. 2016), and quadruplet-based methods with doubleheader hinge loss (Huang, Loy, and Tang 2016). All of them
construct pairs (samples) by using several images and introduce relative constraints among these pairs.
Compared with classification task, deep metric learning
methods deal with much more training samples since all
possible combinations of images need to be considered,
e.g., quadratically larger samples for contrastive loss and
cubically larger samples for triplet loss. Consequently, this
yields too slow convergence and poor local optima due
to a large fraction of trivial samples, e.g., non-informative
samples that can be easily verified and contribute zero to
the loss function. To alleviate this, sample mining methods are commonly used to select nontrivial images to accelerate convergence and improve performance. Therefore,
a variety of sample mining strategies have been studied recently (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015; Oh Song
et al. 2016; Wang and Gupta 2015; Simo-Serra et al. 2015;
Huang, Loy, and Tang 2016; Yuan, Yang, and Zhang 2017;
Shi et al. 2016; Cui et al. 2016).
Despite the popularity of exploiting sample mining in
deep metric learning, there are two problems in the existing
methods:
(1) Not making full use of all samples in the mini-batch –
the first problem concerns with the use of samples in the
mini-batch. When most methods perform sample mining,
they select samples out of mini-batch, e.g., hard 1 difficult
negatives mining (Oh Song et al. 2016). Specifically, they
assign one binary score (0 or 1) to each sample in order to
‘drop it’ or ‘keep it’. In this way, some samples which may
be useful to some extent are removed and thus only a subset
of samples are mined. Therefore they cannot make full use
of information in each mini-batch.
(2) Outliers – the second problem arises from outliers.

Deep metric learning aims to learn a deep embedding that
can capture the semantic similarity of data points. Given the
availability of massive training samples, deep metric learning is known to suffer from slow convergence due to a large
fraction of trivial samples. Therefore, most existing methods
generally resort to sample mining strategies for selecting nontrivial samples to accelerate convergence and improve performance. In this work, we identify two critical limitations of
the sample mining methods, and provide solutions for both of
them. First, previous mining methods assign one binary score
to each sample, i.e., dropping or keeping it, so they only selects a subset of relevant samples in a mini-batch. Therefore,
we propose a novel sample mining method, called Online Soft
Mining (OSM), which assigns one continuous score to each
sample to make use of all samples in the mini-batch. OSM
learns extended manifolds that preserve useful intraclass variances by focusing on more similar positives. Second, the existing methods are easily influenced by outliers as they are
generally included in the mined subset. To address this, we
introduce Class-Aware Attention (CAA) that assigns little attention to abnormal data samples. Furthermore, by combining
OSM and CAA, we propose a novel weighted contrastive loss
to learn discriminative embeddings. Extensive experiments
on two fine-grained visual categorisation datasets and two
video-based person re-identification benchmarks show that
our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
With success of deep learning, deep metric learning has
attracted a great deal of attention and been applied to a
wide range of visual tasks such as image retrieval (Wang
et al. 2014; Huang, Change Loy, and Tang 2016; Oh Song
et al. 2016), face recognition and verification (Schroff,
Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015; Sun et al. 2014; Taigman et al. 2014), and person re-identification (McLaughlin, del Rincon, and Miller 2017; Song et al. 2018). The
goal of deep metric learning is to learn a feature embedding/representation that captures the semantic similarity of
data points in the embedding space such that samples belonging to the same classes are located closer, while samples belonging to different classes are far away. Various

1

In this paper, ‘hard’ means ‘not soft’ as we propose soft mining
(continuous mining score) in contrast with ‘hard’ mining (binary
mining score). While in previous work, it means ‘difficult’.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5361

