The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Task Transfer by Preference-Based Cost Learning
Mingxuan Jing,∗† Xiaojian Ma,∗† Wenbing Huang,‡ Fuchun Sun,† Huaping Liu†
†

Department of Computer Science and Technology, State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
National Lab for Information Science and Technology (TNList), Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
‡
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
{jmx16, maxj14}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {fcsun, hpliu}@tsinghua.edu.cn
hwenbing@126.com
Abstract
The goal of task transfer in reinforcement learning is migrating the action policy of an agent to the target task from the
source task. Given their successes on robotic action planning,
current methods mostly rely on two requirements: exactlyrelevant expert demonstrations or the explicitly-coded cost
function on target task, both of which, however, are inconvenient to obtain in practice. In this paper, we relax these two
strong conditions by developing a novel task transfer framework where the expert preference is applied as a guidance. In
particular, we alternate the following two steps: Firstly, letting
experts apply pre-defined preference rules to select related
expert demonstrates for the target task. Secondly, based on
the selection result, we learn the target cost function and trajectory distribution simultaneously via enhanced Adversarial
MaxEnt IRL and generate more trajectories by the learned
target distribution for the next preference selection. The theoretical analysis on the distribution learning and convergence of
the proposed algorithm are provided. Extensive simulations on
several benchmarks have been conducted for further verifying
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Figure 1: Problem statement and method introduction. As an
example, we want to transfer a multi-joint robot from moving
towards arbitrary directions (basic task) to moving forward
(target task). Our preference-based task transfer framework
iterate following two steps. 1. Querying expert for preferencebased selection; 2. Learning distribution and cost simultaneously from selected samples, doing policy optimization and
re-generating more samples, which would have the same
distribution as the selected ones.

Introduction

Imitation Learning has become an incredibly convenient
scheme to teach robots skills for specific tasks (Wang et
al. 2017; Pathak et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2018; Stadie, Abbeel,
and Sutskever 2017; Sermanet et al. 2018; Edmonds et al.
2017). It is often achieved by showing the robot various
expert trajectories of state-action pairs. Existing imitation
methods like MAML (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017) and
One-Shot Imitation Learning (Duan et al. 2017) requires
perfect demonstrations in the sense that the experts should
perform the same as they expect the robot would do. However, this requirement may not always hold since collecting
exactly-relevant demonstrations is resource-consuming.
One possible relaxation is assuming the expert to perform
a basic task that is related but not necessary the same as
the target task (sharing some common features, parts, etc).
This relaxation, at the very least, can reduce the human effort
on demonstration collecting and enrich the diversity of the
demonstrations for task transfer. For example in Figure 1, the

expert demonstrations contain the agent movements along an
arbitrary direction, while the desired target is to move along
only one specified direction.
Clearly, it does not come for free to learn target action policy from the relaxed expert demonstrations. More advanced
strategies are required to transfer the action policy from the
demonstrations to the target task. The work by (De Gemmis
et al. 2009) suggests that using experts’ preference as a supervised signal can achieve nearly optimal learning result. Here,
the preference refers to the highly-abstract evaluation rules or
choice tendency of a human for making comparison and selection among data samples. Indeed, the preference mechanism
has been applied in many other scenarios, such as complex
tasks learning (Wirth et al. 2017), policy updating (Christiano
et al. 2017), and policy optimization combing with Inverse
Reinforcement Learning (IRL) (Wirth and Fürnkranz 2013)
to name a few.
However, previous preference-based methods mainly focus on learning the utility function behind each comparison,
where the distribution of trajectories is never studied. However, this would be inadequate for task transfer. The impor-

∗

These two authors contributed equally
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2471

