The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Similarity Learning via Kernel Preserving Embedding
Zhao Kang,1∗ Yiwei Lu,1,2 Yuanzhang Su,3 Changsheng Li,1 Zenglin Xu1∗
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
Department of Computer Science, University of Manitoba, 66 Chancellors Cir, Winnipeg, MB R3T 2N2, Canada
3
School of Foreign Languages, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Sichuan 611731, China
Zkang@uestc.edu.cn, luy2@cs.umanitoba.ca, syz@uestc.edu.cn, lichangsheng@uestc.edu.cn, zlxu@uestc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Towne, Rosé, and Herbsleb 2016). A variety of similarity metrics, e.g., Cosine, Jaccard coefficient, Euclidean distance, Gaussian function, are often used in practice for
convenience. However, they are often data-dependent and
sensitive to noise (Huang, Nie, and Huang 2015). Consequently, different metrics lead to a big difference in the
final results. In addition, several other similarity measure
strategies are popular in dimension reduction techniques.
For example, in the widely used locally linear embedding
(LLE) (Roweis and Saul 2000), isomeric feature mapping
(ISOMAP) (Tenenbaum, De Silva, and Langford 2000), and
locality preserving projection (LPP) (Niyogi 2004) methods,
one has to construct an adjacency graph of neighbors. Then,
k-nearest-neighborhood (knn) and -nearest-neighborhood
graph construction methods are often utilized. These approaches also have some inherent drawbacks, including 1)
how to determine neighbor number k or radius ; 2) how to
choose an appropriate similarity metric to define neighborhood; 3) how to counteract the adverse effect of noise and
outliers; 4) how to tackle data with structures at different
scales of size and density. Unfortunately, all these factors
heavily influence the subsequent tasks (Kang et al. 2018b).
Recently, automatically learning of similarity information
from data has drawn significant attention. In general, it can
be classified into two categories. The first one is adaptive
neighbors approach. It learns similarity information by assigning a probability for each data point as the neighborhood
of another data point (Nie, Wang, and Huang 2014). It has
been shown to be an effective way to capture the local manifold structure.
The other one is self-expression approach. The basic idea
is to represent every data point by a linear combination of
other data points. In contrast, LLE reconstructs the original
data by expressing each data point as a linear combination
of its k nearest neighbors only. Through minimizing this reconstruction error, we can obtain a coefficient matrix, which
is also named similarity matrix. It has been widely applied
in various representation learning tasks, including sparse
subspace clustering (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Peng et al.
2016), low-rank representation (Liu et al. 2013), multi-view
learning (Tao et al. 2017), semi-supervised learning (Zhuang
et al. 2017), nonnegative matrix factorization(NMF) (Zhang
et al. 2017).
However, this approach just tries to reconstruct the origi-

Data similarity is a key concept in many data-driven applications. Many algorithms are sensitive to similarity measures.
To tackle this fundamental problem, automatically learning of
similarity information from data via self-expression has been
developed and successfully applied in various models, such
as low-rank representation, sparse subspace learning, semisupervised learning. However, it just tries to reconstruct the
original data and some valuable information, e.g., the manifold structure, is largely ignored. In this paper, we argue that
it is beneficial to preserve the overall relations when we extract similarity information. Specifically, we propose a novel
similarity learning framework by minimizing the reconstruction error of kernel matrices, rather than the reconstruction
error of original data adopted by existing work. Taking the
clustering task as an example to evaluate our method, we observe considerable improvements compared to other state-ofthe-art methods. More importantly, our proposed framework
is very general and provides a novel and fundamental building block for many other similarity-based tasks. Besides, our
proposed kernel preserving opens up a large number of possibilities to embed high-dimensional data into low-dimensional
space.

Introduction
Nowadays, high-dimensional data can be collected everywhere, either by low-cost sensors or from the internet (Chen
et al. 2012). Extracting useful information from massive
high-dimensional data is critical in different areas like text,
images, videos and more. Data similarity is especially important since it is the input for a number of data analysis tasks, such as spectral clustering (Ng et al. 2002;
Chen et al. 2018), nearest neighbor classification (Weinberger, Blitzer, and Saul 2005), image segmentation (Li et
al. 2016), person re-identification (Hirzer et al. 2012), image retrieval (Hoi, Liu, and Chang 2008), dimension reduction (Passalis and Tefas 2017), and graph-based semisupervised learning (Kang et al. 2018a). Therefore, similarity measure is crucial to the performance of many techniques
and is a fundamental problem in machine learning, pattern
recognition, and data mining communities (Gao et al. 2017;
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4057

