The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Green Security Games with Real-Time Information
Yufei Wang,1 Zheyuan Ryan Shi,2 Lantao Yu,3 Yi Wu,4 Rohit Singh,5 Lucas Joppa,6 Fei Fang2
1

4

Peking University, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Stanford University
University of California, Berkeley, 5 World Wild Fund for Nature, 6 Microsoft Research
wang.yufei@pku.edu.cn, {ryanshi, feifang}@cmu.edu, lantaoyu@cs.stanford.edu
jxwuyi@eecs.berkeley.edu, rsingh@wwfnet.org, lujoppa@microsoft.com
Abstract

been neglected in previous game models, not to mention the
agents’ subsequent actions upon receiving the information.
For example, rangers can observe traces left by the poacher
(e.g., footprints, tree marks) or learn of poacher’s location
in real time from camera traps and conservation drones. A
well-trained ranger would make use of the real-time information to adjust her patrol route. Indeed, there have been
reports that rangers arrested the poachers after finding blood
stains on the ground nearby (Maasailand Preservation Trust
2011). Similarly, a poacher may also observe the ranger’s
action in real time and adjust his attack plan, and the rangers
should be aware of such risk. Thus, the prescribed patrol
plans in previous work have limited applicability in practice
as they are not adaptive to observations during the patrol.
Our paper aims at filling the gap. First, we propose a
new game model GSG-I which augments GSGs with the vital element of real-time information and allows players to
adjust their movements based on the received real-time information. These features lead to significant complexity, inevitably resulting in a large extensive-form game (EFG) with
imperfect information.
Second, we design a novel deep reinforcement learning
(DRL)-based algorithm, DeDOL (Deep-Q Network based
Double Oracle enhanced with Local modes), to compute a
patrolling strategy that adapts to the real-time information
for zero-sum GSG-I. DeDOL is among the first few attempts
to leverage advances in DRL for security games (Kamra et
al. 2018; Trejo, Clempner, and Poznyak 2016) and is the
first to use deep Q-learning for complex extensive-form security games. DeDOL builds upon the classic double oracle framework (DO) (McMahan, Gordon, and Blum 2003;
Bosansky et al. 2013) which solves zero-sum games using
incremental strategy generation, and a meta-method named
policy-space response oracle (PSRO) (Lanctot et al. 2017)
which augments DO with RL to handle a long time horizon
in multi-agent interaction. Tailored towards GSG-I, DeDOL
uses a deep Q-network (DQN) to compactly represent a pure
strategy, integrates several recent advances in deep RL to
find an approximate best response, which is a key step in
the DO framework. Further, DeDOL uses domain-specific
heuristic strategies, including a parameterized random walk
strategy and a random sweeping strategy as initial strategies
to warm up the strategy generation process. In addition, exploring the game structure of GSG-I, DeDOL uses several

Green Security Games (GSGs) have been proposed and applied to optimize patrols conducted by law enforcement agencies in green security domains such as combating poaching, illegal logging and overfishing. However, real-time information such as footprints and agents’ subsequent actions
upon receiving the information, e.g., rangers following the
footprints to chase the poacher, have been neglected in previous work. To fill the gap, we first propose a new game
model GSG-I which augments GSGs with sequential movement and the vital element of real-time information. Second,
we design a novel deep reinforcement learning-based algorithm, DeDOL, to compute a patrolling strategy that adapts to
the real-time information against a best-responding attacker.
DeDOL is built upon the double oracle framework and the
policy-space response oracle, solving a restricted game and
iteratively adding best response strategies to it through training deep Q-networks. Exploring the game structure, DeDOL
uses domain-specific heuristic strategies as initial strategies
and constructs several local modes for efficient and parallelized training. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt
to use Deep Q-Learning for security games.

Introduction
Security games (Tambe 2011) have been used for addressing complex resource allocation and patrolling problems in
security and sustainability domains, with successful applications in critical infrastructure protection, security inspection
and traffic enforcement (Basilico, Gatti, and Amigoni 2009;
Durkota et al. 2015; Yin, An, and Jain 2014; Rosenfeld and
Kraus 2017). In particular, Green Security Games (GSG)
have been proposed to model the strategic interaction between law enforcement agencies (referred to as defenders)
and their opponents (referred to as attackers) in green security domains such as combating poaching, illegal logging and overfishing. Mathematical programming based algorithms are designed to compute the optimal defender
strategy, which prescribes strategically randomized patrol
routes for the defender (Fang, Stone, and Tambe 2015;
Fang et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2017).
Despite the efforts, a key element, real-time information,
existing widely in practice in green security domains, has
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1401

