The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning a Deep Convolutional Network for
Colorization in Monochrome-Color Dual-Lens System
Xuan Dong,1 Weixin Li,2∗ Xiaojie Wang,1 Yunhong Wang2
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University
dongxuan8811@bupt.edu.cn, weixinli@buaa.edu.cn, xjwang@bupt.edu.cn, yhwang@buaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract
In the monochrome-color dual-lens system, the gray image
captured by the monochrome camera has better quality than
the color image from the color camera, but does not have
color information. To get high-quality color images, it is desired to colorize the gray image with the color image as reference. Related works usually use hand-crafted methods to
search for the best-matching pixel in the reference image for
each pixel in the input gray image, and copy the color of the
best-matching pixel as the result. We propose a novel deep
convolution network to solve the colorization problem in an
end-to-end way. Based on our observation that, for each pixel
in the input image, there usually exist multiple pixels in the
reference image that have the correct colors, our method performs weighted average of colors of the candidate pixels in
the reference image to utilize more candidate pixels with correct colors. The weight values between pixels in the input
image and the reference image are obtained by learning a
weight volume using deep feature representations, where an
attention operation is proposed to focus on more useful candidate pixels and a 3-D regulation is performed to learn with
context information. In addition, to correct wrongly colorized
pixels in occlusion regions, we propose a color residue joint
learning module to correct the colorization result with the input gray image as guidance. We evaluate our method on the
Scene Flow, Cityscapes, Middlebury, and Sintel datasets. Experimental results show that our method largely outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods.

(a) The input pair of gray and color images.

(b) The output color image.

(c) The input and output color images in the red box region.

Figure 1: An example of colorization in the dual-lens system. The input images are captured by the dual-lens system
of Huawei P9 phone. The output colorization result has high
quality in the monochrome channel and correct colors.

and correct colors as well. An example is shown in Fig. 1.
In the literature, reference-based colorization methods,
e.g. (Ironi, Cohen-Or, and Lischinski 2005), (Gupta et
al. 2012), (Jeon et al. 2016), are related to our problem.
Most methods, e.g. (Ironi, Cohen-Or, and Lischinski 2005),
(Gupta et al. 2012), usually use hand-crafted features, such
as luminance, variance, etc., to search for the best-matching
pixel in the reference image for each pixel in the input image. Jeon et al. (Jeon et al. 2016) use a stereo matching
method, which is based on brightness constancy and edge
similarity constraints, to search for the best-matching pixel.
For occlusion pixels, color propagation, e.g. (Levin, Lischinski, and Weiss 2004), is usually performed to estimate or
correct the colors of these pixels based on their neighboring
pixels. Recently, deep learning based methods have proven
to be effective for many vision problems compared with
traditional ‘hand-crafted’ methods, e.g. single image superresolution (Dong et al. 2014), and stereo matching (Zbontar
and LeCun 2016). However, for reference-based colorization, to the best of our knowledge, deep learning based methods have not been explored yet. In addition, to estimate the
color of each pixel, previous methods usually copy the color
of only one pixel in the reference image as the result. We

Introduction
The dual-lens system with one monochrome camera and
one color camera has been widely used in popular smart
phones, e.g. Huawei P9 and P10. In the dual-lens system,
the monochrome camera has better light efficiency than the
color camera (Jeon et al. 2016), so the image captured by
the monochrome camera has higher quality (i.e. signal-tonoise ratio) than the image from the color camera, but does
not have color information. To shoot high quality color images using dual-lens systems, it is desirable to colorize the
gray images from the monochrome camera with the color
images from the color camera as reference, so that the colorized images have high quality in the monochrome channel
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8255

