The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robust Online Matching with User Arrival Distribution Drift
Yu-Hang Zhou, Chen Liang, Nan Li, Cheng Yang, Shenghuo Zhu, Rong Jin
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{zyh174606,liangchen.lc,nanli.ln,charis.yangc,shenghuo.zhu,jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

To make the online problem more resoluble, researchers
introduce some assumptions regarding the user arrival fashion. In general, there are two common user arrival models, i.e., adversarial model and stochastic model. They differ from each other in how much information the algorithm
knows in advance about the user distribution. The adversarial user arrival model assumes that there is an adversary who knows the strategy of the algorithm and generates the worst user sequence for the algorithm, which is
usually too pessimistic in practice (Aggarwal et al. 2011;
Kalyanasundaram and Pruhs 2000). The stochastic user arrival model, by contrast, assumes that the users are drawn
from a stationary distribution or arrive at a random order
(Devanur and Hayes 2009; Feldman et al. 2010; Vee, Vassilvitskii, and Shanmugasundaram 2010). However, this assumption can be too optimistic in real applications, because
a stationary distribution might not capture the real user arrival fashion well. For example, in an ad allocation task, the
user crowd on weekends could be rather different from that
on weekdays because the former contains more office workers. When the user distribution is changing, the algorithms
with stochastic assumption could suffer severely degenerated performance.
In order to design more practical algorithms, we consider a hybrid case between the adversarial and stochastic assumption in which users are drawn from a drifting distribution, and propose the Robust Dynamic Learning Algorithm (RDLA) to address such issue. Specifically,
we assume that there is a drift between the user distributions of adjacent periods, which is much more realistic in
real tasks. Rather than maximizing the empirical total revenues on the revealed users, RDLA leverages distributionally robust optimization techniques (Goh and Sim 2010;
Wiesemann, Kuhn, and Sim 2014) to learn dual variables via
a worst-case approach over an uncertainty set on the underlying user distribution. Furthermore, we present a dynamic
learning framework to tackle user arrival distribution drifts
by updating dual variables at equal time intervals. Experiments on a real-world dataset exhibit the impressive performance of RDLA.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
introduces related works and Section 3 gives some preliminaries. Section 4 proposes the RDLA approach and Section
5 reports our experiments. Section 6 concludes the paper.

Recently, online matching problems have attracted much attention due to its emerging applications in internet advertising. Most existing online matching methods have adopted either adversarial or stochastic user arrival assumption, while
on both of them significant limitation exists. The adversarial model does not exploit existing knowledge of the user
sequence, and thus can be pessimistic in practice. On other
hands, the stochastic model assumes that users are drawn
from a stationary distribution, which may not be true in
real applications. In this paper, we consider a novel user arrival model where users are drawn from drifting distribution,
which is a hybrid case between the adversarial and stochastic model, and propose a new approach RDLA to deal with
such assumption. Instead of maximizing empirical total revenues on the revealed users, RDLA leverages distributionally
robust optimization techniques to learn dual variables via a
worst-case consideration over an ambiguity set on the underlying user distribution. Experiments on a real-world dataset
exhibit the superiority of our approach.

Introduction
Matching is a classic problem with a long history, which is
defined on graphs originally (Berge 1957; Gale and Shapley
1962). Given a bipartite graph G(U, V, E), a matching is a
set of edges M ⊂ E such that for every v ∈ V there is at
most one edge in M incident on v. Matching problems are
widely relevant to many applications, e.g., resource allocation, stable matching, network routing and so on. For ad allocation problems, the vertices in U and V represent bidders
and users respectively, thus each edge can be seen as an allocation from bidder to user with a predefined revenue. Since
there are supply and demand constraints on both bidders and
users, the goal is to find a matching with maximal revenues
satisfying the constraints. However, in real applications, it
is usual to see that the matching problem is inherently online (Mehta 2013). In other words, the users often arrive incrementally, and we have to allocate a bidder to the incoming user without complete information about the subsequent
users. An optimal online matching algorithm can reach the
same objective value as its offline version, which is difficult to achieve because the allocation results are irrevocable
while the user arrival information is unknown.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

459

