The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SVM-Based Deep Stacking Networks
Jingyuan Wang,†,§ Kai Feng,† Junjie Wu‡,§∗
†MOE Engineering Research Center of Advanced Computer Application Technology,
School of Computer Science Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
‡Beijing Key Laboratory of Emergency Support Simulation Technologies for City Operations,
School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
§Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
Email: {jywang, fengkai, wujj}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

societies. Some potential solutions have been proposed to
build deep structure models using non neural network approaches. For instance, in the literature, the PCANet build
a deep model using an unsupervised convolutional principal component analysis (Chan et al. 2015). The gcForest builds a tree based deep model using stacked random
forests, which is regarded as a good alternative to deep neural networks (Zhi-Hua Zhou 2017). Deep Fisher Networks
build deep networks by stacking Fisher vector encoding into
multiple layers (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013).
Along this line, in this paper, we propose a novel SVMbased Deep Stacking Network (SVM-DSN) for deep machine learning. On one hand, SVM-DSN belongs to the community of Deep Stacking Networks (DSN), which consist of
many stacked multilayer base blocks that could be trained in
a parallel way and have comparable performance with deep
neural networks (Deng and Yu 2011; Deng, He, and Gao
2013). In this way, SVM-DSN can gain the deep learning
ability with extra scalability. On the other hand, we replace
the traditional base blocks in a DSN, i.e., the perceptrons, by
the well known Support Vector Machine (SVM), which has
long been regarded as a succinct model with appealing math
properties such as the convexity in optimization, and was
considered as a different method to model complicated data
distributions compared with deep neural networks (Bengio
and others 2009). In this way, SVM-DSN can gain the ability in anti-saturation and enjoys improved interpretability,
which are deemed to be the tough challenges to deep neural networks. A BP-like Layered Tuning (BLT) algorithm is
then proposed for SVM-DSN to conduct holistic and local
optimizations for all base SVMs simultaneously.
Compared with the traditional deep stacking networks and
deep neural networks, the SVM-DSN model has the following advantages:

The deep network model, with the majority built on neural
networks, has been proved to be a powerful framework to
represent complex data for high performance machine learning. In recent years, more and more studies turn to nonneural network approaches to build diverse deep structures,
and the Deep Stacking Network (DSN) model is one of such
approaches that uses stacked easy-to-learn blocks to build
a parameter-training-parallelizable deep network. In this paper, we propose a novel SVM-based Deep Stacking Network
(SVM-DSN), which uses the DSN architecture to organize
linear SVM classifiers for deep learning. A BP-like layer tuning scheme is also proposed to ensure holistic and local optimizations of stacked SVMs simultaneously. Some good math
properties of SVM, such as the convex optimization, is introduced into the DSN framework by our model. From a global
view, SVM-DSN can iteratively extract data representations
layer by layer as a deep neural network but with parallelizability, and from a local view, each stacked SVM can converge to its optimal solution and obtain the support vectors,
which compared with neural networks could lead to interesting improvements in anti-saturation and interpretability. Experimental results on both image and text data sets demonstrate the excellent performances of SVM-DSN compared
with some competitive benchmark models.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the tremendous interests from
both the academy and industries in building deep neural networks (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006; Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013). Many types of deep neural networks have been proposed for classification, regression and feature extracting tasks, such as Stacked Denoising Autoencoders (SAE) (Vincent et al. 2010), Deep Belief Networks (DBN) (Hinton 2011), deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) (Medsker and
Jain 2001), and so on.
Meanwhile, the shortcomings of neural network based
deep models, such as the non-convex optimization, hardto-parallelizing, and lacking model interpretation, are getting more and more attentions from the pertinent research

• The optimization of each base-SVM is convex. Using the
proposed BLT algorithm, all base-SVMs are optimized as
a whole, and meanwhile each base-SVM can also converge to its own optimum. The final solution of SVMDSN is a group of optimized linear SVMs that are integrated as a deep model. This advantage allows SVMDSN to avoid the neuron saturation problem in deep neural networks, and thus could improve the performance.

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• The SVM-DSN model is very easy to parallelize. The
5273

