The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Resisting Adversarial Attacks Using Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoders
Partha Ghosh,∗1 Arpan Losalka,∗2 Michael J Black1
1

Max Planck Institute of Intelligent Systems, 2 IBM Research AI
partha.ghosh@tuebingen.mpg.de, arlosalk@in.ibm.com, black@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract

fooling samples as defined by (2015). Existence of adversarial samples was first shown by Szegedy et al. (2014), while
fooling samples (2015), which are closely related to the idea
of “rubbish class” images (1998) were introduced by Nguyen
et al. (2015). Evolutionary algorithms were applied to inputs drawn from a uniform distribution, using the predicted
probability corresponding to the targeted class as the fitness
function (2015) to craft such fooling samples. It has also
been shown that Gaussian noise can be directly used to trick
classifiers into predicting one of the output classes with very
high probability (2014).
Adversarial attack methods can be classified into (i) white
box attacks (2014; 2014; 2017b; 2016a; 2016; 2018), which
use knowledge of the machine learning model (such as model
architecture, loss function used during training, etc.) for crafting adversarial samples, and (ii) black box attacks (2017;
2016; 2017), which only require the model for obtaining
labels corresponding to input samples. Both these kinds of attacks can be further split into two sub categories, (i) targeted
attacks, which trick the model into producing a chosen output, and (ii) non-targeted attacks, which cause the model to
produce any undesired output (2014). The majority of attacks
and defenses have dealt with adversarial samples so far (2014;
2014; 2016b), while a relatively smaller literature deals with
fooling samples (2015). However, to the best of our knowledge, no prior method tries to defend against both kinds of
samples simultaneously under a unified framework. Stateof-the-art defense mechanisms have tried to harden a classifier by one or more of the following techniques: adversarial retraining (2014), preprocessing inputs (2014), deploying auxiliary detection networks (2017a) or obfuscating gradients (2018). One common drawback of these defense mechanisms is that they do not eliminate the vulnerability of deep networks altogether, but only try to defend
against previously proposed attack methods. Hence, they
have been easily broken by stronger attacks, which are specifically designed to overcome their defense strategies (2016;
2018).

Susceptibility of deep neural networks to adversarial attacks
poses a major theoretical and practical challenge. All efforts
to harden classifiers against such attacks have seen limited
success till now. Two distinct categories of samples against
which deep neural networks are vulnerable, “adversarial samples” and “fooling samples”, have been tackled separately so
far due to the difficulty posed when considered together. In
this work, we show how one can defend against them both
under a unified framework. Our model has the form of a variational autoencoder with a Gaussian mixture prior on the latent
variable, such that each mixture component corresponds to
a single class. We show how selective classification can be
performed using this model, thereby causing the adversarial
objective to entail a conflict. The proposed method leads to the
rejection of adversarial samples instead of misclassification,
while maintaining high precision and recall on test data. It
also inherently provides a way of learning a selective classifier in a semi-supervised scenario, which can similarly resist
adversarial attacks. We further show how one can reclassify
the detected adversarial samples by iterative optimization.1

1

Introduction

The vulnerability of deep neural networks to adversarial attacks has generated a lot of interest and concern in the past
few years. The fact that these networks can be easily fooled
by adding specially crafted noise to the input, such that the
original and modified inputs are indistinguishable to humans
(2014), clearly suggests that they fail to mimic the human
learning process. Even though these networks achieve stateof-the-art performance, often surpassing human level performance (2015; 2017) on the test data used for different tasks,
their vulnerability is a cause of concern when deploying them
in real life applications, especially in domains such as health
care (2018), autonomous vehicles (2018) and defense, etc.

Adversarial Attacks and Defenses
Adversarially crafted samples can be classified into two broad
categories, namely (i) adversarial samples (2014) and (ii)

Szegedy et al. (2014) argue that the primary reason for
the existence of adversarial samples is the presence of small
“pockets” in the data manifold, which are rarely sampled in
the training or test set. On the other hand, Goodfellow et
al. (2014) have proposed the “linearity hypothesis” to explain
the presence of adversarial samples. Under our approach as

∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Accepted for publication in the Proceedings of the Thirty-Third
AAAI Conference on Aritificial Intelligence (AAAI 2019)

541

