The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving Search with Supervised Learning in Trick-Based Card Games
Christopher Solinas, Douglas Rebstock, Michael Buro
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada
{solinas,drebstoc,mburo}@ualberta.ca

Abstract

components are vital to good play. Even if a player could
perfectly evaluate every state in an information set, combining them with inaccurate inference can easily introduce
catastrophic errors in the final move values. In trick-taking
card games like Contract Bridge or Skat, private information
slowly becomes public as cards are played, but every move
each player makes can reveal additional information through
careful reasoning. The most experienced human players are
able to read into the implications of every opponent move
and act accordingly.
In this paper, we investigate inference in trick-taking card
games. We show that the history of moves in the game thus
far can be used to infer the hidden cards of other players, and
that this information can be used to considerably boost the
performance of simple search-based evaluation techniques
in the domain of Skat.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We first
summarize the state of research related to state evaluation
and inference for cardplay in trick-taking card games, and
explain the basic rules of Skat — our application domain.
Next, we describe a technique for performing state inference by predicting the locations of individual cards using
move history. Then, we provide statistically significant experimental results that show the effectiveness of this type of
inference in trick-based card games like Skat. Finally, we
finish the paper with conclusions and ideas for future research.

In trick-taking card games, a two-step process of state sampling and evaluation is widely used to approximate move values. While the evaluation component is vital, the accuracy
of move value estimates is also fundamentally linked to how
well the sampling distribution corresponds the true distribution. Despite this, recent work in trick-taking card game AI
has mainly focused on improving evaluation algorithms with
limited work on improving sampling. In this paper, we focus
on the effect of sampling on the strength of a player and propose a novel method of sampling more realistic states given
move history. In particular, we use predictions about locations
of individual cards made by a deep neural network — trained
on data from human gameplay — in order to sample likely
worlds for evaluation. This technique, used in conjunction
with Perfect Information Monte Carlo (PIMC) search, provides a substantial increase in cardplay strength in the popular
trick-taking card game of Skat.

1

Introduction

Games have always been at the forefront of AI research because they provide a controlled, efficient, and predictable
environment to study decision-making in various contexts.
Researchers are constantly trying to develop new techniques
that allow for intelligent decisions to be made in more complex environments.
Imperfect information games require players to make decisions without being able to observe the full state. This setting is attractive to researchers because it is a closer approximation to real life. To make good decisions, the player to
move must account for the private holdings of every player
in the game, and must consider that each action they take reveals information about their holdings. These are just some
of the reasons that algorithms developed for perfect information games may not translate well to games with hidden
information.
For imperfect information games with information sets
too large to game theoretically solve, most game-playing
algorithms can be broken down into two key components:
inference and state evaluation. State evaluation tells a player
how advantageous a particular state is; whereas inference allows a player to determine the likelihood of said state. Both

2

Background and Related Work

Card games have long been an important application for
researchers wishing to study imperfect information games.
Recent advances in computer poker (Moravčı́k et al. 2017;
Brown and Sandholm 2017) have led to theoretically sound
agents which are able to outperform professional human
players in the full variant of Poker called Heads Up No Limit
Texas Hold’em. However, the same techniques have thus far
been unable to find success in trick-taking card games because they rely on expert abstractions in order to scale to
such large games. Compact yet expressive abstractions are
difficult to construct in trick-taking card games because every single card in each player’s hand can immensely affect
the value of a state or action.
Perfect Information Monte Carlo (PIMC) search (Levy
1989) has been successfully applied to popular trick-taking

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1158

