The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Probabilistic-Logic Bots for Efficient Evaluation
of Business Rules Using Conversational Interfaces
Joseph Bockhorst,1 Devin Conathan,1 Glenn M Fung1
1

American Family Insurance
jbockhor@amfam.com, dconathan@amfam.com, gfung@amfam.com

Abstract

that have the potential for addressing many of these concerns (Zamora 2017; Perez and Pascual 2011). A successful
intelligent virtual assistant would interact with users to understand their questions or concerns. After it has determined
that the user wants to know whether a certain business rule
applies, it would do so by asking the user the fewest number
of questions. Furthermore, the virtual agent would be intelligent enough to allow the user to communicate in natural
language.
This paper reports on efforts we have made toward creating efficient and intelligent conversational interfaces. We
present an approach for creating intelligent virtual agents,
which we call probabilistic-logic bots (PL-bots), that empower users to quickly evaluate complex business rules by
minimizing the number of questions the bot asks of the user.
We have deployed PL-bots as part of a conversational agent
that aims to assist insurance agents in answering questions
about eligibility for insurance coverage discounts and endorsements for new and existing customers. We have also
designed and deployed tools that allow domain experts, who
in general have non-analytical backgrounds, to quickly create, edit and manage PL-bots with little training.
Our tools allow users to publish stateless APIs to be consumed by stateful chatbot applications. The PL-bots are implemented as look-up functions: the user or chatbot application supplies the ID of the business rule being evaluated
and the current evidence or set of known facts. The PL-bot
either responds with the optimal fact to ask next or the resulting value of the business rule (i.e., true or false) if the
supplied evidence is sufficient to evaluate it.
The key technology underlying PL-bots are Bayesian networks (BNs), a member of the class of probabilistic graphical models (see, for example, the Koller and Friedman textbook (Koller and Friedman 2009)). The BNs used by PLbots encode the logical expressions for the business rule deterministically and the uncertainty over input facts probabilistically.

We present an approach for designing conversational interfaces (chatbots) that users interact with to determine whether
or not a business rule applies in a context possessing uncertainty (from the point of view of the chatbot) as to the value
of input facts. Our approach relies on Bayesian network models that bring together a business rule’s logical, deterministic aspects with its probabilistic components in a common
framework. Our probabilistic-logic bots (PL-bots) evaluate
business rules by iteratively prompting users to provide the
values of unknown facts. The order facts are solicited is dynamic, depends on known facts, and is chosen using mutual
information as a heuristic so as to minimize the number of interactions with the user. We have created a web-based content
creation and editing tool that quickly enables subject matter
experts to create and validate PL-bots with minimal training
and without requiring a deep understanding of logic or probability. To date, domain experts at a well-known insurance
company have successfully created and deployed over 80 PLbots to help insurance agents determine customer eligibility
for policy discounts and endorsements.

1

Introduction

Employees, agents, customers and other interested parties
of many businesses often need to determine whether or not a
business rule or guideline applies in a given context. For instance, a homeowners insurance policy holder might wish to
determine if their new diamond ring is covered in the case of
theft, and if not what endorsement they need to add, while an
insurance agent might want to learn if a one of their clients
qualifies for a certain discount.
Although the customer or employee may have access to
web sites, policy contracts or other documentation describing the business rule, such sources are often difficult to find.
Moreover, even if documentation is located, the rule may
require high cognitive load to understand or be outright incomprehensible by the seeker due to jargon, ambiguity or
inherent complexity. This leads to an increased burden on
corporate call centers as confused and frustrated customers
or employees seek an expert for help.
Conversational interfaces, chatbots, and related intelligent user interfaces are promising emerging technologies

2
2.1

Preliminaries

Bayesian Networks

A Bayesian network is way of representing the joint probability distribution of a set of random variables that exploits the conditional independence relationships among the

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9422

