The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Bilingual Lexicon Induction from Mono-Lingual Multimodal Data
Shizhe Chen,1 Qin Jin,1∗ Alexander Hauptmann2
1

2

School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
Language Technology Institude, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
{cszhe1, qjin}@ruc.edu.cn, alex@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Bilingual lexicon induction, translating words from the
source language to the target language, is a long-standing natural language processing task. Recent endeavors prove that it
is promising to employ images as pivot to learn the lexicon induction without reliance on parallel corpora. However, these
vision-based approaches simply associate words with entire
images, which are constrained to translate concrete words and
require object-centered images. We humans can understand
words better when they are within a sentence with context.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose to utilize images and
their associated captions to address the limitations of previous approaches. We propose a multi-lingual caption model
trained with different mono-lingual multimodal data to map
words in different languages into joint spaces. Two types of
word representation are induced from the multi-lingual caption model: linguistic features and localized visual features.
The linguistic feature is learned from the sentence contexts
with visual semantic constraints, which is beneficial to learn
translation for words that are less visual-relevant. The localized visual feature is attended to the region in the image
that correlates to the word, so that it alleviates the image restriction for salient visual representation. The two types of
features are complementary for word translation. Experimental results on multiple language pairs demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method, which substantially outperforms previous vision-based approaches without using any
parallel sentences or supervision of seed word pairs.

(a) The previous vision-based approach: a word is represented by
global features extracted from retrieved images. It requires objectcentered images and is unreliable for non-concrete words.

(b) Our proposed approach: the word representation is learned
from both sentence contexts and visual localization.

Figure 1: Comparison of previous vision-based approaches
and our proposed approach for bilingual lexicon induction.
Best viewed in color.
there are abundant multimodal mono-lingual data on the Internet, such as images and their associated tags and descriptions, which motivates researchers to induce bilingual lexicon from these non-parallel data without supervision.
There are mainly two types of mono-lingual approaches
to build bilingual dictionaries in recent works. The first is
purely text-based, which explores the structure similarity
between different linguistic space. The most popular approach among them is to linearly map source word embedding into the target word embedding space (Mikolov,
Le, and Sutskever 2013; Conneau et al. 2018). The second
type utilizes vision as bridge to connect different languages
(Bergsma and Van Durme 2011; Kiela, Vulic, and Clark
2015; Hewitt et al. 2018). It assumes that words correlating to similar images should share similar semantic meanings. So previous vision-based methods search images with

1. Introduction
The bilingual lexicon induction task aims to automatically build word translation dictionaries across different languages, which is beneficial for various natural language
processing tasks such as cross-lingual information retrieval
(Lavrenko, Choquette, and Croft 2002), multi-lingual sentiment analysis (Denecke 2008), machine translation (Och
and Ney 2003) and so on. Although building bilingual lexicon has achieved success with parallel sentences in resourcerich languages (Och and Ney 2003), the parallel data is insufficient or even unavailable especially for resource-scarce
languages and it is expensive to collect. On the contrary,
∗

Qin Jin is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8207

