The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Model-Free Affective Reinforcement Learning Approach to Personalization of
an Autonomous Social Robot Companion for Early Literacy Education
Hae Won Park,1 Ishaan Grover,1 Samuel Spaulding,1 Louis Gomez,1,2 Cynthia Breazeal1
1

Personal Robots Group, MIT Media Lab
20 Ames Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02142
{haewon,igrover,samuelsp,cynthiab}@media.mit.edu
2
Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Wichita State University
1845 Fairmount, 249 Jabara Hall, Wichita, KS 67260
lagomez@shockers.wichita.edu

Abstract

2018). It is noteworthy that in 2015, only 35% of 4th, 36%
of 8th and 38% of 12th grade students scored at reading proficiency levels on the National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NAEP) (National Center for Educational Statistics 2016). Many of these students do not have learning disabilities but still struggle to comprehend complex text.
School systems are under great pressure to provide instruction in kindergarten that remedies areas of early literacy and English language weakness before children enter
primary school. In early childhood, there is a close dependency between oral language development and learning to
read (Snow 1991). Language skill development, in turn, requires sufficient exposure to a rich variety of vocabulary in
context and spoken language with others (Asaridou et al.
2016). Simply hearing language through passive listening is
not enough. Young children need to actively use language
while being emotionally and physically engaged in communication to maximize their learning gains (Romeo et al.
2018; Wells 2000).
Unfortunately, a “participation gap” has been identified to
exist between families coming from different socioeconomic
status (SES) backgrounds with respect to the amount of daily
parent-child interactions and active parental involvement
in their child’s language and early literacy development at
home (Romeo et al. 2018; Neuman and Celano 2012). As a
result, many preschool age children from low SES families
have significantly smaller vocabularies and less-developed
vocalizations than their high SES counterparts (Gilkerson et
al. 2017). These differences often become magnified over
time (Hart and Risley 1995).
In at-risk communities, it is very difficult for a kindergarten teacher to offer a curriculum that addresses the wide
diversity of cognitive and pre-literacy starting points at
which children enter school. When a child enters kindergarten, she is a unique distribution of the various cognitive,
visual, social and linguistic skills needed to be a successful reader (Wolf and Gottwald 2016; Dehaene 2009). Young
children would clearly benefit from personalized instruction
and active language-based interaction that can measure and
adapt to the many intersecting domains of skills and abili-

Personalized education technologies capable of delivering
adaptive interventions could play an important role in addressing the needs of diverse young learners at a critical time
of school readiness. We present an innovative personalized
social robot learning companion system that utilizes children’s verbal and nonverbal affective cues to modulate their
engagement and maximize their long-term learning gains.
We propose an affective reinforcement learning approach to
train a personalized policy for each student during an educational activity where a child and a robot tell stories to each
other. Using the personalized policy, the robot selects stories
that are optimized for each child’s engagement and linguistic
skill progression. We recruited 67 bilingual and English language learners between the ages of 4–6 years old to participate in a between-subjects study to evaluate our system. Over
a three-month deployment in schools, a unique storytelling
policy was trained to deliver a personalized story curriculum
for each child in the Personalized group. We compared their
engagement and learning outcomes to a Non-personalized
group with a fixed curriculum robot, and a baseline group that
had no robot intervention. In the Personalization condition,
our results show that the affective policy successfully personalized to each child to boost their engagement and outcomes
with respect to learning and retaining more target words as
well as using more target syntax structures as compared to
children in the other groups.

Introduction
Early literacy and language skills are a significant precursor to children’s later educational success (Hart and Risley 1995). Quality preschool programs support the development of key pre-literacy skills such as phonological awareness, alphabetic knowledge, and core vocabulary. These
foundations support the development of literacy skills in
later grades and can help prevent academic failure (Hart
and Risley 1995; Fish and Pinkerman 2003; Snow et al.
2007). Yet, only about 32.7% of eligible 4-year-olds attend
preschool (National Institute of Early Education Research
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

687

