The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Violence Rating Prediction from Movie Scripts
Victor R. Martinez

Krishna Somandepalli

Karan Singla

University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
victorrm@usc.edu

University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
somandep@usc.edu

University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
singlak@usc.edu

Anil Ramakrishna

Yalda T. Uhls

Shrikanth Narayanan

University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
akramakr@usc.edu

University of California Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA
yaldatuhls@gmail.com

University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
shri@sipi.usc.edu

Abstract

severely restricts both the promotion of the film as well as
the viewership. This is sometimes considered a “commercial
death sentence” (Cornish and Block 2012; Susman 2013).
This usually forces filmmakers to trim the violent content
to receive a rating of R or lower. As shown by (Thompson
and Yokota 2004), MPAA ratings have been to be inconsistent. Hence it is crucial to develop an objective measure of
violence in media content.
Using violent content is often a trade-off between the economic advantage and social responsibility of the filmmakers.
The impact of portrayed violence on the society, especially
children and young adults, has been long studied (See detailed review (American Academy of Pediatrics and Others
2001)). Violent content has been implicated in evoking aggressive behavior in real life (Anderson and Bushman 2001)
and cultivating the perception of the world as a dangerous
place (Anderson and Dill 2000). But this type of content
does not appear to increase severe forms of violence (e.g.,
homicide, aggravated assault) at the societal level (Markey,
French, and Markey 2015), and its impact on an individual is highly dependent on personality predispositions (AliaKlein et al. 2014). Casting people of certain demographics
as perpetrators more frequently than others may contribute
to the creation of negative stereotypes (Potter et al. 1995;
Smith et al. 1998), which may put these populations at
a higher risk of misrepresentation (Eyal and Rubin 2003;
Igartua 2010). Thus, it is important to study violence in
movies at scale.
There is a demand for scalable tools to identify violent
content with the increase in movie production (777 movies
released in 2017; up 8% from 2016 (Motion Picture Association of America 2017)). Most efforts in detecting violence
in movies have used audio and video-based classifiers (e.g.,
(Ali and Senan 2018; Dai et al. 2015)). No study to date has
explored language use from subtitles or scripts. This limits
their application to after the visual and sound effects have
been added to a movie.
There are many reasons why identifying violent content
from movie scripts is useful: 1) Such a measure can provide

Violent content in movies can influence viewers’ perception
of the society. For example, frequent depictions of certain
demographics as perpetrators or victims of abuse can shape
stereotyped attitudes. In this work, we propose to characterize aspects of violent content in movies solely from the language used in the scripts. This makes our method applicable
to a movie in the earlier stages of content creation even before it is produced. This is complementary to previous works
which rely on audio or video post production. Our approach is
based on a broad range of features designed to capture lexical,
semantic, sentiment and abusive language characteristics. We
use these features to learn a vector representation for (1) complete movie, and (2) for an act in the movie. The former representation is used to train a movie-level classification model,
and the latter, to train deep-learning sequence classifiers that
make use of context. We tested our models on a dataset of 732
Hollywood scripts annotated by experts for violent content.
Our performance evaluation suggests that linguistic features
are a good indicator for violent content. Furthermore, our ablation studies show that semantic and sentiment features are
the most important predictors of violence in this data. To date,
we are the first to show the language used in movie scripts is
a strong indicator of violent content. This offers novel computational tools to assist in creating awareness of storytelling.

Introduction
Violence is an important narrative tool, despite some of
its ill effects. It is used to enhance a viewer’s experience,
boost movie profits (Barranco, Rader, and Smith 2017;
Thompson and Yokota 2004), and facilitate global market
reach (Sparks, Sherry, and Lubsen 2005). Including violent
content may modify a viewer’s perception of how exciting
a movie is by intensifying the sense of relief when a plotline is resolved favorably (Topel 2007; Sparks, Sherry, and
Lubsen 2005).
There is a sweet-spot of how much violent content filmmakers should include to maximize their gains. Too much
violence may lead to a movie being rated as NC-171 which
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Motion Picture Association of America’s rating system classifies media into 5 categories, ranging from suitable for all audiences

(G) to Adults only (NC-17). NC-17 films do not admit anyone under 17. In contrast, restricted rating (R) films may contain adult
material but still admit children accompanied by their parents.

671

