The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

AVS-Net: Automatic Visual Surveillance using Relation Network
Sein Jang,1 Young-Ho Park,2 Aziz Nasridinov1
1

Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, 28644, South Korea, +82-10-7482-7227
{sein, aziz}@cbnu.ac.kr
2
Sookmyung Women’s University, Seoul, 04310, South Korea
yhpark@sm.ac.kr

Abstract

two processes complement each other in determining suspicious activity. For example, in object detection approaches,
the failure to detect a dangerous object can lead to failure
of the visual surveillance. In contrast, under the proposed
approach, even if the object detection fails, it can still perform visual surveillance through image classification. Furthermore, in order to increase the accuracy of visual surveillance, we apply a relation module. The relation module infers relationships between objects in the image and obtains
detailed insights from the image, such as identifying different situations based on the location of each object and the
distance between them.

Visual surveillance through closed circuit television (CCTV)
can help to prevent crime. In this paper, we propose an automatic visual surveillance network (AVS-Net), which simultaneously performs image processing and object detection to
determine the dangers of situations captured by CCTV. In
addition, we add a relation module to infer the relationships
of the objects in the images. Experimental results show that
the relation module greatly improves classification accuracy,
even if there is not enough information.

Introduction
Crime is one of the most serious problems in modern society. To prevent crime, one efficient way is automatic visual
surveillance through CCTV. There is not enough manpower
to monitor every area through human operators. Meanwhile,
due to the rapid development of deep learning, computer vision has shown remarkable progress in image classification
and object detection. For this reason, there have been a variety of approaches to automatic visual surveillance using
deep learning. These approaches can be divided into two categories: image classification and object detection.
Image classification approaches determines suspicious
activities using feature extraction and classification techniques. For example, (Grega et al. 2016) used visual descriptors from the MPEG-7 feature extraction library for feature
extraction, and used a support vector machine (SVM) to determine, and alert suspicious activities captured by CCTV.
On the other hand, object detection approaches performs visual surveillance by identifying a dangerous object or behavior in the CCTV. (Nair, Mathew Gillroy, and Davies 2018)
proposed i-SURVEILLANCE, which detects abnormal behavior by a person and alerts a human operator. The Tensorflow Object Detection API used to determine suspicious
activities by detecting the persons on CCTV who exhibit abnormal behaviour. However, both approaches rely heavily on
the performance of each visual surveillance technique.
In this paper, we propose automatic visual surveillance
using a relation network (abbreviated as AVS-Net), which
simultaneously performs image classification and object detection. The advantage of the proposed approach is that the

Proposed Model
Figure 1 shows the overall flow of the proposed approach.
Image Classification. We used a convolutional neural
network (CNN) to obtain a set of objects from an image. The
128 x 128 size input images pass through four convolution
layers. The output of the CNN is a set of objects from feature maps of the image ”i-objects”, I = (i1 , i2 , ..., in ). Each
pair of i-objects is treated as input to the relation module.
Object Detection. We used the you only look once
(YOLO) (Redmon and Farhadi 2017), which is a model to
perform object detection. We defined dangerous tools and
actions to detect suspicious activity. Using a trained YOLO
model to detect defined objects, we obtain a set of objects
detected by YOLO ”d-objects”, D = (d1 , d2 , ..., dm ). Each
d-object is treated as input to the relation module.
Relational Reasoning. For relational reasoning between
the image and the objects, we used the relation module (Santoro et al. 2017). Each i-object from the output of the CNN,
ii ∈ R, is the ith object that could comprise information
about the background, a particular physical object, a texture, etc. The d-object, dk ∈ R, is the k th object that could
comprise the type, coordinates in the image, and the size
of the detected object. In the relation module, the model
learns the relations between objects in the image, so that our
model can figure out the current situation in the image. As
shown in Figure 1 (c), to compose the input for the relation
module, we generate a tuple of objects by combining a pair
of i-objects and a d-object as (ii , ij , dk ). Next, the object
pairs passes through a multi-layer perceptron (MLP), where
the model learns the relation between each object. We call
the output of the first MLP a ”relation feature”. Finally, an

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9947

