The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SNR: Sub-Network Routing for
Flexible Parameter Sharing in Multi-Task Learning
Jiaqi Ma,1∗ Zhe Zhao,2 Jilin Chen,2 Ang Li,3 Lichan Hong,2 Ed H. Chi2
1

School of Information, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 Google AI 3 DeepMind
1
jiaqima@umich.edu 2,3 {zhezhao, jilinc, anglili, lichan, edchi}@google.com

Abstract

and that of a user liking watching a movie, so as to decide
whether or not to recommend the movie in milliseconds. The
many concurrent tasks, the low latency requirement, and the
large exploration space of user and movie combination make
efficient multi-task learning highly desirable.
Figure 1(a) provides an illustration of a classic yet widelyused multi-task learning model (Caruana 1998), which we
call Shared-Bottom (SB) model. This model consists of several large low-level layers (Shared-Bottom) that are shared
by all tasks, and several small task-specific high-level layers built on top of the shared layers. Compared to having a
separate model for each task, the SB model learns a joint
representation of many related tasks which can not only improve its model accuracy, but also save computation cost at
serving time by sharing low-level network layers.
Despite many successful use cases in multi-task learning, the classic SB model is known to suffer from significant degeneration in accuracy when tasks are unrelated to
each other (Ma et al. 2018). Compared to single-task models, the SB model introduces inductive bias into the shared
low-level layers. When tasks are unrelated, the inductive
biases in different tasks will have conflicts and hurt the
model accuracy. A straightforward solution to this problem is to try multi-task models as well as single-task models, i.e., use multi-task models for related tasks and use
single-task models for unrelated tasks. Another solution is
to manually tune the network architecture to allow flexible parameter sharing, i.e., sharing more layers for highly
related tasks and less layers for less related ones. Indeed,
Misra et al. (2016) showed that different multi-task architectures are required to work well for two different related
pairs of tasks. Note that both solutions rely on the knowledge of task relatedness. Despite the effort of several prior
works (Baxter 2000; Ben-David, Gehrke, and Schuller 2002;
Ben-David and Schuller 2003), efficiently measuring task
relatedness in real-world data still remains an open problem.
So, for both aforementioned solutions, we need to manually
tune model structures by training and optimizing directly on
the task accuracies. This usually does not scale for largescale multi-task problems.
A scalable way to address the conflict problem is to design a multi-task model with a flexible parameter sharing architecture, e.g. gating structures, that can adapt to different
representation needs and level of task relatedness (Misra et

Machine learning applications, such as object detection and
content recommendation, often require training a single
model to predict multiple targets at the same time. Multi-task
learning through neural networks became popular recently,
because it not only helps improve the accuracy of many prediction tasks when they are related, but also saves computation cost by sharing model architectures and low-level representations. The latter is critical for real-time large-scale machine learning systems.
However, classic multi-task neural networks may degenerate
significantly in accuracy when tasks are less related. Previous works (Misra et al. 2016; Yang and Hospedales 2016;
Ma et al. 2018) showed that having more flexible architectures in multi-task models, either manually-tuned or softparameter-sharing structures like gating networks, helps improve the prediction accuracy. However, manual tuning is not
scalable, and the previous soft-parameter sharing models are
either not flexible enough or computationally expensive.
In this work, we propose a novel framework called SubNetwork Routing (SNR) to achieve more flexible parameter
sharing while maintaining the computational advantage of the
classic multi-task neural-network model. SNR modularizes
the shared low-level hidden layers into multiple layers of subnetworks, and controls the connection of sub-networks with
learnable latent variables to achieve flexible parameter sharing. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a
large-scale dataset YouTube8M. We show that the proposed
method improves the accuracy of multi-task models while
maintaining their computation efficiency.

Introduction
In recent years, neural network based multi-task learning
(Caruna 1993; Caruana 1998) has been successfully applied
to a variety of real-world applications such as real-time object detection (Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015) and online
recommender systems (Bansal, Belanger, and McCallum
2016; Ma et al. 2018). Given a single input, these systems
usually predict multiple targets (or categories) at the same
time. They often have low-latency requirement at the serving
time. For example, a movie recommender system may need
to predict both the probability of a user clicking a movie
∗

Work done while interning at Google.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

216

