The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Asynchronous Proximal Stochastic Gradient
Algorithm for Composition Optimization Problems
Pengfei Wang,1,2 Risheng Liu,3 Nenggan Zheng,1∗ Zhefeng Gong4
1

Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
3
International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Liaoning, China
4
Department of Neurobiology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
{pfei, zng, zfgong}@zju.edu.cn, rsliu@dlut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

where

In machine learning research, many emerging applications
can be (re)formulated as the composition optimization problem with nonsmooth regularization penalty. To solve this
problem, traditional stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm and its variants either have low convergence rate or
are computationally expensive. Recently, several stochastic
composition gradient algorithms have been proposed, however, these methods are still inefficient and not scalable to
large-scale composition optimization problem instances. To
address these challenges, we propose an asynchronous parallel algorithm, named Async-ProxSCVR, which effectively
combines asynchronous parallel implementation and variance
reduction method. We prove that the algorithm admits the
fastest convergence rate for both strongly convex and general nonconvex cases. Furthermore, we analyze the query
complexity of the proposed algorithm and prove that linear
speedup is accessible when we increase the number of processors. Finally, we evaluate our algorithm Async-ProxSCVR
on two representative composition optimization problems including value function evaluation in reinforcement learning and sparse mean-variance optimization problem. Experimental results show that the algorithm achieves significant
speedups and is much faster than existing compared methods.

f pxq “

Composition optimization problem proposed recently by
Wang et al. (Wang, Fang, and Liu 2014) arises in many
important applications including reinforcement learning
(Wang, Liu, and Tang 2017), statistical learning (Hinton and
Roweis 2003), risk management (Shapiro, Dentcheva, and
Ruszczyński 2009), and multi-stage stochastic programming
(Shapiro, Dentcheva, and Ruszczyński 2009). In this paper,
we study the finite-sum scenario for the regularized composition optimization problem whose objective function is
the composition of two finite-sum functions plus a possibly
nonsmooth regularization term, i.e.,
min Hpxq “ f pxq ` hpxq,

(2)

where Gj : RN Ñ RM , Fi : RM Ñ R, and
f : RN Ñ R are continuously
differentiable functions.
řn2
Gj pxq, y :“ Gpxq, and
We denote Gpxq :“ n12 j“1
řn1
F pyq :“ n11 i“1
Fi pyq. And we call Gpxq the inner function and F pyq the outer function. Often f pxq is used as
the empirical risk approximation to the composition of two
expected-value function Ei Fi pEj Gj pxqq. The regularization
h : RN Ñ RYt`8u is an extended real-valued closed convex but possibly nonsmooth function, which is often used to
constrain the capacity of the hypothesis space.
In general, problem (1) is substantially more challenging than its non-composition counterpart, i.e., empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem (Friedman, Hastie,
and ř
Tibshirani 2001) with the finite-sum form f pxq “
n
1{n i“1 Fi pxq. On the one hand, the composition objective is nonlinear with respect to the joint distribution of data
indices pi, jq, which leads to the difficulty of an unbiased
sampling for estimating the full gradient ∇f pxq. On the
other hand, the two finite-sums structure causes unprecedented computational challenges for traditional stochastic
gradient methods in solving problem (1). For example, to
apply stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method, we need
to compute pBGj pxqqT ∇Fi pGpxqq in each iteration. The inner function Gpxq is computationally expensive with periteration queries proportional to n2 .
To solve problem (1), Wang et al. (Wang, Fang, and
Liu 2014; Wang, Liu, and Tang 2017) first propose a class
of stochastic compositional gradient descent methods, i.e.,
SCGD and ASC-PG, which are based on the random evaluations of Gpxq, F pyq and their gradients with a low periteration cost. However, SCGD and ASC-PG suffer from
low convergence rate because of the variance induced by
the random samplings. In recent years, variance reduction
based methods have been proposed to improve the convergence rate for the composition optimization problem
(1). Some algorithms employ stochastic variance reduction gradient (SVRG) method to improve SCGD, including Compositional-SVRG-1(Lian, Wang, and Liu 2017),
Compositional-SVRG-2 (Lian, Wang, and Liu 2017), and

Introduction

xPRN

n1
n2
1 ÿ
1 ÿ
Fi p
Gj pxqq,
n1 i“1
n2 j“1

(1)

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1633

