The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Transfer Learning for Sequence Labeling Using Source Model and Target Data
Lingzhen Chen

Alessandro Moschitti*

University of Trento
Povo, Italy
lingzhen.chen@unitn.it

Amazon
Manhattan Beach, CA, USA
amosch@amazon.com

Abstract

Hence, if there are models pretrained on data with these
common NEs, it would be useful to have some methods that
modify them to serve customized NER purposes. Even in
the same application domains, NE categories can vary over
time due to, for example, the introduction of new products.
In these cases, a typical sequence labeling approach
would be to (i) build a new dataset including the annotation
of the new categories; and (ii) retrain a model from scratch.
However, in addition to the disadvantage of retraining models and re-annotating all the documents, some industrial scenarios prevent the release of training data (e.g., for copyright
or privacy concerns) to rebuild the models.
Motivated by the problems described above, in this work,
we define a new paradigm for a progressive learning of sequence labeling tasks. To simplify our study, without loss of
generality, we define a setting consisting of two aspects: (i)
a source model, MS , already trained to recognize a certain
number of categories on the source data, DS ; and (ii) a TL
task consisting in training a new model, MT , on the target
data, DT , where new categories appear, in addition to those
of the DS (note that DS is no longer available to perform
TL). DT is typically much smaller in size compared to DS .
These kinds of problems regard leveraging knowledge about
a model learned on a source domain, to improve learning a
model for another task on a target domain (Pan and Yang
2010). One variation of TL is a setting where the target domain does not change while the output space of the target
task changes. This corresponds to our described progressive
sequence labeling setting.
To tackle the problem, we propose two neural methods of
TL for progressive labelling. Firstly, given an initial neural
model MS trained on source data DS , we modify its output layer to include new neurons for learning the new categories and then we continue to train on DT . More specifically, we implement a Bidirectional LSTM (BLSTM) with
Conditional Random Fields (CRF) as MS . In the transfer
learning step, we modify such architecture to build MT ,
reuse previous weights and fine-tuning them on DT , where
again the assumption is that DT contains both seen and unseen categories.
Secondly, as a refinement of the first approach, we propose to use a neural adapter: it connects MS to MT , also
enabling the latter to use the features from the former. The
connection is realized by a BLSTM, which takes the hidden

In this paper, we propose an approach for transferring the
knowledge of a neural model for sequence labeling, learned
from the source domain, to a new model trained on a target domain, where new label categories appear. Our transfer
learning (TL) techniques enable to adapt the source model
using the target data and new categories, without accessing
to the source data. Our solution consists in adding new neurons in the output layer of the target model and transferring
parameters from the source model, which are then fine-tuned
with the target data. Additionally, we propose a neural adapter
to learn the difference between the source and the target label distribution, which provides additional important information to the target model. Our experiments on Named Entity Recognition show that (i) the learned knowledge in the
source model can be effectively transferred when the target
data contains new categories and (ii) our neural adapter further improves such transfer.

Introduction
One important challenge of sequence labeling tasks concerns dealing with the change of the application domain
during time. For example, in standard concept segmentation
and labeling (Wang, Deng, and Acero 2005), semantic categories, e.g., departure or arrival cities, vary according to
new scenarios, e.g., low-cost flight or budget terminal were
not available when the Automatic Terminal Information Service (ATIS) corpus was compiled (Hemphill, Godfrey, and
Doddington 1990). Similar rationale applies to another very
important sequence labeling task, Named Entity Recognition (NER), where entities in a domain are continuously
evolving, e.g., see the smart phone domain.
Standard models for sequence labeling are supposed to
be trained and applied to the data with the same set of
categories, which may limit the reuse of previous models.
As an example for NER, users interested in finance would
probably target entities such as Companies or Banks while
other users interested in politics want to recognize Senators,
Bills, Ministries, etc. Besides these domain-specific NEs,
there may be common categories, such as Location or Date.
* The main part of this work was carried out when the author
was at the Unviversity of Trento.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6260

