The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Iterative Classroom Teaching
Teresa Yeo

Parameswaran Kamalaruban

Adish Singla

Arpit Merchant

LIONS, EPFL
teresa.yeo@epfl.ch

LIONS, EPFL
kamalaruban.parameswaran@epfl.ch

MPI-SWS
adishs@mpi-sws.org

MPI-SWS
arpitdm@mpi-sws.org

Thibault Asselborn

Louis Faucon

Pierre Dillenbourg

Volkan Cevher

CHILI Lab, EPFL
thibault.asselborn@epfl.ch

CHILI Lab, EPFL
louis.faucon@epfl.ch

CHILI Lab, EPFL
pierre.dillenbourg@epfl.ch

LIONS, EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract

focuses on finding an optimal sequence of examples to meet
the needs of the student under consideration, which is, in fact,
the natural expectation in a personalized teaching environment (Koedinger et al. 1997). (Liu et al. 2017) introduced the
iterative machine teaching setting wherein the teacher has
full knowledge of the internal state of the student at every
time step using which she designs the subsequent optimal
example. They show that such an “omniscient” teacher can
help a single student
approximately learn the target concept

using O log 1 training examples
 (where  is the accuracy
parameter) as compared to O 1 examples chosen randomly
by the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) teacher.

We consider the machine teaching problem in a classroom-like
setting wherein the teacher has to deliver the same examples
to a diverse group of students. Their diversity stems from differences in their initial internal states as well as their learning
rates. We prove that a teacher with full knowledge about the
learning dynamics of the students can teach a target concept
to the entire classroom using O min {d, N } log 1 examples, where d is the ambient dimension of the problem, N is
the number of learners, and  is the accuracy parameter. We
show the robustness of our teaching strategy when the teacher
has limited knowledge of the learners’ internal dynamics as
provided by a noisy oracle. Further, we study the trade-off between the learners’ workload and the teacher’s cost in teaching
the target concept. Our experiments validate our theoretical
results and suggest that appropriately partitioning the classroom into homogenous groups provides a balance between
these two objectives.

Classroom teaching In real-world classrooms, the teacher
is restricted to providing the same examples to a large class
of academically-diverse students. Customizing a teaching
strategy for a specific student may not guarantee optimal
performance of the entire class. Alternatively, teachers may
constitute a partitioning of the students so as to maximize
intra-group homogeneity while balancing the orchestration
costs of managing parallel activities. (Zhu, Liu, and Lopes
2017) propose methods for explicitly constructing a minimal training set for teaching a class of batch learners based
on a minimax teaching criterion. They also study optimal
class partitioning based on prior distributions of the learners.
However, they do not consider an interactive teaching setting.

Introduction
Machine teaching considers the inverse problem of machine
learning. Given a learning model and a target, the teacher
aims to find an optimal set of training examples for the
learner (Zhu et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2017). Machine teaching provides a rigorous formalism for various real-world
applications such as personalized education and intelligent
tutoring systems (Rafferty et al. 2016; Patil et al. 2014), imitation learning (Cakmak and Lopes 2012; Haug, Tschiatschek,
and Singla 2018), program synthesis (Mayer, Hamza, and
Kuncak 2017), adversarial machine learning (Mei and Zhu
2015), and human-in-the-loop systems (Singla et al. 2014;
2013).1

Overview of our Approach
In this paper, we study the problem of designing optimal
teaching examples for a classroom of iterative learners. We
refer to this new paradigm as iterative classroom teaching
(CT). We focus on online projected gradient descent learners
under squared loss function. The learning dynamics comprise of the learning rates and the initial states which are
different for different students. At each time step, the teacher
constructs the next training example based on information
regarding the students’ learning dynamics. We focus on the
following teaching objectives motivated by real-world classroom settings, where at the end of the teaching process:

Individual teaching Most of the research in this domain
thus far, has focused on teaching a single student in the batch
setting. Here, the teacher constructs an optimal training set
(e.g., of minimum size) for a fixed learning model and a target concept and gives it to the student in a single interaction
(Goldman and Kearns 1995; Zilles et al. 2011; Zhu 2013;
Doliwa et al. 2014). Recently, there has been interest in studying the interactive setting (Liu et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2018; Hunziker et al. 2018), wherein the teacher

(i) all learners in the class converge to the target model (cf.
Eq. (1)),

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://teaching-machines.cc/nips2017/

(ii) the class on average converges to the target model (cf.
Eq. (2)).
5684

