The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

HSME: Hypersphere Manifold
Embedding for Visible Thermal Person Re-Identification
Yi Hao,† Nannan Wang,‡∗ Jie Li,† Xinbo Gao†
†

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
‡
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
Abstract
Person Re-identification(re-ID) has great potential to contribute to video surveillance that automatically searches and
identifies people across different cameras. Heterogeneous
person re-identification between thermal(infrared) and visible images is essentially a cross-modality problem and important for night-time surveillance application. Current methods
usually train a model by combining classification and metric learning algorithms to obtain discriminative and robust
feature representations. However, the combined loss function
ignored the correlation between classification subspace and
feature embedding subspace. In this paper, we use Sphere
Softmax to learn a hypersphere manifold embedding and constrain the intra-modality variations and cross-modality variations on this hypersphere. We propose an end-to-end dualstream hypersphere manifold embedding network(HSMEnet)
with both classification and identification constraint. Meanwhile, we design a two-stage training scheme to acquire
decorrelated features, we refer the HSME with decorrelation as D-HSME. We conduct experiments on two crossmodality person re-identification datasets. Experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods on two datasets. On RegDB dataset, rank-1
accuracy is improved from 33.47% to 50.85%, and mAP is
improved from 31.83% to 47.00%.

Figure 1: Heterogeneous pedestrian images. The top row is
visible images captured by visible camera, bottom row is
thermal images captured by thermal camera. Each column
has same identity.

heterogeneous person re-identification significant for public
surveillance applications.
However, few works have paid attention to Re-ID between
RGB cameras and infrared/thermal cameras, which is essentially a cross-modality problem and widely encountered
in real-world scenarios. Wu et al. (Wu et al. 2017a) proposed a one-stream zero-padding network which learned a
shared representation from heterogeneous images. Ye et al.
(Ye et al. 2018b) proposed an end-to-end framework for visible thermal person re-identification (VT-REID), which used
identity loss and ranking loss to learn a discriminative representation.
VT-REID is a very challenging problem because of the
great difference between visible and thermal modalities. Visible and thermal images are intrinsically distinct. As shown
in Figure 1, the first row is RGB images containing three
channel information captured by visible cameras in the day,
the second row is thermal images containing one channel
information captured by thermal camera at night. Thus, they
can be regarded as heterogeneous pedestrian images. In the
view of imaging principle, the wave-length range of RGB
and thermal images are different. Moreover, human pose and
viewpoint change can also cause large intra-class discrepancy in VT-REID.
In this paper, we proposed an end-to-end dual-stream hy-

1.Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims at identifying a person from non-overlapping camera views, which has important value in video surveillance area. For example, given a
query/probe pedestrian image, we need to retrieve all images of the same person ID in gallery images. A large
number of algorithms for Re-ID problem have been proposed, such as (Zheng, Yang, and Hauptmann 2016) (Zheng,
Zheng, and Yang 2017). Recent researches mainly focus on
visible pedestrian images (Zheng et al. 2017)(Zheng et al.
2015)(Wang et al. 2018b)(Wang et al. 2016), i.e., both query
images and gallery images are captured by visible camera.
However, in night time or dark environment, visible images
become uninformative. In such case, imaging devices that
do not rely on visible light should be applied, which makes
∗
Corresponding author: Nannan Wang (nnwang@xidian.edu.
cn)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8385

