The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Mode Variational LSTM Robust to Unseen Modes of
Variation: Application to Facial Expression Recognition
Wissam J. Baddar, Yong Man Ro∗
Image and Video Systems Lab., Electrical Engineering,
KAIST, South Korea
{wisam.baddar,ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Statistical methods have tried to provide a single mode of
variation. Most popular of those statistical methods are: factor analysis (Fabrigar and Wegener 2011), principal component analysis (PCA) (Duda, Hart, and Stork 2012) and singular value decomposition (SVD) (Golub and Van Loan 2012).
However, most forms of visual data (images and videos)
have many different, and possibly independent, modes of
variation. This makes it difficult for single mode of variation methods (such as PCA) to be able to represent all the
variations in such visual data (Wang et al. 2017).
To reduce the negative effect of modes of variation, several supervised methods have been proposed to disentangle
independent modes of variation and extract them from visual
data (Tucker 1966; De Lathauwer, De Moor, and Vandewalle
2000; Kroonenberg and De Leeuw 1980; Kolda and Bader
2009; Coppi and Bolasco 1988). Such supervised methods
disentangle multiple multilinear (tensor) decompositions of
the data to represent all the variations (Wang et al. 2017).
The high order SVD (HOSVD) (De Lathauwer, De Moor,
and Vandewalle 2000) was proposed to identify different
modes of variation in face images, by decomposing carefully designed data tensors (data tensors for identities, data
tensors for expressions and data tensors for poses). This
method is known as TensorFaces (Vasilescu and Terzopoulos 2002). The main drawbacks of the aforementioned supervised methods are: (1) they require labels of the modes
of variation available at the training time. (2) They require
the same number of samples under all modes of variation
(e.g., the same face under different expressions, poses etc.).
Therefore, their applicability is limited to well-organized
data, usually captured in well-controlled conditions (Wang
et al. 2017). Moreover, such methods were devised for disentangling modes of variation in only spatial features of images.
Different from previous methods that were designed to
suppress the negative effect of modes of variation in images, we investigate the effect modes of variation has on
the spatio-temporal features encoded from the sequence dynamics via LSTM. We show our proposed method on the
task of facial expression recognition (FER). To that end, we
first show that, by continuously feeding a static sequence
(obtained by replicating a frame in the test sequence which
could have mode of a variation) into the LSTM, a tangible
representation of the mode of variation could be obtained.

Spatio-temporal feature encoding is essential for encoding
the dynamics in video sequences. Recurrent neural networks,
particularly long short-term memory (LSTM) units, have
been popular as an efficient tool for encoding spatio-temporal
features in sequences. In this work, we investigate the effect
of mode variations on the encoded spatio-temporal features
using LSTMs. We show that the LSTM retains information
related to the mode variation in the sequence, which is irrelevant to the task at hand (e.g. classification facial expressions).
Actually, the LSTM forget mechanism is not robust enough
to mode variations and preserves information that could negatively affect the encoded spatio-temporal features. We propose the mode variational LSTM to encode spatio-temporal
features robust to unseen modes of variation. The mode variational LSTM modifies the original LSTM structure by adding
an additional cell state that focuses on encoding the mode
variation in the input sequence. To efficiently regulate what
features should be stored in the additional cell state, additional gating functionality is also introduced. The effectiveness of the proposed mode variational LSTM is verified using the facial expression recognition task. Comparative experiments on publicly available datasets verified that the proposed mode variational LSTM outperforms existing methods.
Moreover, a new dynamic facial expression dataset with different modes of variation, including various modes like pose
and illumination variations, was collected to comprehensively
evaluate the proposed mode variational LSTM. Experimental results verified that the proposed mode variational LSTM
encodes spatio-temporal features robust to unseen modes of
variation.

Introduction
One of the key features of deep learning is trying to learn the
latent features from sample (training) data. However, encoding features that represent all types of variation that could
occur in a data sample is hard to achieve (Ding and Tao
2015; Baddar, Kim, and Ro 2017). For example, when considering a population of face images, the face images would
have different identities, expressions, poses and illumination
variations. The resulting face image could be considered as a
multifactor confluence of all those modes of variation (Wang
et al. 2017).
∗

Corresponding author: Yong Man Ro {ymro@kaist.ac.kr} .
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3215

