The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Approximate Inference of Outcomes in Probabilistic Elections
Batya Kenig∗

Benny Kimelfeld†

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
batyak@cs.washington.edu

Technion Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa 3200003, Israel
bennyk@cs.technion.ac.il

(1, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0) starting with k ones, the k-veto rule defined by (1, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0) ending with k zeros, and the
Borda rule defined by (m − 1, m − 2, . . . , 0).
Yet, rankings of voters may be uncertain due to missing or unreliable information. A simple form of uncertainty is incompleteness: voters provide only partial orders
over the candidates, thereby collectively forming a partial
voting profile. Another form of uncertainty is probability,
where we associate with each voter a probability distribution over the complete rankings of the candidates. For partial voting profiles, Konczak and Lang (2005) introduced
the notions of possible and necessary winners: a candidate c is a possible winner if there is a completion of (the
partial orders in) the partial profile into a complete profile
wherein c is a winner, and c is a necessary winner if c is
a winner in every completion of the partial profile. In the
case of probabilistic votes, every candidate c has a winning probability—the probability that c is a winner in a
random profile (Bachrach, Betzler, and Faliszewski 2010;
Hazon et al. 2012).
The above voting framework entails computational problems. In the possible winner problem, we are given a partial
profile and a candidate c, and wish to determine whether
c is a possible winner. Similarly, in the necessary-winner
problem, the goal is to determine whether c wins in every
completion of the partial profile. In the winning probability
problem, we are given a representation of the corresponding distribution over profiles (which we discuss later in this
section), and a candidate c, and the goal is to calculate the
probability that c is a winner. The complexity of the first two
problems has been studied thoroughly for the family of positional scoring rules. It has been established that the possible
winner problem is solvable in polynomial time for the case
of plurality and veto, but NP-complete for any other positional scoring rule,1 under a common assumption that the
rule is pure, as we formally define later on (Konczak and
Lang 2005; Betzler and Dorn 2010; Baumeister and Rothe
2012). On the other hard, the necessary-winner problem can
be solved in polynomial time for every positional scoring
rule (Xia and Conitzer 2011).

Abstract
We study the complexity of estimating the probability of an
outcome in an election over probabilistic votes. The focus
is on voting rules expressed as positional scoring rules, and
two models of probabilistic voters: the uniform distribution
over the completions of a partial voting profile (consisting of
a partial ordering of the candidates by each voter), and the
Repeated Insertion Model (RIM) over the candidates, including the special case of the Mallows distribution. Past research
has established that, while exact inference of the probability of winning is computationally hard (#P-hard), an additive
polynomial-time approximation (additive FPRAS) is attained
by sampling and averaging. There is often, though, a need
for multiplicative approximation guarantees that are crucial
for important measures such as conditional probabilities. Unfortunately, a multiplicative approximation of the probability
of winning cannot be efficient (under conventional complexity assumptions) since it is already NP-complete to determine
whether this probability is nonzero. Contrastingly, we devise
multiplicative polynomial-time approximations (multiplicative FPRAS) for the probability of the complement event,
namely, losing the election.

Introduction
Various processes require the preferences of different voters over candidates to be aggregated towards a joint decision; these include political elections, website rankings in
search engines, and multiagent systems. In the general approach that has gained the focus of the field of computational social choice, every voter provides a ranking (total
order) of the candidates, and a voting rule maps the collection of rankings, called a voting profile, to a set of selected alternatives, namely the winners (Brandt et al. 2016).
A well studied family of such rules is that of the positional
scoring rules: a voter contributes a score to each candidate
from a shared scoring vector according to the position of the
candidate in the total order. This family includes the plurality rule defined by the scoring vector (1, 0, . . . , 0), the veto
rule defined by (1, . . . , 1, 0), the k-approval rule defined by
∗

This work was supported by the Schmidt Family Foundation.
This work was supported by ISF Grant 5921551 and NSF-BSF
Grant 1814152.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1

Here and throughout the paper, we make the standard assumption that the scores form a coprime set of natural numbers (Betzler
and Dorn 2010).

2061

