The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bayesian Execution Skill Estimation
Christopher Archibald, Delma Nieves-Rivera
archibald@cse.msstate.edu, din7@msstate.edu
Computer Science and Engineering
Mississippi State University

Abstract

of these settings, an important characteristic of an agent is
the probability distribution over action execution errors that
describe their ability to precisely execute actions.
This paper focuses on the problem of estimating this agent
property given observations of the same agent acting in a
continuous domain. This problem was first introduced in
(Archibald and Nieves-Rivera 2018). We are interested in
this problem for the potential impact it has in helping model
and analyze agents in adversarial continuous domains, as
well as the potential applications for assessing and giving
feedback on human skill levels in many real-world settings;
including sports, law enforcement, and elderly assistance.
Along with introducing the problem, we demonstrated
that it is possible to estimate an agent’s execution ability,
which we called execution skill, under certain assumptions
(Archibald and Nieves-Rivera 2018). The central assumption in that work was that the agent utilized a perfectly rational planning component, which is similar to assumptions
made in work on plan recognition in continuous domains
(Kaminka, Vered, and Agmon 2018).
In this paper, we introduce a Bayesian approach to the
execution skill estimation problem and show that it outperforms the previous approach in the same toy domain. We
then demonstrate how this Bayesian approach can be naturally applied to domains where the rationality assumption
does not hold and show how it can effectively estimate execution skill in the domain of computational billiards.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows, in section 2 relevant related work is discussed. Section 3 presents
the definition of the problem and previous results. Section 4
introduces the novel Bayesian approach that is the focus of
this work. Sections 5, 6, and 7 present and discuss experimental work in two domains, and section 8 concludes with
discussion and future work.

The performance of agents in many domains with continuous action spaces depends not only on their ability to select
good actions to execute, but also on their ability to execute
planned actions precisely. This ability, which has been called
an agent’s execution skill, is an important characteristic of
an agent which can have a significant impact on their success. In this paper, we address the problem of estimating the
execution skill of an agent given observations of that agent
acting in a domain. Each observation includes the executed
action and a description of the state in which the action was
executed and the reward received, but notably excludes the
action that the agent intended to execute. We previously introduced this problem and demonstrated that estimating an
agent’s execution skill is possible under certain conditions.
Our previous method focused entirely on the reward that the
agent received from executed actions and assumed that the
agent was able to select the optimal action for each state. This
paper addresses the execution skill estimation problem from
an entirely different perspective, focusing instead on the action that was executed. We present a Bayesian framework for
reasoning about action observations and show that it is able to
outperform previous methods under the same conditions. We
also show that the flexibility of this framework allows it to be
applied in settings where the previous limiting assumptions
are not met. The success of the proposed method is demonstrated experimentally in a toy domain as well as the domain
of computational billiards.

1

Introduction

Many real-world physical domains require agents to both
plan and execute continuous actions. These planned actions
can generally not be executed with perfect precision, resulting in some amount of execution error which will vary from
agent to agent. Robust agents in these domains need to plan
actions taking into account their execution noise. Continuous domains with these properties include robotics settings,
where angles and velocities are selected from continuous
ranges; human settings, where a human either moves itself or
causes other objects to move, again in continuous space; and
computational settings, where abstract toy domains or simulations of games with continuous action spaces are modeled
and used as a test-bed for algorithms and approaches. In each

2

Related Work

Many topics related to the execution skill estimation problem have been studied.
The topics of skill in games has been investigated by
several researchers (Larkey et al. 1997; Dreef, Borm, and
Genugten 2002; Borm and Genugten 2001; Dreef, Borm,
and van der Genugten 2004), although skill as these works
define it refers to a characteristic of the game itself, and is

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6014

