The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Optimal Surveillance of Covert Networks by Minimizing Inverse Geodesic Length
Serge Gaspers, Kamran Najeebullah
UNSW Sydney, Australia, and Data61, CSIRO, Australia
sergeg@cse.unsw.edu.au, kamran.najeebullah@data61.csiro.au

Abstract

critical for a high performance of the network. The problem of weakening a covert network has mostly been considered with respect to vertex deletion (see, e.g., (Michalak
et al. 2013; Aziz, Gaspers, and Najeebullah 2017; Aziz et
al. 2018; Gaspers and Lau 2018)). A common trend here
– seemingly influenced by social network analysis and epidemiology (see, e.g., (Carley, Reminga, and Kamneva 2003;
Valente 2012) and (Kovács and Barabási 2015; Zhang et
al. 2012)) – is to rank the vertices with respect to their
importance and eliminate them in the order of maximum
score (Michalak et al. 2013; 2015; Szczepanski, Michalak,
and Rahwan 2015)). While the assumption that a node can
be eliminated sounds realistic for social and epidemic networks, it might not be as practical for covert networks due
to various geopolitical reasons.
Quantifying the performance of a network has been a
topic of interest in network analysis, and several measures
have been proposed. Some of the most frequently used measures of network performance are component order connectivity (size of the largest connected component) (Gross et al.
2013; Drange, Dregi, and van’t Hof 2014), clustering coefficient (probability that two nodes are connected if both
are connected to a common third node) (Watts and Strogatz 1998) and inverse geodesic length (IGL). We choose
to quantify the
by IGL. Formally,
P network performance
1
IGL(G) = {u,v}⊆V dist(u,v)
. Our choice is dictated by
the frequent use of IGL as a measure of network performance across various fields, such as AI (e.g. (Aziz, Gaspers,
and Najeebullah 2017)), network security (e.g. (Holme et al.
2002)), social networks (e.g. (Morone and Makse 2015)) and
game theory (e.g. (Holme et al. 2002; Michalak et al. 2015;
Szczepanski, Michalak, and Rahwan 2015)). Moreover, Latora and Marchiori (2001) found IGL to be effective on
small-world graphs and studied several networks systems to
show that it is the underlying general principle of construction for several real-world networks including transportation, communication and neural networks.
A practical example to demonstrate how a higher IGL
value indicates better network performance is of a communication network where the quality of the signal degrades
when the distance between the nodes increases. We consider
the problem of minimizing the IGL of a graph by allowing a
limited number of edge deletions. One interpretation in this
case is that the deletion of edges corresponds to surveillance

The inverse geodesic length (IGL) is a well-known and
widely used measure of network performance. It equals the
sum of the inverse distances of all pairs of vertices. In network
analysis, IGL of a network is often used to assess and evaluate
how well heuristics perform in strengthening or weakening a
network. We consider the edge-deletion problem M IN IGLED. Formally, given a graph G, a budget k, and a target inverse geodesic length T , the question is whether there exists
a subset of edges X with |X| ≤ ck, such that the inverse
geodesic length of G − X is at most T .
In this paper, we design algorithms and study the complexity
of M IN IGL-ED. We show that it is NP-complete and cannot be solved in subexponential time even when restricted to
bipartite or split graphs assuming the Exponential Time Hypothesis. In terms of parameterized complexity, we consider
the problem with respect to various parameters. We show
that M IN IGL-ED is fixed-parameter tractable for parameter
T and vertex cover by modeling the problem as an integer
quadratic program. We also provide FPT algorithms parameterized by twin cover and neighborhood diversity combined
with the deletion budget k. On the negative side we show that
M IN IGL-ED is W[1]-hard for parameter tree-width.

1

Introduction

Network analysis, in particular the strategic aspect of network analysis, has attained profound interest in recent years
due to its relevance across many fields of research, including
Artificial Intelligence (e.g., (Aziz, Gaspers, and Najeebullah 2017; Michalak, Rahwan, and Wooldridge 2017)). One
fundamental problem within this area is the identification of
most critical vertices and edges of a network (Michalak et
al. 2013; Chen et al. 2012; Zheng, Dunagan, and Kapoor
2011). The problem enjoys a vast area of applications including containing the spread of an epidemic (see, e.g.,
(Kovács and Barabási 2015)), weakening a terrorist network
(see, e.g., (Aziz, Gaspers, and Najeebullah 2017)), preventing the spread of a contagion in a computer network (see,
e.g., (Kuhlman et al. 2013)) and blocking rumors or ”fake
news” in social networks (see, e.g., (Zhang et al. 2016)).
We focus on the problem of weakening a covert network
by identifying and deleting or monitoring the links that are
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

533

