The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Melding the Data-Decisions Pipeline:
Decision-Focused Learning for Combinatorial Optimization
Bryan Wilder, Bistra Dilkina, Milind Tambe
Center for Artificial Intelligence in Society, University of Southern California
{bwilder, dilkina, tambe}@usc.edu

Abstract

unknown quantities; optimization algorithms use these predictions to arrive at a decision which maximizes some objective. Our concern here is combinatorial optimization, which
is ubiquitous in real-world applications of artificial intelligence, ranging from matching applicants to public housing
to selecting a subset of movies to recommend. We focus
on common classes of combinatorial problems which have
well-structured continuous relaxations, e.g., linear programs
and submodular maximization. A vast literature has been devoted to combinatorial optimization (Korte et al. 2012). Importantly though, optimization is often insufficient without
the broader pipeline because the objective function is unknown and must predicted via machine learning.
While machine learning has witnessed incredible growth
in recent years, the two pieces of the pipeline are treated
entirely separately by typical training approaches. That is,
a system designer will first train a predictive model using
some standard measure of accuracy, e.g., mean squared error for a regression problem. Then, the model’s predictions
are given as input to the optimization algorithm to produce a
decision. Such two-stage approaches are extremely common
across many domains (Wang et al. 2006; Fang et al. 2016;
Mukhopadhyay et al. 2017; Xue et al. 2016). This process
is justified when the predictive model is perfect, or near-so,
since completely accurate predictions also produce the best
decisions. However, in complex learning tasks, all models
will make errors and the training process implicitly trades
off where these errors will occur. When prediction and optimization are separate, this tradeoff is divorced from the goal
of the broader pipeline: to make the best decision possible.
We propose a decision-focused learning framework
which melds the data-decisions pipeline by integrating prediction and optimization into a single end-to-end system.
That is, the predictive model is trained using the quality
of the decisions which it induces via the optimization algorithm. Similar ideas have recently been explored in the
context of convex optimization (Donti, Amos, and Kolter
2017), but to our knowledge ours is the first attempt to train
machine learning systems for performance on combinatorial decision-making problems. Combinatorial settings raise
new technical challenges because the optimization problem
is discrete. However, machine learning systems (e.g., deep
neural networks) are often trained via gradient descent.
Our first contribution is a general framework for training

Creating impact in real-world settings requires artificial intelligence techniques to span the full pipeline from data, to
predictive models, to decisions. These components are typically approached separately: a machine learning model is
first trained via a measure of predictive accuracy, and then its
predictions are used as input into an optimization algorithm
which produces a decision. However, the loss function used to
train the model may easily be misaligned with the end goal,
which is to make the best decisions possible. Hand-tuning
the loss function to align with optimization is a difficult and
error-prone process (which is often skipped entirely).
We focus on combinatorial optimization problems and introduce a general framework for decision-focused learning,
where the machine learning model is directly trained in conjunction with the optimization algorithm to produce highquality decisions. Technically, our contribution is a means
of integrating common classes of discrete optimization problems into deep learning or other predictive models, which are
typically trained via gradient descent. The main idea is to use
a continuous relaxation of the discrete problem to propagate
gradients through the optimization procedure. We instantiate
this framework for two broad classes of combinatorial problems: linear programs and submodular maximization. Experimental results across a variety of domains show that decisionfocused learning often leads to improved optimization performance compared to traditional methods. We find that standard
measures of accuracy are not a reliable proxy for a predictive
model’s utility in optimization, and our method’s ability to
specify the true goal as the model’s training objective yields
substantial dividends across a range of decision problems.

Introduction
The goal in many real-world applications of artificial intelligence is to create a pipeline from data, to predictive
models, to decisions. Together, these steps enable a form
of evidence-based decision making which has transformative potential across domains such as healthcare, scientific
discovery, transportation, and more (Horvitz and Mitchell
2010; Horvitz 2010). This pipeline requires two technical
components: machine learning models and optimization algorithms. Machine learning models use the data to predict
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1658

