The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

How to Combine Tree-Search Methods in Reinforcement Learning
Yonathan Efroni

Gal Dalal

Bruno Scherrer

Shie Mannor

Technion, Israel

Technion, Israel

INRIA, Villers les Nancy, France

Technion, Israel

h-step greedy with respect to (w.r.t.) the value function, for
h > 1. Calculating such policies can be done via Dynamic
Programming (DP) or other planning methods such as tree
search. Combined with sampling, the latter corresponds to
the famous Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm
employed in (Silver et al. 2017b; 2017a). In this work, we
show that even when partial (inexact) policy evaluation is
performed and noise is added to it, along with a noisy policy
improvement stage, the above PI scheme converges with a
γ h contraction coefficient. While doing so, we also isolate
a sufficient convergence condition which we refer to as hgreedy consistency and relate it to previous 1-step greedy
relevant literature.
A straightforward ‘naive’ implementation of the PI scheme
described above would perform an h-step greedy policy improvement and then evaluate that policy by bootstrapping the
‘usual’ value function. Surprisingly, we find that this procedure does not necessarily contracts toward the optimal value,
and give an example where it is indeed non-contractive. This
contraction coefficient depends both on h and on the partial
evaluation parameter: m in the case of m-step return, and
λ when eligibility trace is used. The non-contraction occurs
even when the h-greedy consistency condition is satisfied.
To solve this issue, we propose an easy fix which we employ in all our algorithms, that relieves the convergence rate
from the dependence of m and λ, and allows the γ h contraction mentioned earlier in this section. Let us treat each state
as a root of a tree of depth h; then our proposed fix is the following. Instead of backing up the value only at the leaves and
ridding of all non-root related tree-search outputs, we reuse
the tree-search byproducts and back up the optimal value of
the root node children. Hence, instead of bootstrapping the
‘usual’ value function in the evaluation stage, we bootstrap
the optimal value obtained from the h − 1 horizon optimal
planning problem.
The contribution of this work is primarily theoretical, but
in Section 8 we also present experimental results on a toy
domain. The experiments support our analysis by exhibiting
better performance of our enhancement above compared to
the ‘naive’ algorithm. Additionally, we identified previous
practical usages of this enhancement in literature. In (Baxter,
Tridgell, and Weaver 1999), the authors proposed backing
up the optimal tree search value as a heuristic. They named
the algorithm TDLeaf(λ) and showcase its outperformance

Abstract
Finite-horizon lookahead policies are abundantly used in Reinforcement Learning and demonstrate impressive empirical
success. Usually, the lookahead policies are implemented with
specific planning methods such as Monte Carlo Tree Search
(e.g. in AlphaZero (Silver et al. 2017b)). Referring to the planning problem as tree search, a reasonable practice in these implementations is to back up the value only at the leaves while
the information obtained at the root is not leveraged other than
for updating the policy. Here, we question the potency of this
approach. Namely, the latter procedure is non-contractive in
general, and its convergence is not guaranteed. Our proposed
enhancement is straightforward and simple: use the return
from the optimal tree path to back up the values at the descendants of the root. This leads to a γ h -contracting procedure,
where γ is the discount factor and h is the tree depth. To establish our results, we first introduce a notion called multiple-step
greedy consistency. We then provide convergence rates for
two algorithmic instantiations of the above enhancement in
the presence of noise injected to both the tree search stage and
value estimation stage.

1

Introduction

A significant portion of the Reinforcement Learning (RL)
literature regards Policy Iteration (PI) methods. This family of algorithms contains numerous variants which were
thoroughly analyzed (Puterman 1994; Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1995) and constitute the foundation of sophisticated
state-of-the-art implementations (Mnih et al. 2016; Silver
et al. 2017b). The principal mechanism of PI is to alternate
between policy evaluation and policy improvement. Various well-studied approaches exist for the policy evaluation
stages; these may rely on single-step bootstrap, multi-step
Monte-Carlo return, or parameter-controlled interpolation of
the former two. For the policy improvement stage, theoretical analysis was mostly reserved for policies that are 1-step
greedy, while recent prominent implementations of multiplestep greedy policies exhibited promising empirical behavior
(Silver et al. 2017b; 2017a).
Relying on recent advances in the analysis of multiple-step
lookahead policies (Efroni et al. 2018a; 2018c), we study
the convergence of a PI scheme whose improvement stage is
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3494

