The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

AffinityNet: Semi-Supervised Few-Shot Learning for Disease Type Prediction
Tianle Ma, Aidong Zhang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, New York 14260
{tianlema, azhang}@buffalo.edu

Abstract

directly applied to complex objects whose features are not
ordered structurally.
One critical challenge in cancer patient clustering problem is the “big p, small N ” problem: we only have a relatively small number of samples (i.e., patients) compared
with high-dimensional features each sample has. In other
words, we do not have an “ImageNet”(Russakovsky et al.
2015) to train deep learning models that can learn good representations from raw features. Moreover, unlike pixels in
images, patient features such as gene expressions are much
noisier and more heterogeneous. These features are not “naturally” ordered. Thus we cannot directly use convolutional
neural networks with small filters to extract abstract local
features.
For a clustering/classification task, nodes/objects belonging to the same cluster should have similar representations
that are near the cluster centroid. Based on this intuition we
developed the k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) attention pooling layer, which applies the attention mechanism to learning node representations. With the kNN attention pooling
layer, each node’s representation is decided by its k-nearest
neighbors as well as itself, ensuring that similar nodes will
have similar learned representations. Similar to Graph Attention Model (GAM) (Veličković et al. 2017), we propose
the Affinity Network Model (AffinityNet) that consists of
stacked kNN attention pooling layers to learn the deep representations of a set of objects. While GAM is designed to
tackle representation learning on graphs (Veličković et al.
2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017b) and it does not
directly apply to data without a known graph, our AffinityNet model generalizes GAM to facilitate representation
learning on any collections of objects with or without a
known graph.
In addition to learning deep representations for classifying
objects, feature selection is also important in biomedical research. Though the number of features (i.e., variables or covariates) in genomic data is usually very high, many features
may be irrelevant to a specific task. For instance, a disease
may only have a few risk factors involving a small number
of features. In order to facilitate feature selection in a “deep
learning” way, we propose a feature attention layer, a simple special case of the kNN attention pooling layer which
can be incorporated into a neural network model and directly
learn feature weights using backpropagation.

While deep learning has achieved great success in computer
vision and many other fields, currently it does not work very
well on patient genomic data with the “big p, small N ” problem (i.e., a relatively small number of samples with highdimensional features). In order to make deep learning work
with a small amount of training data, we have to design new
models that facilitate few-shot learning. Here we present the
Affinity Network Model (AffinityNet), a data efficient deep
learning model that can learn from a limited number of training examples and generalize well. The backbone of the AffinityNet model consists of stacked k-Nearest-Neighbor (kNN)
attention pooling layers. The kNN attention pooling layer is
a generalization of the Graph Attention Model (GAM), and
can be applied to not only graphs but also any set of objects regardless of whether a graph is given or not. As a new
deep learning module, kNN attention pooling layers can be
plugged into any neural network model just like convolutional layers. As a simple special case of kNN attention pooling layer, feature attention layer can directly select important
features that are useful for classification tasks. Experiments
on both synthetic data and cancer genomic data from TCGA
projects show that our AffinityNet model has better generalization power than conventional neural network models with
little training data.

Introduction
Patients, drugs, networks, etc., are all complex objects with
heterogeneous features or attributes. Complex object clustering and classification are ubiquitous in real world applications. For instance, it is important to cluster cancer patients
into subgroups and identify disease subtypes in cancer genomics (Shen et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2014; Ma and Zhang
2017). Compared with images, which have homogeneous
structured features (i.e., pixels are arranged in a 3-D array
as raw features), complex objects usually have heterogeneous features with unclear structures. Deep learning models such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) widely
used in computer vision (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) and other fields
(Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals, and
Le 2014; Silver et al. 2016; Banino et al. 2018) cannot be
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1069

