The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Connecting the Digital and Physical World:
Improving the Robustness of Adversarial Attacks
Steve T.K. Jan,1 Joseph Messou,1 Yen-Chen Lin,2 Jia-Bin Huang,1 Gang Wang1
1 Virginia Tech 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology

{tekang, mejc2014}@vt.edu, yenchenl@mit.edu, {jbhuang, gangwang}@vt.edu

Abstract

Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016; Papernot et
al. 2016; Sharif et al. 2016; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017). However, this assumption is unrealistic since attackers have limited control on how the target system (e.g.,
self-driving cars, surveillance cameras) takes photos. The
different viewing angles and the non-linear camera response
functions may substantially reduce the impact of the adversarial perturbations.
More recently, researchers started to study the feasibility of adversarial examples in the physical domain by printing out the images and re-taking them using cameras (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017). The results show that
the effectiveness of adversarial perturbations (or noises) degrades significantly under the various physical conditions
(e.g., different viewing angles and distances). Initial efforts
have been investigated to improve the robustness of adversarial examples by either synthesizing the digital images
to simulate the effect of rotation, scaling, and perspective
changes (Athalye et al. 2018; Sitawarin et al. 2018) or manually taking “physical-domain” photos from different viewpoints and distances for producing robust physical adversarial examples (Eykholt et al. 2017; Evtimov et al. 2018).
However, two challenges remain un-addressed that limit
the feasibility of physical-domain adversarial examples.
First, most existing methods (Lu, Sibai, and Fabry 2017;
Eykholt et al. 2017; Evtimov et al. 2018; Sitawarin et al.
2018) are evaluated with an extremely small set of testing
cases (e.g., 5 cases in (Evtimov et al. 2018)). This is largely
due to the expensive manual efforts required to conduct
physical-domain experiments. There is a lack of large-scale
evaluation to fairly and thoroughly assess different methods
under a common ground. Second, existing methods, especially those relying on image synthesis, did not consider the
transformation introduced by physical devices (e.g., cameras, printers), which significantly limits its performance.
In this paper, we advance the state-of-the-art by addressing these challenges. First, we propose a new method (called
D2P) to generate robust adversarial examples that can survive in the physical world. The core idea is to explicitly
simulate the digital-to-physical transformation of the physical devices (e.g., paper printing, non-linear camera response
functions, sensor quantization, and noises) to translate a
digital image to its physical version before generating adversarial noises. We introduce an image-to-image transla-

While deep learning models have achieved unprecedented
success in various domains, there is also a growing concern
of adversarial attacks against related applications. Recent results show that by adding a small amount of perturbations to
an image (imperceptible to humans), the resulting adversarial examples can force a classifier to make targeted mistakes.
So far, most existing works focus on crafting adversarial examples in the digital domain, while limited efforts have been
devoted to understanding the physical domain attacks. In this
work, we explore the feasibility of generating robust adversarial examples that remain effective in the physical domain.
Our core idea is to use an image-to-image translation network to simulate the digital-to-physical transformation process for generating robust adversarial examples. To validate
our method, we conduct a large-scale physical-domain experiment, which involves manually taking more than 3000 physical domain photos. The results show that our method outperforms existing ones by a large margin and demonstrates a
high level of robustness and transferability.

Introduction
Deep learning algorithms have shown exceptionally good
performance in speech recognition, natural language processing, and image classification. However, there is growing
concern about the robustness of the deep neural networks
(DNN) against adversarial attacks (Bastani et al. 2016). This
concern is particularly escalated after recent deadly crashes
of self-driving vehicles (Fonseca and Krisher 2018). For image classifiers, it has been shown that adding small perturbations to the original input image (known as “adversarial examples”) can force an image classifier to make mistakes (Szegedy et al. 2014; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017; Lu, Sibai, and Fabry 2017), which can yield practical risks. For example, an image classifier used to recognize stop signs for self-driving cars may mistake the sign as
a yield sign if adversarial perturbations were added to the
image (that are imperceivable to humans).
Unfortunately, the current exploration of adversarial machine learning largely resides in the “digital domain”, without considering the physical constraints in practice. A common assumption is that attackers can directly feed the digital images into the target classifiers (Szegedy et al. 2014;
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

962

