The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Generic Approach to Accelerating Belief Propagation Based
Incomplete Algorithms for DCOPs via a Branch-and-Bound Technique
Ziyu Chen,1 Xingqiong Jiang,1 Yanchen Deng,2,∗ Dingding Chen,1 Zhongshi He1
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
1
{chenziyu, jxq, dingding, zshe}@cqu.edu.cn, 2 dyc941126@126.com

Abstract

Okamoto, Zivan, and Nahon 2016) trade accuracy for computation time and memory so that they can be applied to
large-scale problems. As a kind of incomplete algorithms
based on belief propagation, Max-Sum (Farinelli et al. 2008)
and its variants (Rogers et al. 2011; Zivan and Peled 2012;
Chen, Deng, and Wu 2017) have drawn a lot of attention
since they can easily be deployed to any DCOP setting.
Moreover, they can explicitly handle n-ary constraints and
more variables per agent (Cerquides et al. 2014). In more
detail, agents in Max-Sum propagate and accumulate beliefs
through the whole factor graph. And each agent only holds
its belief about the utility for each possible assignment and
continuously updates its belief based on the messages received from its neighbors.
In spite of many advantages of belief propagation approaches, they suffer from a huge challenge in scalability.
Specifically, they perform maximization operations repeatedly to locally accumulate beliefs for the involved variables,
given the local utility function and a set of incoming messages. The computation complexity of this step grows exponentially as the number of constraint arities. In other words,
when a constraint function holds n variables and the domain size of each variable is d, Max-Sum needs to perform
dn maximization operations to yield the best assignment for
each variable.
To address the issue, two kinds of methods were proposed
to improve the scalability of belief propagation approaches.
The first kind is the algorithms based on a branch-and-bound
technique including BnB-MS (Stranders et al. 2009) and
BnB-FMS (Macarthur et al. 2011) which both consist of a
preprocessing phase and a pruning phase. In the preprocessing phase, the two algorithms use localized message-passing
to simplify DCOPs. Specifically, BnB-MS reduces the number of moves that each agent needs to consider in coordinating mobile sensors while BnB-FMS removes tasks that an
agent should never perform in dynamic task allocations. In
the pruning phase, both algorithms reduce the search space
using a branch-and-bound technique to speed up maximization operations. Unfortunately, these algorithms require to
exchange a lot of messages in their preprocessing phases.
Moreover, the bounds in these algorithms are computed by
either brute force or domain-specific knowledge, which limits their applicability.
The second kind of approaches is sorting based, such as

Belief propagation approaches, such as Max-Sum and its
variants, are important methods to solve large-scale Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs). However, for problems with n-ary constraints, these algorithms
face a huge challenge since their computational complexity
scales exponentially with the number of variables a function holds. In this paper, we present a generic and easy-touse method based on a branch-and-bound technique to solve
the issue, called Function Decomposing and State Pruning
(FDSP). We theoretically prove that FDSP can provide monotonically non-increasing upper bounds and speed up belief
propagation based incomplete DCOP algorithms without an
effect on solution quality. Also, our empirically evaluation
indicates that FDSP can reduce 97% of the search space at
least and effectively accelerate Max-Sum, compared with the
state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs)
which require agents to coordinate their decisions to optimize a global objective, are a fundamental framework
for modeling multi-agent coordination in multi-agent systems (Hirayama and Yokoo 1997). Thus, DCOPs are widely
deployed in some real world coordination tasks including
meeting scheduling (Enembreck and Barthès 2012), sensor
networks (Farinelli, Rogers, and Jennings 2014), power networks (Fioretto et al. 2017), etc.
Algorithms for DCOPs can be classified into two categories: complete and incomplete, according to whether
they guarantee to find the optimal solution. Complete algorithms (Hirayama and Yokoo 1997; Modi et al. 2005;
Petcu and Faltings 2005; Yeoh, Felner, and Koenig 2008;
Vinyals, Rodriguez-Aguilar, and Cerquides 2009; Gershman, Meisels, and Zivan 2009) can get the optimal solutions but incur exponential communication or computation
overheads since DCOPs are NP-hard. In contrast, incomplete algorithms (Maheswaran, Pearce, and Tambe 2004;
Arshad and Silaghi 2004; Zhang et al. 2005; Ottens, Dimitrakakis, and Faltings 2012; Nguyen, Yeoh, and Lau 2013;
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6038

