The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Profiles, Proxies, and Assumptions: Decentralized,
Communications-Resilient Planning, Allocation, and Scheduling∗
Ugur Kuter,1 Brian Kettler,2 Katherine Guo,2 Martin Hofmann,2 Valerie Champagne,3
Kurt Lachevet,4 Jennifer Lautenschlager,2 Robert P. Goldman,1 Luis Asencios,2 Josh Hamell1
1

SIFT, LLC, 2 Lockheed Martin, ATL, 3 PatchPlus Consulting, LLC, 4 AFRL Rome
{ukuter,rpgoldman,jhamell}@sift.net,
{brian.p.kettler,jinhong.guo,martin.hofmann,jennifer.lautenschlager,luis.a.asencios.reynoso}@lmco.com,
vchampagne@patchplusconsulting.com, kurt.lachevet@us.af.mil
Abstract

planning, resource allocation, and scheduling may not converge to an optimal or even attainable solution. The large
scale (a thousand missions per day), the dependencies between distributed decisions, and the high degree of configurability of resources exacerbate the plan optimization challenge. These planners must also operate under assumptions
about peer decisions as resource allocation and scheduling
cannot be modeled as finite, logical formalisms. On the other
hand, decentralized multi-agent systems (Seuken and Zilberstein 2008) address partial-observability and uncertainty
during planning, but these approaches cannot scale up to
large-scale C2 operations and use closed-world formalisms.
We describe L A P LATA (Living Air Operations Planning
Triggered by Assessment), a novel service-oriented system
designed and being developed for emerging decentralized
C2 applications. L A P LATA employs decentralized planning,
plan coordination, adaptation, critiquing and distributed resource scheduling and allocation to address the challenges
of decentralized C2. Our contributions are as follows —
• We describe our L A P LATA architecture for rapid plan
adaptation at multiple layers (i.e., tasks, actions, resources, and schedules for them) with minimal ripple effects. We discuss how our loosely-coupled approach to
planning and allocation/scheduling negotiation results in
termination under decentralized uncertainty.
• We describe L A P LATA’s novel assumption-based, decentralized hierarchical task network planning framework,
called APA, that uniquely combines our plan generation, adaptation, and critiquing algorithms. APA manages
assumptions about imperfect knowledge of dynamic demand, temporal information, and distributed constraints.
• We describe how L A P LATA uses proxy knowledge to inform assumptions and estimate the status of the world
and decisions at peer nodes in a decentralized auctionbased resource allocation algorithm, called GAO. GAO
performs global, dynamic, and distributed resource allocation under conditions of oversubscribed resources and
potentially combinatorial number of scheduling options.
• We present our experimental evaluation and results that
demonstrate the scalability and effectiveness of our approach for air campaigns and compare L A P LATA solutions to those from subject matter experts. We evaluated
L A P LATA over several metrics, including planning run

Degraded communications are expected in large-scale disaster response and military operations, which nevertheless require rapid, concerted actions by distributed decision makers,
each with limited visibility into the changing situation and in
charge of a limited set of resources. We describe L A P LATA,
a novel architecture that addresses these challenges by separating mission planning from allocation/scheduling for scalability but at the cost of some negotiation. We describe formal
algorithms that achieve near-optimal performance according
to mission completion percentage and subject matter expert
review: assumption-based planning and replanning, profileassisted cooperative allocation, and schedule negotiation. We
validate our approach on a realistic problem specification and
compare results against subject matter expert solutions.

Introduction
In the U.S. Air Force, Decentralized Command and Control (C2) of large-scale, multi-day air operation campaigns
(Hostage III and Broadwell Jr. 2014) follow the tenet of centralized control and decentralized execution. Recent events
have led to an emphasis of decentralized C2, where communications links among forward planning and execution nodes
are either interrupted by natural disaster or an adversary capable of communications denial, e.g., extensive jamming. If
forward nodes were to wait for communications to be reestablished, they would miss critical time windows. It is during these moments that decentralized control, not traditional
centralized control, provides a resilient C2 architecture that
maintains the initiative in the contested environment.
Existing distributed and multi-agent planning systems
(Torreño et al. 2017) typically focus on deterministic planning methods that distribute the input planning task among
multiple agents. Decentralized C2 mission planning must involve independent planners and reasoners that are responsible for accomplishing different tasks under large-scale uncertainty, while communicating and coordinating their outcomes. Under severely degraded communications, mission
∗
The work reported in this paper is sponsored by the Air Force
Research Laboratory (AFRL) under contract FA8750-16-C-0182.
Cleared for public release, no restrictions (AFRL PA 88ABW2018-4459).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9504

