The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving Neural Question Generation Using Answer Separation
Yanghoon Kim,1,2 Hwanhee Lee,1 Joongbo Shin,1 Kyomin Jung1,2
1

2

Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
Automation and Systems Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{ad26kr,wanted1007,jbshin,kjung}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural question generation (NQG) is the task of generating
a question from a given passage with deep neural networks.
Previous NQG models suffer from a problem that a significant proportion of the generated questions include words
in the question target, resulting in the generation of unintended questions. In this paper, we propose answer-separated
seq2seq, which better utilizes the information from both the
passage and the target answer. By replacing the target answer in the original passage with a special token, our model
learns to identify which interrogative word should be used.
We also propose a new module termed keyword-net, which
helps the model better capture the key information in the target answer and generate an appropriate question. Experimental results demonstrate that our answer separation method significantly reduces the number of improper questions which
include answers. Consequently, our model significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art NQG models.

Figure 1: An example of overall idea for QG in this paper.
Generated questions from existing NQG models tend to include words from the answer, resulting in the generation of
improper questions. Replacing the answer into a special token effectively prevents the answer words from appearing in
the question, resulting in the generation of desired questions.

Neural question generation (NQG) is the task of generating questions from a given passage with deep neural networks. One of its key applications is to generate questions
for educational materials (Heilman and Smith 2010). It is
also used as a way to improve question answering (QA) systems (Duan et al. 2017; Tang et al. 2017; 2018) or to engage
chatbots to start and continue a conversation (Mostafazadeh
et al. 2016).
Automatic question generation (QG) from a passage is a
challenging task due to the unstructured nature of textual
data. One of major issues in NQG is how to take the question target, referred to as the target answer, in the passage.
Specifying the question target is necessary for generating
natural questions because there could be multiple target answers in the passage as in the following example. In Figure
1(a), the passage “John Francis O’Hara was elected president of Notre Dame in 1934.” has various candidates to be
asked such as the person “John Francis O’Hara”, the location “Notre Dame”, and the number “1934.” Without taking
the target answer as an additional input, existing NQG models such as (Du, Shao, and Cardie 2017) tend to generate

questions without specific target. This is a fundamental limitation due to the fact that recent NQG systems mostly rely
on RNN sequence-to-sequence model (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015), and RNNs
do not have the ability to model high-level variability (Serban et al. 2017).
To overcome this limitation, most recent NQG models incorporated the target answer information by using the answer position feature (Zhou et al. 2017; Song et al. 2018).
However, these approaches have a critical issue that a significant proportion of the generated questions include words
in the target answer. For example, Figure 1(b) shows the improperly generated question “Who was elected John Francis?”1 which exposes some words in the answer. This problem results from the tendency of the sequence-to-sequence
model to include all information from the passage (Amplayo, Lim, and Hwang 2018). It becomes severer with the
recent trend that NQG models use the copy mechanism
(Gulcehre et al. 2016) to encourage that many words in the
original passage appear in the question.
This study focuses on resolving this problem by separating the target answer from the original passage. For example,
the masked passage “<a> was elected president of Notre
Dame in 1934.” in Figure 1(c) still contains enough information to generate the desired question in Figure 1(d), because

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
This example is actually generated by our base model which
will be introduced in the later part.

Introduction

6602

