The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CAMO: A Collaborative Ranking Method for Content Based Recommendation
Chengwei Wang,1,3 Tengfei Zhou,3 Chen Chen,1,3 Tianlei Hu,1,3,∗ Gang Chen2,3
1

The Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Computing of Zhejiang Province, China
2
CAD & CG State Key Lab, Zhejiang University, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{rr, zhoutengfei, cc33, htl, cg}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

in practical applications, which makes such methods produce inferior recommendation results. To enhance the performance, many researchers indicate that an item’s content information is capable of boosting model’s expressing
power (Kim et al. 2016; Gupta and Varma 2017). Consequently, RSs with item content have higher accuracy than
their vanilla counterparts (Wang and Blei 2011; Gopalan,
Charlin, and Blei 2014).
In this paper, we focus on fusing RS with textual contents.
Many Content-Based Recommendation (CBR) approaches
have been proposed for exploiting a corpus of textual contents. Generally, CBR methods combine a Collaborative Filtering (CF) function with an encoder which extracts features
from the text (Bansal, Belanger, and McCallum 2016; Chen
et al. 2017; Xiaoyan Cai and Yang 2018). Note that these
encoders dominate the performance of such methods since
they have similar CF architectures. Though abundant literature have comprehensively studied the construction of content encoders (Zhang et al. 2017; Agarwal and Chen 2010;
Volkovs, Yu, and Poutanen 2017), we find that there are still
significant rooms for improvements.
Firstly, most existing methods fail to simultaneously capture topic semantics and word order information, since they
belong to different semantic hierarchies. For topic-aware encoders, the content features are extracted by models such as
Latent Dirichlet Allocation and autoencoder (Liu et al. 2017;
Gopalan, Charlin, and Blei 2014; Wang, Wang, and Yeung 2015). Since these models are built upon the “bagof-words” assumption, they are not sensitive to the order
of words. For example, “I prefer apple to banana” and
“I prefer banana to apple” are semantically equivalent to
such methods, which induces serious bias in text understanding. To catch word order, many researchers use a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) such as Gated Recurrent
Unit (GRU) or Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) to encode content text
(Wang, Xingjian, and Yeung 2016;
Bansal, Belanger, and McCallum 2016). However, they treat
a document as one sequence of words, which fails to identify
the high leveled topic information.
Secondly, a sophisticated encoder has poor generalization
for unseen content. Empirical evidence given by (Almahairi
et al. 2015) shows that replacing a simple encoder such as
word embedding with a complex RNN can make recommendation accuracy drop seriously due to over-fitting. To re-

In real-world recommendation tasks, feedback data are usually sparse. Therefore, a recommender’s performance is often
determined by how much information that it can extract from
textual contents. However, current methods do not make full
use of the semantic information. They encode the textual contents either by “bag-of-words” technique or Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). The former neglects the order of words
while the latter ignores the fact that textual contents can contain multiple topics. Besides, there exists a dilemma in designing a recommender. On the one hand, we shall use a sophisticated model to exploit every drop of information in item
contents; on the other hand, we shall adopt a simple model to
prevent itself from over-fitting when facing the sparse feedbacks. To fill the gaps, we propose a recommender named
CAMO 1 . CAMO employs a multi-layer content encoder for
simultaneously capturing the semantic information of multitopic and word order. Moreover, CAMO makes use of adversarial training to prevent the complex encoder from overfitting. Extensive empirical studies show that CAMO outperforms state-of-the-art methods in predicting users’ preferences.

Introduction
Recommender System (RS) is one of the most important
applications of artificial intelligence (Bennett and Lanning
2007; Linden, Smith, and York 2003; Su and Khoshgoftaar 2009). In e-commerce, RS is capable of selecting customized commodities for users and boosting vendors’ profits (Zhu et al. 2014). In online media, RS is able to provide
personalized playlists and increase users’ engagement (Bonnin and Jannach 2013). In information retrieval, RS can be
used to filter out users’ unwanted links and improve their
searching efficiency (Zhang, Yao, and Sun 2017).
RS aims to mine users’ preferences from their feedbacks,
including explicit ratings and implicit clicks (Rendle et al.
2009). Therefore, many methods use feedbacks as the sole
data source to train a recommendation model (Mnih and
Salakhutdinov 2007; Koren 2008; Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009). However, the feedbacks are often severely sparse
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
CAMO is short for Collaborative rAnking via dynaMic rOuting.

5224

