The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Singe Image Rain Removal with Unpaired
Information: A Differentiable Programming Perspective
Hongyuan Zhu,1 Xi Peng,2 Joey Tianyi Zhou,3∗
Songfan Yang,4 Vijay Chanderasekh,1 Liyuan Li,1 Joo-Hwee Lim1
1

Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore,
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
3
Institute of Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore
4
AI Lab, TAL Education Group, China
2

Abstract
Single image rain-streak removal is an extremely challenging
problem due to the presence of non-uniform rain densities
in images. Previous works solve this problem using various
hand-designed priors or by explicitly mapping synthetic rain
to paired clean image in a supervised way. In practice, however, the pre-defined priors are easily violated and the paired
training data are hard to collect. To overcome these limitations, in this work, we propose RainRemoval-GAN (RRGAN), the first end-to-end adversarial model that generates
realistic rain-free images using only unpaired supervision.
Our approach alleviates the paired training constraints by introducing a physical-model which explicitly learns a recovered images and corresponding rain-streaks from the differentiable programming perspective. The proposed network consists of a novel multiscale attention memory generator and a
novel multiscale deeply supervised discriminator. The multiscale attention memory generator uses a memory with attention mechanism to capture the latent rain streaks context at
different stages to recover the clean images. The deeply supervised multiscale discriminator imposes constraints at the
recovered output in terms of local details and global appearance to the clean image set. Together with the learned rainstreaks, a reconstruction constraint is employed to ensure
the appearance consistent with the input image. Experimental results on public benchmark demonstrates our promising
performance compared with nine state-of-the-art methods in
terms of PSNR, SSIM, visual qualities and running time.

(a) Input

(b) Ground truth

(c) Our result

Figure 1: A visual illustration of single image deraining. The
target is to recover a clean image from the input rain image.
Our method produces a recovered image with faithful color
and structure without using any paired training data.
A rain image I can be modeled as an image composition
problem (Luo, Xu, and Ji 2015):
I =X +R

(1)

where X and R denote the desired clean image and the rain
streaks, respectively. Single image rain-streak removal aims
to estimate the hidden X and R from a given I, which is
an unconstrained problem because we need to estimate two
unknown variables and there are infinitely solutions if no
further regularization are imposed.
To make the rain streak removal problem trackable, existing methods can be roughly grouped into two categories:
prior-based and data-driven. The prior-based methods estimate the rain-streak based on various priors or assumptions. Typical priors include but not limited to sparse-coding
prior (Luo, Xu, and Ji 2015), low-rank prior (Chang, Yan,
and Zhong 2017) and Gaussian prior (Li et al. 2016). Despite remarkable progress achieved by adopting these priors,
they are easily violated in practice given the rain-streak does
not strictly follow the Gaussian or sparse distribution and the
background scenes is cluttered and contains complex illuminations.
In recent, the interest has shifted to data-driven approaches which utilize labeled data with paired rain image
and rain streak to learn a deep neural network (Fu et al. 2017;
Yang et al. 2017b; Zhang and Patel 2018; Li et al. 2018).
Given an input image, the rain streaks or clean image can
be regressed with given input rain image. More recently,
inspired by the huge success of generative adversarial networks (GAN) in image-to-image translation tasks (Goodfel-

Introduction
Rain, snow, and fog are common visual artifacts which affects many vision-based applications (Zhu, Vial, and Lu
2017; Zhu et al. 2016; 2018a; 2015; Zhu, Weibel, and Lu
2016), such as drone-based video surveillance and selfdriving cars. The performance of many computer vision
systems often exhibits significant drop when they are presented with images that contain these artifacts. Hence, it is
highly practical and expected to develop automatic artifacts
removal methods (Li et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2017b). In
this paper, we mainly focus on the problem of rain streak
removal from a single image.
∗

Corresponding author: Joey Tianyi Zhou
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9332

