The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Covariate Shift Adaptation on Learning from Positive and Unlabeled Data
Tomoya Sakai∗

Nobuyuki Shimizu

NEC Corporation
t-sakai@ah.jp.nec.com

Yahoo Japan Corporation
nobushim@yahoo-corp.jp

Abstract

samples belong to positive or negative classes. To obtain the
classifier, du Plessis, Niu, and Sugiyama (2015) proposed a
method based on empirical risk minimization (ERM), which
enables us to compute a risk estimator unbiased to the risk
in supervised learning by only using PU data. Moreover, the
theoretical properties of the ERM-based PU classification
method have been studied in various perspective (Niu et al.
2016; Kiryo et al. 2017).
In addition to the PU learning situation, in practice, a
distribution for training can be different from testing due
to the time variation and domain change for example. As
a distribution shift scenario, the covariate shift is widely
considered and has been studied so far (Shimodaira 2000;
Quioñero Candela et al. 2009). In the covariate shift, the
input-output relation is assumed to be the same across training and test, but the input distribution in a test phase is different from that in training. For example, when we want to
predict whether a patient has a certain disease in some city
but the training data were gathered in a different city, the
distribution of patients will often change.
To address the covariate shift, an importance-weighted
risk minimization approach was proposed and its superior
performance was demonstrated (Quioñero Candela et al.
2009). The importance function is the ratio between test and
training densities and it is multiplied by a loss, so that an average of weighted losses over training data approximates an
average of (non-weighted) losses over test data. Although
the effectiveness of the importance-weighted ERM for the
covariate shift has been demonstrated in various machine
learning tasks, it has not been elucidated in the PU learning
setting even if the PU learning situation frequently occurs in
real-world applications.
In this paper, we consider the problem of training a classifier from PU data under the covariate shift. To address the
problem, we propose a novel risk function and show the
practical implementation. The proposed method can reuse
positive data from the training distribution; thus we can save
annotation cost for obtaining labeled data from test distribution, which is similar to the existing supervised learning
methods for covariate shift adaptation. Our analysis reveal
the situations where the importance-weighting is necessary
for PU learning under the covariate shift. Besides, we discuss the relation between the covariate shift and the prior
probability shift, which is also often considered in dataset

The goal of binary classification is to identify whether an input sample belongs to positive or negative classes. Usually,
supervised learning is applied to obtain a classification rule,
but in real-world applications, it is conceivable that only positive and unlabeled data are accessible for learning, which is
called learning from positive and unlabeled data (PU learning). Furthermore, in practice, data distributions are likely to
differ between training and testing due to, for example, time
variation and domain shift. The covariate shift is a dataset
shift situation, where distributions of covariates (inputs) differ between training and testing, but the input-output relation is the same. In this paper, we address the PU learning
problem under the covariate shift. We propose an importanceweighted PU learning method and reveal in which situations
the importance-weighting is necessary. Moreover, we derive
the convergence rate of the proposed method under mild conditions and experimentally demonstrate its effectiveness.

1

Introduction

The goal of binary classification is to identify whether an input sample belongs to positive or negative classes. To obtain
classification rules, we collect labeled data for both positive
and negative classes and use supervised learning. However,
in real-world applications, it is conceivable that collecting
positive data is easy but collecting negative data is relatively
difficult or almost impossible. For example, in social networking services, the users’ favorite articles (positive data)
can be found using a “like” button, but disliked articles (negative data) cannot be explicitly observed unless a “dislike”
button is implemented; the articles that the users did not declare to “like” are a mixture of positive and negative data,
i.e., unlabeled data.
To address such a situation, learning from positive and unlabeled data (PU learning) (Letouzey, Denis, and Gilleron
2000; Lee and Liu 2003; Elkan and Noto 2008) has been
studied and recently gaining much attention (Xu et al. 2017;
Yang, Liu, and Yang 2017; Kiryo et al. 2017; Gong et al.
2018). In PU learning, a classifier is trained with only positive and unlabeled data, and used for identifying whether test
∗
Part of this work was done while at the University of Tokyo
and RIKEN.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4838

