The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hierarchical Photo-Scene Encoder for Album Storytelling
Bairui Wang,1∗ Lin Ma,2† Wei Zhang,1† Wenhao Jiang,2 Feng Zhang2
1

School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, 2 Tencent AI Lab
{bairuiwong, forest.linma, cswhjiang}@gmail.com
davidzhang@sdu.edu.cn, jayzhang@tencent.com

Abstract
···

Image
Captioning

Album
Storytelling

In this paper, we propose a novel model with a hierarchical
photo-scene encoder and a reconstructor for the task of album storytelling. The photo-scene encoder contains two subencoders, namely the photo and scene encoders, which are
stacked together and behave hierarchically to fully exploit the
structure information of the photos within an album. Specifically, the photo encoder generates semantic representation
for each photo while exploiting temporal relationships among
them. The scene encoder, relying on the obtained photo representations, is responsible for detecting the scene changes and
generating scene representations. Subsequently, the decoder
dynamically and attentively summarizes the encoded photo
and scene representations to generate a sequence of album
representations, based on which a story consisting of multiple
coherent sentences is generated. In order to fully extract the
useful semantic information from an album, a reconstructor
is employed to reproduce the summarized album representations based on the hidden states of the decoder. The proposed
model can be trained in an end-to-end manner, which results in an improved performance over the state-of-the-arts on
the public visual storytelling (VIST) dataset. Ablation studies
further demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed hierarchical photo-scene encoder and reconstructor.

···

···

···

···

1) After a long summer day of playing hard.
2) Swinging and playing and playing with friends.
3) Making up dances and helping clean up after the picnic.
4) We headed for the city fireworks.
5) What a great ending to a great day!
1) The picture is of a little boy sitting in a swing.
2) A young blonde girl soaking wet holding onto a ladder.
3) Two young girls wearing pink and posing the same for the picture.
4) The fireworks are shot off in the distance.
5) A large firework exploding in the sky on a dark night.

Figure 1: Differences between album storytelling and image
captioning. Only five representative photos from an album
of visual storytelling (VIST) (Huang et al. 2016) dataset are
shown. Sentences in image captioning describe what exactly
happens in the current image, while the sentences in album
storytelling focus on the sentence coherence and story completeness. Please note that the blue and green boxes represent two different scenes in the album.
the album. It can be observed that the sentences for the image captioning task are independent, only expressing the exact visual content of each image. On the contrary, the sentences for the album storytelling task take the sentence coherence and story completeness into consideration. Lastly,
some sentences in album storytelling might not describe any
photos in the stream. The goal of such sentences is to preserve sentence coherence and story completeness. For example, the last sentence in storytelling “what a great
ending to a great day!” does not describe any images in the album, but it perfectly concludes a story. For
these reasons, we need to consider how to extract related
salient information, detect the exiting events or scenes in the
album, and finally generate coherent sentences to present the
story.
Album storytelling is usually realized in an encoderdecoder architecture. The encoder relies on the convolutional neural network (CNN) widely used for different
works (Zhang, Yu, and He 2017; Zhang et al. 2018b; 2018a;
Ma, Lu, and Li 2016; Qi et al. 2018), to extract the visual
feature of each photo and fuses them together to yield the
whole album representation. The decoder usually employs

Introduction
Album storytelling (Yu, Bansal, and Berg 2017; Huang et
al. 2016; Liu, Li, and Shi 2017) is a task to produce a paragraph to describe an ordered photo stream, and has become
a hot research topic in the vision and language community.
Images in an album are usually redundant and diverse, since
people tend to take multiple photos under multiple scenes.
To describe an album, the model needs not only to extract
the salient contents from the photo stream, but also generate coherent sentences to describe them. Hence, it is totally different from the image captioning task and album
storytelling is more challenging. Human labeled examples
of both image captioning and album storytelling are illustrated in Fig. 1. In this example, five representative images
as well as their labeled captions and story are selected from
∗
This work was done while Bairui Wang was a Research Intern
with Tencent AI Lab.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8909

