The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Representations in
Model-Free Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
Jacob Rafati,∗ David C. Noelle
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Computational Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory
University of California, Merced. 5200 North Lake Road, Merced, CA 95343. USA.

Abstract

of future rewards). Temporal Difference (TD) learning is a
class of model-free RL methods that attempt to learn a policy
without learning a model of the environment. It is often useful to define a value function, qπ : S × A → R, to estimate
the expected value of return when taking a given action in a
given state and then following the policy π. When the state
space is large, it is common to use a function approximator, Q(s, a; w), to estimate the value function, qπ . Artificial
neural networks are often used as such function approximators. Q-learning is a TD algorithm that attempts to find the
optimal value function, characterized by parameters, w, by
minimizing a loss function, L(w), which is defined as the
expectation of squared TD error over a recent transition experience memory, D:
h
2 i
L(w) , Ee∼D r + γ max
Q(s0 , a0 ; w) − Q(s, a; w) .
0

Common approaches to Reinforcement Learning (RL) are seriously challenged by large-scale applications involving huge
state spaces and sparse delayed reward feedback. Hierarchical
Reinforcement Learning (HRL) methods attempt to address
this scalability issue by learning action selection policies at
multiple levels of temporal abstraction. Abstraction can be
had by identifying a relatively small set of states that are
likely to be useful as subgoals, in concert with the learning of
corresponding skill policies to achieve those subgoals. Many
approaches to subgoal discovery in HRL depend on the analysis of a model of the environment, but the need to learn such
a model introduces its own problems of scale. Once subgoals
are identified, skills may be learned through intrinsic motivation, introducing an internal reward signal marking subgoal
attainment. We present a novel model-free method for subgoal discovery using incremental unsupervised learning over
a small memory of the most recent experiences of the agent.
When combined with an intrinsic motivation learning mechanism, this method learns subgoals and skills together, based
on experiences in the environment. Thus, we offer an original approach to HRL that does not require the acquisition
of a model of the environment, suitable for large-scale applications. We demonstrate the efficiency of our method on a
variant of the rooms environment.

1

a

2

Representations in Model-Free HRL

Problem statement
The reinforcement learning problem suffers from serious
scaling issues. Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL)
is an important computational approach intended to tackle
problems of scale by learning to operate over different levels
of temporal abstraction (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999).
One of the common approaches to temporal abstraction
is to identify a set of useful states as subgoals. One major
open problem in HRL is automatic subgoal discovery. Existing methods for subgoal discovery require a model of the
environment, such as the state transition probability model
and knowledge of the reward function (Şimşek, Wolfe, and
Barto 2005). Learning a model of the environment is a difficult problem, however, particularly for large-scale tasks.
In comparison, model-free HRL does not require learning
a model of the environment. Still, producing accurate value
function approximators generally involves learning good internal representations of states. In our previous work, we
have studied methods for learning such internal representations during model-free reinforcement learning (Rafati and
Noelle 2015; 2017). We now seek to address major open
problems in the integration of internal representation learning, automatic subgoal discovery, and intrinsic motivation
learning, all within the model-free HRL framework.

Background

The Reinforcement Learning (RL) problem involves learning behaviors through interaction with an environment (Sutton and Barto 2017). At any given time step, the agent receives a representation of the environment’s state, s ∈ S,
where S is the set of all possible states, and, on that basis,
the agent selects an action, a ∈ A, where A is the set of all
available actions. One time step later, as a consequence of
the agent’s action, the agent receives information from the
environment, consisting of a reward, r ∈ R, and also the
resulting new state of the agent. Each cycle of interaction
is called a transition experience, e = (s, a, r, s0 ). At each
time step, the agent implements a mapping from states to
possible actions, π : S → A, called its policy. The goal of
the RL agent is to find an optimal policy that maximizes the
expected value of the return, G (e.g., the cumulative sum
∗

Email: jrafatiheravi@ucmerced.edu, URL: http://rafati.net/
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10009

