The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Incremental Triplet Margin for Person Re-Identification
Yingying Zhang, Qiaoyong Zhong, Liang Ma, Di Xie, Shiliang Pu
Hikvision Research Institute
{zhangyingying7,zhongqiaoyong,maliang6,xiedi,pushiliang}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to match people across
multiple non-overlapping video cameras deployed at different
locations. To address this challenging problem, many metric learning approaches have been proposed, among which
triplet loss is one of the state-of-the-arts. In this work, we
explore the margin between positive and negative pairs of
triplets and prove that large margin is beneficial. In particular, we propose a novel multi-stage training strategy which
learns incremental triplet margin and improves triplet loss
effectively. Multiple levels of feature maps are exploited to
make the learned features more discriminative. Besides, we
introduce global hard identity searching method to sample
hard identities when generating a training batch. Extensive
experiments on Market-1501, CUHK03, and DukeMTMCreID show that our approach yields a performance boost and
outperforms most existing state-of-the-art methods.

Positive
shift1

shift2

Anchor
Negative

(a) LITM training procedure.

172

507

175

411

Introduction
In recent years, person re-identification (ReID) has aroused
concerns of more and more researchers due to its wide
range of applications in security and video surveillance. It
is a challenging task because of varying illumination conditions, human occlusion, background clutter and different
camera views. Most existing methods use a feature vector
to represent each person image and then match them with a
specific metric. With the emergence of deep learning, feature representations learned with convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
LeCun et al. 1989) immensely outperform hand-crafted features.
Currently, the most commonly used loss functions are
triplet loss, classification loss and verification loss. Triplet
loss was first introduced by (Weinberger and Saul 2009). It
directly optimizes a deep CNN which produces embeddings
such that positive examples are closer to an anchor example
than negative examples. For classification loss, each identity
of person in the training set is considered as a class, and the
network is trained to classify them correctly. Subsequently,
the trained network is used as a feature extractor and a specific metric is chosen to rank the extracted features. In general, the performance of classification loss is superior over

(b) Hard identity examples (yellow: anchor, red: negative).

Figure 1: (a) illustrates the proposed LITM training procedure. By repeatedly applying a shift on the data points in
the embedding space, the margin between the positive and
negative pairs in the triplet is progressively increased. (b)
shows two examples of hard identity pair on the Market1501 dataset. The number on the bottom right is the identity
label of each person.

triplet loss, since it enforces global inter-class separability
in the embedding space. However, as the number of identities increases, the number of learnable parameters grows.
For scenarios with very large quantity of identities, it would
be non-trivial to train a classification loss. Lastly, verification loss is used to learn a cross-image representation. The
network predicts the similarity between two input images directly. During inference, all query-gallery image pairs need
to go through the whole network, which is very expensive.
Triplet loss attempts to enforce a margin between the positive and negative pairs of each triplet. Surprisingly, the im-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9243

