The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Convolutional Sum-Product Networks
Cory J. Butz

Jhonatan S. Oliveira

André E. dos Santos

André L. Teixeira

butz@cs.uregina.ca
University of Regina
Canada

oliveira@cs.uregina.ca
University of Regina
Canada

dossantos@cs.uregina.ca
University of Regina
Canada

teixeira@cs.uregina.ca
University of Regina
Canada

Abstract

Conditions are given as to when subclasses of CNNs define valid SPNs, including convolutional layer filters of certain sizes and non-overlapping windows in sum-pooling layers. Satisfaction of these conditions yields a subclass of
CNNs, called convolutional SPNs (CSPNs). CSPNs permit a
vectorized representation allowing for exploitation of tensor
libraries such as Tensorflow, but they also can suffer from
being too shallow, and it is known that deep SPNs are more
expressive than shallow SPNs (Delalleau and Bengio 2011).
We introduce deep convolutional sum-product networks
(DCSPNs). DCSPNs permit the convolutional and sumpooling layers to form rich DAG structures by augmenting
layer tensors under conditions that maintain decomposability and completeness. As a decomposable and complete SPN
is a valid SPN, our main result is that DCSPNs are a larger
subclass of CNNs that define valid SPNs. DCSPNs are a rigorous probabilistic model. As such, they can exploit probabilistic reasoning, including marginal inference and most
probable explanation (MPE) inference. This allows an alternative method for learning DCSPNs using vectorized differentiable MPE. We show how to vectorize MPE using a
mask algorithm and how it plays a role similar to the GANs
generator. Image sampling is yet another application demonstrating the robustness of DCSPNs. This involves a minor
modification to the mask algorithm. Our preliminary results
on image sampling are promising, since the DCSPN sampled images exhibit variability. Experimental results on leftand bottom-completion like those in Table 1 show DCSPNs
achieve state-of-the-art by building deeper structures using
both vertical and horizontal sum-pooling windows, which
leverage local structure in the image data in both directions. Applying a simple low pass filter as a post-processing
smoothing operation lowers the mean squared error (MSE)
score from 455 to 401 for left-completion in Olivetti.

We give conditions under which convolutional neural networks (CNNs) define valid sum-product networks (SPNs).
One subclass, called convolutional SPNs (CSPNs), can be
implemented using tensors, but also can suffer from being
too shallow. Fortunately, tensors can be augmented while
maintaining valid SPNs. This yields a larger subclass of
CNNs, which we call deep convolutional SPNs (DCSPNs),
where the convolutional and sum-pooling layers form rich directed acyclic graph structures. One salient feature of DCSPNs is that they are a rigorous probabilistic model. As
such, they can exploit multiple kinds of probabilistic reasoning, including marginal inference and most probable explanation (MPE) inference. This allows an alternative method
for learning DCSPNs using vectorized differentiable MPE,
which plays a similar role to the generator in generative adversarial networks (GANs). Image sampling is yet another
application demonstrating the robustness of DCSPNs. Our
preliminary results on image sampling are encouraging, since
the DCSPN sampled images exhibit variability. Experiments
on image completion show that DCSPNs significantly outperform competing methods by achieving several state-of-the-art
mean squared error (MSE) scores in both left-completion and
bottom-completion in benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Generative models are of current interest in the deep
learning community, including generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), variational autoencoders (Kingma and Welling 2014), neural autoregressive distribution estimators (Larochelle and Murray 2011),
pixel recurrent neural networks (Oord, Kalchbrenner, and
Kavukcuoglu 2016), and convolutional arithmetic circuits
(Sharir et al. 2018). Convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
(Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016) can be used in
GANs. Sum-product networks (SPNs) (Poon and Domingos 2011) are a generative model that have received limited
attention from the deep learning community (Peharz et al.
2018). An SPN is a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where
leaf nodes are tractable distributions and each internal node
is either a sum or product operation. A valid SPN defines a
joint probability distribution and allows for efficient inference (Poon and Domingos 2011).

Table 1: Mean squared error (MSE) scores in Olivetti Face.
P&D (Poon and Domingos 2011)
ICNN (Amos, Xu, and Kolter 2017)
D&V (Dennis and Ventura 2012)
DCGAN (Yeh et al. 2017)
DCSPN

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3248

left
942
833
779
935
455

bottom
918
782
707
503

