The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Selective Refinement Network for High Performance Face Detection
Cheng Chi,1,3∗ Shifeng Zhang,2,3 * † Junliang Xing,2,3 Zhen Lei,2,3 Stan Z. Li,2,3 Xudong Zou1,3
1

2

Institute of Electronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

Abstract
High performance face detection remains a very challenging
problem, especially when there exists many tiny faces. This
paper presents a novel single-shot face detector, named Selective Refinement Network (SRN), which introduces novel twostep classification and regression operations selectively into
an anchor-based face detector to reduce false positives and
improve location accuracy simultaneously. In particular, the
SRN consists of two modules: the Selective Two-step Classification (STC) module and the Selective Two-step Regression
(STR) module. The STC aims to filter out most simple negative anchors from low level detection layers to reduce the
search space for the subsequent classifier, while the STR is
designed to coarsely adjust the locations and sizes of anchors
from high level detection layers to provide better initialization
for the subsequent regressor. Moreover, we design a Receptive Field Enhancement (RFE) block to provide more diverse
receptive field, which helps to better capture faces in some
extreme poses. As a consequence, the proposed SRN detector
achieves state-of-the-art performance on all the widely used
face detection benchmarks, including AFW, PASCAL face,
FDDB, and WIDER FACE datasets. Codes will be released
to facilitate further studies on the face detection problem.

(a) Effect on Class Imbalance

(b) Recall Efficiency

(c) Adjusted Anchor

(d) Location Accuracy

Figure 1: The effects of STC and STR on recall efficiency
and location accuracy. (a) The STC and STR increase the
positives/negatives ratio by about 38 and 3 times respectively, (b) which improve the precision by about 20% at high
recall rates. (c) The STR provides better initialization for the
subsequent regressor, (d) which produces more accurate locations, i.e., as the IoU threshold increases, the AP gap gradually increases.

Introduction
Face detection is a long-standing problem in computer vision with extensive applications including face alignment,
face analysis, face recognition, etc. Starting from the pioneering work of Viola-Jones (Viola and Jones 2004), face
detection has made great progress. The performances on
several well-known datasets have been improved consistently, even tend to be saturated. To further improve the performance of face detection has become a challenging issue.
In our opinion, there remains room for improvement in two
aspects: (a) recall efficiency: number of false positives needs
to be reduced at the high recall rates; (b) location accuracy:
accuracy of the bounding box location needs to be improved.
These two problems are elaborated as follows.
On the one hand, the average precision (AP) of current
face detection algorithms is already very high, but the precision is not high enough at high recall rates, e.g., as shown

in Figure 1(b) of RetinaNet (Lin et al. 2017b), the precision is only about 50% (half of detections are false positives) when the recall rate is equal to 90%, which we define as the low recall efficiency. Reflected on the shape
of the Precision-Recall curve, it has extended far enough
to the right, but not steep enough. The reason is that existing algorithms pay more attention to pursuing high recall rate but ignore the problem of excessive false positives. Analyzing with anchor-based face detectors, they detect faces by classifying and regressing a series of preset
anchors, which are generated by regularly tiling a collection of boxes with different scales and aspect ratios. To detect the tiny faces, e.g., less than 16 × 16 pixels, it is necessary to tile plenty of small anchors over the image. This
can improve the recall rate yet cause the extreme class imbalance problem, which is the culprit leading to excessive

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8231

