The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Concurrency Debugging with MaxSMT
Miguel Terra-Neves,1 Nuno Machado,2 Inês Lynce,1 Vasco Manquinho1
1

2

INESC-ID / Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
Teradata Spain and HASLab - INESC TEC / Universidade do Minho, Portugal
{neves, ines, vmm}@sat.inesc-id.pt
nuno.machado@teradata.com

Abstract

of work has focused on the ability to reproduce concurrency bugs in multi-threaded programs, namely deterministic execution (Berger et al. 2009; Devietti et al. 2010;
Olszewski, Ansel, and Amarasinghe 2009) and deterministic
record and replay (Lee et al. 2009; Altekar and Stoica 2009;
Huang, Zhang, and Dolby 2013). However, simply replicating a failing schedule does not provide any special insight
into the reason why the program has failed. As a result, finding the bug in the code that allows the failure to surface can
still be a daunting task.
One way to ease the diagnosis of concurrency bugs is
to report the differences between a failing execution and a
non-failing execution. Given a failing schedule and a failure
condition, some systems try to produce a similar non-failing
schedule by systematically reordering pairs of thread events
in the failing execution. For each alternative schedule resulting from a thread event swapping, a Satisfiability Modulo
Theories (SMT) model is built that encodes the program’s
logic and synchronization constraints of the original execution and a condition representing the absence of the failure.
Next, an SMT solver is used to check if there is an alternate,
non-failing schedule that satisfies the constraints. After finding a feasible non-failing schedule, a report is generated that
highlights the differences between the original failing schedule and the non-failing. Hence, the programmer only needs
to focus on the differences in order to fix the bug.
Although effective in some cases, this technique has several limitations. In particular, if more than two pairs of operations need to be reordered simultaneously in order to prevent the failure, then there is no guarantee that a non-failing
schedule will be generated.
Alongside, there are systems that expose and isolate concurrency errors that depend on both the thread operation
schedule and execution path. However, these systems do not
guarantee that the failing and non-failing executions exhibit
similar orderings of operations. As a consequence, the generated reports can be unnecessarily long and hard to analyze.
Recently, new Maximum Satisfiability Modulo Theories
(MaxSMT) algorithms have been proposed. However, its application in many areas is still in its infancy. In this paper,
we propose the usage of MaxSMT to improve the effectiveness of reports produced by systems that analyze concurrency bugs in multi-threaded programs. In particular, we argue that a minimal explanation for the occurrence of a con-

Current Maximum Satisfiability (MaxSAT) algorithms based
on successive calls to a powerful Satisfiability (SAT) solver
are now able to solve real-world instances in many application domains. Moreover, replacing the SAT solver with a Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) solver enables effective
MaxSMT algorithms. However, MaxSMT has seldom been
used in debugging multi-threaded software.
Multi-threaded programs are usually non-deterministic due
to the huge number of possible thread operation schedules,
which makes them much harder to debug than sequential programs. A recent approach to isolate the root cause of concurrency bugs in multi-threaded software is to produce a report
that shows the differences between a failing and a non-failing
execution. However, since they rely solely on heuristics, these
reports can be unnecessarily large. Hence, reports may contain operations that are not relevant to the bug’s occurrence.
This paper proposes the use of MaxSMT for the generation
of minimal reports for multi-threaded software with concurrency bugs. The proposed techniques report situations that
the existing techniques are not able to identify. Experimental
results show that using MaxSMT can significantly improve
the accuracy of the generated reports and, consequently, their
usefulness in debugging the root cause of concurrency bugs.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, multicore and multiprocessor architectures have
become the dominant platforms. To take full advantage of
these computer architectures, one has to resort to parallel
and concurrent programming. However, multi-threaded programs are much more challenging to develop than sequential programs, as they typically allow a huge diversity of
thread operation schedules that can yield different outcomes.
Among the many possible schedules, some may result in undesirable behavior, like a crash or incorrect output (Lu et al.
2008). Such failing schedules (i.e. schedules that cause the
program to fail) are typically non-deterministic and hard to
reproduce, which renders the debugging of multi-threaded
programs notoriously difficult.
A concurrency bug occurs when some shared memory
is incorrectly changed due to a specific schedule of operations of concurrent threads being executed. A large body
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1608

