The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Non-Parametric Transformation Networks
for Learning General Invariances from Data
Dipan K. Pal, Marios Savvides
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{dipanp,marioss}@andrew.cmu.edu
Abstract

Convolutional Networks and Beyond. Towards this
goal, ideas proposed in (LeCun et al. 1998) with the introduction of convolutional neural networks have proved to
be very useful. Weight sharing implemented as convolutions
followed by pooling resulted in the hard encoding of translation invariances (and symmetries) in the network. This
made it one of the first applications of modelling invariance
through a network’s architecture itself. Such a mechanism
resulted in greater regularization in the form of a structural
or inductive bias in the network. With this motivation in
mind, it is almost natural to ask whether networks which
model more complicated invariances and symmetries perform better? Investigating architectures which invoke invariances not implicitly through the model’s functional map but
explicitly through an architectural property seems important.
New Dimensions in Network Architecture. Over the
years, deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) have enjoyed a wide array of improvements in architecture. It was
observed early on that a larger number of filters (width) in
ConvNets led to improved performance, though with diminishing returns. (He et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2016) present
another significant milestone with the development and maturity of residual connections and dense skip connections.
Though there have been more advances in network architecture, many of the improvements have been derivatives of
these two ideas (for instance (Zagoruyko and Komodakis
2016; Chen et al. 2017; Hu, Shen, and Sun 2017)). Recently
however, (Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017) introduced Capsule Nets which presented another potentially fundamental
idea of encoding properties of an entity or an object in an
activity vector rather than a scalar. With the goal of designing more powerful networks, ideas presented in this paper
for modelling general invariances in the same framework as
ConvNets, open up a new and potentially key dimension for
architecture development.
Primary Contribution. In this work, we explore one
such architecture class, called Transformation Networks
(TN) which is a generalization of ConvNets. Additionally,
we introduce a new type of TN using which a new class
of networks can be built called Non-Parametric Transformation Networks (NPTNs). NPTNs networks have the ability
to learn invariances to general transformations that are observed in the data which are non-parametric in nature (difficult to express mathematically). They can be easily im-

ConvNets, through their architecture, only enforce invariance
to translation. In this paper, we introduce a new class of deep
convolutional architectures called Non-Parametric Transformation Networks (NPTNs) which can learn general invariances and symmetries directly from data. NPTNs are a natural generalization of ConvNets and can be optimized directly
using gradient descent. Unlike almost all previous works in
deep architectures, they make no assumption regarding the
structure of the invariances present in the data and in that
aspect are flexible and powerful. We also model ConvNets
and NPTNs under a unified framework called Transformation
Networks (TN), which yields a better understanding of the
connection between the two. We demonstrate the efficacy of
NPTNs on data such as MNIST with extreme transformations
and CIFAR10 where they outperform baselines, and further
outperform several recent algorithms on ETH-80. They do so
while having the same number of parameters. We also show
that they are more effective than ConvNets in modelling symmetries and invariances from data, without the explicit knowledge of the added arbitrary nuisance transformations. Finally,
we replace ConvNets with NPTNs within Capsule Networks
and show that this enables Capsule Nets to perform even better.

Introduction
The Fundamental Problem. One of the central problems
of machine learning, has been supervised classification. A
core challenge towards these problems is the encoding or
learning of invariances and symmetries that exist in the training data. Indeed, methods which incorporate some known
invariances or promote learning of more powerful invariances for a learning problem perform better in the target task
given a certain amount of data. A number of ways exist to
achieve this. One can present transformed versions of the
training data as in (Niyogi, Girosi, and Poggio 1998), minimize auxiliary objectives promoting invariance during training as in (Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006) or pool over
transformed versions of the representation itself as in (Liao,
Leibo, and Poggio 2013; Pal, Juefei-Xu, and Savvides 2016;
Pal et al. 2017).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4667

