The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exploiting Background Knowledge in Compact Answer Generation for
Why-Questions
Ryu Iida, Canasai Kruengkrai, Ryo Ishida,
Kentaro Torisawa, Jong-Hoon Oh, and Julien Kloetzer
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Kyoto, 619-0289, Japan
{ryu.iida, torisawa, rovellia, julien}@nict.go.jp, canasai@gmail.com, ishida.ryo@jp.panasonic.com

Abstract

I found the following: “Because they evolved to detoxify the toxins” and
“Because there are enzymes that decompose the bacteria and toxins
in the leaves.”

This paper proposes a novel method for generating compact
answers to open-domain why-questions, such as the following answer, “Because deep learning technologies were introduced,” to the question, “Why did Google’s machine translation service improve so drastically?” Although many works
have dealt with why-question answering, most have focused
on retrieving as answers relatively long text passages that
consist of several sentences. Because of their length, such
passages are not appropriate to be read aloud by spoken dialog systems and smart speakers; hence, we need to create
a method that generates compact answers. We developed a
novel neural summarizer for this compact answer generation
task. It combines a recurrent neural network-based encoderdecoder model with stacked convolutional neural networks
and was designed to effectively exploit background knowledge, in this case a set of causal relations (e.g., “[Microsoft’s
machine translation has made great progress over the last
few years]effect since [it started to use deep learning.]cause ”)
that was extracted from a large web data archive (4 billion
web pages). Our experimental results show that our method
achieved significantly better ROUGE F-scores than existing
encoder-decoder models and their variations that were augmented with query-attention and memory networks, which
are used to exploit the background knowledge.

1

Why are poisonous eucalyptus leaves a
staple of the diets of koalas?

Why do koalas sleep
for such a long time?

I found the following: “Because during long
sleeps, hydrocyanic acid inside the body gets
decomposed,” “Because of digestion” and
“Because they need to store energy.”

Figure 1: Screenshot of our spoken dialog system prototype
WEKDA: why-questions and their compact answers were
manually translated.

with an existing why-QA method. Much of the retrieved passages is unnecessary and/or has little to do with the question.
Since such redundant and long passages are inappropriate to
be read aloud by spoken dialog systems and smart speakers, we need a method that condenses the essence of these
answer passages into much shorter, compact answers using
only a handful of words.
The aim of this work is to develop a novel method
that generates non-redundant compact answers to Japanese
open-domain why-questions. Actually, the method presented in this paper is already being used in our spoken dialog system prototype called WEb-based Knowledge
Disseminating dialog Agent (WEKDA). The system can
smoothly provide compact answers to such why-questions
as “Why are poisonous eucalyptus leaves a staple of diets of
koalas?” and “Why do koalas sleep for such a long time?”
(Figure 1).
As exemplified by the compact answer in Table 1, these
answers should be short and comprehensible (e.g., the constituents of each compact answer are limited to 25 Japanese
characters in our target dataset) so that they can be read

Introduction

The recent popularity of smart speakers suggests that spoken dialog systems may become a core component of future
user interfaces and be used in a wide range of environments
for many types of tasks. However, in the current state of language technologies, many such tasks are beyond the reach of
dialog systems. One such task is non-factoid Question Answering (QA), such as why-question answering (why-QA)
and how to-question answering. Although many attempts
have been made to develop highly accurate non-factoid
QA methods (Girju 2003; Higashinaka and Isozaki 2008;
Verberne et al. 2011; Oh et al. 2013; Oh et al. 2016;
Sharp et al. 2016; Tan et al. 2016; dos Santos et al. 2016;
Oh et al. 2017), most developed methods retrieve from a text
archive long text passages that contain real answers that are
not suitable for dialog systems due to their lengths. Table 1
exemplifies a why-question and its answer passage retrieved
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

142

