The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Nonconvex Projection Method for Robust PCA
Aritra Dutta,∗ Filip Hanzely,† Peter Richtárik‡

Abstract

replaces the other singular values by 0. In many real-world
problems, if sparse large errors or outliers are present in the
data matrix, PCA fails to deal with it. Therefore, it is natural
to consider a robust matrix decomposition model in which
we wish to decompose A into the sum of a low-rank matrix L
and an error matrix S: A = L + S. However, without further
assumptions, the problem is ill-posed. We assume that the
error matrix S is sparse and that it allows its entries to have
arbitrarily large magnitudes. That is, given A, we consider
the problem of finding a low rank matrix L and a sparse
matrix S such that

Robust principal component analysis (RPCA) is a well-studied
problem whose goal is to decompose a matrix into the sum of
low-rank and sparse components. In this paper, we propose
a nonconvex feasibility reformulation of RPCA problem and
apply an alternating projection method to solve it. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first paper proposing a method
that solves RPCA problem without considering any objective
function, convex relaxation, or surrogate convex constraints.
We demonstrate through extensive numerical experiments on a
variety of applications, including shadow removal, background
estimation, face detection, and galaxy evolution, that our approach matches and often significantly outperforms current
state-of-the-art in various ways.

A = L + S.

In this context, the celebrated principal component pursuit
(PCP) formulation of the problem uses the ℓ0 norm (cardinality) to address the sparsity constraint and (3). Therefore, PCP
is the constrained minimization problem (Candès et al. 2011;
Chandrasekaran et al. 2011):

Principal component analysis (PCA) (Jolliffee 2002) addresses the problem of best approximation of a matrix
A ∈ Rm×n by a matrix of rank r:
X ∗ = arg

min

X∈Rm×n
rank(X)≤r

∥A − X∥2F ,

(1)

min rank(L) + λ∥S∥ℓ0
L,S

where ∥ · ∥F denotes the Frobenius norm of matrices. The
solution to (1) is given by
def

X ∗ = Hr (A) = U Σr V T ,

(3)

subject to A = L + S,

(4)

where λ > 0 is a balancing parameter. Since both rank(L)
and ∥S∥ℓ0 are non-convex, one often replaces the rank function by the (convex) nuclear norm and ℓ0 by the (convex)
ℓ1 norm. This replacement leads to the immensely popular
robust principal component analysis (RPCA) (Wright et al.
2009; Lin, Chen, and Ma 2010; Candès et al. 2011), which
can be seen as a convex relaxation of (4):

(2)

where A has singular value decompositions A = U ΣV T ,
and Σr (A) is the diagonal matrix obtained from Σ by hardthresholding that keeps the r largest singular values only and
∗
Aritra Dutta is with the Visual Computing Center, Division of Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and
Engineering (CEMSE) at King Abdullah University of Science
and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia-23955-6900, e-mail: aritra.dutta@kaust.edu.sa.
†
Filip Hanzely is with the Visual Computing Center, Division of Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and
Engineering (CEMSE) at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia-23955-6900, e-mail:
filip.hanzely@kaust.edu.sa.
‡
Peter Richtárik is with the Visual Computing Center, Division of Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and
Engineering (CEMSE) at King Abdullah University of Science
and Technology, University of Edinburgh, and MIPT, e-mail: peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

min ∥L∥∗ + λ∥S∥ℓ1
L,S

subject to A = L + S,

(5)

where ∥ · ∥∗ denotes the nuclear norm (sum of the singular
values) of matrices. Under some reasonable assumptions on
the low-rank and sparse components, (Chandrasekaran et al.
2011; Candès et al. 2011) showed that (4) can be provably
solved via (5). A vast literature is dedicated to solving the
RPCA problem, and among them the exact and inexact augmented Lagrangian method of multipliers (Lin, Chen, and
Ma 2010), accelerated proximal gradient method (Wright et
al. 2009), alternating direction method (Yuan and Yang 2013),
alternating projection with intermediate denoising (Netrapalli
et al. 2014), dual approach (Lin et al. 2009), and SpaRCS
(Waters, Sankaranarayanan, and Baraniuk 2011) are a few
popular ones. Recently, Yi et al. (Yi et al. 2016), Zhang and
1468

