The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Powerful Global Test Statistic for Functional Statistical Inference
Jingwen Zhang,1 Joseph Ibrahim,1 Tengfei Li,2 Hongtu Zhu1
1

Department of Biostatistics, UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health
2
Biomedical Research Imaging Center, UNC School of Medicine
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
jingwenz@live.unc.edu, ibrahim@bios.unc.edu
tengfeili2006@gmail.com, htzhu@email.unc.edu
where β(s) is a p × 1 vector of functional coefficients, ηi (s)
is a function of random effect that characterizes subjectspecific spatial variation, and ei (s) represents measurement error. It is assumed that ηi (s) and ei (s) are mutually
independent and identical copies of SP{0, Ση (s, s0 )} and
SP{0, σe2 (s)I(s = s0 )}, respectively, where SP(µ, Σ) denotes a stochastic process with mean function µ(s) and covariance function Σ(s, s0 ), and I(·) is the indicator function
of an event. Many hypothesis testing problems of interest,
such as comparison across groups, can often be formulated
as a global testing problem across S, which is given by,

Abstract
We consider the problem of performing an association test
between functional data and scalar variables in a varying coefficient model setting. We propose a functional projection
regression model and an associated global test statistic to aggregate relatively weak signals across the domain of functional
data, while reducing the dimension. An optimal functional projection direction is selected to maximize signal-to-noise ratio
with ridge penalty. Theoretically, we systematically study the
asymptotic distribution of the global test statistic and provide
a strategy to adaptively select the optimal tuning parameter.
We use simulations to show that the proposed test outperforms
all existing state-of-the-art methods in functional statistical
inference. Finally, we apply the proposed testing method to
the genome-wide association analysis of imaging genetic data
in UK Biobank dataset.

H0 : Cβ(s) = b0 (s) ∀s ∈ S,
H1 : Cβ(s) 6= b0 (s) ∃s ∈ S,

in which C is an r × p matrix and b0 (s) is an r × 1 matrix.
Without loss of generality, we center the covariates, standardize the responses, and assume rank(C) = r = 1 and
b0 (s) = 0.
The key problem is how to design a powerful global test
statistic that can efficiently aggregate weak signals across
S, while achieving high statistical power for testing problem (2). To the best of our knowledge, such problem has
not been fully solved yet. We focus on a specific setting
that all components in β(s) lie in an infinite-dimensional
functional space, but p is relatively small. Existing testing
methods are not powerful enough to detect moderate or weak
signals due to two major challenges, (i) infinite-dimensional
functional parameters and (ii) complicated covariance structure Ση (s, s0 ). Popular pooled global test statistics are to
conduct univariate analysis at each sample grid point of S
and then combine their results (Zhu, Li, and Kong 2012;
Huang et al. 2017). However, since most of such tests ignore the correlation structure of yi (s), they may suffer from
severe power loss in the presence of high correlation. Moreover, testing at each grid point individually in the mass univariate analysis requires a substantial penalty of controlling for multiplicity. The Hotelling’s T 2 type test is also
not well-defined for our problem of interest, since the sample estimate of Ση is usually non-invertible. Although dimension reduction techniques, such as principal component analysis (PCA), can be applied to reduce the dimension of functional response, most of the methods ignore
the variation of covariates and their associations with responses. Thus, such methods are sub-optimal for our prob-

Introduction
Functional regression modeling with a functional response
y(s), s ∈ S and multivariate covariates x ∈ Rp is a
powerful statistical tool in modern high-dimensional inference, with wide applications in various biomedical studies. Specifically, functional responses frequently arise in
medical imaging, computational biology and computer vision, and have been widely used to characterize brain
structure and function, such as cortical complexity and
white matter microstructure (Grenander and Miller 2007;
Miller and Qiu 2009; Kendall et al. 2009; Srivastava and
Klassen 2016; Smith et al. 2006; Smith and Nichols 2009;
Huang et al. 2017). In imaging genetic studies, our primary
problem of interest is to identify genetic variants (x) associated with functional phenotypic variation (y(s)), which may
ultimately lead to discoveries of risk genes contributing to
neuropsychiatric and neurological disorders.
Suppose that we observe a functional response yi (s) and
a set of clinical variables (e.g., age, genetic markers, and
gender) xi ∈ Rp for n unrelated subjects. Without loss of
generality, we assume S = [0, S] for a positive scalar S.
Throughout this paper, we consider n independent observations (yi (s), xi ) and a varying coefficient model given by
yi (s) = xTi β(s) + ηi (s) + ei (s),

(2)

(1)

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5765

