The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Identification of Causal Effects in the Presence of Selection Bias
Juan D. Correa

Jin Tian

Elias Bareinboim

Computer Science Department
Purdue University
correagr@purdue.edu

Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University
jtian@iastate.edu

Computer Science Department
Purdue University
eb@purdue.edu

Abstract

and the target inference. In practice, this is particularly relevant since data is almost invariably plagued with various
biases, most prominently, confounding and selection. The
former refers to the presence of a set of factors that affect
both the action (also known as treatment) and the outcome,
while the latter arises when the action, outcome, and other
factors differentially affect the inclusion of subjects in the
data sample (Bareinboim and Pearl 2016).
The problem of identifiability gives formal dressing to
the issue of confounding (Pearl 2000, Ch. 3). Specifically,
it is concerned with determining the effect of a treatment
(X) on an outcome (Y ), denoted P (y|do(x)) (for short,
Px (y)), based on the observational, non-experimental distribution P (v) (where V represents observable variables)
and causal assumptions commonly expressed as a directed
acyclic graph. The difference between P (y|do(x)) and its
probabilistic counterpart, P (y|x), is what is called confounding bias (Bareinboim and Pearl 2016). This problem
has been extensively studied in the literature. A systematic treatment of this problem was given in (Pearl 1995),
which introduced do-calculus. The do-calculus was shown
to be complete for non-parametric identifiability from observational and experimental data (Tian and Pearl 2002a;
Huang and Valtorta 2006; Shpitser and Pearl 2006; Bareinboim and Pearl 2012a).
The other source of disparities, selection bias, usually appears due to the preferential exclusion of units from the sample. For instance, in a typical study of the effect of grades
on college admissions, subjects with higher achievement
tend to report their scores more frequently than those who
scored lower. In this case, the data-gathering process will
reflect a distortion in the sample’s proportions and, since the
data is no longer a faithful representation of the underlying population, biased estimates will be produced regardless
of the number of samples collected (even when the treatment is controlled). The problem of selection bias can also
be modeled graphically through the explicit articulation of
the sampling mechanism, S. This mechanism can be seen
as a binary indicator of entry into the data pool, such that
S=1 if a unit is included in the sample and S=0 otherwise.
Clearly, when the sampling process is entirely random, S
is independent of all variables in the analysis. When samples are collected preferentially, the causal effects not only
need to be identified but also recovered from the distribution

Cause-and-effect relations are one of the most valuable types
of knowledge sought after throughout the data-driven sciences since they translate into stable and generalizable explanations as well as efficient and robust decision-making capabilities. Inferring these relations from data, however, is a challenging task. Two of the most common barriers to this goal
are known as confounding and selection biases. The former
stems from the systematic bias introduced during the treatment assignment, while the latter comes from the systematic
bias during the collection of units into the sample. In this paper, we consider the problem of identifiability of causal effects when both confounding and selection biases are simultaneously present. We first investigate the problem of identifiability when all the available data is biased. We prove that
the algorithm proposed by [Bareinboim and Tian, 2015] is,
in fact, complete, namely, whenever the algorithm returns a
failure condition, no identifiability claim about the causal relation can be made by any other method. We then generalize
this setting to when, in addition to the biased data, another
piece of external data is available, without bias. It may be the
case that a subset of the covariates could be measured without
bias (e.g., from census). We examine the problem of identifiability when a combination of biased and unbiased data is
available. We propose a new algorithm that subsumes the current state-of-the-art method based on the back-door criterion.

Introduction
One prominent challenge shared throughout the empirical
disciplines is to infer cause and effect relationships – for
instance, one may need to determine how increasing the
state’s educational budget will bring about change in the
average income of the population, whether exposing subjects to a new advertisement campaign would translate into
additional sales revenue, or how patients will react to the
decrease of the drug’s dosage, would they still recover in
acceptable health conditions? Despite the disparate nature
of these questions in terms of subject matter, they evoke
the same set of principles and formal machinery, which
comes under the rubric of causal inference (Pearl 2000;
Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2001).
Causal inference is concerned with the potential mismatch between the inferential power of the collected data
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2744

