The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Automated Verification of Social Laws
for Continuous Time Multi-Robot Systems
Ronen Nir, Erez Karpas
Technion — Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
ronen.nir@outlook.com, karpase@technion.ac.il

Abstract

obliged to follow this law is called an “artificial social system” (Tennenholtz 1991; Shoham and Tennenholtz 1992a;
1992b; 1995; Moses and Tennenholtz 1995). In previous
work (Karpas, Shleyfman, and Tennenholtz 2017), a social law is called robust if it guarantees that each agent can
choose any plan it wants to achieve its goal, and the plans of
different agents will not interfere with each other. This work
took a first step towards reasoning about social laws using
automated planning, by describing a formalism to represent
social laws and a criteria for social law robustness, as well
as an algorithm to verify whether a given social law is robust
by compilation to classical planning.
It is important to note however, that this work assumed
that actions are instantaneous, and that some external scheduler chooses which agent acts next, and thus is not applicable to real multi-robot systems where actions take time and
robots can act concurrently. In fact, assuming that only one
single robot acts at any given moment requires a centralized
controller, which defeats the purpose of social law.
In this paper, we address a more realistic setting, where
actions have durations, and agents can act concurrently. We
assume the plan of each agent is a sequence of actions. The
result of agents acting together is a schedule. The contributions of this paper are threefold: First, we describe a new
notion of robustness of social laws in a continuous time setting where agents act concurrently. Second, we describe a
compilation to temporal planning, which can verify whether
a given social law is robust in such a setting. Finally, we provide an empirical evaluation which demonstrates our compilation on a real multi-robot system as well as on several
PDDL 2.1 domains.

Designing multi-agent systems, where several agents work
in a shared environment, requires coordinating between the
agents so they do not interfere with each other. One of the
canonical approaches to coordinating agents is enacting a social law, which applies restrictions on agents’ available actions. A good social law prevents the agents from interfering
with each other, while still allowing all of them to achieve
their goals. Recent work took the first step towards reasoning about social laws using automated planning and showed
how to verify if a given social law is robust, that is, allows
all agents to achieve their goals regardless of what the other
agents do. This work relied on a classical planning formalism,
which assumed actions are instantaneous and some external
scheduler chooses which agent acts next. However, this work
is not directly applicable to multi-robot systems, because in
the real world actions take time and the agents can act concurrently. In this paper, we show how the robustness of a social
law in a continuous time setting can be verified through compilation to temporal planning. We demonstrate our work both
theoretically and on real robots.

Introduction
One of the main challenges of designing systems with multiple autonomous agents is coordinating between all agents
acting in a shared environment. Each agent has a goal and
a set of actions it can perform and when the agent acts
it’s actions can affect other agents. Thus, without coordination, agents must come up with a contingent plan, which
must consider all possible actions of all other agents. This
can be solved using non-deterministic planning (Muise et al.
2016), which unfortunately does not scale very well. There
are also no examples of non-deterministic planners in continuous time settings, the settings we consider in this paper.
There are several methods to achieve coordination. One,
for example, is to establish a centralized controller, which
controls all agents, ensuring that each achieves its goal.
However, this method fails to scale well for a large number of agents. A different method is to apply some restrictions on the agents’ actions. These restrictions are designed
to make the agents mutually compatible. The union of these
restrictions is called a “social law”, and a system that is

Preliminaries
We define a temporal multi-agent planning setting, which
is built around a combination of MA - STRIPS (Brafman and
Domshlak 2008) and PDDL 2.1 (Fox and Long 2003). As
in previous work on social laws (Karpas, Shleyfman, and
Tennenholtz 2017), this is different than traditional multiagent planning in that each agent has its own goal, and we
assume that each agent can achieve its goal alone, that is,
cooperation is not needed. Moreover, we assume that an
agent is capable of performing only one action at a time.
Formally, a temporal multi-agent planning setting is a tuple
Π = hF, {Ai }ni=1 , I, {Gi }ni=1 i, where: F is the set of facts

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7683

