The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Near-Lossless Binarization of Word Embeddings
Julien Tissier, Christophe Gravier, Amaury Habrard
Univ. Lyon, UJM Saint-Etienne
CNRS, Lab Hubert Curien UMR 5516
42023, Saint-Etienne, France
{julien.tissier, christophe.gravier, amaury.habrard}@univ-st-etienne.fr

Abstract

smartphones send data to large computing servers that perform the calculations and return the results. The method described in this paper aims to reduce the size of the word
embeddings models so that the computations can be done
locally on the embedded device. The benefits are twofold:

Word embeddings are commonly used as a starting point in
many NLP models to achieve state-of-the-art performances.
However, with a large vocabulary and many dimensions,
these floating-point representations are expensive both in
terms of memory and calculations which makes them unsuitable for use on low-resource devices. The method proposed
in this paper transforms real-valued embeddings into binary
embeddings while preserving semantic information, requiring only 128 or 256 bits for each vector. This leads to a small
memory footprint and fast vector operations. The model is
based on an autoencoder architecture, which also allows to
reconstruct original vectors from the binary ones. Experimental results on semantic similarity, text classification and sentiment analysis tasks show that the binarization of word embeddings only leads to a loss of ∼2% in accuracy while vector size is reduced by 97%. Furthermore, a top-k benchmark
demonstrates that using these binary vectors is 30 times faster
than using real-valued vectors.

1

1. the embedded device can run NLP applications offline;
2. privacy is preserved since no user data is send to servers.
A solution to reduce the size is to binarize the model; either the learning parameters (Hubara et al. 2016) or the vector representations (Joulin et al. 2017). This paper stands in
the second category. Associating binary codes to words allows one to speed up calculations as the vector operations
can be done with bitwise operators instead of floating-point
arithmetic, e.g. computing the distance between two binary
vectors only requires a XOR and a popcount() 1 operations (which are both performed with a single CPU cycle due to hardware optimizations in modern processors)
while it requires O(n) floating-point multiplications and additions for n-dimensional real-valued vectors. To take advantage of fast CPU optimized bitwise operations, the size
of binary vectors has to be in adequacy with register sizes
(64, 128 or 256 bits). When this criteria is met, the computations are much faster (Norouzi, Punjani, and Fleet 2012;
Subercaze, Gravier, and Laforest 2015). Nevertheless, mapping words to binary codes is not enough as the vectors are
then used in NLP applications. They also need to encode
semantic and syntactic information; the objective then becomes to find binary vectors that preserve the language aspects and are small enough to fit in CPU registers.

Introduction

Word embeddings models play a central role in many NLP
applications like document classification (Joulin et al. 2017;
Conneau et al. 2017) or sentiment analysis (Socher et al.
2013; Qian et al. 2017). The real-valued vector representation associated to each word of a vocabulary V reflects
its semantic and syntactic information extracted from the
language (Bengio et al. 2003). They are usually created
from a large corpus by moving closer the vectors of words
co-occurring together (Mikolov et al. 2013) or factorizing
the matrix containing co-occurrences statistics (Pennington,
Socher, and Manning 2014), and commonly require several
gigabytes of memory space. For example, with a vocabulary
of 2 million words and 300-dimensional vectors, storing the
word embedding require 2.4 gigabytes (with real values encoded with 32-bit float).

Contributions This paper solves the problem of producing binary word vectors from real-valued embeddings while
preserving semantic information. Our model is based on an
autoencoder architecture which transforms any real-valued
vectors to binary vectors of any size (more specifically 64,
128 or 256 bits) and allows one to reconstruct original vectors from the binary ones. Our binary vectors use 37.5 times
less memory and perform a top-k query 30 times faster than
real-valued vectors, with only an accuracy loss of ∼2% on
several NLP tasks. Entire source code to generate and evaluate binary vectors is available online 2 .

Motivation Storing and running such models on embedded devices like cell phones is not feasible in practice, due to
their limited memory and low computing power for floatingpoint arithmetic. In general, NLP applications running on

1

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

7104

popcount(n) returns the number of bits set to 1 in n.
https://github.com/tca19/near-lossless-binarization

