The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving Natural Language Inference Using
External Knowledge in the Science Questions Domain
Xiaoyan Wang,§ Pavan Kapanipathi,† Ryan Musa,† Mo Yu,†
Kartik Talamadupula,† Ibrahim Abdelaziz,† Maria Chang,†
Achille Fokoue,† Bassem Makni,† Nicholas Mattei,† Michael Witbrock†
§ Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA xiaoyan5@illinois.edu
† IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA

{ramusa, kapanipa, yum, krtalamad, achille, witbrock}@us.ibm.com
{ibrahim.abdelaziz1, maria.chang, bassem.makni, n.mattei}@ibm.com
Abstract

a natural language premise p. NLI is often cast as a classification problem: given two sentences – hypothesis and
premise – the problem lies in classifying the relationship
between them into one of three classes: ‘entailment’, ‘contradiction’, or ‘neutral’. In this paper, we restrict our focus
in solving the NLI problem to the “entailment” class, as it
is the most salient to down-stream tasks such as question
answering (Khot, Sabharwal, and Clark 2018); we group
the other two options into the “neutral” class. Specifically,
we develop a framework that accurately assesses whether a
given premise entails a given hypothesis using background
knowledge provided by external sources including WordNet (Miller 1995), ConceptNet (Speer, Chin, and Havasi
2017), and DBPedia (Auer et al. 2007).
Usable inference and reasoning methods have been a central contribution of artificial intelligence research. Specifically, reasoning methods and the knowledge bases that support them have played an important role in addressing formal reasoning tasks. Our own previous work (Boratko et al.
2018) associates the QA task with the reasoning and knowledge types required to answer various types of science exam
questions. While the introduction of large datasets for NLI
has led to it being cast as a classification problem, the potential of pre-existing knowledge has been only minimally
explored (Chen et al. 2018; Marelli et al. 2014). This knowledge may manifest itself in various forms: as facts consisting of entities and their relationships; as lexical knowledge
about the synonyms of entities; or as common-sense concepts and relationships between them. Exploiting additional
knowledge from different knowledge graphs may well aid
attempts to solve the NLI problem.
Figure 1 shows an example of a subgraph that can be derived from ConceptNet based on the concepts mentioned in a
given premise and hypothesis1 . This subgraph includes connections between the concepts mentioned in the premise and
the hypothesis, via concepts available in ConceptNet. Such
subgraphs, enhances the concepts mentioned in the text with
additional information and hence can improve the performance of learning-based systems (Kapanipathi et al. 2014;

Natural Language Inference (NLI) is fundamental to many
Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications including
semantic search and question answering. The NLI problem has gained significant attention due to the release of
large scale, challenging datasets. Present approaches to the
problem largely focus on learning-based methods that use
only textual information in order to classify whether a given
premise entails, contradicts, or is neutral with respect to a
given hypothesis. Surprisingly, the use of methods based on
structured knowledge – a central topic in artificial intelligence
– has not received much attention vis-a-vis the NLI problem.
While there are many open knowledge bases that contain various types of reasoning information, their use for NLI has not
been well explored. To address this, we present a combination of techniques that harness external knowledge to improve
performance on the NLI problem in the science questions domain. We present the results of applying our techniques on
text, graph, and text-and-graph based models; and discuss the
implications of using external knowledge to solve the NLI
problem. Our model achieves close to state-of-the-art performance for NLI on the SciTail science questions dataset.

1

Introduction

Natural Language Inference (NLI) – also known as textual
entailment – is a fundamental task in Natural Language
Understanding (NLU) (MacCartney and Manning 2009).
Progress on the NLI problem has been shown to improve
performance on important tasks that require NLU, including semantic search, question answering, and text summarization. In accordance with this, multiple large-scale
datasets for NLI have been released (Bowman et al. 2015;
Khot, Sabharwal, and Clark 2018; Williams, Nangia, and
Bowman 2018), and the task has garnered significant attention from the NLP community (Parikh et al. 2016; Zhao,
Huang, and Ma 2016; Khot, Sabharwal, and Clark 2018;
Yin, Roth, and Schütze 2018; Chen et al. 2018).
The main goal in the NLI problem is to determine whether
a given natural language hypothesis h can be inferred from
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1 Example based on the SNLI dataset (Bowman et al. 2015).

7208

