The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Determining Solvability in the Birds of a Feather Card Game
Shuto Araki, Juan Pablo Arenas Uribe, Zach Wilkerson, Steven Bogaerts, Chad Byers
DePauw University
Greencastle, IN 46135, U.S.A.
{shutoaraki 2020, jarenasuribe 2021, zwilkerson 2020, stevenbogaerts, cbyers}@depauw.edu

Abstract

A Baseline Approach: Constrained DFS

Birds of a Feather is a single-player card game in which cards
are arranged in a grid. The player attempts to combine stacks
of cards under certain rules, with the goal being to combine
all cards into a single stack. This paper highlights several
approaches for efficiently classifying whether a randomlychosen state has a single-stack solution. These approaches
use graph theory and machine learning concepts to prune a
state’s search space, resulting in significant reductions in runtime relative to a baseline search.

A solvable state has a game tree with at least one leaf representing a single-stack state. Thus one approach for determining solvability is to search for such a leaf. For early-game
states, an exhaustive search is not feasible due to the size
of the tree, but a simple pruning strategy serves as an effective baseline approach (Neller 2018). Specifically, once
a solvable child is found, the parent may be declared solvable, with the other children pruned. Applying this pruning
to depth-first search, we call this “Constrained DFS”.

Dataset Generation

Introduction

This work uses a randomly-generated dataset of 500,000
rows, each consisting of a game state, represented as a string,
and a binary value indicating whether the state is solvable or
not. The first random choice is the number of stacks, from
1 to 16, followed by the top card for each stack, and finally
the row/column placement of each stack. Constrained DFS
is then used to determine the solvability of the state. Additional input features are also generated, to be used by some
of the algorithms. Below, two types of input features are described: graph features and card features.

In this paper we compare several search and machinelearning approaches to determining the solvability of a puzzle game, Birds of a Feather (BoaF) (Neller 2018). In this
single-player game, cards are drawn randomly from a standard 52-card deck and placed face up in an r-by-c grid. Here,
we focus on the r = c = 4 case. Each of the placed cards
can be thought of as a stack of size 1. Under certain conditions, stack x can be moved on top of stack y, forming a
single new stack at y’s position with x on top, and leaving
a blank space at x’s former position. This is allowed only
when x and y are in the same row or column and the stacks’
top cards meet one of two conditions: 1) they share a suit,
or 2) they have the same or adjacent rank, according to the
ordering A, 2, 3, ..., J, Q, K, where A and K are not adjacent.
The goal of the game is to combine stacks one move at a time
using these rules until a single stack remains on the grid. If a
given game state can be reduced to a single stack, then that
game state is said to be solvable. Many (but not all) initial
deals are solvable, but moves must be chosen carefully to
avoid a mistake leading to an unsolvable mid-game state.
This research compares several algorithms for taking a
game state (starting or mid-game) and determining whether
or not that state is solvable. Some algorithms achieve 100%
accuracy through search of a pruned game tree. Others avoid
the game tree entirely, aiming for lower execution time, but
also having imperfect accuracy. This paper describes each
of these algorithms in detail, and concludes with an experimental comparison.

Graph Features
To consider graph features, we first define two stacks to be
compatible if the top cards are of the same suit, and/or have
the same or adjacent ranks. Note in particular that compatibility does not consider the position (row and column) of
the stack. We then define an undirected graph corresponding
to a state, called a compatibility graph. This graph has one
node for each stack, and an edge between nodes indicates
that the corresponding pair of stacks is compatible. Such a
graph is introduced in (Neller 2018).
Consider a state s with corresponding compatibility graph
g. Suppose s has compatible stacks xs and ys . Therefore, g
has an edge between the corresponding nodes xg and yg . If
xs and ys happen also to be in the same row or column, then
one can be placed on the other. For example, xs might be
placed on top of ys . In that case, g is updated such that yg
and all edges connected to yg are removed. If, on the other
hand, xs and ys are not in the same row or column, the edge
between xg and yg indicates the potential of the corresponding stacks being combined, if future gameplay results in a
row or column match.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9627

