The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Holographic Factorization Machines for Recommendation
Yi Tay,1∗ Shuai Zhang,2∗ Anh Tuan Luu,3
Siu Cheung Hui,1 Lina Yao,2 Tran Dang Quang Vinh1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
University of New South Wales, Australia
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
ytay017@e.ntu.edu.sg, shuai.zhang@unsw.edu.au
Abstract

missing values. As such, a rating score can be approximated
for an item a user has never seen or used.
Factorization Machines (FM) (Rendle 2010) were later
proposed, combining the key ideas of factorization models (e.g., MF, SVD) with general purpose machine learning techniques such as Support Vector Machines (SVMs)
(Steinwart and Christmann 2008). The key idea between
FMs is to model pairwise feature interaction using the inner
product of two vectors (factorized parameters). FMs have
demonstrated widespread success both in general machine
learning tasks, collaborative filtering and recommendation
tasks (Rendle 2012; 2010; Zheng, Noroozi, and Yu 2017;
Tay, Luu, and Hui 2018; Pasricha and McAuley 2018).
At its core, an FM model comprises a collection of embedding vectors {v1 , v2 . . . vn } ∈ Rk in which the inner
product between vi and vj is used to approximate feature
interaction (xi , xj ). Unfortunately, the usage of solely inner
products may be sub-optimal for FMs as inner products only
consider element-wise interactions between (vi , vj ). Moreover, FMs sum over a series of inner products, which may
result in further information loss.
This paper presents an improved memory-enhanced adaptation of factorization machines. More specifically, we
enhance FMs with holographic reduced representations
(HRRs) (Plate 1995), replacing the inner products with HRR
operators such as circular convolution and circular correlation. There are several key benefits to investigating such an
architecture:

Factorization Machines (FMs) are a class of popular algorithms that have been widely adopted for collaborative filtering and recommendation tasks. FMs are characterized by its
usage of the inner product of factorized parameters to model
pairwise feature interactions, making it highly expressive
and powerful. This paper proposes Holographic Factorization
Machines (HFM), a new novel method of enhancing the representation capability of FMs without increasing its parameter size. Our approach replaces the inner product in FMs with
holographic reduced representations (HRRs), which are theoretically motivated by associative retrieval and compressed
outer products. Empirically, we found that this leads to consistent improvements over vanilla FMs by up to 4% improvement in terms of mean squared error, with improvements
larger at smaller parameterization. Additionally, we propose
a neural adaptation of HFM which enhances its capability
to handle nonlinear structures. We conduct extensive experiments on nine publicly available datasets for collaborative
filtering with explicit feedback. HFM achieves state-of-theart performance on all nine, outperforming strong competitors such as Attentional Factorization Machines (AFM) and
Neural Matrix Factorization (NeuMF).

Introduction
In an era of information overload and content overdrive, consumers naturally suffer from overchoice. After all, there are
easily a million songs, a thousand videos and hundreds of
restaurants to choose from at a given time. This is the exact problem that recommender systems are designed for making lives easier, by automatically providing and recommending the best choices to users. At the intersection of information retrieval and user profiling, collaborative filtering
(CF) algorithms (Goldberg et al. 1992) are highly popular
and effective recommendation algorithms. The core intuition
behind CF is that it tries to predict the preference of a given
user by gathering preferences from other users.
Across the rich history of CF research, techniques based
on matrix factorization (MF) (Mnih and Salakhutdinov
2008) were highly dominant. The key idea behind MF is to
factorize a user-item interaction matrix, learning latent patterns of user behavior and approximating and completing the

• Operations such as circular convolution behave as compressed outer products. Hence, our proposed model acts
as an outer product adaptation of FMs without actually
incurring the parameter cost of the standard outer product. Unlike inner products which are element-wise operations, outer products model pairwise interactions between
parameters. Hence our proposed FM can be regarded as a
tensorized factorization machine, albeit compressed.
• Aside from enriched representation capability, the internal memory of the FM additionally acts as an associative memory array. Each parameter pair (vi , vj ) now acts
as a key-value pair in this addressible distributed memory. As such, each input feature vector is modeled with
a memory trace and individual feature interactions can
be efficiently retrieved by an associative retrieval mech-

∗

Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5143

