The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-View Multi-Instance Multi-Label
Learning Based on Collaborative Matrix Factorization∗
Yuying Xing,1 Guoxian Yu,1,2,∗ Carlotta Domeniconi,3 Jun Wang,1 Zili Zhang,1,4 Maozu Guo5
1

College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, China
Hubei Key Laboratory of Intelligent Geo-Information Processing, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China
3
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, USA
4
School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
5
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Beijing University of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Beijing, China
{yyxing4148, gxyu, kingjun, zhangzl}@swu.edu.cn, carlotta@cs.gmu.edu, guomaozu@bucea.edu.cn
2

Abstract

(Nguyen, Zhan, and Zhou 2013; Shao et al. 2016). For
example, as shown in Figure 1, three exemplar bags encompassing diverse instances are represented with V heterogenous feature views. Since there are multi-type relations between bags and between instances, learning from
multi-view bags is more difficult and challenging than the
recently heavily studied MIML task (Feng and Zhou 2017;
Zhu, Ting, and Zhou 2017).

Multi-view Multi-instance Multi-label Learning (M3L) deals
with complex objects encompassing diverse instances, represented with different feature views, and annotated with multiple labels. Existing M3L solutions only partially explore the
inter or intra relations between objects (or bags), instances, and
labels, which can convey important contextual information for
M3L. As such, they may have a compromised performance.
In this paper, we propose a collaborative matrix factorization
based solution called M3Lcmf. M3Lcmf first uses a heterogeneous network composed of nodes of bags, instances, and
labels, to encode different types of relations via multiple relational data matrices. To preserve the intrinsic structure of the
data matrices, M3Lcmf collaboratively factorizes them into
low-rank matrices, explores the latent relationships between
bags, instances, and labels, and selectively merges the data
matrices. An aggregation scheme is further introduced to aggregate the instance-level labels into bag-level and to guide the
factorization. An empirical study on benchmark datasets show
that M3Lcmf outperforms other related competitive solutions
both in the instance-level and bag-level prediction.

view 1

R111

2
R11

view 1

R122

view 2

R 222

...

...

view 2

R12

view V

view V
R 23

Bags

Instances

R13

Introduction

Labels

R 33

Multi-Instance Multi-Label learning (MIML) is a framework
for modeling complex objects, in which each object (or bag)
contains one or more instances and is annotated by several
semantic labels (Zhou et al. 2012). Let’s consider n bags
Bi = {xi1 , xi2 , · · · , xik } (i = 1, . . . , n), where each bag
encompasses ni ≥ 1 instances, and xij ∈ Rd is the feature
vectorP
of the j-th instance of the i-th bag. The n bags and the
n
m = i=1 ni instances are annotated with q distinct labels.
1×q
Yi ∈ R
is the q-dimensional label vector for the i-th bag.
Given a training dataset D = {(Bi , Yi )}ni=1 , MIML aims at
learning an instance-level f (x) ∈ Rq (or bag-level) predictor,
which maps the input features of instances (or bags) onto the
label space.
Most MIML algorithms focus on single view data, where
instances of bags are represented by one set of features.
However, in real-world applications, a multi-instance multilabel object can often be represented via different views

Figure 1: An illustrative example of multi-view multiinstance multi-label objects. {Rvij }Vv=1 are the multi-type
relational data matrices between bags (objects), instances,
and labels across V heterogeneous feature views.
Several Multi-view Multi-instance Multi-label Learning
(M3L) approaches have been proposed to tackle this challenge (Nguyen, Zhan, and Zhou 2013; Nguyen et al. 2014;
Li et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2018). Nguyen, Zhan, and Zhou
(2013) pioneered an approach called M3LDA, which employs Latent Dirichlet Allocation (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003)
to explore the visual-label topics from the visual view and
the text-label topics from the text view, and then enforces
the predicted labels from the two respective views to be
consistent. Nguyen et al. (2014) introduced another M3L
approach, called MIMLmix, to leverage multiple views using
a hierarchical Bayesian network and variational inference.
MIMLmix can handle samples which are absent in some

∗

Corresponding author, gxyu@swu.edu.cn (Guoxian Yu).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5508

