The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Scene Text Recognition from Two-Dimensional Perspective
Minghui Liao,1∗ Jian Zhang,2∗ Zhaoyi Wan,2∗ Fengming Xie,2
Jiajun Liang,2 Pengyuan Lyu,1 Cong Yao,2 Xiang Bai1†
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Megvii (Face++)
mhliao@hust.edu.cn, buaacszj@qq.com, i@wanzy.me, beautifeng@gmail.com,
liangjiajun@megvii.com, lvpyuan@gmail.com, yaocong2010@gmail.com, xbai@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

RNN (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and CTC (Graves
et al. 2006) to decode the target sequence. These methods
produce good results when the text in the image is horizontal
or nearly horizontal. However, different from speech, text in
scene images is essentially distributed in a two-dimensional
space. For example, the distribution of the characters can be
scattered, in arbitrary orientations, and even in curve shapes,
as shown in Fig. 1. In these cases, roughly encoding the images into one-dimensional sequences may lose key information or bring undesired noises. (Shi et al. 2016) tried to alleviate this problem by adopting a Spatial Transform Network
(STN) (Jaderberg et al. 2015b) to rectify the shape of the
text. Nevertheless, (Shi et al. 2016) still used a sequencebased model, so the effect of the rectification is limited.

Inspired by speech recognition, recent state-of-the-art algorithms mostly consider scene text recognition as a sequence prediction problem. Though achieving excellent performance, these methods usually neglect an important fact
that text in images are actually distributed in two-dimensional
space. It is a nature quite different from that of speech,
which is essentially a one-dimensional signal. In principle,
directly compressing features of text into a one-dimensional
form may lose useful information and introduce extra noise.
In this paper, we approach scene text recognition from a
two-dimensional perspective. A simple yet effective model,
called Character Attention Fully Convolutional Network
(CA-FCN), is devised for recognizing the text of arbitrary
shapes. Scene text recognition is realized with a semantic segmentation network, where an attention mechanism for characters is adopted. Combined with a word formation module,
CA-FCN can simultaneously recognize the script and predict the position of each character. Experiments demonstrate
that the proposed algorithm outperforms previous methods on
both regular and irregular text datasets. Moreover, it is proven
to be more robust to imprecise localizations in the text detection phase, which are very common in practice.

Sequence Decoder

Introduction
Scene text recognition has been an active research field in
computer vision because it is a critical element of a lot
of real-world applications, such as street sign reading in
the driverless vehicle, human computer interaction, assistive technologies for the blind and guide board recognition (Rong, Yi, and Tian 2016; Zhu et al. 2018). As compared to the maturity of document recognition, scene text
recognition is still a challenging task due to large variations
in text shapes, fonts, colors, backgrounds, etc.
Most of the recent works (Shi, Bai, and Yao 2017;
Shi et al. 2016; Zhu, Yao, and Bai 2016) convert scene text
recognition into sequence recognition, which hugely simplifies the problem and leads to great performance on regular
text. As shown in Fig. 1a, they firstly encode the input image into a feature sequence and then apply decoders such as

Word without locations of characters

Word with locations of characters

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of text recognition in one-dimensional
and two-dimensional spaces. (a) shows the recognition procedures of sequence-based methods. (b) presents the proposed segmentation-based method. Different colors mean
different character classes.
As discussed above, the limitations of sequence-based
methods are mainly caused by the difference between the
one-dimensional distribution of feature sequences and the
two-dimensional distribution of text in scene images. To
overcome these limitations, we tackle the scene text recognition problem in a new and natural perspective. We propose to
directly predict the text in a two-dimensional space instead
of a one-dimensional sequence. Inspired by FCN (Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), a Character Attention Fully
Convolutional Network (CA-FCN) is proposed to predict the
characters at pixel level. Then the word, as well as the loca-

∗

Authors contribute equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8714

