The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Single-Label Multi-Class Image Classification by Deep Logistic Regression
1

Qi Dong,1 Xiatian Zhu,2 Shaogang Gong1

Queen Mary University of London, 2 Vision Semantics Ltd.
q.dong@qmul.ac.uk, eddy@visionsemantics.com, s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

It is intuitive that single-label classification is a special
case of multi-label classification. Hence, LR should be applicable for single-label classification. Surprisingly, despite that
both SR and LR have been extensively studied and exploited
for learning single-label and multi-label classification independently, their comparison in deep learning of single-label
classification has never been investigated systematically in
the literature to our knowledge. A few fundamental questions
remain unclear: How advantageous is the de facto standard
choice SR over LR for single-label classification on earth? Is
LR possibly competitive with or even superior to SR?
In this work, we investigate the potential and validity of
the Logistic Regression learning algorithm for single-label
multi-class classification in theory and practice. We observe
that although SR has an advantage of conducting class discriminative learning via posing a competition mechanism between the ground-truth and other classes per training sample,
it may simultaneously distort the underlying data manifold
geometry which may in turn hurt the model generalisation
capability (Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006). This is
because in SR all non-ground-truth classes are identically
pushed away from the labelled ground-truth class in a homogeneous fashion with the class-to-class correlation ignored
in model learning. On the contrary, LR avoids this limitation
due to that each class is modelled independently as a separate
binary classification task (Bishop 2006). This allows the intrinsic inter-class geometrical correlation to emerge naturally
in a data-mining manner.
In light of the above theoretical merit, we particularly study
the efficacy of LR for single-label classification learning. Empirically, we found that the vanilla LR indeed yields less
discriminative and generalisable models on image classification tasks in most cases. With in-depth LR loss and gradient
analysis, we identify that the negative class distraction problem turns out to be the major model learning barrier.
We make three contributions: (1) We investigate the fundamental characteristics of SR and LR in single-label multiclass classification learning. This is an essential and understudied problem in the literature to our knowledge. (2) We
identify the negative class distraction problem in LR as the
main obstacle for single-label classification learning, and propose two optimisation focus rectified LR learning algorithms
in a hard mining principle as effective solvers. (3) We conduct extensive evaluations on two single-label multi-class

The objective learning formulation is essential for the success
of convolutional neural networks. In this work, we analyse
thoroughly the standard learning objective functions for multiclass classification CNNs: softmax regression (SR) for singlelabel scenario and logistic regression (LR) for multi-label
scenario. Our analyses lead to an inspiration of exploiting LR
for single-label classification learning, and then the disclosing
of the negative class distraction problem in LR. To address this
problem, we develop two novel LR based objective functions
that not only generalise the conventional LR but importantly
turn out to be competitive alternatives to SR in single label
classification. Extensive comparative evaluations demonstrate
the model learning advantages of the proposed LR functions
over the commonly adopted SR in single-label coarse-grained
object categorisation and cross-class fine-grained person instance identification tasks. We also show the performance
superiority of our method on clothing attribute classification
in comparison to the vanilla LR function. The code had been
made publicly available.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al. 1989)
have demonstrated impressive performance success in a
wide variety of image recognition problems (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016).
Two common problems are single-label (one class label per
image) and multi-label (multiple class labels per image) classification. Whilst both problems have the same learning
objective of inducing a multi-class classifier CNN model
through supervised training, their standard objective learning
functions are rather different.
Specifically, in single-label classification learning, we often adopt the softmax regression (SR) learning algorithm. This is based on the per-sample single-label and classexclusion assumptions (Bridle 1990). For multi-label classification in which a data sample may be tied with multiple class
labels, we instead adopt the logistic regression
(LR) learning algorithm (Bishop 2006). Without the “singlelabel” and “class-exclusion” prior, LR considers per-sample
prediction of all individual class labels independently.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3486

