The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On the Complexity of the Inverse Semivalue Problem for Weighted Voting Games
Ilias Diakonikolas

Chrystalla Pavlou

University of Southern California
USA
ilias.diakonikolas@gmail.com

University of Edinburgh
UK
C.Pavlou@sms.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

voting games (Shapley and Shubik 1954)), the Banzhaf index (Banzhaf III 1964), the Deegan-Packel index (Deegan
and Packel 1978), and the Holler index (Holler 1982). The
problem of computing the agents’ power indices in a given
game has received ample attention and its computational
complexity is well-understood for many game representations and power index functions (Prasad and Kelly 1990;
Deng and Papadimitriou 1994; Aziz 2008).

Weighted voting games are a family of cooperative games,
typically used to model voting situations where a number of
agents (players) vote against or for a proposal. In such games,
a proposal is accepted if an appropriately weighted sum of the
votes exceeds a prespecified threshold. As the influence of a
player over the voting outcome is not in general proportional
to her assigned weight, various power indices have been proposed to measure each player’s influence. The inverse power
index problem is the problem of designing a weighted voting
game that achieves a set of target influences according to a
predefined power index. In this work, we study the computational complexity of the inverse problem when the power
index belongs to the class of semivalues. We prove that the
inverse problem is computationally intractable for a broad
family of semivalues, including all regular semivalues. As a
special case of our general result, we establish computational
hardness of the inverse problem for the Banzhaf indices and
the Shapley values, arguably the most popular power indices.

Our Contributions In this work, we focus on the inverse
power index problem — that is, the problem of designing
a weighted voting game with a given set of power indices.
As we will explain in detail below, the inverse problem has
been extensively studied in various fields, including game
theory, social choice theory, and learning theory. Various
works have provided heuristic methods, exponential time
algorithms, or polynomial time approximation algorithms
with provable performance guarantees for this problem.
Despite this wealth of prior work on the algorithmic version of the inverse problem, its computational complexity
is poorly understood, even for the most popular power indices (Shapley values, Banzhaf indices). In this paper, we
study and essentially resolve the computational complexity
of the inverse power index for weighted voting games with
respect to a broad and extensively studied family of power
indices. Specifically, we prove that the inverse problem is
computationally intractable, under standard complexity assumptions. More specifically, we prove that for a large class
of power indices — that includes the popular Banzhaf and
Shapley indices, the class of semivalues (Weber 1979) —
the inverse problem cannot be in the polynomial hierarchy
(PH), unless the polynomial hierarchy collapses. Prior to this
work, it was conceivable that there exists an (exact) polynomial time algorithm for this problem. It follows from our
hardness result that the existence of such an algorithm is unlikely.

Introduction
Background and Motivation Weighted voting games are
a classical family of cooperative games that have been extensively studied in the game theory and social choice literature. Such games model a common voting scenario where
each agent (player), associated with a weight, casts a “YES”
(for) or “NO” (against) vote: if the weighted sum of the
“YES” votes exceeds a threshold, then the voting outcome is
“YES”, otherwise the outcome is “NO”. Examples of such
practical scenarios are the voting system of the European
Union, stockholder companies and resource allocation in
multiagent systems (Elkind et al. 2008; De Keijzer, Klos,
and Zhang 2014).
Although having a larger weight might help an agent affect the voting outcome, her influence on the result of the
game is not always proportional to her weight. Thus, instead of using agents’ weights, the power of an agent over
the outcome is usually measured in a systematic way by a
power index. Over the years, many power indices have been
proposed and studied, such as the Shapley value (Shapley
1953) (known also as Shapley-Shubik index for weighted

Related work Several heuristic algorithms for the inverse Banzhaf index problem have been proposed in the social choice and game theory literature. Aziz, Paterson, and
Leech (2007) give an approximation algorithm that given
target Banzhaf indices and a desired `2 -distance outputs a
weighted voting game with integer weights that has Banzhaf

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1869

