The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Semantic Representations for
Novel Words: Leveraging Both Form and Context
Timo Schick

Hinrich Schütze

Sulzer GmbH
Munich, Germany
timo.schick@sulzer.de

Center for Information and Language Processing
LMU Munich, Germany
inquiries@cislmu.org

Abstract

In recent times, several ways have been proposed to overcome these limitations and to extend word embedding models with the ability to obtain representations of previously
unseen words on the fly. These approaches can roughly be
divided into two directions: (i) the usage of subword information, i.e., exploiting information that can be extracted
from the surface-form of the word and (ii) the usage of
context information. The first direction aims to obtain good
embeddings for novel words by looking at their characters
(Pinter, Guthrie, and Eisenstein 2017), morphemes (Lazaridou et al. 2013; Luong, Socher, and Manning 2013; Cotterell, Schütze, and Eisner 2016) or n-grams (Wieting et al.
2016; Bojanowski et al. 2017; Ataman and Federico 2018;
Salle and Villavicencio 2018). Naturally, this direction is
especially well-suited for languages with rich morphology
(Gerz et al. 2018). The second, context-based direction
tries to infer embeddings for novel words from the words
surrounding them (Lazaridou, Marelli, and Baroni 2017;
Herbelot and Baroni 2017; Khodak et al. 2018). Both directions show promising results on various benchmarks. However, for both purely surface-form-based and purely contextbased approaches, there are many cases in which they are
highly unlikely to succeed in obtaining meaningful embeddings. As an example, suppose that we encounter the following three words – highlighted in bold letters – as novel
words in the given contexts:

Word embeddings are a key component of high-performing
natural language processing (NLP) systems, but it remains a
challenge to learn good representations for novel words on
the fly, i.e., for words that did not occur in the training data.
The general problem setting is that word embeddings are induced on an unlabeled training corpus and then a model is
trained that embeds novel words into this induced embedding
space. Currently, two approaches for learning embeddings of
novel words exist: (i) learning an embedding from the novel
word’s surface-form (e.g., subword n-grams) and (ii) learning an embedding from the context in which it occurs. In this
paper, we propose an architecture that leverages both sources
of information – surface-form and context – and show that it
results in large increases in embedding quality. Our architecture obtains state-of-the-art results on the Definitional Nonce
and Contextual Rare Words datasets. As input, we only require an embedding set and an unlabeled corpus for training
our architecture to produce embeddings appropriate for the
induced embedding space. Thus, our model can easily be integrated into any existing NLP system and enhance its capability to handle novel words.

1

Introduction

Distributed word representations (or embeddings) are a
foundational aspect of many natural language processing
systems; they have successfully been used for a wide variety of different tasks (Goldberg 2016). The idea behind embeddings is to assign to each word a low-dimensional, realvalued vector representing its meaning. In particular, neural
network based approaches such as the skipgram and cbow
models introduced by Mikolov et al. (2013) have gained increasing popularity over the last few years.
Despite their success, an important problem with current
approaches to learning embeddings is that they require many
observations of a word for its embedding to become reliable;
as a consequence, they struggle with small corpora and infrequent words (Ataman and Federico 2018). Furthermore,
as models are typically trained with a fixed vocabulary, they
lack the ability to assign vectors to novel, out-of-vocabulary
(OOV) words once training is complete.

(1) We should write no one off as being unemployable.
(2) A cardigan is a knitted jacket or sweater with buttons
up the front.
(3) Unlike the grapefruit, the pomelo has very little importance in the marketplace.
In sentence (1), the context is of almost no help for determining the meaning of the novel word, but we can deduce its meaning without great difficulty from an analysis of the morphemes “un”, “employ” and “able”. For sentence (2), the reverse is true: While the novel word’s morphemes give no indication that it is a piece of clothing, this
information can easily be derived from the context in which
it occurs. Perhaps most interesting is sentence (3): Both the
close occurrence of the word “grapefruit” and the fact that
the novel word’s morphemes resemble words like “pome”,
“pomegranate” and “melon” are indicative of the fact that it
may be some sort of fruit. While none of those indicators

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6965

