The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Attention Guided Imitation Learning and Reinforcement Learning
Ruohan Zhang
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin

Introduction

where attention is treated as a sequential decision problem
and is jointly trained with the control policy.
In my previous work we proposed the AGIL (Attention
Guided Imitation Learning) framework (Zhang et al. 2017;
2018). With collected human gaze data in Atari games, we
first train a deep network that can predict human visual attention with high accuracy (the gaze network) and then train
another network to predict human actions (the policy network). Incorporating the learned attention model from the
gaze network into the policy network significantly improves
the action prediction accuracy and task performance, see
Fig. 1a. Here human attention information helps the learning agent infer the correct decision state of the human by
highlighting the relevant visual features for that decision in
a high-dimensional state space.
Prior to deep RL, my research focused on a modularized
solution to the RL problems. Modular RL assumes that humans have limited attention resources hence cannot pay attention to all state features at the same time. Therefore a
complex task should be decomposed into modules, where
each module is a simpler Markov decision process with reduced state space that is factorized from the original state
space (Rothkopf and Ballard 2013). My work used modular
RL as a cognitive model for human behaviors, and developed a corresponding sample-efficient modular inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) algorithm to retrieve the intrinsic
reward of human. Using virtual-reality and motion capture,
we collected human navigation decisions in a virtual room
with multiple subtasks. With the proposed modular IRL algorithm, we were able to create an avatar which can infer
relative importance (reward) of different objects and goals
from observed human behavior, and generate walking trajectories that are human-like in novel environment. The modular IRL significantly outperformed a standard Bayesian IRL
in modeling human behaviors.
Improving AGIL The key challenge for visual attention
guided learning is to fuse the attention information into the
decision (policy) network. In previous work a naive pipeline
architecture was used (predicting gaze first then feed the result into the policy network via element-wise masking). Fusing multiple channels of information is well studied in the
computer vision community (Feichtenhofer, Pinz, and Zisserman 2016). We find that the design choices of a fusion
network, such as where (which layer) and how (which arith-

In end-to-end learning of visuomotor behaviors, algorithms
such as imitation learning, reinforcement learning (RL), or
a combination of both, have achieved remarkable successes.
However millions of training samples are often required to
achieve the desired performance. Hence in practice human
demonstration can be used to speedup learning and improve
sample efficiency (Silver et al. 2016; Hester et al. 2018).
When an agent learns from human demonstration, it may
benefit from knowing where the human is allocating his or
her visual attention, which can be inferred from the gaze.
Humans have high acuity foveal vision only in the central
1-2 visual degrees of the visual field, covering the width of a
finger at arm’s length. Consequently humans learn to move
their foveae to the correct place at the right time in order to
process important task-relevant visual features (Hayhoe and
Ballard 2005). A wealth of information is encoded in human
gaze behaviors–for example, the priority of one object over
another in obtaining longterm reward. Therefore human attention mechanism can be viewed as a powerful visual feature extractor for reward-seeking decision tasks.
We propose a framework that uses learned human visual
attention model to guide the learning process of an imitation
learning or reinforcement learning agent. We have collected
high-quality human action and eye-tracking data while playing Atari games in a carefully controlled experimental setting. We have shown that incorporating a learned human
gaze model into deep imitation learning yields promising
results. We plan to further improve the existing algorithm
for imitation learning, and incorporating visual attention into
deep reinforcement learning. Meanwhile we are studying
how visual attention is formed in a biological neural network and hope to transfer that knowledge to artificial neural
networks.

Proposal
Related and Accomplished Work The relation between
attention and RL has been extensively studied by neuroscience community (Roelfsema and van Ooyen 2005;
Leong et al. 2017). In machine learning, (Mnih et al. 2014)
pioneered efforts to combine deep RL with visual attention,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9906

