The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Region Embedding with Multi-View Spatial Networks:
A Perspective of Locality-Constrained Spatial Autocorrelations
Yanjie Fu,1 Pengyang Wang,1 Jiadi Du,1 Le Wu,2 Xiaolin Li3
1

Missouri University of Science and Technology, 2 HeFei University of Technology, 3 Nanjing University
fuyan@mst.edu, pwqt3@mst.edu, jddgh@mst.edu, lewu@hfut.edu.cn, lixl@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

dynamics of cities, to support urban planning, to boost commercial activities, and, ultimately, to make our cities more
livable and sustainable.
All of the above evidence suggests it is highly appealing to investigate the LESR problem. With the pervasiveness of mobile sensing and location based services, Big
Crowd-sourced Geo-tagged Data (BCGD), such as PointOf-Interests, road networks, trajectories of vehicles, GPS
traces from location based Apps, are increasingly available
from diverse sources (e.g., buildings, vehicles, sensors, devices) in urban space, and provide great opportunities for understanding and quantifying the configurations, structures,
connections of regions. Meanwhile, deep network and word
embedding techniques (e.g., Skipgram (Cheng, Greaves, and
Warren 2006), LINE (Tang et al. 2015), DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014a), AutoEncoder (Liou et al.
2014)) have been widely used to learn an embedding space
for social networks and natural languages.
These studies have inspired several preliminary studies (Zhang et al. 2017; Wang and Li 2017; Yao et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2018a; Liu et al. 2019) for region embeddings.
Several strategies have been studied. The first strategy learns
embeddings from coarse-grained inter-region correlations.
For example, the study in (Wang and Li 2017) learns embeddings from a homogeneous network, where vertexes are regions and node embeddings are embeddings of regions, via a
skip-gram based method. The second strategy learns embeddings from coarse-grained cross-geo-type (region and other
spatiotempral items) correlations. The studies in (Yao et al.
2018; Zhang et al. 2017) learn embeddings from a heterogeneous graph, where vertexes are mixtures of regions, time,
mobility arrival events, and/or texts, and the vertex embeddings are not just embeddings of regions, but also embeddings of time, texts, or mobility events, via matrix factorization or skipgram based methods. The third strategy learns
embeddings from fine-grained intra-region structural information (e.g., configurations, structures, connections). The
study in (Wang et al. 2018a) learns region embeddings from
a set of networks, where a network is a region, vertexes are
critical infrastructures (i.e., POIs) of a region, and the embedding of a region indeed is the embedding of an entire
graph, via an encode-decode framework.
However, after exploiting and exploring the three strategies with BCGD, we find that these strategies have both

Urban regions are places where people live, work, consume,
and entertain. In this study, we investigate the problem of
learning an embedding space for regions. Studying the representations of regions can help us to better understand the
patterns, structures, and dynamics of cities, support urban
planning, and, ultimately, to make our cities more livable and
sustainable. While some efforts have been made for learning the embeddings of regions, existing methods can be improved by incorporating locality-constrained spatial autocorrelations into an encode-decode framework. Such embedding
strategy is capable of taking into account both intra-region
structural information and inter-region spatial autocorrelations. To this end, we propose to learn the representations
of regions via a new embedding strategy with awareness of
locality-constrained spatial autocorrelations. Specifically, we
first construct multi-view (i.e., distance and mobility connectivity) POI-POI networks to represent regions. In addition,
we introduce two properties into region embedding: (i) spatial autocorrelations: a global similarity between regions; (ii)
top-k locality: spatial autocorrelations locally and approximately reside on top k most autocorrelated regions. We propose a new encoder-decoder based formulation that preserves
the two properties while remaining efficient. As an application, we exploit the learned embeddings to predict the mobile
checkin popularity of regions. Finally, extensive experiments
with real-world urban region data demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our method.

Introduction
An urban region (region for short) is a spatial area along
with the agglomeration of high density population, infrastructures of built environments, and socioeconomic activities. As fundamental elements of a city, regions are places
where people consume, live, work, and entertain. In this
study, we investigate the problem of Learning an Embedding Space for Regions (LESR). The LESR problem refers
to the efforts of finding a mapping function to represent regions into vectors in a latent embedding feature space, while
preserving certain geospatial characteristics and regularizations. Studying the quantitative representations of regions
can help us to better understand the patterns, structures, and
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

906

