The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Multi-Task Learning Framework for Abstractive Text Summarization
Yao Lu,1,3 Linqing Liu,3 Zhile Jiang,4 Min Yang,5∗ Randy Goebel1,2
1

Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute 2 Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
3
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo 4 Sichuan University
5
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yao.lu, linqing.liu}@uwaterloo.ca jiangzhile.zz@gmail.com
min.yang@siat.ac.cn rgoebel@ualberta.ca
Abstract

Our framework consolidates these improvements by exploiting the recent successes of the encoder-decoder framework to generate abstractive summaries. While this standard
framework is common in related approaches, we additionally propose extended regularizations using multi-task learning. Our encoder and decoder are regularized with the cotraining required to perform additional text categorization
and syntax annotation task, respectively. This co-training is
not intended to maximize performance on these auxiliary
tasks, but rather to compensate for the missing regularization
requirement of text summarization in the standard framework. We also employ reinforcement learning to maximize
long-term rewards of generation. Overall, the integration of
multi-task learning approach in the framework provides significant improvements in abstractive summarization.

We propose a Multi-task learning approach for Abstractive
Text Summarization (MATS), motivated by the fact that humans have no difficulty performing such task because they
have the capabilities of multiple domains. Specifically, MATS
consists of three components: (i) a text categorization model
that learns rich category-specific text representations using
a bi-LSTM encoder; (ii) a syntax labeling model that learns
to improve the syntax-aware LSTM decoder; and (iii) an abstractive text summarization model that shares its encoder and
decoder with the text categorization and the syntax labeling
tasks, respectively. In particular, the abstractive text summarization model enjoys significant benefit from the additional
text categorization and syntax knowledge. Our experimental
results show that MATS outperforms the competitors.1

Introduction

Methodology

Abstractive text summarization aims to generate condensed
and concise summaries that retain the salient information of
a source text. The abstracted summaries potentially contain
new phrases and sentences that don’t appear in the source
text. Inspired by the recent success of sequence-to-sequence
(seq2seq) models in statistical machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015), most abstractive summarization systems employ a seq2seq framework to generate summaries (Nallapati et al. 2016; See, Liu, and Manning 2017).
Despite progress, significant generation and syntax conforming challenges remain: (1) writing styles and words
in different categories can significantly vary. But existing
methods apply a uniform model to generate summaries for
the source texts in different categories, which tend to generate trivial and generic summaries which easily under represent salient aspects of the source text. (2) syntactic information plays a crucial role in sentence generation, and enforcing syntactic conformance addresses issues like incomplete
sentences. Despite its usefulness, the exploitation of syntax
has received little attention in abstractive summarization.
Here we consider an integration of these aforementioned
approaches to the noted challenges, and show measurable
progress in how they improve abstractive summarization.

Assume each input article X = {x1 , x2 , ..., xn } has corresponding reference summary Y = {y1 , y2 , ..., yk } and category label L, where n and k denote the length of input article and reference summary, respectively. Given an input article X, the abstractive summarization task tries to generate a
summary Ŷ = {yˆ1 , yˆ2 , ..., yˆm }, where m denote the length
of the generated summary. For the text categorization task,
given an input article X, our objective is to predict the category label L̂ for the input text. For syntax labeling, we have
Z = {z1 , z2 , ..., zm } denoting the CCG supertag sequence
for the corresponding summary Ŷ of source text X.
Shared Bi-LSTM encoder: The summarization shares
encoder with the text categorization task. Each word x in the
source text is mapped through the embedding layer. Then,
given the input word embedding vi at time step i, the hidden
state hi can be updated with the previous hidden state hi−1
as hi = Bi-LSTM(hi−1 , vi ). In this way, we obtain the hidden states H = {h1 , ..., hn } for the source text X. For text
categorization, we use the final state hn as the representation of source text. hn is then fed into a task-specific fully
connected layer with softmax to predict the category label.
Shared LSTM decoder: LSTM decoder is shared by
summarization and syntax labeling tasks. On each decoding step t, the decoder receives the input ut (while training,
ut is the embedding of previous word of reference sum-

∗
Min Yang is correponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Supplementary material: https://github.com/yaolu/MATS

9987

