The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Scalable Robust Kidney Exchange
Duncan C McElfresh

Hoda Bidkhori

John P Dickerson

Department of Mathematics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
dmcelfre@math.umd.edu

Department of Industrial Engineering
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
bidkhori@pitt.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
john@cs.umd.edu

Abstract

often far more tractable than stochastic approaches (Ben-Tal,
El Ghaoui, and Nemirovski 2009).
This paper addresses uncertainty in kidney exchange, a
real-world barter market where patients with end-stage renal
disease enter and trade their willing paired kidney donors (Rapaport 1986; Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver 2004). Kidney exchange is a relatively new paradigm for organ allocation, but
already accounts for over 10% of living kidney donations
in the United States, and is growing in popularity worldwide (Biró et al. 2017). Modern exchanges also include nondirected donors (NDDs), who enter the market without a
paired patient and donate their kidney without receiving one
in return. Computationally, kidney exchange is a packing
problem: solutions (matchings) consist of cyclic organ swaps
and NDD-initiated donation chains in a directed compatibility
graph, representing all participants and potential transactions.
Each potential transplant is given a numerical weight by
policymakers; the objective is to select cycles and chains
that maximize overall matching weight. In general, this
problem is NP-hard (Abraham, Blum, and Sandholm 2007;
Biró, Manlove, and Rizzi 2009); however, many efficient
deterministic formulations exist that are fielded now and
clear real exchanges (Abraham, Blum, and Sandholm 2007;
Manlove and O’Malley 2015; Anderson et al. 2015; Dickerson et al. 2016; Dickerson, Procaccia, and Sandholm 2018).
Uncertainty in kidney exchange. Presently-fielded kidney
exchange algorithms largely do not address uncertainty. Here,
we consider two types of uncertainty in kidney exchange:
over the quality of the transplant (weight uncertainty) and
over the existence of potential transplants (existence uncertainty). Policymakers assign weights to potential transplants,
which are (imperfect) estimates of transplant quality; weight
uncertainty stems from both measurement uncertainty (e.g.,
medical compatibility and kidney quality) and uncertainty
in the prioritization of some patients over others. Transplant
existence is always uncertain: matched transplants “fail” before executing for a variety of reasons, severely impacting
a planned kidney exchange. To address both cases, we propose uncertainty sets containing different realizations of the
uncertain parameters. We then develop a scalable robust optimization approach, and demonstrate its success on data from
a large fielded kidney exchange.
Robust optimization is a popular approach to optimization
under uncertainty, with applications in reinforcement learn-

In barter exchanges, participants directly trade their endowed
goods in a constrained economic setting without money. Transactions in barter exchanges are often facilitated via a central
clearinghouse that must match participants even in the face
of uncertainty—over participants, existence and quality of
potential trades, and so on. Leveraging robust combinatorial
optimization techniques, we address uncertainty in kidney
exchange, a real-world barter market where patients swap
(in)compatible paired donors. We provide two scalable robust methods to handle two distinct types of uncertainty in
kidney exchange—over the quality and the existence of a potential match. The latter case directly addresses a weakness
in all stochastic-optimization-based methods to the kidney
exchange clearing problem, which all necessarily require explicit estimates of the probability of a transaction existing—a
still-unsolved problem in this nascent market. We also propose
a novel, scalable kidney exchange formulation that eliminates
the need for an exponential-time constraint generation process
in competing formulations, maintains provable optimality, and
serves as a subsolver for our robust approach. For each type
of uncertainty we demonstrate the benefits of robustness on
real data from a large, fielded kidney exchange in the United
States. We conclude by drawing parallels between robustness
and notions of fairness in the kidney exchange setting.

1

Introduction

Real-world optimization problems face various types of uncertainty that impact both the quality and feasibility of candidate solutions. Uncertainty in combinatorial optimization
is especially troublesome: if the existence of certain constraints or variables is uncertain, identifying a good—or even
feasible—solution can be extremely difficult. Stochastic optimization approaches endeavor to maximize the expected
objective value, under uncertainty. While sometimes successful, stochastic optimization relies heavily on a correct
characterization of uncertainty; furthermore, stochastic approaches are often intractable—especially in combinatorial
domains (Bertsimas, Brown, and Caramanis 2011). A complementary approach is robust optimization, which protects
against worst-case outcomes. Robust approaches can be less
sensitive to the exact characterization of uncertainty, and are
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1077

