The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

GRN: Gated Relation Network to Enhance
Convolutional Neural Network for Named Entity Recognition∗
Hui Chen,† Zijia Lin,‡ Guiguang Ding,† Jianguang Lou,‡ Yusen Zhang,§ Borje Karlsson‡
†

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
§
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{jichenhui2012, yusenzhang95}@gmail.com, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn, {zijlin, jlou, borje.karlsson}@microsoft.com
Abstract

success to the NLP fields, including machine translation,
syntactic parsing, relation extraction, etc. RNNs have been
proved to be powerful in learning from basic components of
text sentences, like words and characters (Tran, MacKinlay,
and Yepes 2017). Therefore, currently the vast majority of
state-of-the-art NER systems are based on RNNs, especially
long-short-term-memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and its variant Bi-directional LSTM (BiLSTM).
For example, Huang et al. (2015) firstly used a BiLSTM to
enhance words’ context information for NER and demonstrated its effectiveness.
However, RNNs process the sentence in a sequential manner, because they typically factor the computation along the
positions of the input sequence. As a result, the computation
at the current time step is highly dependent on those at previous time steps. This inherently sequential nature of RNNs
precludes them from fully exploiting the GPU parallelism
on training examples, and thus can lead to higher time costs
to train and test.
Unlike RNNs, convolutional neural network (CNN) can
deal with all words in a feed-forward fashion, rather than
composing representations incrementally over each word in
a sentence. This property enables CNNs to well exploit the
GPU parallelism. But in the NER community, little attention has been paid to performing NER with CNNs. It is
mainly due to the fact that CNNs have the capacity of capturing local context information but they are not as powerful
as LSTMs in capturing the long-term context information.
Although the receptive field of CNNs can be expanded by
means of stacking multiple convolutional layers or using dilated convolutional layers, the global context capturing issue still remains, especially for variant-sized text sentences,
which hinders CNNs obtaining comparable performance as
LSTMs for NER.
In this paper, we propose a CNN-based network for NER,
i.e., Gated Relation Network (GRN), which is more powerful than common CNNs for capturing long-term context information. Different from RNNs that capture the long-term
dependencies in a recurrent component, our proposed GRN
aims to capture the dependencies within a sentence by modelling the relations between any two words. Modelling word
relations permits GRN to compose global context features
without regard to the limited receptive fields of CNNs, enabling it to capture the global context information. This al-

The dominant approaches for named entity recognition
(NER) mostly adopt complex recurrent neural networks
(RNN), e.g., long-short-term-memory (LSTM). However,
RNNs are limited by their recurrent nature in terms of computational efficiency. In contrast, convolutional neural networks
(CNN) can fully exploit the GPU parallelism with their feedforward architectures. However, little attention has been paid
to performing NER with CNNs, mainly owing to their difficulties in capturing the long-term context information in a
sequence. In this paper, we propose a simple but effective
CNN-based network for NER, i.e., gated relation network
(GRN), which is more capable than common CNNs in capturing long-term context. Specifically, in GRN we firstly employ CNNs to explore the local context features of each word.
Then we model the relations between words and use them as
gates to fuse local context features into global ones for predicting labels. Without using recurrent layers that process a
sentence in a sequential manner, our GRN allows computations to be performed in parallel across the entire sentence.
Experiments on two benchmark NER datasets (i.e., CoNLL2003 and Ontonotes 5.0) show that, our proposed GRN can
achieve state-of-the-art performance with or without external
knowledge. It also enjoys lower time costs to train and test.

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is one of the fundamental
tasks in natural language processing (NLP). It is designed to
locate a word or a phrase that references a specific entity, like
person, organization, location, etc., within a text sentence. It
plays a critical role in NLP systems for question answering,
information retrieval, relation extraction, etc. And thus many
efforts have been dedicated to the field.
Traditional NER systems mostly adopt machine learning
models, such as Hidden Markov Model (HMM) (Bikel et
al. 1997) and Conditional Random Field (CRF) (McCallum
and Li 2003). Although these systems can achieve high performance, they heavily rely on hand-crafted features or taskspecific resources (Ma and Hovy 2016), which are expensive
to obtain and hard to adapt to other domains or languages.
With the development of deep learning, recurrent neural
network (RNN) along with its variants have brought great
∗

Work was done during an internship at Microsoft Research.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6236

