The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dependency or Span, End-to-End Uniform Semantic Role Labeling
Zuchao Li,1,2,∗ Shexia He,1,2,∗ Hai Zhao,1,2,† Yiqing Zhang,1,2 Zhuosheng Zhang,1,2
Xi Zhou,3 Xiang Zhou3
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
CloudWalk Technology, Shanghai, China
{charlee,heshexia}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn,
{zhangyiqing,zhangzs}@sjtu.edu.cn, {zhouxi,zhouxiang}@cloudwalk.cn
A0
A1
A2
AM-TMP
v
Marry borrowed a book from John last week

Abstract
Semantic role labeling (SRL) aims to discover the predicateargument structure of a sentence. End-to-end SRL without
syntactic input has received great attention. However, most
of them focus on either span-based or dependency-based semantic representation form and only show specific model optimization respectively. Meanwhile, handling these two SRL
tasks uniformly was less successful. This paper presents an
end-to-end model for both dependency and span SRL with
a unified argument representation to deal with two different types of argument annotations in a uniform fashion. Furthermore, we jointly predict all predicates and arguments,
especially including long-term ignored predicate identification subtask. Our single model achieves new state-of-the-art
results on both span (CoNLL 2005, 2012) and dependency
(CoNLL 2008, 2009) SRL benchmarks.

A0

borrow.01

A1

A2

AM-TMP

Figure 1: Examples of annotations in span (above) and dependency (below) SRL.

still achieving favorable results. However, these systems focus on either span or dependency SRL, which motivates us
to explore a uniform approach.
Both span and dependency are effective formal representations for semantics, though for a long time it has been kept
unknown which form, span or dependency, would be better
for the convenience and effectiveness of semantic machine
learning and later applications. Furthermore, researchers are
interested in two forms of SRL models that may benefit from
each other rather than their separated development. This
topic has been roughly discussed in (Johansson and Nugues
2008a), who concluded that the (best) dependency SRL system at then clearly outperformed the span-based (best) system through gold syntactic structure transformation. However, Johansson and Nugues (2008a) like all other traditional
SRL models themselves had to adopt rich syntactic features,
and their comparison was done between two systems in quite
different building styles. Instead, this work will develop full
syntax-agnostic SRL systems with the same fashion for both
span and dependency representation, so that we can revisit
this issue under a more solid empirical basis.
In addition, most efforts focus on argument identification
and classification since span and dependency SRL corpora
have already marked predicate positions. Although no predicate identification is needed, it is not available in many
downstream applications. Therefore, predicate identification
should be carefully handled in a complete practical SRL system. To address this problem, He et al. (2018a) proposed
an end-to-end approach for jointly predicting predicates and
arguments for span SRL. Likewise, Cai et al. (2018) introduced an end-to-end model to naturally cover all predicate/argument identification and classification subtasks for
dependency SRL.
To jointly predict predicates and arguments, we present an
end-to-end framework for both span and dependency SRL.

Introduction
The purpose of semantic role labeling (SRL) is to derive
the meaning representation for a sentence, which is beneficial to a wide range of natural language processing (NLP)
tasks (Wang et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2018). SRL can be
formed as four subtasks, including predicate detection, predicate disambiguation, argument identification and argument
classification. For argument annotation, there are two formulizations. One is based on text spans, namely span-based
SRL. The other is dependency-based SRL, which annotates
the syntactic head of argument rather than entire argument
span. Figure 1 shows example annotations.
Great progress has been made in syntactic parsing (Dozat
and Manning 2017; Li et al. 2018a; 2018c). Most traditional
SRL methods rely heavily on syntactic features. To alleviate the inconvenience, recent works (Zhou and Xu 2015;
Marcheggiani, Frolov, and Titov 2017; He et al. 2017;
Tan et al. 2018; He et al. 2018a; 2018b; Cai et al. 2018) propose end-to-end models for SRL, putting syntax aside and
∗

These authors made equal contribution.† Corresponding author. This paper was partially supported by National Key Research
and Development Program of China (No. 2017YFB0304100), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61672343 and No.
61733011), Key Project of National Society Science Foundation
of China (No. 15-ZDA041), The Art and Science Interdisciplinary
Funds of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (No. 14JCRZ04).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6730

