The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Tackling Sparse Rewards in Real-Time
Games with Statistical Forward Planning Methods
Raluca D. Gaina, Simon M. Lucas, Diego Pérez-Liébana
Queen Mary University of London, UK
{r.d.gaina, simon.lucas, diego.perez}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

In this paper we propose modifications that alter how far
the agents can simulate into the future in two different ways.
First, we increase the length of the simulations the algorithms are allowed to make (while stretching the budget per
game tick accordingly) to test if the agents are able to solve
sparse rewards problems better when they are able to see
further ahead. And second, we dynamically vary the length
of the simulations within a predefined budget per game tick,
depending on the flatness of the reward landscape, in order
to examine the algorithm’s ability to adapt to the various
types of problems proposed.
Two base methods are evaluated on 20 real-time games in
the General Video Game AI Framework (GVGAI), Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) and Rolling Horizon Evolutionary Algorithms (RHEA), which have recently proven most
competitive in this domain. Additionally, all algorithms and
variations are evaluated on 5 further deceptive games, the
same analysed in (Anderson et al. 2018).

One of the issues general AI game players are required to deal
with is the different reward systems in the variety of games
they are expected to be able to play at a high level. Some
games may present plentiful rewards which the agents can
use to guide their search for the best solution, whereas others
feature sparse reward landscapes that provide little information to the agents. The work presented in this paper focuses on
the latter case, which most agents struggle with. Thus, modifications are proposed for two algorithms, Monte Carlo Tree
Search and Rolling Horizon Evolutionary Algorithms, aiming
at improving performance in this type of games while maintaining overall win rate across those where rewards are plentiful. Results show that longer rollouts and individual lengths,
either fixed or responsive to changes in fitness landscape features, lead to a boost of performance in the games during testing without being detrimental to non-sparse reward scenarios.

1

Introduction

2

When testing Artificial Intelligence agents on multiple distinct games in a general game playing black box setting, the
main difficulty the players face is being able to correctly
judge and differentiate situations. Most games cannot be
fully explored until the end due to their complexity in action space, state space or both.
If the algorithm is targeted at a particular game, human
knowledge about the problem can be integrated into the
heuristic function in order to effectively guide the search in
the right direction, even if no “natural” rewards (from the
game) are observed by the agent. However, the lack of domain knowledge in general video game playing poses a significant challenge on how to bias or guide the search effectively in the case of a mostly flat reward landscape (Perez,
Samothrakis, and Lucas 2014).
The main goal of this paper is to analyze potential improvements on agents for sparse reward games, but still keep
a similar overall performance in those games where rewards
are found more often. We study this in the context of Statistical Forward Planning algorithms: Monte Carlo Tree Search
and Rolling Horizon Evolution. These offer high performance and rapid adaptation for general video game playing.

Literature Review

The problem tackled in this paper refers to the variety of
reward landscapes in games and how most current general methods are not equipped to handle this. Anderson et
al. (Anderson et al. 2018) highlight deceptive reward systems in games (i.e. by introducing score gains which guide
the AI player away from winning the game), using agents
from the General Video Game AI Competition (GVGAI) to
show that AI game players can be easily tricked into not
finding the optimal solution. Companez et al. (Companez
and Aleti 2016) look at enhancements for Monte Carlo Tree
Search in Tic-Tac-Toe variations meant to overcome such
deceptive issues, highlighting a particular situation where
the agent should be able to self-sacrifice in the short run in
order to obtain a larger gain in the long run.
The variety of games that general algorithms are expected
to achieve a high performance on is noted by Horn et al.
in (Horn et al. 2016). They look at the 2D grid-physics
games in the GVGAI Framework and identify the different
strengths and weaknesses of Evolutionary Algorithms as opposed to Tree Search based methods. The authors propose a
game difficulty estimation scheme based on several observable game characteristics, which could be used as a guideline to predict agent performance depending on the game
type. Some of the metrics they extracted tie in to the fitness

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1691

