The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Exponential Tail Bound for the Deleted Estimate
Karim Abou–Moustafa,∗ Csaba Szepesvári†
Dept. of Computing Sciecne, University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2E8, Canada
aboumous@ualberta.ca, szepesva@ualberta.ca

Abstract

in their work, the polynomial bounds of Devroye and Wagner (1979b) for instance relied on the so called hypothesis
stability; a name that is due to Kearns and Ron (1999). Various results for different estimates followed the works of Devroye and Wagner (1979b). Lugosi and Pawlak (1994) extended the work of Devroye and Wagner (1979b) to smooth
estimates of the error developed in terms of a posteriori distribution for the deleted estimate. Holden (1996) derived
sanity-check bounds for the deleted estimate and the k folds
cross–validation (KFCV) estimate using hypothesis stability for few algorithms in the realizable setting. Kearns and
Ron (1999), using the notion of error stability, give sanitycheck bounds for the deleted estimate but for more general
classes of learning rules (in the unrealizable or agnostic setting). More recently, Kale, Kumar, and Vassilvitskii (2011)
show that, using a weak notion of stability known as meansquare stability, the averaging taking place in the KFCV estimation procedure can reduce the variance of the generalization error; i.e. the averaging in the KFCV estimation procedure can improve the concentration of the estimated error
around the expected error of the hypothesis returned by the
learning rule.
For general learning rules and for regularized empirical risk minimization learning rules, Bousquet and Elisseeff (2002) using the notion of uniform stability, extended
the work of Lugosi and Pawlak (1994) and derived exponential generalization bounds for the resubstitution estimate and
the deleted estimate. Further generalization results based on
uniform stability (or one of its variants) were obtained in the
works of Kutin and Niyogi; Rakhlin, Mukherjee, and Poggio; Mukherjee et al.; Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2002; 2005;
2006; 2010), to name but a few. These results were extended
in various directions such as deriving new results for randomized learning algorithms (Elisseeff, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2005), transfer and meta learning (Maurer 2005), adaptive data analysis (Bassily et al. 2016), stochastic gradient
descent (Hardt, Recht, and Singer 2016), structured prediction (London, Huang, and Getoor 2016), multi-task learning (Zhang 2015), ranking algorithms (Agarwal and Niyogi
2009), as well as in understanding the trade-off between
sparsity and stability (Xu, Caramanis, and Mannor 2012).
Despite these recent advances, and excluding sanitycheck bounds, there seems to be an overlooked dichotomy in
the type of stability-based generalization results. In particu-

There is an accumulating evidence in the literature that stability of learning algorithms is a key characteristic that permits
a learning algorithm to generalize. Despite various insightful
results in this direction, there seems to be an overlooked dichotomy in the type of stability-based generalization bounds
we have in the literature. On one hand, the literature seems
to suggest that exponential generalization bounds for the estimated risk, which are optimal, can be only obtained through
stringent, distribution independent and computationally intractable notions of stability such as uniform stability. On the
other hand, it seems that weaker notions of stability such as
hypothesis stability, although it is distribution dependent and
more amenable to computation, can only yield polynomial
generalization bounds for the estimated risk, which are suboptimal. In this paper, we address the gap between these two
regimes of results. In particular, the main question we address
here is whether it is possible to derive exponential generalization bounds for the estimated risk using a notion of stability
that is computationally tractable and distribution dependent,
but weaker than uniform stability. Using recent advances in
concentration inequalities, and using a notion of stability that
is weaker than uniform stability but distribution dependent
and amenable to computation, we derive an exponential tail
bound for the concentration of the estimated risk of a hypothesis returned by a general learning rule, where the estimated
risk is expressed in terms of the deleted estimate. Interestingly, we note that our final bound has similarities to previous
exponential generalization bounds for the deleted estimate, in
particular, the result of Bousquet and Elisseeff (2002) for the
regression case.

1

Introduction

There is an accumulating evidence in the literature that stability of learning algorithm is a key characteristic that permits a learning algorithm to generalize. The earliest result
in this regard is due to Devroye and Wagner (1979a) and
Devroye and Wagner (1979b) where they derive distribution
free polynomial generalization bounds for the concentration
of the leave-one-out estimate, or the deleted estimate, for
the expected error of some nonparametric learning rules. Although the notion of stability was not explicitly mentioned
∗

Currently with SAS Inst. Inc., Cary, North Carolina, USA
Currently with Google DeepMind, London, UK
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3143

