The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Single-View 3D Object Reconstruction with Visual Hull Embedding
Hanqing Wang,∗1,2 Jiaolong Yang,2 Wei Liang,1 Xin Tong2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
{hanqingwang,liangwei}@bit.edu.cn, {jiaoyan,xtong}@microsoft.com

Abstract
3D object reconstruction is a fundamental task of many
robotics and AI problems. With the aid of deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), 3D object reconstruction has witnessed a significant progress in recent years. However, possibly due to the prohibitively high dimension of the 3D object
space, the results from deep CNNs are often prone to missing some shape details. In this paper, we present an approach
which aims to preserve more shape details and improve the
reconstruction quality. The key idea of our method is to leverage object mask and pose estimation from CNNs to assist
the 3D shape learning by constructing a probabilistic singleview visual hull inside of the network. Our method works by
first predicting a coarse shape as well as the object pose and
silhouette using CNNs, followed by a novel 3D refinement
CNN which refines the coarse shapes using the constructed
probabilistic visual hulls. Experiment on both synthetic data
and real images show that embedding a single-view visual
hull for shape refinement can significantly improve the reconstruction quality by recovering more shapes details and
improving shape consistency with the input image.

Synthetic
Data
Input

3D-R2N2

Marrnet

Ours

GT

Input

3D-R2N2

Marrnet

Ours

Pseudo GT

Real Data

Figure 1: Some results reconstructed from synthetic data and
real data by the baseline approach (Choy et al. 2016), MarrNet (Wu et al. 2017) and our approach on the chair category.
Note the inconsistency with input images and missing parts
in the results of the former two methods.

Introduction
Recovering the dense 3D shapes of objects from 2D imageries is a fundamental AI problem which has many applications such as robot-environment interaction, 3D-based object retrieval, recognition and functionality estimate (Wang,
Liang, and Yu 2017; Zhu, Zhao, and Zhu 2015; Liang et
al. 2016), etc. Given a single image of an object, a human
can reason the 3D structure of the object reliably. However,
single-view 3D object reconstruction is very challenging for
computer algorithms.
Recently, a significant progress of single-view 3D reconstruction has been achieved by using deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) (Choy et al. 2016; Girdhar et al.
2016; Wu et al. 2016; Yan et al. 2016; Fan, Su, and Guibas
2017; Tulsiani et al. 2017b; Zhu et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2017;
Tulsiani, Efros, and Malik 2018). Most CNN-based methods reconstruct the object shapes using 2D and 3D convolutions in a 2D encoder-3D decoder structure with the volumetric 3D representation. The input to these CNNs are ob-

ject images taken under unknown viewpoints, while the output shapes are often aligned with the canonical viewpoint in
a single, pre-defined 3D coordinate system such that shape
regression is more tractable.
Although promising results have been shown by these
CNN-based methods, single-view 3D reconstruction is still
a challenging problem and the results are far from being perfect. One of the main difficulties lies in the object shape
variations which can be very large even in a same object
category. The appearance variations in the input images
caused by pose differences make this task even harder. Consequently, the results from CNN-based methods are prone to
missing some shape details and sometimes generate plausible shapes which, however, are inconsistent with input images, as shown in Figure 1.
In this paper, we propose an approach to improve the fidelity of the reconstructed shapes by CNNs. Our method
combined traditional wisdom into the network architecture.
It is motivated by two observations: 1) while directly recovering all the shape details in 3D is difficult, extracting the
projected shape silhouette on the 2D plane, i.e. segmenting

∗

Part of this work was done when HW was an intern at MSR.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8941

