The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Artificial Intelligence Competencies
for Data Science Undergraduate Curricula
Andrea Danyluk

Scott Buck

Williams College
47 Lab Campus Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
andrea@cs.williams.edu

Intel Corporation
5000 W. Chandler Blvd., m/s CH7-230
Chandler, AZ 85226
scott.buck@intel.com

Abstract

computing discipline-specific contributions to undergraduate data science curricula, as well as a call to create a joint
task force of the ACM with other (non-computing) societies to produce a complete volume that is global in scope.
While there have been several important curricular efforts
surrounding data science, they have either been regional
[e.g., the EDISON project in Europe (EDISON 2018)]; focused on core curricula without a full articulation of possible electives and connections to other disciplines [e.g., (DeVeaux et al. 2017)], or higher level statements on the importance of data science [e.g., (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2018)]. The draft of the
ACM Data Science Task Force report contains an introduction to the purpose and processes of the task force, a summary of two surveys fielded by the committee, a review of
other data science curricular reports and projects, itemization of computing discipline-specific Knowledge Areas, and
data science-relevant competencies in each of these areas.

In August 2017, the ACM Education Council initiated a task
force to add to the broad, interdisciplinary conversation on
data science, with an articulation of the role of computing discipline-specific contributions to this emerging field.
Specifically, the task force is seeking to define what the computing contributions are to this new field, in order to provide
guidance for computer science or similar departments offering data science programs of study at the undergraduate level.
The ACM Data Science Task Force has completed the initial
draft of a curricular report. The computing-knowledge areas
identified in the report are drawn from across computing disciplines and include several sub-areas of AI. This short paper
describes the overall project, highlights AI-relevant areas, and
seeks to open a dialog about the AI competencies that are to
be considered central to a data science undergraduate curriculum.

The ACM Data Science Task Force was created by the ACM
Education Council and tasked with articulating the role of
computing discipline-specific contributions to this emerging
field. The task force is developing recommendations for curricula at the undergraduate level, and has released a first
draft report for public discussion and comment. Here we
give a broad overview of this effort, describe the draft report and its contents, and call for a discussion with the AI
education community. AI and Data Science are by no means
synonymous, but there are many areas of AI that are directly
relevant to Data Science, including machine learning, computer vision, intelligent interfaces, and speech and natural
language processing. Our goal is to present the intersections
identified as being most central to Data Science, and solicit
feedback from the AI community.

ACM Data Science Survey
In late spring / summer 2018, the ACM Data Science Task
Force fielded two surveys to gather the computing community’s perspective on the relative importance of computing
concepts for data science. The academic survey asked academics whether their institution had any sort of data science
program at the undergraduate level, asked what type of program was offered, in what department(s) it was housed, and
what computing areas were required, elective, or not present
in the program. It also allowed respondents to add to the
list of computing areas. Finally, the survey asked participants whether their data science program had a “data science in context” requirement – i.e., a requirement that students apply data science to another area. The industry survey
roughly mirrored the academic one; however, the primary
question was whether the company looked for job applicants
with data science experience and what computing experience they required or preferred those applicants to have.

Overview of the Report Draft
The ACM, in partnership with other professional societies,
has been producing curricular recommendations for well
over 60 years (ACM 2018). The product of the ACM Data
Science Task Force will not be a complete volume of curricular recommendations in the sense of other ACM curricular volumes. Instead, it is intended to be part white paper
and part curricular volume: a thorough articulation of the

Other Data Science Reports and Projects
As noted above, important work has already been done in
the data science curriculum space. For example, in October
2015, the National Science Foundation (NSF) sponsored a
workshop with representatives of many perspectives on data
science (Cassel and Topi 2015). The EDISON Data Science

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9746

