The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

PARA BANK: Monolingual Bitext Generation and Sentential
Paraphrasing via Lexically-Constrained Neural Machine Translation
J. Edward Hu, Rachel Rudinger, Matt Post, Benjamin Van Durme
3400 North Charles Street
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, USA

Abstract
We present PARA BANK, a large-scale English paraphrase
dataset that surpasses prior work in both quantity and quality.
Following the approach of PARA NMT (Wieting and Gimpel,
2018), we train a Czech-English neural machine translation
(NMT) system to generate novel paraphrases of English reference sentences. By adding lexical constraints to the NMT
decoding procedure, however, we are able to produce multiple high-quality sentential paraphrases per source sentence,
yielding an English paraphrase resource with more than 4 billion generated tokens and exhibiting greater lexical diversity.
Using human judgments, we also demonstrate that PARA BANK’s paraphrases improve over PARA NMT on both semantic similarity and fluency. Finally, we use PARA BANK to
train a monolingual NMT model with the same support for
lexically-constrained decoding for sentence rewriting tasks.

1

Figure 1: Contrasting prior work (e.g., PARA NMT) on
building sentential paraphrase collections via translation,
PARA BANK conditions on both the source and target side
of a translation pair, employing positive and negative lexical
constraints derived from the reference to result in multiple,
diverse paraphrases.

Introduction

In natural languages, mappings between meaning and utterance may be many-to-many. Just as ambiguity allows for
multiple semantic interpretations of a single sentence, a single meaning can be realized by different sentences. The ability to identify and generate paraphrases has been pursued
in the context of many natural language processing (NLP)
tasks, e.g., semantic similarity, plagiarism detection, translation evaluation, monolingual transduction tasks such as
text simplification and style transfer, textual entailment, and
short-answer grading.
Paraphrastic resources exist at many levels of granularity,
e.g., WordNet (Miller, 1995) for word-level and the Paraphrase Database (PPDB) (Ganitkevitch, Van Durme, and
Callison-Burch, 2013) for phrase-level. We are interested in
building a large resource for sentence-level paraphrases in
English. In this work, we introduce PARA BANK, the largest
publicly-available collection of English paraphrases we are
aware of to date. We follow and extend the approach of Wieting and Gimpel (2018), who generate a set of 50 million
English paraphrases, under the name PARA NMT-50M, via
neural machine translation (NMT).
A part of PARA BANK is trained and decoded on the
same Czech-English parallel corpus (Bojar et al., 2016) as
PARA NMT. However, PARA BANK not only contains more

reference sentences but also more paraphrases per reference
than PARA NMT with overall improvements in lexical diversity, semantic similarity, and fluency. We are able to obtain a larger number of paraphrases per sentence by applying explicit lexical constraints to the NMT decoder, requiring specific words to appear (positive constraint) or not to
appear (negative constraint) in the decoded sentence. Using
PARA BANK, we train, and release to the public, a monolingual sentence re-writing system, which may be used to paraphrase unseen English sentences with lexical constraints.
The main contributions of this work are:
• A novel approach to translation-based generation of
monolingual bitext;
• The largest and highest quality English-to-English bitext
resource to date with 79.5 million references and predicted human-judgment scores;
• Manual assessment of candidate paraphrases on semantic
similarity, across a variety of generation strategies;
• A trained and freely released model for English-toEnglish rewriting, supporting positive and negative lexical
constraints.
PARA BANK is available for download at: http://nlp.jhu.
edu/parabank.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6521

