The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Weakly-Supervised Hierarchical Text Classification
Yu Meng, Jiaming Shen, Chao Zhang, Jiawei Han
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
{yumeng5, js2, czhang82, hanj}@illinois.edu

Abstract

train a set of local classifiers and make predictions in a topdown manner, or design global hierarchical loss functions
that regularize with the hierarchy. Most existing efforts for
hierarchical text classification rely on traditional text classifiers. Recently, deep neural networks have demonstrated
superior performance for flat text classification. Compared
with traditional classifiers, deep neural networks (Kim 2014;
Yang et al. 2016) largely reduce feature engineering efforts by
learning distributed representations that capture text semantics. Meanwhile, they provide stronger expressive power over
traditional classifiers, thereby yielding better performance
when large amounts of training data are available.
Motivated by the enjoyable properties of deep neural networks, we explore using deep neural networks for hierarchical text classification. Despite the success of deep neural
models in flat text classification and their advantages over
traditional classifiers, applying them to hierarchical text classification is nontrivial because of two major challenges.
The first challenge is that the training data deficiency prohibits neural models from being adopted. Neural models are
data hungry and require humans to provide tons of carefullylabeled documents for good performance. In many practical
scenarios, however, hand-labeling excessive documents often
requires domain expertise and can be too expensive to realize.
The second challenge is to determine the most appropriate
level for each document in the class hierarchy. In hierarchical
text classification, documents do not necessarily belong to
leaf nodes and may be better assigned to intermediate nodes.
However, there are no simple ways for existing deep neural
networks to automatically determine the best granularity for
a given document.
In this work, we propose a neural approach named
WeSHClass, for Weakly-Supervised Hierarchical Text
Classification and address the above two challenges. Our
approach is built upon deep neural networks, yet it requires
only a small amount of weak supervision instead of excessive
training data. Such weak supervision can be either a few (e.g.,
less than a dozen) labeled documents or class-correlated keywords, which can be easily provided by users. To leverage
such weak supervision for effective classification, our approach employs a novel pretrain-and-refine paradigm. Specifically, in the pre-training step, we leverage user-provided
seeds to learn a spherical distribution for each class, and
then generate pseudo documents from a language model

Hierarchical text classification, which aims to classify text
documents into a given hierarchy, is an important task in
many real-world applications. Recently, deep neural models
are gaining increasing popularity for text classification due
to their expressive power and minimum requirement for feature engineering. However, applying deep neural networks
for hierarchical text classification remains challenging, because they heavily rely on a large amount of training data and
meanwhile cannot easily determine appropriate levels of documents in the hierarchical setting. In this paper, we propose a
weakly-supervised neural method for hierarchical text classification. Our method does not require a large amount of training
data but requires only easy-to-provide weak supervision signals such as a few class-related documents or keywords. Our
method effectively leverages such weak supervision signals
to generate pseudo documents for model pre-training, and
then performs self-training on real unlabeled data to iteratively
refine the model. During the training process, our model features a hierarchical neural structure, which mimics the given
hierarchy and is capable of determining the proper levels for
documents with a blocking mechanism. Experiments on three
datasets from different domains demonstrate the efficacy of
our method compared with a comprehensive set of baselines.

Introduction
Hierarchical text classification, which aims at classifying text
documents into classes that are organized into a hierarchy,
is an important text mining and natural language processing
task. Unlike flat text classification, hierarchical text classification considers the interrelationships among classes and
allows for organizing documents into a natural hierarchical
structure. It has a wide variety of applications such as semantic classification (Tang, Qin, and Liu 2015), question
answering (Li and Roth 2002), and web search organization
(Dumais and Chen 2000).
Traditional flat text classifiers (e.g., SVM, logistic regression) have been tailored in various ways for hierarchical text
classification. Early attempts (Ceci and Malerba 2006) disregard the relationships among classes and treat hierarchical
classification tasks as flat ones. Later approaches (Dumais
and Chen 2000; Liu et al. 2005; Cai and Hofmann 2004)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6826

