The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Building Causal Graphs from Medical Literature and Electronic Medical Records
Galia Nordon

Gideon Koren

Varda Shalev

Technion
Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

Maccabi-Kahn
Institute of Research and Innovation
Tel-Aviv, Israel

Maccabi-Kahn
Institute of Research and Innovation
Tel-Aviv, Israel

Benny Kimelfeld

Uri Shalit

Kira Radinsky

Technion
Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

Technion
Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

Technion
Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

Abstract

knowledge. EMRs are being widely adopted for use in observational causal studies, where the causal effect of an intervention is sought (Avillach et al. 2012; Stuart et al. 2013;
Casucci et al. 2017; Gottlieb et al. 2017). Crucial to observational studies is the question of which covariates may
influence the studied effect. These covariates, called confounders and mediators (depending on whether they cause
or are caused by the intervention), need to be taken into consideration when analyzing the data.
While ostensibly the large amount of covariates in EMR
data is an advantage, in practice it often creates difficulties
in observational studies. Standard methods for causal inference in observational studies, such as propensity score adjustment or matching, often fail when the number of covariates is large, e.g. in the thousands. This is due to the
fact that it is very difficult to define good metrics in highdimensions, and that propensity scores often show lack of
overlap in high-dimensions (D’Amour et al. 2017). A common practice (Triantafillou et al. 2017) is therefore to look
at a small set of confounders and mediators that are believed
to be most relevant to the problem at hand. This set is usually built manually by experts. However, expert knowledge
is sometimes limited and not fully reproducible, and moreover, it does not account for the full potential of EMRs to
discover new knowledge. In this work, we focus on the challenge of automatically constructing useful causal graphs.
Several notions of health graphs have been proposed as
means of capturing expert medical knowledge from the literature (Rotmensch et al. 2017; Goodwin and M. Harabagiu
2013). Yet, adapting these graphs for causal inference carries
numerous challenges. It is difficult to identify confounders
and mediators from disconnected pieces of causality knowledge extracted from text.
In this work, we propose a new approach to constructing a
causal graph from observational data originating from EMR,
while incorporating knowledge about interventional distributions gained through the countless experiments present in
the medical literature (a repository of 27 million medical abstracts and citations from PubMed). Our approach consists

Large repositories of medical data, such as Electronic Medical Record (EMR) data, are recognized as promising sources
for knowledge discovery. Effective analysis of such repositories often necessitate a thorough understanding of dependencies in the data. For example, if the patient age is ignored,
then one might wrongly conclude a causal relationship between cataract and hypertension. Such confounding variables
are often identified by causal graphs, where variables are connected by causal relationships. Current approaches to automatically building such graphs are based on text analysis over
medical literature; yet, the result is typically a large graph of
low precision. There are statistical methods for constructing
causal graphs from observational data, but they are less suitable for dealing with a large number of covariates, which is
the case in EMR data. Consequently, confounding variables
are often identified by medical domain experts via a manual,
expensive, and time-consuming process.
We present a novel approach for automatically constructing
causal graphs between medical conditions. The first part is a
novel graph-based method to better capture causal relationships implied by medical literature, especially in the presence of multiple causal factors. Yet even after using these
advanced text-analysis methods, the text data still contains
many weak or uncertain causal connections. Therefore, we
construct a second graph for these terms based on an EMR
repository of over 1.5M patients. We combine the two graphs,
leaving only edges that have both medical-text-based and observational evidence. We examine several strategies to carry
out our approach, and compare the precision of the resulting
graphs using medical experts. Our results show a significant
improvement in the precision of any of our methods compared to the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Electronic Medical Record (EMR) data is a powerful resource for discovering medical and other health-related
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1102

