The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Forming Probably Stable Communities with Limited Interactions
Ayumi Igarashi

Jakub Sliwinski

Yair Zick

Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
igarashi@agent.inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp

ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
jsliwinski@ethz.ch

National University of Singapore
Singapore
zick@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

(b) Group formation on social media: given a social media
network (e.g. Facebook), people prefer being affiliated
with certain groups; however, they are limited to joining
groups that already contain their friends.

A community needs to be partitioned into disjoint groups;
each community member has an underlying preference over
the groups that they would want to be a member of. We are interested in finding a stable community structure: one where no
subset of members S wants to deviate from the current structure. We model this setting as a hedonic game, where players
are connected by an underlying interaction network, and can
only consider joining groups that are connected subgraphs of
the underlying graph. We analyze the relation between network structure, and one’s capability to infer statistically stable
(also known as PAC stable) player partitions from data. We
show that when the interaction network is a forest, one can
efficiently infer PAC stable coalition structures. Furthermore,
when the underlying interaction graph is not a forest, efficient
PAC stabilizability is no longer achievable. Thus, our results
completely characterize when one can leverage the underlying
graph structure in order to compute PAC stable outcomes for
hedonic games. Finally, given an unknown underlying interaction network, we show that it is NP-hard to decide whether
there exists a forest consistent with data samples from the
network.

1

Constrained coalition formation problems are often modeled
as hedonic games. Hedonic games formally capture a simple,
yet compelling, paradigm: how does one partition players
into groups, while factoring individual players’ preferences?
The literature on hedonic games is primarily focused on finding “good” coalition structures — partitions of players into
disjoint groups. A set of coalition structures satisfying certain desiderata is called a solution concept. A central hedonic
solution concept is coalitional stability: given a coalition
structure π, we say that a set of players (also known as a
coalition) S can deviate from π if every i ∈ S prefers S to
its assigned group under π; a coalition structure π is stable if
no coalition S can deviate. In other words, S contains at least
one player i who prefers its current coalition (denoted π(i))
to S. The set of stable coalition structures — also known
as the core of the hedonic game — may be empty; what’s
worse, even when it is known to be non-empty, finding a
stable coalition structure may be computationally intractable.
Moreover, efficient algorithms for finding stable coalition
structures often assume full knowledge of the underlying hedonic game; that is, in order to work, the algorithm needs to
have either oracle access to player preferences (i.e. queries of
the form ‘does player i prefer coalition S to coalition T ?’), or
structural knowledge of the underlying preference structure
(e.g. some concise representation of player preferences that
one can leverage in order to obtain a poly-time algorithm).
Neither assumption is realistic in practice: eliciting user
preferences is notoriously difficult, especially over combinatorially complex domains such as subsets of players. If one
forgoes preference elicitation and opts for mathematically
modeling preferences (e.g. assuming that users have additive
preferences over coalition members), it is not entirely obvious what mathematical model of user preferences is valid.
This leads us to the following natural question: can we find
a stable coalition structure when player preferences are unknown? Recent works (Balcan, Procaccia, and Zick 2015;
Balkanski, Syed, and Vassilvitskii 2017; Sliwinski and Zick
2017) propose a statistical approach to stability in collaborative environments. In this framework, one assumes the
existence of user preference data over some coalitions, which

Introduction

A professor wants her students to complete a group programming project. In order to do so, students should divide into
project groups with a few students in each; naturally, some
groups will be objectively better than others. However, students seldom try to find a group that’s objectively optimal
for them; they would rather join groups that have at least
one or two of their friends. This type of scenario falls into
the realm of constrained coalition formation; in other words,
how should we partition a group of people given that (a) they
have preferences over the groups they are assigned to and
(b) they have limited interactions with one another? Other
scenarios fitting this description include
(a) Seating arrangements at a wedding (or at conference banquets): some guests should absolutely not be seated together, while others would probably enjoy one another’s
company. However, it should always be the case that
every guest has at least one acquaintance seated at their
table.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2053

