The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Beyond Speech: Generalizing D-Vectors for Biometric Verification∗
Jacob Baldwin, Ryan Burnham, Andrew Meyer, Robert Dora, Robert Wright
Assured Information Security, Inc.
153 Brooks Rd.
Rome, NY 13441
{baldwinj, burnhamr, meyera, dorar, wrightr}@ainfosec.com

Abstract

verification known as Deep Vectors (D-Vectors) (Variani et
al. 2014). Speaker verification, and biometric verification
in general, is the process of positively identifying an individual based upon their unique biometric patterns, such as
speech. This technology has many important applications
including secure computer access (Smith 2018) and fraud
detection (Cowley 2018).
D-Vectors automatically extracts a latent feature space
from speech audio that effectively separates the uniquenesses of individuals. This approach has demonstrated significant improvements over competing speaker verification
methods with regard to equal error rates (EER) and robustness to noise (Variani et al. 2014; Heigold et al. 2016); however, the D-Vectors approach and models are not passive,
require explicitly formatted input to function, and specific
to speaker verification. As such, D-Vectors has not been explored outside of speaker verification.
In this paper, we present a novel framework, inspired by
D-Vectors, that generalizes beyond speaker verification and
can readily be applied to any biometric verification problem. The only requirements for the application of this framework are user-labeled data and a parameterized model for
feature extraction. As evidence of the framework’s generality, we apply it to two distinctly different and challenging
behavioral verification problems, keystroke and mobile gait.
Unlike in prior applications of D-Vectors, the data was collected passively and few assumptions are made upon input
sequences. Additionally, we provide an empirical evaluation
that shows our approach is more robust and significantly outperforms modern state-of-the-art (SOA) verification methods for these modalities. Our key contributions can be summarized as follows:
• Generalization of D-Vectors as a framework for any biometric verification problem
• Improvements to the robustness of similarity scoring by
incorporating two additional distance measures
• Detailed descriptions of how the framework can be applied to keystroke and mobile gait verification
• A novel featurization model for keystroke data that breaks
from four decades of research and dramatically improves
performance
• A comprehensive empirical study comparing our approach across two distinct domains and three independent

Deep learning based automatic feature extraction methods
have radically transformed speaker identification and facial
recognition. Current approaches are typically specialized for
individual domains, such as Deep Vectors (D-Vectors) for
speaker identification. We provide two distinct contributions:
a generalized framework for biometric verification inspired
by D-Vectors and novel models that outperform current stateof-the-art approaches. Our approach supports substitution of
various feature extraction models and improves the robustness of verification tests across domains. We demonstrate the
framework and models for two different behavioral biometric
verification problems: keystroke and mobile gait. We present
a comprehensive empirical analysis comparing our framework to the state-of-the-art in both domains. Our models perform verification with higher accuracy using orders of magnitude less data than state-of-the-art approaches in both domains. We believe that the combination of high accuracy and
practical data requirements will enable application of behavioral biometric models outside of the laboratory in support of
much-needed improvements to cyber security.

Introduction
Automatic feature extraction is revolutionizing the application of machine learning. The advent of deep learning
has given rise to viable automatic feature extraction methods (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015) that derive latent
features from high-dimensional problem spaces with littleto-no domain knowledge. This approach has been demonstrably more effective than traditional handcrafted features,
leading to breakthroughs in computer vision (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), speech recognition (Graves,
Mohamed, and Hinton 2013), and artificial intelligence (Silver and Hassabis 2016).
Deep learning is leading to similar advancements in
biometrics, where it has been successfully applied to facial (Taigman et al. 2014) and speaker recognition (Snyder et
al. 2017). One such advancement is an approach for speaker
∗

This research was developed with funding from the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). The views, opinions and/or findings expressed are those of the author and should
not be interpreted as representing the official views or policies of
the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

842

