The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Model-Based Diagnosis for Cyber-Physical Production Systems
Based on Machine Learning and Residual-Based Diagnosis Models
Andreas Bunte

Benno Stein

Oliver Niggemann

OWL University of Applied Sciences
Institute Industrial IT
Langenbruch 6, 32657 Lemgo, Germany
andreas.bunte@hs-owl.de

Bauhaus-Universität Weimar
Faculty of Media, Webis Group
99421 Weimar, Germany
benno.stein@uni-weimar.de

OWL University of Applied Sciences
Institute Industrial IT
Langenbruch 6, 32657 Lemgo, Germany
oliver.niggemann@hs-owl.de

Abstract

system model if all components function correctly. If an inconsistency between the system model and an observation is
detected, assumptions about the correct behavior of components are withdrawn until all inconsistencies disappear; the
withdrawn assumptions are hence called diagnoses. This approach also has limitations, especially when MBD is used
for large, dynamic, and especially, hybrid CPPSs.
Challenge 1: Integration of Continuous Models.
MBD requires a system description in a suitable logic (Reiter 1987) which makes MBD predestined for discrete systems. But CPPSs are typically hybrid and combine both
value discrete and value continuous variables. Therefore,
models of multiple continuous variables have to be integrated into the diagnosis system: often, a change in the values of discrete variables leads to a different system behavior,
called a mode change (Niggemann and Lohweg 2015). Due
to a mode change, the system’s models are changed and continuous signals can shift abruptly. For example, turning on a
heater triggers a mode change and will increase the power
consumption by entering a new mode.
Challenge 2: Creation of Diagnosis Models.
The creation of a holistic qualitative model, which is required for existing approaches, has to cover the whole system description. Especially in large CPPSs it is challenging
to create such models since they are often designed manually. It requires a lot of knowledge about the system and its
causalities, and only experts can create them. However, even
for experts it is time consuming and costly. Since CPPSs are
adaptive, the models may need to be adapted often, which is
not feasible. Hence, for CPPSs the models should be learned
automatically (Niggemann and Lohweg 2015).
Challenge 3: Diagnosis Runtime.
The diagnosis runtime is challenging for large-scale systems (Stern et al. 2015). The computation of the often used
minimal cardinality diagnosis, a diagnosis with the smallest
number of components, is NP-hard. I.e., algorithms have an
exponential runtime with respect to the number of components (Metodi et al. 2014). To enable an efficient diagnosis
for large-scale CPPSs, the search space has to be reduced.
Main idea of this paper is a Residual-Based Diagnosis
Algorithm (RDA), which is sketched in Fig. 1. First, in the
training phase, a model of the normal behavior of the CPPS
is learned from data (top, right-hand side of the figure).

This paper introduces a novel approach to Model-Based Diagnosis (MBD) for hybrid technical systems. Unlike existing approaches which normally rely on qualitative diagnosis models expressed in logic, our approach applies a learned
quantitative model that is used to derive residuals. Based on
these residuals a diagnosis model is generated and used for a
root cause identification. The new solution has several advantages such as the easy integration of new machine learning
algorithms into MBD, a seamless integration of qualitative
models, and a significant speed-up of the diagnosis runtime.
The paper at hand formally defines the new approach, outlines its advantages and drawbacks, and presents an evaluation with real-world use cases.

Introduction
Current trends in production lead toward intelligent modular
production systems, called Cyber Physical Production System (CPPSs). Modular CPPSs are highly adaptive and can
be configured in many different ways to produce a broad
range of products. If such a CPPS fails, operators may not
have gathered sufficient experience with the current configuration, and efficient manual diagnoses becomes harder if not
impossible. An adaptive diagnosis system is considered the
silver bullet to tackle a quick and reliable CPPS repair.
However, diagnosis concepts from today’s production
systems are not applicable in this regard: Heuristic methods, such as alarm generation, are hard to create and maintain for large, quickly changing CPPSs and require too much
manual engineering effort. Model-based approaches can be
used for discrete CPPSs, but the models have to be both created and tested manually after every system adaption. Additionally, the diagnosis runtime become an important issue
in large systems (Stern et al. 2015). Nevertheless, the MBD
approach is promising for the future needs.
Model-Based Diagnosis (MBD) was introduced by Reiter (1987) as Diagnosis from First Principles and by de
Kleer and Williams (1987) as General Diagnostic Engine
(GDE). It is a generic diagnosis technique which uses a system model in logic as a basis. Observations from the system
are added and they are expected to stay consistent with the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2727

