The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Quasi-Perfect Stackelberg Equilibrium
Alberto Marchesi,1 Gabriele Farina,2 Christian Kroer,2 Nicola Gatti,1 Tuomas Sandholm2
1

2

Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, I-20133, Milan, Italy
Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it, gfarina@cs.cmu.edu, ckroer@cs.cmu.edu,
nicola.gatti@polimi.it, sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

and this excludes some unreasonable strategies (Mertens
1995). Computation of NE refinements has received extensive attention in the literature. In the two-player case, Miltersen and Sørensen (2010) provide algorithms for finding a
QPE, while Farina and Gatti (2017) for finding an EFPE.
In particular, Miltersen and Sørensen (2010) show that a
strict subset of the QPEs can be found when the sequence
form is subject to a specific perturbation, while Farina and
Gatti (2017) do the same for the EFPE. Iterative algorithms
for such perturbed games in the zero-sum EFPE setting were
introduced by Kroer, Farina, and Sandholm (2017) and Farina, Kroer, and Sandholm (2017).1
In Stackelberg games, a leader commits to a (possibly
mixed) strategy first, and then a follower best responds to
that strategy (von Stackelberg 1934). Stackelberg games
have received significant attention in recent years (Conitzer
and Sandholm 2006) due to their applications, for example,
in security domains (Tambe 2011).
Work on equilibrium refinements in the context of Stackelberg extensive-form games has only started recently. Akin
to usual extensive-form game refinements, Stackelberg equilibrium (SE) refinements should guarantee both the optimality of the commitment off the equilibrium path and some
form of robustness against small trembles of the opponent.
To our knowledge, there is only one prior study of refinements for Stackelberg extensive-form games (Farina et
al. 2018). They characterize a set of SE refinements based
on what solutions can be obtained by imposing a perturbation scheme on the game—where players tremble onto suboptimal strategies with some small probabilities—and tak-

Abstract
Equilibrium refinements are important in extensive-form (i.e.,
tree-form) games, where they amend weaknesses of the Nash
equilibrium concept by requiring sequential rationality and
other beneficial properties. One of the most attractive refinement concepts is quasi-perfect equilibrium. While quasiperfection has been studied in extensive-form games, it is
poorly understood in Stackelberg settings—that is, settings
where a leader can commit to a strategy—which are important for modeling, for example, security games. In this paper, we introduce the axiomatic definition of quasi-perfect
Stackelberg equilibrium. We develop a broad class of game
perturbation schemes that lead to them in the limit. Our
class of perturbation schemes strictly generalizes prior perturbation schemes introduced for the computation of (nonStackelberg) quasi-perfect equilibria. Based on our perturbation schemes, we develop a branch-and-bound algorithm for
computing a quasi-perfect Stackelberg equilibrium. It leverages a perturbed variant of the linear program for computing
a Stackelberg extensive-form correlated equilibrium. Experiments show that our algorithm can be used to find an approximate quasi-perfect Stackelberg equilibrium in games with
thousands of nodes.

1

Introduction

The main solution concept in game theory, Nash equilibrium
(NE), may prescribe non-credible strategies in extensiveform (i.e., tree-form) games (EFGs). To solve that problem, equilibrium refinements have been proposed for such
games (Selten 1975). Among the plethora of NE refinements (see van Damme (1987) for details), the quasi-perfect
equilibrium (QPE), proposed by Van Damme (1984), plays
a central role, and it is considered one of the most attractive NE refinement concepts, as argued, for example,
by Mertens (1995). The rationale behind the QPE concept is
that every player, in every information set, plays her best response to perturbed—that is, subject to trembles—strategies
of the opponents. Unlike the normal-form perfect equilibrium, the QPE guarantees that the strategies of the players
are sequentially rational, and furthermore, quasi-perfection
implies normal-form perfection. Unlike the extensive-form
perfect equilibrium (EFPE), in a QPE every player (reasonably) assumes that she will not make mistakes in the future,

1

Normal-form proper equilibrium is a refinement of
QPE (Van Damme 1984), but it has drawbacks: (1) it requires
players to assume a very specific structure on trembles which is
not necessarily well-motivated, (2) the minimum tremble magnitudes depend on the action probabilities, which begets additional
computational challenges, and (3) it is unknown whether it can be
represented via perturbation schemes, even in the non-Stackelberg
setting. For the zero-sum case, Miltersen and Sørensen (2008)
show a polynomial-time approach using the sequence form, but it
is based on solving a large (possibly linear in game-size) number
of LPs, and thus may not be practical. For the general-sum case, it
is not even known whether the sequence form can be applied; the
only known approach relies on conversion to normal form—which
causes an exponential blow-up—and then applying a pivoting
algorithm (Sørensen 2012).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2117

