The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Approximate Kernel Selection with Strong Approximate Consistency
Lizhong Ding,1,∗ Yong Liu,3 Shizhong Liao,4 Yu Li,2 Peng Yang,2
Yijie Pan,5 Chao Huang,6 Ling Shao,1 Xin Gao2,∗
1

2

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
3
Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, China 4 Tianjin University, China
5
Ningbo Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China
6
Ningbo Institute of Information Technology Application, CAS, China
Abstract

mon practice to resort to estimates of the generalization error. One can either use empirical estimates that are based on
experiments, or theoretical estimates that are based on the
upper bounds of the generalization error. Cross-validation
(CV) is a well-known empirical estimate of the generalization error. Leave-one-out (LOO), the extreme form of
CV, provides an almost unbiased estimate of the generalization error. However, the naı̈ve kernel selection strategy
of CV, exhaustive search in the kernel parameter space, is
computationally intensive. To speed up CV-based methods,
approximate CV approaches were proposed, such as efficient LOO (Cawley and Talbot 2010) and Bouligand influence function CV (BIFCV) (Liu, Jiang, and Liao 2014;
Liu et al. 2018). Employing the theoretical estimate bounds
of the generalization error as kernel selection criteria is another alternative to experimental methods. Different boundbased criteria introduce different measures of the capacity
of the hypothesis space (Bartlett, Boucheron, and Lugosi
2002; Ding et al. 2018), such as Rademacher complexity
(Bartlett and Mendelson 2002), local Rademacher complexity (Cortes, Kloft, and Mohri 2013; Li et al. 2018), maximal
discrepancy (Bartlett, Boucheron, and Lugosi 2002), maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Sriperumbudur et al. 2009;
Gretton et al. 2012; Song et al. 2012; Ding et al. 2019), covering number (Ding and Liao 2014b) and effective dimensionality (Zhang 2005). However, the computational complexities of the existing kernel selection criteria are at least
quadratic in the number of examples l, i.e., O(l2 ). This kind
of scalability is prohibitive for large-scale problems.

Kernel selection is fundamental to the generalization performance of kernel-based learning algorithms. Approximate kernel selection is an efficient kernel selection approach that exploits the convergence property of the kernel selection criteria and the computational virtue of kernel matrix approximation. The convergence property is measured by the notion of
approximate consistency. For the existing Nyström approximations, whose sampling distributions are independent of the
specific learning task at hand, it is difficult to establish the
strong approximate consistency. They mainly focus on the
quality of the low-rank matrix approximation, rather than the
performance of the kernel selection criterion used in conjunction with the approximate matrix. In this paper, we propose
a novel Nyström approximate kernel selection algorithm by
customizing a criterion-driven adaptive sampling distribution
for the Nyström approximation, which adaptively reduces the
error between the approximate and accurate criteria. We theoretically derive the strong approximate consistency of the
proposed Nyström approximate kernel selection algorithm.
Finally, we empirically evaluate the approximate consistency
of our algorithm as compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Kernel-based learning provides a way to implicitly transform data into a new feature space, which allows the learning of nonlinear functions using linear classifiers or regressors in the kernel-induced feature space. The kernel function
determines the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS),
which is the hypothesis space of kernel-based learning and
hence has an essential influence on the performance of the
resulting hypothesis. Therefore, the selection of the kernel function is a central problem in kernel-based learning
(Micchelli and Pontil 2005). The problem of kernel selection is closely linked to the generalization error of kernelbased learning algorithms. The kernel with the smallest generalization error is usually regarded as the optimal kernel
(Bartlett, Boucheron, and Lugosi 2002; Liu et al. 2017;
Liu and Liao 2015). However, in practice one cannot compute the generalization error because the underlying probability distribution of the data is unknown. It is thus com-

Approximate kernel selection is an emerging and efficient
kernel selection approach, which exploits the convergence
property of the kernel selection criteria as well as the computational virtue of kernel matrix approximation (Ding and
Liao 2011; 2014a; 2017). The basic principle of approximate kernel selection is that it is sufficient to calculate approximate kernel selection criteria, which can discriminate
the (nearly) optimal kernel from other candidates with high
efficiency. Two theoretical problems are faced by approximate kernel selection: how kernel matrix approximation impacts the kernel selection criterion and whether this impact
can be ignored for large enough examples. In (Ding and Liao
2014a), the approximate consistency was first defined to theoretically answer these questions, by studying under what
conditions and at what speed the approximate kernel selec-

∗
Corresponding authors (email: lizhong.ding@inceptioniai.org,
xin.gao@kaust.edu.sa)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3462

