The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Diverse Exploration via Conjugate Policies for Policy Gradient Methods
Andrew Cohen

Xingye Qiao

Lei Yu

Binghamton University
acohen13@binghamton.edu

Binghamton University
qiao@math.binghamton.edu

Binghamton University
Yantai University
lyu@cs.binghamton.edu

Elliot Way

Xiangrong Tong

Binghamton University
eway1@binghamton.edu

Yantai University
txr@ytu.edu.cn

Abstract

an algorithmic solution to a unique challenge in PG methods: to maximally explore local policy space in order to improve the gradient estimate while ensuring performance.
Parameter space noise for exploration (Plappert et al.
2018) can be thought of as a DE approach specific to the PG
context. To achieve exploration, different behavior policies
are generated by randomly perturbing policy parameters. To
maintain the guarantees of the policy improvement step from
the previous iteration, the magnitude of these perturbations
has to be limited which inherently limits exploration. Thus,
for effective exploration in PG methods, we need an optimal
diversity objective and a principled approach of maximizing
diversity. In light of this, we propose DE by conjugate policies that maximize a theoretically justified Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence objective for exploration in PG methods.
The novel contributions of this paper are three–fold. First,
it proposes a DE solution via conjugate policies for natural
policy gradient (NPG) methods. DE learns and deploys a set
of conjugate policies in the local region of policy space and
follows the natural gradient descent direction during each
policy improvement iteration.
Second, it provides formal explanation for why DE via
conjugate policies is effective in NPG methods. Our theoretical results show that: (1) maximizing the diversity (in
terms of KL divergence) among perturbed policies is inversely related to the variance of the perturbed gradient estimate, contributing to more accurate policy updates; and (2)
conjugate policies generated by conjugate vectors maximize
pairwise KL divergence among a constrained number of perturbations. In addition to justifying DE via conjugate policies, these theoretical results explain why parameter space
noise (Plappert et al. 2018) improves upon NPG methods
but is not optimal in terms of the maximum diversity objective proposed in this work.
Finally, it develops a general algorithmic framework of
DE via conjugate policies for NPG methods. The algorithm
efficiently generates conjugate policies by taking advantage
of conjugate vectors produced in each policy improvement
iteration when computing the natural gradient descent direction. Experimental results based on Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al. 2015) on three continuous control domains show that TRPO with DE significantly
outperforms the baseline TRPO as well as TRPO with random perturbations.

We address the challenge of effective exploration while maintaining good performance in policy gradient methods. As a
solution, we propose diverse exploration (DE) via conjugate
policies. DE learns and deploys a set of conjugate policies
which can be conveniently generated as a byproduct of conjugate gradient descent. We provide both theoretical and empirical results showing the effectiveness of DE at achieving
exploration, improving policy performance, and the advantage of DE over exploration by random policy perturbations.

Introduction
Policy gradient (PG) (Peters and Schaal 2008; Schulman et
al. 2015; Sutton et al. 1999; Wu et al. 2017) methods in
reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998) have
shown the ability to train large function approximators with
many parameters but suffer from slow convergence and data
inefficiency due to a lack of exploration. Achieving exploration while maintaining effective operations is a challenging problem as exploratory decisions may degrade performance. Conventional exploration strategies which achieve
exploration via noisy action selection (like -greedy (Sutton
and Barto 1998)) or actively reducing uncertainty (like RMAX (Brafman and Tennenholtz 2003)) do not guarantee
performance of the behavior policy.
This work follows an alternative line that performs exploration in policy space, and is inspired by two recent advances: Diverse Exploration (DE) (Cohen, Yu, and Wright
2018) and parameter space noise for exploration (Plappert
et al. 2018). The key insight of DE is that, in many domains,
there exist multiple different policies at various levels of policy quality. Effective exploration can be achieved without
sacrificing exploitation if an agent learns and deploys a set
of diverse behavior policies within some policy performance
constraint. This work shares a similar intuitive motivation in
the context of PG methods: multiple parameterizations of
“good” but, importantly, different policies exist in the local
region of a main policy. Deploying a set of these policies increases the knowledge of the local region and can improve
the gradient estimate in policy updates. Though similarly
motivated, this work provides distinct theoretical results and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3404

