The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Solving Large Extensive-Form Games with Strategy Constraints
Trevor Davis,1 Kevin Waugh,2 Michael Bowling2,1
1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
2
DeepMind
trdavis1@ualberta.ca, {waughk, bowlingm}@google.com

Abstract

One approach for handling multiple objectives is to use a
linear combination of per-objective utilities. This approach
has been used in EFGs to “tilt” poker agents toward taking
specific actions (Johanson et al. 2011), and to mix between
cost minimization and risk mitigation in sequential security
games (Lisý, Davis, and Bowling 2016). However, objectives are typically measured on incommensurable scales. This
leads to dubious combinations of weights often selected by
trial-and-error.

Extensive-form games are a common model for multiagent
interactions with imperfect information. In two-player zerosum games, the typical solution concept is a Nash equilibrium
over the unconstrained strategy set for each player. In many
situations, however, we would like to constrain the set of possible strategies. For example, constraints are a natural way to
model limited resources, risk mitigation, safety, consistency
with past observations of behavior, or other secondary objectives for an agent. In small games, optimal strategies under
linear constraints can be found by solving a linear program;
however, state-of-the-art algorithms for solving large games
cannot handle general constraints. In this work we introduce
a generalized form of Counterfactual Regret Minimization
that provably finds optimal strategies under any feasible set of
convex constraints. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
algorithm for finding strategies that mitigate risk in security
games, and for opponent modeling in poker games when given
only partial observations of private information.

1

A second approach is to constrain the agents’ strategy
spaces directly. For example, rather than minimizing the
expected cost, we use a hard constraint that disqualifies highcost strategies. Using such constraints has been extensively
studied in single-agent perfect information settings (Altman
1999) and partial information settings (Isom, Meyn, and
Braatz 2008; Santana, Thiébaux, and Williams 2016), as well
as in (non-sequential) security games (Brown et al. 2014).
Incorporating strategy constraints when solving EFGs
presents a unique challenge. Nash equilibria can be found by
solving a linear program (LP) derived using the sequenceform representation (Koller, Megiddo, and von Stengel 1996).
This LP is easily modified to incorporate linear strategy constraints; however, LPs do not scale to large games. Specialized algorithms for efficiently solving large games, such as
an instantiation of Nesterov’s excessive gap technique (EGT)
(Hoda et al. 2010) as well as counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al. 2008) and its variants (Lanctot
et al. 2009; Tammelin et al. 2015), cannot integrate arbitrary
strategy constraints directly. Currently, the only large-scale
approach is restricted to constraints that consider only individual decisions (Farina, Kroer, and Sandholm 2017).

Introduction

Multiagent interactions are often modeled using extensiveform games (EFGs), a powerful framework that incoporates
sequential actions, hidden information, and stochastic events.
Recent research has focused on computing approximately
optimal strategies in large extensive-form games, resulting in
a solution to heads-up limit Texas Hold’em, a game with approximately 1017 states (Bowling et al. 2015), and in two independent super-human computer agents for the much larger
heads-up no-limit Texas Hold’em (Moravčı́k et al. 2017;
Brown and Sandholm 2018).
When modeling an interaction with an EFG, for each outcome we must specify the agents’ utility, a cardinal measure
of the outcome’s desirability. Utility is particularly difficult to
specify. Take, for example, situations where an agent has multiple objectives to balance: a defender in a security game with
the primary objective of protecting a target and a secondary
objective of minimizing expected cost, or a robot operating
in a dangerous environment with a primary task to complete
and a secondary objective of minimizing damage to itself and
others. How these objectives combine into a single value, the
agent’s utility, is ill-specified and error prone.

In this work we present the first scalable algorithm for
solving EFGs with arbitrary convex strategy constraints. Our
algorithm, Constrained CFR, provably converges towards
a strategy profile that is minimax optimal under √
the given
constraints. It does this while retaining the O(1/ T ) convergence rate of CFR and requiring additional memory proportional to the number of constraints. We demonstrate the
empirical effectiveness of Constrained CFR by comparing
its solution to that of an LP solver in a security game. We
also present a novel constraint-based technique for opponent
modeling with partial observations in a small poker game.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1861

