The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Knowledge-Driven Encode, Retrieve,
Paraphrase for Medical Image Report Generation
Christy Y. Li,∗1 Xiaodan Liang,†2 Zhiting Hu,2 Eric P. Xing3
1

Duke University, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Petuum, Inc
yl558@duke.edu, {xiaodan1,zhitingh}@cs.cmu.edu, eric.xing@petuum.com.

Abstract

modeling (Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015). Current visual text
generation approaches tend to generate plausible sentences
that look natural by the language model but poor at finding visual groundings. Although some approaches have
been proposed to alleviate this problem (Lu et al. 2018;
Anderson et al. 2018), most of them ignore the internal
knowledge structure of the task at hand. However, most
real-world data and problems exhibit complex and dynamic
structures such as intrinsic relations among discrete entities under nature’s law (Taskar, Guestrin, and Koller 2004;
Hu et al. 2016). Knowledge graph, as one of the most powerful representations of dynamic graph-structured knowledge (Mitchell et al. 2018; Bizer, Heath, and Berners-Lee
2011), complements the learning-based approaches by explicitly modeling the domain-specific knowledge structure
and relational inductive bias. Knowledge graph also allows
incorporating priors, which is proven useful for tasks where
universal knowledge is desired or certain constraints have to
be met (Battaglia et al. 2017; Liang, Hu, and Xing 2018).
As an emerging task of long text generation of practical use, medical image report generation (Li et al. 2018;
Jing, Xie, and Xing 2018) must satisfy more critical protocols and ensure the correctness of medical terminology usage. As shown in Figure 1, a medical report consists of a
finding section describing medical observations in details of
both normal and abnormal features, an impression or conclusion sentence indicating the most prominent medical observation, and peripheral sections such as patient’s information
and indications. Among these sections, the finding section
is considered as the most important component and is expected to 1) cover contents of key relevant aspects such as
heart size, lung opacity, and bone structure; 2) correctly detect any abnormalities and support with details such as the
location and shape of the abnormality; 3) describe potential
diseases such as effusion, pneumothorax and consolidation.
It is often observed that, to write a medical image report, radiologists first check a patient’s images for abnormal
findings, then write reports by following certain templates,
and adjusting statements in the templates for each individual
case when necessary (Hong and Kahn 2013). To mimic this
procedure, we propose to formulate medical report writing
as a knowledge-driven encode, retrieve, paraphrase (KERP)
process. In particular, KERP first invokes an Encode module to transform visual features of medical images into an

Generating long and semantic-coherent reports to describe
medical images poses great challenges towards bridging visual and linguistic modalities, incorporating medical domain
knowledge, and generating realistic and accurate descriptions. We propose a novel Knowledge-driven Encode, Retrieve, Paraphrase (KERP) approach which reconciles traditional knowledge- and retrieval-based methods with modern
learning-based methods for accurate and robust medical report generation. Specifically, KERP decomposes medical report generation into explicit medical abnormality graph learning and subsequent natural language modeling. KERP first
employs an Encode module that transforms visual features
into a structured abnormality graph by incorporating prior
medical knowledge; then a Retrieve module that retrieves text
templates based on the detected abnormalities; and lastly, a
Paraphrase module that rewrites the templates according to
specific cases. The core of KERP is a proposed generic implementation unit—Graph Transformer (GTR) that dynamically
transforms high-level semantics between graph-structured
data of multiple domains such as knowledge graphs, images
and sequences. Experiments show that the proposed approach
generates structured and robust reports supported with accurate abnormality description and explainable attentive regions, achieving the state-of-the-art results on two medical
report benchmarks, with the best medical abnormality and
disease classification accuracy and improved human evaluation performance.

Introduction
Beyond the traditional image captioning task (Xu et al.
2015; Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015; Rennie et al. 2017) that
produces single-sentence descriptions, generating long and
semantic-coherent stories or reports to describe visual contents (e.g., images, videos) has recently attracted increasing research interests (Liang et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2016;
Krause et al. 2017), and is posed as a more challenging and realistic goal towards bridging visual patterns with
human linguistic descriptions. Particularly, an outstanding
challenge in modeling long narrative from visual content
is to balance between knowledge discovery and language
∗

This work was done when Christy Y. Li was at Petuum, Inc.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6666

