The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Anomaly Detection Using Autoencoders in High Performance Computing Systems
Andrea Borghesi,1 Andrea Bartolini,1 Michele Lombardi,2 Michela Milano,2 Luca Benini3
1

DEI, University of Bologna, 2 DISI, University of Bologna, 3 Integrated Systems Laboratory, ETHZ
andrea.borghesi3@unibo.it, a.bartolini@unibo.it, michele.lombardi2@unibo.it, michela.milano@unibo.it, lbenini@iis.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract

automated process for anomaly detection would be a great
improvement for current HPC systems, and it will probably
be a necessity for future Exascale supercomputers.
Nowadays, monitoring infrastructures are available in
many HPC systems and data centers, used to gather data
about the state of the systems and their components thanks
to a large variety of measurement sensors. Given the deluge of data originating from a monitoring framework, realtime identification of problems and undesired situations is a
daunting task for system administrators. The growing scale
of HPC systems will only make this task even more difficult.
In this paper we present a novel approach to deal with this issue, relying on a fine-grain monitoring framework and on an
autonomous anomaly detection method that uses Machine
Learning (ML) techniques.
Automated anomaly detection is still a relatively unexplored area in the HPC field. The current state-of-the-art relies on supervised (Mitchell 1999) ML methods that learn to
distinguish between healthy and faulty states after a training
phase during which the supercomputer must be subjected
to different conditions, namely the behaviour classes to be
identified, for example normal behaviour and a set of anomalies. With this scheme, the anomaly detector learns to classify different classes using labeled training data.
This requirement complicates the training process: a supervised algorithm needs to be shown data containing examples of both healthy and unhealthy status (normal behaviour
and anomalies). Moreover, the data set should ideally be
unbiased and balanced, that is there should be roughly the
same number of examples (data points in the set) for each
class. In HPC systems, data is very abundant but labels are
scarce. However, in supercomputers the normal behaviour is
predominant – and can be deterministically restored by system administrators. The same cannot be said for faulty behaviour, which is undesired, sporadic and uncontrolled. Furthermore, even when abnormal conditions are observed and
dealt with, they are not necessarily stored in logging systems
(unless the logging systems are explicitly designed for this),
but rather the burden of assigning labels to a data set – identify the corresponding class, healthy/unhealthy – falls onto
the system administrators, a less than ideal situation. Thus
it is not easy and often neither possible to obtain the correct
labeled data sets required by typical supervised approaches.
Conversely, there is another type of ML that does not re-

Anomaly detection in supercomputers is a very difficult problem due to the big scale of the systems and the high number of components. The current state of the art for automated
anomaly detection employs Machine Learning methods or
statistical regression models in a supervised fashion, meaning that the detection tool is trained to distinguish among a
fixed set of behaviour classes (healthy and unhealthy states).
We propose a novel approach for anomaly detection in High
Performance Computing systems based on a Machine (Deep)
Learning technique, namely a type of neural network called
autoencoder. The key idea is to train a set of autoencoders
to learn the normal (healthy) behaviour of the supercomputer nodes and, after training, use them to identify abnormal
conditions. This is different from previous approaches which
where based on learning the abnormal condition, for which
there are much smaller datasets (since it is very hard to identify them to begin with).
We test our approach on a real supercomputer equipped with
a fine-grained, scalable monitoring infrastructure that can
provide large amount of data to characterize the system behaviour. The results are extremely promising: after the training phase to learn the normal system behaviour, our method is
capable of detecting anomalies that have never been seen before with a very good accuracy (values ranging between 88%
and 96%).

Introduction
High Performance Computing (HPC) systems are complex
machines with many components that must operate concurrently at the best of their theoretical performance. In reality,
many factors can degrade the performance of a HPC system:
hardware can break, the applications may enter undesired
and unexpected states, components can be wrongly configured. A critical aspect of modern and future supercomputers is the capability of detecting faulty conditions stemming
from the improper behaviour of one or multiple parts. This
issue is relevant not only for scientific computing systems
but also in data centers and clouds providers, whose business strongly relies on the availability of their web services.
For instance, Amazon in 2016 would have lost 15M$ for just
an hour of out of service (Hennessy and Patterson 2011). An
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9428

