The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Distillation Approach to Data Efficient Individual Treatment Effect Estimation
Maggie Makar

Adith Swaminathan

Emre Kıcıman

CSAIL, MIT
Cambridge, MA
mmakar@mit.edu

Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
adswamin@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
emrek@microsoft.com

Abstract

Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017; Wager and Athey
2018). These approaches perform what we call ITE discovery, i.e., using observational data to discover the causal
effect of a treatment for any individual in the population.
To calculate individual treatment effects, these methods
assume that all the variables used to train the ITE discovery model continue to be available for individuals at test
time. Unfortunately, there are often significant practical constraints limiting the availability of data about new test cases.
For example, a physician may need to decide if a treatment will benefit a specific patient without having all relevant medical test results at her disposal. In this situation,
the physician would prefer to identify and conduct the minimal set of necessary medical tests to accurately estimate
the treatment effect for this patient. Similar situations arise
with social workers, loan officers, judges and other decisionmakers; they might need to identify a small set of attributes
for an individual in order to accurately estimate the effect of
a decision. We refer to this process as ITE prediction.
ITE prediction and ITE discovery are significantly different tasks. For an algorithm to perform reliable ITE discovery, it needs to perform two functions: adjustment for confounding and estimation of heterogeneous effects. Adjustment for confounding accounts for the fact that treatment
was not randomly assigned in the observational data, and
that people who receive the treatment often have systematically different outcome likelihoods than those who did not.
For example, sicker patients who are more likely to die are
also more likely to receive aggressive treatments. Heterogeneous effects estimation accounts for the fact that individuals respond differently to the same treatment based on
their characteristics. For example, elderly or frail patients
may have a systematically adverse response to an aggressive treatment. To adjust for confounding, researchers could
appeal to a number of statistical methods that utilize a set
of variables, confounders, to make the treated and the control populations appear statistically similar. To perform reliable ITE prediction, we only need good estimation of heterogeneous effects (which depend on individual characteristics
that are referred to as effect modifiers).
More formally, confounders affect both treatment likelihood and outcome values, whereas effect modifiers interact
with treatment status to affect outcomes. Figure 1 is a pictorial depiction of a simple example showing treatment ef-

The potential for using machine learning algorithms as a tool
for suggesting optimal interventions has fueled significant interest in developing methods for estimating heterogeneous or
individual treatment effects (ITEs) from observational data.
While several methods for estimating ITEs have been recently suggested, these methods assume no constraints on the
availability of data at the time of deployment or test time.
This assumption is unrealistic in settings where data acquisition is a significant part of the analysis pipeline, meaning data
about a test case has to be collected in order to predict the
ITE. In this work, we present Data Efficient Individual Treatment Effect Estimation (DEITEE), a method which exploits
the idea that adjusting for confounding, and hence collecting information about confounders, is not necessary at test
time. DEITEE allows the development of rich models that
exploit all variables at train time but identifies a minimal set
of variables required to estimate the ITE at test time. Using
77 semi-synthetic datasets with varying data generating processes, we show that DEITEE achieves significant reductions
in the number of variables required at test time with little to no
loss in accuracy. Using real data, we demonstrate the utility
of our approach in helping soon-to-be mothers make planning
and lifestyle decisions that will impact newborn health.

Introduction
When designing a learning system to perform
interventions—whether through direct action or indirect recommendation—it is important to model the
intervention’s causal effect on target outcomes rather than
the correlation between the two (Pearl 2009). Establishing
a causal relationship between the intervention and the
outcome is necessary to ensure that the desired outcome
will happen with high probability should the intervention be
carried out. While conventional causal inference techniques
focus on calculating the average effect of an intervention over a population (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983;
Rosenbaum 2002), more recent methods focus on estimating personalized or individual treatment effects
(ITEs; sometimes referred to as conditional average treatment effects) from observational data (Johansson, Shalit,
and Sontag 2016; Athey, Tibshirani, and Wager 2016;
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4544

