The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Data Augmentation Based on Adversarial Autoencoder
Handling Imbalance for Learning to Rank∗
Qian Yu, Wai Lam
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{yuqian, wlam}@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

scarce in the whole collection and it is hard for an explicit
or implicit relevance judgement annotation procedure to
pick out all the documents with high relevance level.

Data imbalance is a key limiting factor for Learning to Rank
(LTR) models in information retrieval. Resampling methods
and ensemble methods cannot handle the imbalance problem
well since none of them incorporate more informative data
into the training procedure of LTR models. We propose a data
generation model based on Adversarial Autoencoder (AAE)
for tackling the data imbalance in LTR via informative data
augmentation. This model can be utilized for handling two
types of data imbalance, namely, imbalance regarding relevance levels for a particular query and imbalance regarding
the amount of relevance judgements in different queries. In
the proposed model, relevance information is disentangled
from the latent representations in this AAE-based model in
order to reconstruct data with specific relevance levels. The
semantic information of queries, derived from word embeddings, is incorporated in the adversarial training stage for regularizing the distribution of the latent representation. Two informative data augmentation strategies suitable for LTR are
designed utilizing the proposed data generation model. Experiments on benchmark LTR datasets demonstrate that our
proposed framework can significantly improve the performance of LTR models.

2. Imbalance regarding Query (Q-imbalance)
Different queries typically have different amounts of relevance judgements. Since relevance is always querybased, the imbalance of available information associated
with different queries also influences the model training
in LTR. Specifically, if some queries have much larger
amount of judged documents than other queries, then
these queries tend to dominate the learning of LTR models.
The performances of LTR models are restricted by imbalanced training data, especially the pointwise LTR models.
The pairwise LTR models regard pairs of document with
different relevance levels as training samples, and pairwise
learning objectives are designed according to the relative
relevance level for eliminating R-imbalance problem. However, the pairwise objective function and training samples
still suffer from the scarcity of documents with high relevance level. The pairwise training set lacks of diversity since
the ”highly relevance” part of the pairwise training samples
is still derived from the same small set of documents with
high relevance level. Therefore, if we can address the issue
of imbalanced data in LTR, the overall performance of pairwise methods can be improved.
Both resampling methods (Batuwita and Palade 2010;
Chawla et al. 2002) and ensemble methods (Dietterich 2000)
attempt to avoid learning a biased model with imbalanced
data, but none of them provide informative augmentation
for the training data. Instead of modeling complex decision
boundaries with alternative models as in ensemble methods,
we argue that a more proper solution for data imbalance in
LTR should incorporate informative data into the training
set. The data generation procedure should comply with two
criteria. The first criterion is that it should generate informative data that are not merely duplications of existing data.
The second criterion is that the generation procedure should
be controllable regarding relevance levels and query characteristics. For data generation purpose, Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and its variants (Zheng, Zheng, and Yang 2017; Shrivastava et al. 2017;
Mariani et al. 2018) have been proposed. These models try

Introduction
In information retrieval, the task of Learning to Rank (LTR)
(Liu and others 2009) refers to a category of methods where
machine learning models are trained to rank documents
based on the degree of relevance to the query. One challenge
for LTR is that the available training data is usually imbalanced (Verberne et al. 2011; Macdonald, Santos, and Ounis
2013; Agarwal et al. 2012). The imbalance problem for LTR
comes from two sources:
1. Imbalance regarding Relevance (R-imbalance)
Given a query, the documents judged with high relevance
level are much fewer than judged irrelevant documents.
The reason is that the relevant documents are typically
∗

The work described in this paper is substantially supported by
grants from the Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, China (Project Codes: 14203414) and the
Direct Grant of the Faculty of Engineering, CUHK (Project Code:
4055093).
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

411

