The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

High Dimensional Clustering with r-nets
Georgia Avarikioti, Alain Ryser, Yuyi Wang, Roger Wattenhofer
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{zetavar,aryser,yuwang,wattenhofer}@ethz.ch

Abstract

Throughout this paper, we assume data sets to be large and
high dimensional. We therefore assume the number of features d of each object to be non-constant. This leads to interesting and important problems, as this assumption forces us
to think about algorithms whose runtime is sub-exponential
(preferably linear) in the number of features d. In addition,
we want our runtime to be sub-quadratic in the size n of our
data. In this paper we lay theoretical groundwork, by showing improved algorithms on the approximate r-net problem
and applications thereof.

Clustering, a fundamental task in data science and machine
learning, groups a set of objects in such a way that objects
in the same cluster are closer to each other than to those in
other clusters. In this paper, we consider a well-known structure, so-called r-nets, which rigorously captures the properties of clustering. We devise algorithms that improve the runtime of approximating r-nets in high-dimensional
spaces with
√
`1 and `2 metrics from Õ(dn2−Θ( ) ) to Õ(dn + n2−α ),
where α = Ω(1/3 /log(1/)). These algorithms are also
used to improve a framework that provides approximate solutions to other high dimensional distance problems. Using
this framework, several important related problems can also
be solved efficiently, e.g., (1 + )-approximate kth-nearest
neighbor distance, (4 + )-approximate Min-Max clustering,
(4+)-approximate k-center clustering. In addition, we build
an algorithm that (1 + )-approximates greedy permutations
in time Õ((dn + n2−α ) · log Φ) where Φ is the spread of the
input. This algorithm is used to (2 + )-approximate k-center
with the same time complexity.

Related Work
There is not a unique best clustering criterion, hence many
methods (Estivill-Castro 2002) are proposed to solve the
clustering problem for different applications (e.g., (Sibson
1973; Defays 1977; Lloyd 1982; Kriegel et al. 2011)), which
makes it difficult to systematically analyze clustering algorithms.
In our paper we will make use of so-called polynomial
threshold functions (PTF), a powerful tool developed by
(Alman, Chan, and Williams 2016). PTFs are distributions
of polynomials that can efficiently evaluate certain types of
Boolean formulas with some probability. They are mainly
used to solve problems in circuit theory, but were also used
to develop new algorithms for other problems such as approximate all nearest neighbors or approximate minimum
spanning tree in Hamming, `1 and `2 spaces. In the following, we employ this method to develop an algorithm that
computes approximate r-nets.
The algorithmic framework Net & Prune, was developed
by (Har-Peled and Raichel 2015). It is able to solve so called
nice distance problems, when provided with a suitable data
structure for the problem. These data structures are often
constructed by exploiting r-nets. A major drawback of the
framework is its restriction to a constant number of features. Consequentially, this framework was later extended
by (Avarikioti et al. 2017) to also solve higher dimensional
cases. The algorithm, constructed in this paper, yields an immediate improvement on this framework, as the construction
of the framework is based around approximate r-nets. We
also present various of the previously mentioned data structures that we plug into the framework to solve high dimensional distance optimization problems.
Recent work by (Eppstein, Har-Peled, and Sidiropoulos

Introduction
Clustering aims at grouping together similar objects, where
each object is often represented as a point in a high dimensional space. Clustering is considered to be a cornerstone problem in data science and machine learning, and as
a consequence there exist multiple clustering variants. For
instance, while each cluster may just be represented as a set
of points, it is often advantageous to select one point of the
data set as a prototype for each cluster.
A significant formal representation of such a prototype
clustering is known as r-nets. Given a large set of n data
points in d-dimensional space, an r-net is a subset (the prototypes) of these data points. This subset needs to fulfill two
properties: First, balls of radius r around each of the prototypes need to contain every point of the whole data set (covering). Second, we must ensure that the prototypes are well
separated, i.e., no ball contains the center of any other ball
(packing). Approximate r-nets lift the covering constraint a
tiny bit by allowing balls to have a slightly larger radius than
r, while preserving the packing property, i.e., any two prototypes still need to have at least distance r.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3207

