The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Detecting Incongruity between News Headline and Body Text
via a Deep Hierarchical Encoder
Seunghyun Yoon,1,2 Kunwoo Park,3,4 Joongbo Shin,1 Hongjun Lim4
Seungpil Won,1 Meeyoung Cha,4,5 Kyomin Jung1,2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
Automation and Systems Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
3
Qatar Computing Research Institute, Doha, Qatar 4 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea
5
Data Science Group, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Daejeon, Korea
Abstract

thus decrease the chance of encountering unwanted information. Most previous research tackling this problem has
tried to detect incongruity in news headlines either by analyzing linguistic features of news headlines (Blom and
Hansen 2015; Chen, Conroy, and Rubin 2015) or by analyzing the textual similarities between news headlines and body
text (Ferreira and Vlachos 2016; Wang, Hamza, and Florian
2017). However, lack of large-scale public dataset makes
it difficult to develop sophisticated deep learning models
that are better suited for such challenging detection tasks,
which usually require million-scale dataset across various
domains (Lowe et al. 2015; Go, Bhayani, and Huang 2009).
This paper, in an attempt to tackle the incongruent news
headline problem, presents a million-scale dataset that is
built on real news articles published over the course of two
years. We propose deep learning approaches that learn the
complex textual relationship between the news headline and
the full news content, which turned out to be critical for classifying incongruent headlines. Our models were tested on
both synthetic data as well as real news stories in the wild.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

Some news headlines mislead readers with overrated or false
information, and identifying them in advance will better assist readers in choosing proper news stories to consume. This
research introduces million-scale pairs of news headline and
body text dataset with incongruity label, which can uniquely
be utilized for detecting news stories with misleading headlines. On this dataset, we develop two neural networks with
hierarchical architectures that model a complex textual representation of news articles and measure the incongruity between the headline and the body text. We also present a data
augmentation method that dramatically reduces the text input size a model handles by independently investigating each
paragraph of news stories, which further boosts the performance. Our experiments and qualitative evaluations demonstrate that the proposed methods outperform existing approaches and efficiently detect news stories with misleading
headlines in the real world.

Introduction
Misleading or false information in journalism has posed a
critical social problem (Kwon et al. 2013). Much of the information shared online lacks verification and thus can put
our society to unseen threats. News headlines are known to
play an important role in making first impressions to readers, and thereby deciding the viral potential of news stories
within social networks (Reis et al. 2015). In digital environments under information overload, people are less likely to
read or click on the whole contents but just read news headlines (Gabielkov et al. 2016). Likewise, much of news sharing is headline-based; people circulate news headlines without necessarily having read the full news story. On the other
hand, an initial impression gained from the headline is persistent such that its stance remains even after reading the
whole news content (Ecker et al. 2014). Therefore, if a news
headline does not correctly represent the news story — or
is incongruent — it could mislead readers into advocating
overrated or false information, which then becomes hard to
revoke.
Identifying incongruent headlines in advance will better
assist readers to choose which news stories to consume, and

1. We release a million-scale dataset for the incongruent
headline problem, which covers almost all of the news articles published in a nation over two years. The corpus is
composed of pairs of news headlines and body text along
with the annotated incongruity label.
2. We propose deep hierarchical models that encode the
full news article from a word-level to a paragraph-level.
Experiments show our models outperform baseline approaches. We also present a data augmentation method
that splits news paragraphs and annotates each of them
separately. This method not only reduces the data size that
a model handles but also increases the number of training
instances, which further boosts the performance.
3. We extensively evaluate our models with real data. Manual verification successfully demonstrates the efficacy of
our dataset in training of incongruent headlines. In addition, a crowdsourced experiment suggests the perceived
level of incongruence could differ for certain news topics
(e.g., politics) by individual beliefs and media outlets.

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

791

