The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Using Benson’s Algorithm for Regularization Parameter Tracking
Joachim Giesen, Sören Laue, Andreas Löhne

Christopher Schneider

Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
Ernst-Abbe-Platz 2
07743 Jena, Germany

Ernst-Abbe-Hochschule Jena
Fachbereich Grundlagenwissenschaften
Carl-Zeiss-Promenade 2
07745 Jena, Germany

α = (α1 , . . . , αq ). Thus it is important to choose good
values for these parameters. The regularization parameters
are typically optimized using some measure for the generalization error of the model on validation data, while xα
is computed from training data. Optimizing the regularization parameters is almost always a highly non-convex problem, even if Problem (P) is convex. This, essentially, leaves
only searching for optimal parameters over the whole parameter domain. An exhaustive search would require computing xα for all possible parameter values. The gamut of
these solutions is called the full solution gamut. Since it is
almost never tractable to compute the full solution gamut,
approximation methods and heuristics are typically used in
practice. In a search heuristic, the parameter domain is sampled with a finite number α1 , . . . , αk of parameter vectors,
an optimal solution xj , j = 1, . . . , k is computed for all
these vectors, and the best among them is chosen. A naive
search approach, called Grid Search, samples the parameter
domain in a structured way on a grid. As (Bergstra and Bengio 2012) have pointed out, it is highly beneficial to sample
the parameter domain randomly in an unstructured fashion,
if the different parameter dimensions are not equally important, see Figure 1. In this case, Random Search needs significantly fewer samples for achieving the same approximation
error. The main disadvantage of both search approaches is

Abstract
Regularized loss minimization, where a statistical model is
obtained from minimizing the sum of a loss function and
weighted regularization terms, is still in widespread use in
machine learning. The statistical performance of the resulting models depends on the choice of weights (regularization parameters) that are typically tuned by cross-validation.
For finding the best regularization parameters, the regularized
minimization problem needs to be solved for the whole parameter domain. A practically more feasible approach is covering the parameter domain with approximate solutions of the
loss minimization problem for some prescribed approximation accuracy. The problem of computing such a covering is
known as the approximate solution gamut problem. Existing
algorithms for the solution gamut problem suffer from several
problems. For instance, they require a grid on the parameter
domain whose spacing is difficult to determine in practice,
and they are not generic in the sense that they rely on problem
specific plug-in functions. Here, we show that a well-known
algorithm from vector optimization, namely the Benson algorithm, can be used directly for computing approximate solution gamuts while avoiding the problems of existing algorithms. Experiments for the Elastic Net on real world data
sets demonstrate the effectiveness of Benson’s algorithm for
regularization parameter tracking.

Introduction

x∈R

s.t.

g(x) ≤ 0

(P)

are still used extensively in the day-to-day practice of machine learning. Here, ` : Rn → R is a loss function, the
ri : Rn → R, i = 1, . . . , q are regularization terms, and
the αi ≥ 0 are the corresponding regularization parameters.
Sometimes, the problem is constrained, and here the constraints are given by a function g : Rn → Rm .
In many machine learning applications Problem (P) is
convex, i.e., all the functions `, ri , g are convex. The optimal solution xα of Problem (P) describes some machine
learning model, for instance the weights of a support vector machine, and depends on the regularization parameters

function g

function h

Regularized optimization problems of the form
Pq
minn `(x) + i=1 αi ri (x)

function h

1

function g

Figure 1: Optimization of f (x, y) = g(x) + h(y) ≈ g(x).
Above each square, the function g is shown in blue, left to
each square, h is shown in orange. With Grid Search (left),
nine trial parameters only check three values of g. With Random Search (right), nine trial parameters check nine different values of the more important function g (cf. (Bergstra
and Bengio 2012, Figure 1)).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3689

