The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Approximate Stream Reasoning with Metric Temporal Logic under Uncertainty
Daniel de Leng, Fredrik Heintz

Department of Computer and Information Science
Linköping University, 581 83 Linköping, Sweden
{daniel.de.leng, fredrik.heintz}@liu.se

works by incrementally taking states from a state sequence
and computing a new formula that incorporates this state
information using syntactic rewriting. If the new formula
holds over the unseen remainder of the state sequence, then
the original formula is guaranteed to hold over the complete
state sequence. Consequently, the evaluation of an MTL formula through progression is linear in the size of the formula,
but the formula may grow exponentially due to the rewritings. A key advantage is that we may terminate the procedure once a formula is determined to be true or false, without
having to consider the potentially infinite state sequence.
One key assumption for progression is that the states received are complete, i.e. all propositions have a truth value
assigned to them. Essentially, progression requires every
state to provide a complete ‘snapshot’ of the world. This assumption is however unreasonable in many applications for
which acquiring such a snapshot is not feasible, e.g. robots
relying on local sensor data. The main contribution of this
paper is therefore an approximate progression procedure for
path checking with partial states, allowing for a trade-off between precision and space requirements. We also consider
the impact of knowledge concerning the probabilities of individual states in cases where there is uncertainty. This paper is a companion paper to our earlier work (de Leng and
Heintz 2018), which laid some of the groundwork we expand upon here.
The key motivation behind supporting progression with
multiple hypotheses is not just limited to the possibility
that we receive partial states—reasoning with background
knowledge can by itself lead to incomplete information.
For example, the Region Connection Calculus with eight
jointly exhaustive pairwise disjoint (JEPD) relations known
as RCC-8 by (Randell, Cui, and Cohn 1992) uses qualitative reasoning based on composition tables that allow us to
reduce the uncertainty between the qualitative spatial relations that may exist between regions, without narrowing this
relation down to precisely one spatial relation. This effectively means we acquire multiple consistent models, any of
which could be the ‘true’ model, and all of which are valid
hypotheses.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2 we consider some of the related work on progression and partiality. We then give an overview of the preliminaries concerning MTL and progression, including the nota-

Abstract
Stream reasoning can be defined as incremental reasoning
over incrementally-available information. The formula progression procedure for Metric Temporal Logic (MTL) makes
use of syntactic formula rewritings to incrementally evaluate
formulas against incrementally-available states. Progression
however assumes complete state information, which can be
problematic when not all state information is available or can
be observed, such as in qualitative spatial reasoning tasks or
in robotics applications. In those cases, there may be uncertainty as to which state out of a set of possible states represents the ‘true’ state. The main contribution of this paper is
therefore an extension of the progression procedure that efficiently keeps track of all consistent hypotheses. The resulting procedure is flexible, allowing a trade-off between faster
but approximate and slower but precise progression under uncertainty. The proposed approach is empirically evaluated by
considering the time and space requirements, as well as the
impact of permitting varying degrees of uncertainty.

1

Introduction

Temporal logics allow us to make statements about propositions across time, making them powerful in areas such
as runtime verification. Metric Temporal Logic (MTL) by
(Koymans 1990) extends the expressiveness of the wellknown Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) (Emerson 1990) by
adding metric intervals for the temporal operators. The extension makes it possible to describe bounded intervals for
logical formulas, further enhancing their use in practical
applications. MTL thus makes it possible to precisely describe complex temporal statements that go beyond the absolutes of the LTL temporal operators. This makes MTL a
useful tool in realtime applications such as robotics. While
model checking for MTL has been shown to be undecidable (Alur, Feder, and Henzinger 1996), we focus on the
computationally simpler task of path checking, in which we
check whether a given path satisfies a formula. In this paper, we take a stream reasoning approach to path checking, which uses incremental reasoning over incrementallyavailable information.
The syntactic rewriting technique used is known as progression (Bacchus and Kabanza 1996; 1998). Progression
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2760

