The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Personalized Robot Tutoring Using the Assistive Tutor POMDP (AT-POMDP)
Aditi Ramachandran,* Sarah Strohkorb Sebo,* Brian Scassellati
Computer Science, Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut, USA
{aditi.ramachandran, sarah.sebo, brian.scassellati}@yale.edu
*equal contribution

Abstract
Selecting appropriate tutoring help actions that account for
both a student’s content mastery and engagement level is essential for effective human tutors, indicating the critical need
for these skills in autonomous tutors. In this work, we formulate the robot-student tutoring help action selection problem
as the Assistive Tutor partially observable Markov decision
process (AT-POMDP). We designed the AT-POMDP and derived its parameters based on data from a prior robot-student
tutoring study. The policy that results from solving the ATPOMDP allows a robot tutor to decide upon the optimal tutoring help action to give a student, while maintaining a belief of
the student’s mastery of the material and engagement with the
task. This approach is validated through a between-subjects
field study, which involved 4th grade students (n = 28) interacting with a social robot solving long division problems over
five sessions. Students who received help from a robot using the AT-POMDP policy demonstrated significantly greater
learning gains than students who received help from a robot
with a fixed help action selection policy. Our results demonstrate that this robust computational framework can be used
effectively to deliver diverse and personalized tutoring support over time for students.

Figure 1: We studied the effects of the AT-POMDP policy on
student learning in multiple tutoring sessions with a robot.

determining when hints should be provided), robot tutors
could be even more effective by, like human tutors, working from a unified model of the student that encompasses
the student’s knowledge and engagement and employing a
diverse set of assistive behaviors in order to facilitate a more
comprehensive, diverse, and personalized robot-student tutoring interaction. Studies of highly successful human tutors
describe how human tutors “maintain a ‘working model’ of
each tutee” enabling students to do as much of the work as
possible as well as receive sufficient guidance to prevent
frustration and confusion (Lepper and Woolverton 2002;
Merrill et al. 1992). For example, human tutors are excellent at giving minimal help to students who have proven
their competence with the tutoring content, guiding students
with low knowledge step-by-step through the process of how
to solve a problem, and discerning when to stop and take a
break when students get frustrated or bored.
In this work, we emulate expert human tutors in the design of a robot tutor that models the affective and knowledge states of students and, using that model, selects appropriate actions to assist student learners. We design the Assistive Tutor partially observable Markov decision process (ATPOMDP), a unified framework in which a robot tutor can
maintain a belief estimate of student knowledge and engagement via observations that can be directly sensed through
the tutoring system and subsequently plan what supportive
help actions to provide to enhance learning. We also vali-

Introduction
Robots have shown increasing promise as a technology
to emulate many of the benefits of one-on-one human tutoring in a variety of domains (Belpaeme et al. 2018;
Hood, Lemaignan, and Dillenbourg 2015; Kanda et al.
2004). Notably, the physical presence of robots has demonstrated enhanced student learning gains, compliance, and
enjoyment in learning interactions (Bainbridge et al. 2011;
Leyzberg et al. 2012; Pereira et al. 2008). Many aspects of
the robot-student tutoring interaction have been investigated
such as building models of student knowledge (Spaulding,
Gordon, and Breazeal 2016), evaluating different teaching
and instruction paradigms (Hood, Lemaignan, and Dillenbourg 2015), and determining how and when a specific type
of help would be best administered to students (Ramachandran, Litoiu, and Scassellati 2016).
Although most prior work has focused on modifying and
optimizing a single component of the robot-student tutoring interaction (e.g. building a model of student knowledge,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8050

