The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bidirectional Transition-Based Dependency Parsing
Yunzhe Yuan, Yong Jiang, Kewei Tu

School of Information Science and Technology
ShanghaiTech University
{yuanyzh,jiangyong,tukw}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

al. 2016), we propose to alleviate this problem and improve
parsing accuracy with a simple framework of bidirectional
transition-based parsing. During training, in addition to the
traditional left-to-right parser, we also learn a right-to-left
parser by reversing the word order of all the training sentences. For parsing, we propose three joint decoding algorithms that can be used to parse a new sentence based on
both of the learned parsers. The first algorithm runs the two
parsers and then selects one of the two parse trees that has
a higher summed score given by the two parsers. The second algorithm is based on the dual decomposition technique
(Rush and Collins 2012) which is an iterative algorithm that
encourages the two parsers to gradually reach consensus.
The last algorithm follows the same idea, but during each
iteration it guides the two parsers with dynamical oracles
(Goldberg and Nivre 2012). To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to employ the dynamical oracle mechanism
in the decoding period rather than the training period.
Our framework is quite general and can be applied to
any transition-based dependency parsing model with welldefined dynamic oracles. In our experiments, we apply our
framework to the transition-based parser of Kiperwasser and
Goldberg (2016). We evaluate our model on two popular
treebanks (PTB and CTB) as well as eight additional treebanks from the Universal Dependency dataset. Experimental
results show that our proposed algorithms significantly outperform the unidirectional baselines and our third algorithm
based on dynamic oracles has the highest accuracy.

Transition-based dependency parsing is a fast and effective
approach for dependency parsing. Traditionally, a transitionbased dependency parser processes an input sentence and predicts a sequence of parsing actions in a left-to-right manner.
During this process, an early prediction error may negatively
impact the prediction of subsequent actions. In this paper,
we propose a simple framework for bidirectional transitionbased parsing. During training, we learn a left-to-right parser
and a right-to-left parser separately. To parse a sentence, we
perform joint decoding with the two parsers. We propose
three joint decoding algorithms that are based on joint scoring, dual decomposition, and dynamic oracle respectively.
Empirical results show that our methods lead to competitive
parsing accuracy and our method based on dynamic oracle
consistently achieves the best performance.

Introduction
Dependency parsing is a task with a long history in natural language processing. The goal of dependency parsing is
to discover syntactic relations among words in a sentence.
Dependency trees have been shown to provide effective syntactic information in many semantic tasks, such as semantic
role labeling (Lei et al. 2015), machine translation (Chen
et al. 2017) and sentence classification (Ma et al. 2015).
Generally speaking, there are two types of models for dependency parsing, graph-based models (McDonald 2006)
and transition-based models (Yamada and Matsumoto 2003;
Nivre 2003). Known for its efficiency in training and decoding, transition-based parsing has been very popular for many
languages. A transition-based parser processes the input sentence in a sequential manner and outputs a series of actions to incrementally construct a parse tree. During this process, each action is typically predicted using a discriminative
classifier, such as a SVM (Yamada and Matsumoto 2003;
Nivre, Hall, and Nilsson 2006), a stack LSTM (Dyer et al.
2015) or a BiLSTM (Kiperwasser and Goldberg 2016).
Traditionally, transition-based dependency parsing processes the sentence in a left-to-right manner. During this process, a prediction mistake, especially one in the early stage,
may negatively impact many subsequent predictions. Motivated by bidirectional neural machine translation (Liu et

Related Work
Transition-based Dependency Parsing
A transition-based dependency parser incrementally builds a
dependency tree by a sequence of actions. Some of the early
transition-based parsers are list-based (Covington 2001), but
more recently stack-based parsers (Nivre 2003), also known
as shift-reduced parsers, are more widely used. There are
two basic transition systems: the arc-standard system (Nivre
2004) and the arc-eager system (Nivre 2003), which can
be combined to form the arc-hybrid system (Kuhlmann,
Gómez-Rodrı́guez, and Satta 2011; Kiperwasser and Goldberg 2016).
Many traditional machine learning methods can be used
to train a transition-based parser, such as SVM (Yamada

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7434

