The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

EA Reader: Enhance Attentive Reader for
Cloze-Style Question Answering via Multi-Space Context Fusion
Chengzhen Fu, Yan Zhang
Department of Machine Intelligence
Peking University
fuchengzhen@pku.edu.cn and zhy.cis@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

the query. In the answer prediction phase, the candidate token with maximum probability, estimated by either the joint
query-document representation or the normalized attention
vector, is selected as the predicted answer.
Most research focus on the interaction layer which is responsible for semantic interactions between documents and
queries. Attention mechanisms, borrowed from the machine
translation literature, are introduced to aggregate document
representations with a weighted sum. Thus, the attention
scoring function is essential for the quality of the obtained
query-aware context vector. Existing attention scoring functions, such as multiplicative attention (Luong, Pham, and
Manning 2015), additive attention (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2015) and multi-head attention (Vaswani et al.
2017), are mostly applied token-wise (Hermann et al. 2015;
Kadlec et al. 2016; Dhingra et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2017;
Paulus, Xiong, and Socher 2017). Therefore, the attentionPi=n
based pooling can be formularized as c =
i=1 ai vi ,
where ai is a scalar, vi denotes the i-th token embedding
and c is the query-aware context vector for prediction.
In this paper we use the term bit or feature to denote an
element (such as vi1 ) in a vector. A major downside for the
token-wise attention mechanism is that, different bits in vi
are assigned to the same weight, which makes it hard to preserve only the highly related semantic features while discard
those unrelated parts in the attended context vector. Bit-wise
mechanism has been introduced to self-attention and its effectiveness has been verified through (Shen et al. 2018) in
many sequence modeling tasks. It is also promising to learn
query-document sophisticated semantic interactions by applying bit-wise to the inter-attention scoring function.
Another important issue is that the QA task consists of
heterogeneous queries and various document topics. Recent
work in (Xiong, Zhong, and Socher 2017) uses Highway
Maxout Network to pool across multiple model variations.
However, it brings much more parameters compared to a
simple feed-forward network. We take the inspiration from
multi-head attention proposed in (Vaswani et al. 2017). A
simple dot product for modeling relevance may reduce the
effective resolution of attention. To alleviate it, the multispace structure is proposed. It has the advantage of jointly
attending to document information from different representation subspaces. This mechanism has become successful in computing the context-aware features inside the en-

Query-document semantic interactions are essential for the
success of many cloze-style question answering models.
Recently, researchers have proposed several attention-based
methods to predict the answer by focusing on appropriate
subparts of the context document. In this paper, we design
a novel module to produce the query-aware context vector,
named Multi-Space based Context Fusion (MSCF), with the
following considerations: (1) interactions are applied across
multiple latent semantic spaces; (2) attention is measured at
bit level, not at token level. Moreover, we extend MSCF to the
multi-hop architecture. This unified model is called Enhanced
Attentive Reader (EA Reader). During the iterative inference
process, the reader is equipped with a novel memory update
rule and maintains the understanding of documents through
read, update and write operations. We conduct extensive experiments on four real-world datasets. Our results demonstrate that EA Reader outperforms state-of-the-art models.

Introduction
How to enable machines to answer questions with a document as the context has been a long-term goal of natural language processing and artificial intelligence. Towards
this goal, several large-scale datasets of cloze-style questions over a context document have been released (Hermann
et al. 2015; Hill et al. 2015), which contribute to training
supervised question answering (QA) models.
Deep learning techniques, such as end-to-end neural networks, have achieved promising results on cloze-style question answering tasks. A common structure of these recent works can be summarized as an “encoder-interactionprediction” framework (Chen, Bolton, and Manning 2016;
Sordoni et al. 2016; Kadlec et al. 2016; Dhingra et al. 2017;
Cui et al. 2017; Cheng, Dong, and Lapata 2016; Wang and
Jiang 2016; Tan et al. 2017). In the encoder phase, all the
words are transformed into low-dimensional dense vector
representations and the recurrent neural network (RNN) is
applied to encode contextual embeddings. In the interaction
phase, the attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015) allows the query to directly interact with the document at the token level. It then computes a weight distribution over document words according to their relevance to
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6375

