The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Image Retrieval via Decoupling
Diffusion into Online and Offline Processing
Fan Yang,1,2 Ryota Hinami,1,2 Yusuke Matsui,1 Steven Ly,2,3 Shin’ichi Satoh1,2
1

The University of Tokyo, Japan
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
3
University of Southern California, USA
2

Abstract
90

Oxford105k mAP

Diffusion is commonly used as a ranking or re-ranking
method in retrieval tasks to achieve higher retrieval performance, and has attracted lots of attention in recent years. A
downside to diffusion is that it performs slowly in comparison
to the naive k-NN search, which causes a non-trivial online
computational cost on large datasets. To overcome this weakness, we propose a novel diffusion technique in this paper. In
our work, instead of applying diffusion to the query, we precompute the diffusion results of each element in the database,
making the online search a simple linear combination on top
of the k-NN search process. Our proposed method becomes
10∼ times faster in terms of online search speed. Moreover,
we propose to use late truncation instead of early truncation
in previous works to achieve better retrieval performance.

88
86
84

Iscen w/o trunc.
Iscen w/ trunc.
Ours
k-NN

82
80
10ms

0.1s

1s

runtime per query
Figure 1: The efficiency vs. performance comparison between k-NN, Iscen’s method (Iscen et al. 2017), and our
proposed method on Oxford105k dataset with global image
features. Our proposed method achieves better retrieval performance than diffusion by Iscen et al. with almost the same
search speed (∼20ms per query) as k-NN search. We show
the results of varying truncation sizes L.

Introduction
The success of deep neural networks on feature representation has led it to become a standard technique in image retrieval. Models pre-trained on popular datasets such
as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009), Landmarks (Babenko et
al. 2014) etc. can be used to extract features of images.
Particularly, convolutional layers have been proved to be
most beneficial at retrieving images (Babenko et al. 2014;
Radenović, Tolias, and Chum 2016; Gordo et al. 2016;
Razavian et al. 2016). Nearest neighbor search is then used
on the feature vectors to find the most similar images to a
query.
Datasets are usually scraped from the internet, resulting
in images with the same object/landmark shown in a variety of angles, lighting, and other conditions. The diversity
often results in a manifolds in the feature space that are
not conducive to ranking using a distance-based metric. Unlike the rigid distance metric used in k-NN search, diffusion (Zhou et al. 2004b; 2004a; Donoser and Bischof 2013;
Grady 2006) exploits the intrinsic manifold structure of data
based on a neighborhood graph. Such a graph consists of
nodes and edges, where each node represent a feature vector from the database, with the edges connect each node
to its neighbors with corresponding weights proportional to
the pairwise affinities between nodes. Using this graph, diffusion performs a restartable random walk given a query

as the initial state. The final state of random walk can be
viewed as ranking scores showing the similarities of each
image in database to the query. To obtain the convergence of
the final state, there are two main approaches: running iterative random walk or computing the convergence state by the
closed-form theorem proposed in (Zhou et al. 2004b). Diffusion has demonstrated its potential in improving retrieval
performance (Donoser and Bischof 2013; Iscen et al. 2017;
Radenovic et al. 2018), and is also utilized in other fields
such as unsupervised learning (Iscen et al. 2018b). Recently,
other works have attempted to improve the efficiency of diffusion (Iscen et al. 2017), but their speed up is still not sufficient enough to handle the amount of queries found in largescale image retrieval datasets.
We notice that the main bottlenecks in speed of online diffusion processes come from the random walk and preparation steps. Inspired by the closed-form solution of diffusion,
we find that the diffusion for each query can be converted
to a linear combination of the pre-computed diffusion results of all database elements. Following this observation,
our proposed method completely removes the random walk
from the online stage. As a result, our work is able to im-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9087

