The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Combining Fact Extraction and
Verification with Neural Semantic Matching Networks
Yixin Nie, Haonan Chen, Mohit Bansal
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{yixin1, haonanchen, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

Claim: Giada at Home was only available on DVD.

The increasing concern with misinformation has stimulated
research efforts on automatic fact checking. The recentlyreleased FEVER dataset introduced a benchmark factverification task in which a system is asked to verify a claim
using evidential sentences from Wikipedia documents. In this
paper, we present a connected system consisting of three homogeneous neural semantic matching models that conduct
document retrieval, sentence selection, and claim verification
jointly for fact extraction and verification. For evidence retrieval (document retrieval and sentence selection), unlike traditional vector space IR models in which queries and sources
are matched in some pre-designed term vector space, we develop neural models to perform deep semantic matching from
raw textual input, assuming no intermediate term representation and no access to structured external knowledge bases.
We also show that Pageview frequency can also help improve
the performance of evidence retrieval results, that later can
be matched by using our neural semantic matching network.
For claim verification, unlike previous approaches that simply feed upstream retrieved evidence and the claim to a natural language inference (NLI) model, we further enhance the
NLI model by providing it with internal semantic relatedness
scores (hence integrating it with the evidence retrieval modules) and ontological WordNet features. Experiments on the
FEVER dataset indicate that (1) our neural semantic matching method outperforms popular TF-IDF and encoder models, by significant margins on all evidence retrieval metrics,
(2) the additional relatedness score and WordNet features improve the NLI model via better semantic awareness, and (3)
by formalizing all three subtasks as a similar semantic matching problem and improving on all three stages, the complete
model is able to achieve the state-of-the-art results on the
FEVER test set (two times greater than baseline results).1

1

[wiki/Giada at Home]
Giada at Home is a television show hosted by Giada De
Laurentiis. It first aired on October 18, 2008 on the Food
Network.
[wiki/Food Network]
Food Network is an American basic cable and satellite television channel that is owned by Television Food Network, G.P., a
joint venture and general partnership between Discovery, Inc.
(which owns 70% of the network) and Tribune Media (which
owns the remaining 30%).
Label: Refutes

Figure 1: Example of FEVER task. Given the claim, the
system is required to find evidential sentences in the entire
Wikipedia corpus and label it as “S UPPORTS”, “R EFUTES”,
or “N OT E NOUGH I NFO” (Thorne et al. 2018).
fact checking. The recent release of the Fact Extraction and
VERification (Thorne et al. 2018) (FEVER) dataset not only
provides valuable fuel for applying data-driven neural approaches on evidence retrieval and claim verification, but
also introduces a standardized, benchmark task of the automatic fact checking. In this FEVER shared task, a system
is asked to verify an input claim with potential evidence
in about 5 million Wikipedia documents, and label it as
“S UPPORTS”, “R EFUTES”, or “N OT E NOUGH I NFO” if the
evidence can support, refute, or not be found for the claim,
respectively. Fig. 1 shows an example of the task. The task
is difficult in two aspects. First, accurate selection of potential evidence from a huge knowledge base, w.r.t. an arbitrary
claim requires a thoughtful system design and results in a
trade-off between retrieval performance and computational
resources. Moreover, even with ground truth evidence, the
verification sub-task of predicting the relation between evidence and the claim is still a long-existing open problem.2
In this work, we propose a joint system consisting of three
connected homogeneous networks for the 3-stage FEVER
task of document retrieval, sentence selection, and claim
verification and frame them as a similar semantic matching

Introduction

The explosion of online textual content with unknown integrity and verification raises an important concern about
misinformation such as fake news, socio-political deception, and online rumors. This problem of misinformation
could potentially produce uncontrollable and harmful social
impacts, thus stimulating recent research efforts on leveraging modern machine learning techniques for automatic
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code: https://github.com/easonnie/combine-FEVER-NSMN

2

6859

The task is often termed as natural language inference (NLI).

