The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Fair Cost Sharing Games in Machine Learning
Ievgen Redko, Charlotte Laclau
Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS, Institut d Optique Graduate School
Laboratoire Hubert Curien UMR 5516
F-42023, Saint-Etienne, France
name.surname@univ-st-etienne.fr

Abstract

2000; Hu and Wellman 2003; Claus and Boutilier 1998;
Panait and Luke 2005), supervised learning (Freund and
Schapire 1999; Shalev-Shwartz and Singer 2007a; 2007b;
Schuurmans and Zinkevich 2016), and adversarial classification (Liu and Chawla 2009; Brückner and Scheffer 2011;
Dritsoula, Loiseau, and Musacchio 2017) to name a few.
In this paper, we take a closer look at fair cost sharing
games, a special case of games that studies the optimal strategy of a set of agents when they can choose between a cooperative behaviour with a cost equally shared among them
and a non-cooperative (also called “selfish”) behaviour. As
an example of this game, one can consider a set of colleagues
that face a choice between driving their cars to work and individually paying for it or taking the bus together and sharing the cost of the trip. We show that this particular game
can be naturally related to collaborative learning, a problem
often encountered in machine learning that consists in finding the best hypothesis for a set of data samples drawn from
(possibly) different probability distributions and achieving a
nearly optimal individual performance with respect to some
task. In this setting, we associate each agent with a data sample that it can share with other agents in order to learn in a
collaborative way on a larger concatenated sample or stick
to what it has and learn on the sample available to it. We
analyze this problem in several settings where the agents’
sample may or may not be drawn from the same probability distribution and where each agent may have a weight that
corresponds to to its potential benefit from collaboration and
its contribution to it. For both cases considered, we propose
a theoretical result that bounds the ratio between the overall
cost of non-collaborative learning with respect to the collaborative one where the cost can be defined based on empirical risk achieved by the optimal hypothesis or on the sample
complexity of the considered learning approach. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first contribution that establishes a connection between this class of games and collaborative learning and shows its usefulness in providing new
theoretical guarantees for the latter.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We first
introduce the related works that exist in the literature providing the theoretical analysis of the considered learning settings both in traditional and game-theoretical contexts. Then, we present necessary background definitions, on
which we rely in the following sections, that introduce both

Machine learning and game theory are known to exhibit a
very strong link as they mutually provide each other with solutions and models allowing to study and analyze the optimal
behaviour of a set of agents. In this paper, we take a closer
look at a special class of games, known as fair cost sharing
games, from a machine learning perspective. We show that
this particular kind of games, where agents can choose between selfish behaviour and cooperation with shared costs,
has a natural link to several machine learning scenarios including collaborative learning with homogeneous and heterogeneous sources of data. We further demonstrate how the
game-theoretical results bounding the ratio between the best
Nash equilibrium (or its approximate counterpart) and the optimal solution of a given game can be used to provide the upper bound of the gain achievable by the collaborative learning expressed as the expected risk and the sample complexity
for homogeneous and heterogeneous cases, respectively. We
believe that the established link can spur many possible future implications for other learning scenarios as well, with
privacy-aware learning being among the most noticeable examples.

Introduction
In recent years, machine learning community witnessed an
increasing interest among the researchers towards the game
theory, a sub-field of mathematics that studies the problem
of decision-making in the presence of various types of constraints. This is no surprise as game theory proposes tools
and a large variety of theoretical results allowing to determine optimal strategies of a set of agents that may have
conflicting or collaborative objectives: a situation commonly
encountered in many machine learning multi-objective optimization problems. This kind of problems, for instance,
can be faced by game playing machine learning algorithms
that seek to find an optimal trade-off between successfully passing the game level, earning the highest number
of bonuses and doing all this in the fastest possible way.
To this end, game theory has become a topic of ongoing
interest in machine learning field that has already found
its application in contributions related to numerous learning scenarios such as reinforcement learning (Peshkin et al.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4790

