The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DeRPN: Taking a Further Step toward More General Object Detection
Lele Xie, Yuliang Liu, Lianwen Jin,∗ Zecheng Xie
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology
xie.lele@mail.scut.edu.cn, liu.yuliang@mail.scut.edu.cn, ∗ eelwjin@scut.edu.cn, zchengxie@gmail.com

Abstract
Most current detection methods have adopted anchor boxes
as regression references. However, the detection performance
is sensitive to the setting of the anchor boxes. A proper setting of anchor boxes may vary significantly across different
datasets, which severely limits the universality of the detectors. To improve the adaptivity of the detectors, in this paper, we present a novel dimension-decomposition region proposal network (DeRPN) that can perfectly displace the traditional Region Proposal Network (RPN). DeRPN utilizes
an anchor string mechanism to independently match object
widths and heights, which is conducive to treating variant
object shapes. In addition, a novel scale-sensitive loss is designed to address the imbalanced loss computations of different scaled objects, which can avoid the small objects being overwhelmed by larger ones. Comprehensive experiments
conducted on both general object detection datasets (Pascal
VOC 2007, 2012 and MS COCO) and scene text detection
datasets (ICDAR 2013 and COCO-Text) all prove that our
DeRPN can significantly outperform RPN. It is worth mentioning that the proposed DeRPN can be employed directly
on different models, tasks, and datasets without any modifications of hyperparameters or specialized optimization, which
further demonstrates its adaptivity. The code has been released at https://github.com/HCIILAB/DeRPN.

Figure 1: Schemas of RPN and DeRPN: (a) RPN adopts
multiple anchor boxes of fixed shapes and scales, (b) DeRPN
divides bounding boxes into flexible anchor strings, decoupling width and height.

detection cannot produce their due effects (Liao et al. 2017;
Liu and Jin 2017). This problem stems from presupposed
anchor boxes with fixed shapes and scales. Although RPN
was verified to be an effective method to generate region
proposals in (Ren et al. 2015), the anchor boxes adopted
in RPN are very sensitive, which limits the adaptivity to
variant objects. Once the anchor boxes excessively deviate from the ground truths in a dataset, the performance is
curtailed significantly. This is why many specific methods
for scene text detection (Liao et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018a) lay emphasis on the design of the anchor
boxes, which are intended to be long, narrow, and consistent
with the text characteristics. However, manually setting the
anchor boxes is cumbersome and it is difficult to guarantee
the best performance. Although (Redmon and Farhadi 2017)
proposed an algorithm based on K-means clustering to precompute anchor boxes, the improvement was still limited.
As illustrated in Fig.1 (a), RPN adopts anchor boxes as
regression references. We argue that anchor boxes of fixed
scales and shapes have extreme difficulty covering thousands of objects. Therefore, we propose a novel dimensiondecomposition region proposal network (DeRPN). In Fig.1
(b), DeRPN divides anchor boxes into several independent
segments that we call anchor strings, inheriting the terminology from (Ren et al. 2015). Note that DeRPN decomposes
the detection dimension by decoupling the width and height.
The main contributions of our work are summarized as follows:

Introduction
Recently, general object detection has achieved rapid development, driven by the convolutional neural network (CNN).
As a significant task in computer vision, general object
detection is expected to detect more object classes (Redmon and Farhadi 2017; Singh et al. 2018) and perform impressively on different datasets (Everingham et al. 2010;
Lin et al. 2014). Unfortunately, we notice that most of the
general object detection methods are not very general. When
employing some state-of-the-art methods (Dai et al. 2017;
Lin et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018b) on different datasets, it is
usually indispensable to redesign the hyperparameters of regression references, termed as anchor boxes in Region Proposal Network (RPN) (Ren et al. 2015). Even for some specific object detection tasks, such as scene text detection (Lyu
et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018a; Liao, Shi, and Bai 2018), directly applying state-of-the-art approaches of general object
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9046

