The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Heuristic Search Algorithm for Dimensionality Reduction
Optimally Combining Feature Selection and Feature Extraction
Baokun He, Swair Shah, Crystal Maung, Gordon Arnold, Guihong Wan, Haim Schweitzer
(Baokun.He, swair, gordon.arnold, Guihong.Wan, HSchweitzer )@utdallas.edu, Crystal.Maung@gmail.com
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Dallas
800 W. Campbell Road, Richardson, TX 75080

Abstract

Input: the matrix X, the integer r.
Output: the r vectors v1 , . . . , vr .
T
1 Compute the matrix B = XX .
2 v1 , . . . , vr are the top r eigenvectors of B.

The following are two classical approaches to dimensionality
reduction: 1. Approximating the data with a small number of
features that exist in the data (feature selection). 2. Approximating the data with a small number of arbitrary features
(feature extraction). We study a generalization that approximates the data with both selected and extracted features. We
show that an optimal solution to this hybrid problem involves
a combinatorial search, and cannot be trivially obtained even
if one can solve optimally the separate problems of selection
and extraction. Our approach that gives optimal and approximate solutions uses a “best first” heuristic search. The algorithm comes with both an a priori and an a posteriori optimality guarantee similar to those that can be obtained for the
classical weighted A* algorithm. Experimental results show
the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1

Figure 1: The algorithm for optimal feature extraction
applying selection followed by extraction or vice versa does
not give the optimal hybrid representation.
Let Θ be a matrix norm, then the error of approximating
the matrix X by V A is given by:
X ≈ V A,

(1)

Feature extraction. The well-known algorithm for optimal feature extraction is shown in Fig.1. See, e.g., (Jolliffe
2002; Li et al. 2017). Applications of this algorithm include
the technique of principal component analysis (PCA), which
is arguably the most popular feature extraction technique.
With recent advances in numerical techniques for computing eigenvectors (e.g., (Halko, Martinsson, and Tropp 2011;
Li et al. 2017)) the algorithm in Fig.1 can be implemented
efficiently even for large amounts of data.
Among the topics of current research are attempts to minimize the approximation error (1) in norms that are not unitarily invariant. This turns out to be very challenging. In
particular, minimizing the entry-wise l1 or l0 norms is expected to improve the robustness of the estimation, but unfortunately the problem formulated in these norms turns out
to be NP-hard. See, e.g., Gillis (2018), Song (2017), and
Bringmann (2017). For the more general case of entrywise
lp norms see Chierichetti (2017).

Introduction

The representation of data in terms of a small number of
features is a fundamental tool in data analysis. The compact
representation allows for efficient manipulation, and may reveal relations in the data that are harder to identify. We study
the unsupervised case, where a typical criterion of quality
for the representation is the accuracy with which the data
can be reconstructed from the compact representation.
Let m be the number of data items, each specified in terms
of n features, so that the data can be viewed as the matrix X
of m rows and n columns. A compact representation with r
features is given by a matrix V of size m × r, with r ≤ n.
The reconstruction of X from V is computed by X ≈ V A,
where A is the r × n coefficients matrix. We note that the
matrix V A is of rank r, so that X is being approximated
by a rank r matrix. Conversely, any rank r matrix can be
expressed as the product V A, and thus gives a compact representation in terms of r features.

1.1

error = Θ(X − V A)

Feature selection. In feature selection the columns of V
are constrained to be columns of X. This is sometimes
known as the Column Subset Selection Problem (CSSP).
See, e.g. (Golub and Van-Loan 2013). Even though the
approximation obtained by feature selection is worse than
the approximation obtained by feature extraction, there are
advantages of feature selection that make it the preferred
choice in many situations. For example:
• Unlike feature selection, the results obtained by feature
extraction are “notoriously difficult to interpret in terms of

Previous work and the current state of the art

Studies of dimensionality reduction distinguish between the
case where the columns of V must also be columns of X
(feature selection), and the case in which this constraint is
not enforced (feature extraction). We review these two approaches and then propose to combine them. We show that
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2280

