The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Spatial Mixture Models with Learnable Deep Priors for Perceptual Grouping
Jinyang Yuan, Bin Li,∗ Xiangyang Xue
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Fudan-Qiniu Joint Laboratory for Deep Learning
Shanghai Institute of Intelligent Electronics & Systems
{yuanjinyang, libin, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

By hierarchically decomposing the observed visual scenes
(Bienenstock, Geman, and Potter 1997), the raw observations can be summarized into organized and compact knowledge which is generalizable to an infinite number of novel
scenes constructed by the combinations of these primitive
entities (Biederman 1987; Hummel and Biederman 1992;
van den Hengel et al. 2015).
Inspired by the synchronization theory (Milner 1974),
various approaches have been proposed to tackle the perceptual grouping problem by using neuronal synchrony as
the grouping mechanism (Wang and Terman 1995; Rao et
al. 2008; Reichert and Serre 2014). Despite of the satisfactory grouping results already obtained, these methods do not
learn separate representations for individual objects in the
visual scene, which limits the expressiveness and generalization ability of the learned models. In order to learn disentangled and compositional representations of visual scenes,
several methods which integrate spatial mixture models with
neural networks have been proposed in recent years (Greff, Srivastava, and Schmidhuber 2015; Greff et al. 2016;
Prémont-Schwarz et al. 2017; Greff, van Steenkiste, and
Schmidhuber 2017). In these approaches, different objects
are model by different mixture components, and each component is encouraged to focus on an individual object. The
underlying intuition is that the image of visual scene can
be decomposed into the pixel-wise weighted sum of reconstructed images of individual objects, with mixture weights
computed based on similarities between the images of scene
and objects at each pixel.
The perceptual grouping results of these recently proposed spatial mixture models are gratifying. Images of individual objects can be reconstructed accurately if objects
do not overlap each other. However, there exist two potential downsides: 1) pixel-wise mixture weights are computed based on spatially dependent conditional probability
distributions, and 2) the background is either not explicitly modeled by a mixture component or considered as an
ordinary component. The first treatment leads to entangled
learning of spatial dependencies of pixels because mixture
weights shall vary accordingly as conditional probability
distributions vary among pixels. The second treatment either complicates the determination of background pixels or
increases the modeling complexity because the background
is much harder to represent if considered as an ordinary

Humans perceive the seemingly chaotic world in a structured
and compositional way with the prerequisite of being able to
segregate conceptual entities from the complex visual scenes.
The mechanism of grouping basic visual elements of scenes
into conceptual entities is termed as perceptual grouping. In
this work, we propose a new type of spatial mixture models
with learnable priors for perceptual grouping. Different from
existing methods, the proposed method disentangles the representation of an object into “shape” and “appearance” which
are modeled separately by the mixture weights and the conditional probability distributions. More specifically, each object
in the visual scene is modeled by one mixture component,
whose mixture weights and the parameter of the conditional
probability distribution are generated by two neural networks,
respectively. The mixture weights focus on modeling spatial
dependencies (i.e., shape) and the conditional probability distributions deal with intra-object variations (i.e., appearance).
In addition, the background is separately modeled as a special
component complementary to the foreground objects. Our extensive empirical tests on two perceptual grouping datasets
demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms the stateof-the-art methods under most experimental configurations.
The learned conceptual entities are generalizable to novel visual scenes and insensitive to the diversity of objects.

Introduction
The ability to perceive complex visual scenes in a structured
and compositional way is crucial for humans to understand
the seemingly chaotic world (Lake et al. 2017). Finding the
underlying mechanisms of grouping basic visual elements
is usually termed as the binding (Treisman 1996; Wolfe
and Cave 1999), or more specifically, the perceptual grouping (Grossberg, Mingolla, and Ross 1997) problem, and
has been studied extensively in the fields of neuroscience,
cognitive science and psychology. Designing more humanlike AI systems which learn compositional and disentangled representations (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013)
is desirable, because of their superior expressiveness and
generalization ability compared to those systems learning a
single complex representation. Complex visual scenes are
composed of numerous relatively simpler primitive entities.
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9135

