The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Refining Coarse-Grained Spatial Data Using
Auxiliary Spatial Data Sets with Various Granularities
Yusuke Tanaka,1,3 Tomoharu Iwata,2 Toshiyuki Tanaka,3 Takeshi Kurashima,1
Maya Okawa,1 Hiroyuki Toda1
1

NTT Service Evolution Laboratories, NTT Corporation
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
3
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
{tanaka.y, iwata.tomoharu, kurashima.takeshi, okawa.maya, toda.hiroyuki}@lab.ntt.co.jp, tt@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
2

Abstract
We propose a probabilistic model for refining coarse-grained
spatial data by utilizing auxiliary spatial data sets. Existing
methods require that the spatial granularities of the auxiliary
data sets are the same as the desired granularity of target data.
The proposed model can effectively make use of auxiliary
data sets with various granularities by hierarchically incorporating Gaussian processes. With the proposed model, a distribution for each auxiliary data set on the continuous space is
modeled using a Gaussian process, where the representation
of uncertainty considers the levels of granularity. The finegrained target data are modeled by another Gaussian process
that considers both the spatial correlation and the auxiliary
data sets with their uncertainty. We integrate the Gaussian
process with a spatial aggregation process that transforms the
fine-grained target data into the coarse-grained target data, by
which we can infer the fine-grained target Gaussian process
from the coarse-grained data. Our model is designed such
that the inference of model parameters based on the exact
marginal likelihood is possible, in which the variables of finegrained target and auxiliary data are analytically integrated
out. Our experiments on real-world spatial data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model.

1

(a) Community

(b) Borough

Figure 1: The distribution of poverty rates at different spatial
granularities.
As an example, Figures 1(a) and 1(b) visualize the distributions of poverty rates in New York City by community
district and by borough, respectively; darker hues represent
poorer regions. Clearly, to better understand socio-economic
problems, Figure 1(a) is better than Figure 1(b). In practice,
however, such information is often aggregated into coarse
granularities as in Figure 1(b). It is usually thought to be
too time-consuming and costly to conduct a census over the
whole population of a city, and a sample survey is conducted
instead. Accordingly, the number of samples associated with
each fine-grained region may not be large enough to provide
a statistically significant estimate of the value associated to
this region; the typical response is to aggregate samples over
larger regions (?).
With the recent increase in data availability, utilizing
auxiliary spatial data sets on the same region is an effective way of refining coarse-grained target data (?; ?;
?; ?; ?). In these works, the regression models are used
for estimating the relationships between target data (e.g.,
poverty rate) and auxiliary data sets (e.g., unemployment
rate). These existing methods, however, require that the spatial granularities of all the auxiliary data sets are the same as
the desired granularity of target data. This requirement prevents us from making full use of the auxiliary data sets with
various granularities. The auxiliary data sets are actually associated with various geographical partitions. For example,
New York City has released various spatial data sets portioned into boroughs, community districts, zip code, police
precincts and so on.
We propose a probabilistic model for refining coarse-

Introduction

Many cities around the world are now collecting large
amounts of spatial data from a wide range of sources.
Governments and other organizations are releasing data on
items such as poverty rate, air pollution, traffic flow, energy consumption and crime (?; ?; ?). Analyzing such spatial data is of critical importance in improving the life quality of citizens in many fields such as socio-economics (?;
?), public health (?), public security (?; ?) and urban planning (?). For example, knowing the spatial distribution of
poverty enables us to optimize allocation of resources for
remedial action. Likewise, the spatial distribution of air pollution is useful in creating policies that can control air quality and thus protect human health.
Naturally, information at fine spatial granularity is preferred because it allows us to identify key regions that require intervention to improve city environments efficiently.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5091

