The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Fully Dense Neural Networks for Image Semantic Segmentation
Mingmin Zhen,1 Jinglu Wang,2 Lei Zhou,1 Tian Fang,3∗ Long Quan1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Microsoft Research Asia, 3 Altizure.com
{mzhen, lzhouai, quan}@cse.ust.hk, Jinglu.Wang@microsoft.com, fangtian@altizure.com

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is pixel-wise classification which retains critical spatial information. The “feature map reuse” has
been commonly adopted in CNN based approaches to take
advantage of feature maps in the early layers for the later spatial reconstruction. Along this direction, we go a step further
by proposing a fully dense neural network with an encoderdecoder structure that we abbreviate as FDNet. For each stage
in the decoder module, feature maps of all the previous blocks
are adaptively aggregated to feedforward as input. On the one
hand, it reconstructs the spatial boundaries accurately. On
the other hand, it learns more efficiently with the more efficient gradient backpropagation. In addition, we propose the
boundary-aware loss function to focus more attention on the
pixels near the boundary, which boosts the “hard examples”
labeling. We have demonstrated the best performance of the
FDNet on the two benchmark datasets: PASCAL VOC 2012,
NYUDv2 over previous works when not considering training
on other datasets.

Image

Output

Image

Output

Image

Output
1/4

1/8

1/16

1/32

1/16

1/8

1/4

Figure 1: Different types of encoder-decoder structures for
semantic segmentation. Top: basic encoder-decoder structure (e.g. DeconvNet (Noh, Hong, and Han 2015) and SegNet (Vijay, Alex, and Roberto 2017)) using a multiple-stage
decoder to predict masks, often results in very coarse pixel
masks since spatial information is largely lost in the encoder
module. Middle: Feature map reuses structures using previous feature maps of the encoder module achieves very good
results in semantic segmentation tasks (Lin et al. 2017a;
Islam et al. 2017; Ghiasi and Fowlkes 2016) and other related tasks (Pinheiro et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2018), but the
potential of feature map reuse is not deeply released. Bottom: The proposed fully dense networks, using feature maps
from all the previous blocks, are capable of capturing multiscale information, of restoring the spatial information, and
of benefitting the gradient backpropagation.

Introduction
Recent works on semantic segmentation are mostly based on
the fully convolutional network (FCN) (Long, Shelhamer,
and Darrell 2015). Generally, a pretrained classification
network (such as VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015),
ResNet (He et al. 2016) and DenseNet (Huang et al. 2017))
is used as an encoder to generate a series of feature maps
with rich semantic information at the higher layers. In order
to obtain the probability map with the same resolution as
the input image size, the decoder is adopted to recover
the spatial resolution from the output of the encoder (Fig.
1 Top). The encoder-decoder structure is widely used for
semantic segmentation (Vijay, Alex, and Roberto 2017;
Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Noh, Hong, and Han
2015; Zhao et al. 2017) .
The key difficulties for the encoder-decoder structure
are twofold. First, as multiple stages of spatial pooling and
convolutional strides are used to reduce the final feature
map size in the encoder module, much spatial information
is lost. This is hard to recover in the decoder module and

leads to poor semantic segmentation results, especially
for boundary localization. Second, the encoder-decoder
structure is much deeper than the original encoder network
for image classification tasks (such as VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015), ResNet (He et al. 2016) and
DenseNet (Huang et al. 2017)). This results in the training
optimization problem as introduced in (He et al. 2016;
Huang et al. 2017) though it has been partially solved by
using batch normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015).
In order to address the spatial information loss problem,
DeconvNet (Noh, Hong, and Han 2015) uses the unpooling
layers to restore the spatial information by recording the
locations of maximum activations during the pooling operation. However, this cannot completely solve the problem
since only the location of maximum activations is restored.

∗
Tian Fang is with Shenzhen Zhuke Innovation Technology
since 2017.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9283

