The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Learning Helps Supervised Neural Word Segmentation
Xiaobin Wang,1 Deng Cai,2∗ Linlin Li,1† Guangwei Xu,1 Hai Zhao,3† Luo Si1
1

Alibaba Group, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{xuanjie.wxb, linyan.lll, kunka.xgw, luo.si}@alibaba-inc.com
thisisjcykcd@gmail.com, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

various neural networks (e.g., long short-term memory network, LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)) for automatic feature learning and discrimination (Zheng, Chen, and
Xu 2013; Pei, Ge, and Chang 2014; Chen et al. 2015; Xu
and Sun 2016; Chen et al. 2017; Zhang, Liu, and Fu 2018;
Ma, Ganchev, and Weiss 2018; Zhao et al. 2018). Transition
based (Zhang, Zhang, and Fu 2016) and semi-CRF structure
based (Liu et al. 2016) neural models have also be explored.
Both of them can use complete word features. (Cai and Zhao
2016) proposed a direct structured learning method modeling the segmentation-determined compositionality of sentences. It is the state-of-the-art CWS model (closed test)1
and we follow this work as a baseline.
So far, supervised methods have achieved satisfactory performance. Yet this ability relies on large labeled corpus.
Theoretically, there are always new words which can not
be covered by even very huge corpora. Generally, the optimal parameters of neural models are to be obtained via
training on labeled data. Therefore, these methods have
strong power of disambiguation via likelihood estimation
but little capacity to deal with unknown words, i.e., outof-vocabulary (OOV). In addition, supervised methods only
make use of local information about individual characters
and/or n-grams(words) within a sentence, resorting to little
global information derived from a large scope over the entire
corpus.
In contrast, unsupervised segmentation methods do not
require any labeled data for training. These approaches intend to derive segmentation model directly from unlabeled
text. There are two typical manners. One is estimating the
likelihood of a character sequence to be a word, and the
other is estimating the probability of a segmentation given
the certain sentence from the view of language model. Beyond the scope of training data, unsupervised methods can
detect OOVs continuously along with the expansion of data.
This may be an important auxiliary to supervised methods.
Hence, we explore the role of unsupervised segmentation in
term of helping neural CWS.
The CWS benchmark evaluation, SIGHAN-Bakeoff
shared task (Emerson 2005), distinguished the official CWS
evaluation into two types, closed test and open test. The former only allows standard training set for segmenter learning,

By exploiting unlabeled data for further performance improvement for Chinese word segmentation, this work makes
the first attempt at exploring adding unsupervised segmentation information into neural supervised segmenter. We survey various effective strategies, including extending the character embedding, augmenting the word score and applying
multi-task learning, for leveraging unsupervised information
derived from abundant unlabeled data. Experiments on standard data sets show that the explored strategies indeed improve the recall rate of out-of-vocabulary words and thus
boost the segmentation accuracy. Moreover, the model enhanced by the proposed methods outperforms state-of-theart models in closed test and shows promising improvement
trend when adopting three different strategies with the help of
a large unlabeled data set. Our thorough empirical study eventually verifies the proposed approach outperforms the widelyused pre-training approach in terms of effectively making use
of freely abundant unlabeled data.

Introduction
Chinese word segmentation (CWS) is a fundamental task
for Chinese language processing because there is no explicit
word boundary marker in written Chinese while other highlevel tasks rely heavily on words. In the last decades, most of
the work addressing the task uses supervised models, which
learn segmentation model based on some training data that
have been segmented manually.
Conventionally, CWS is usually treated as a sequence labeling problem where a wide range of statistical methods
are applied (Xue and others 2003; Low, Ng, and Guo 2005;
Peng, Feng, and McCallum 2004; Zhao, Huang, and Li
2006; Zhao et al. 2006), including Conditional Random
Fields (CRFs).
Along with deep neural models widely-used for natural
language processing (NLP) tasks, previous explorers working on CWS used the traditional sequence labeling framework, but instead of extracting discrete features, they used
∗
The work was conducted when Deng Cai was an intern of Alibaba from Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

7200

bcmi.sjtu.edu.cn/service/cws rankings/

