The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bayesian Deep Collaborative Matrix Factorization
Teng Xiao,1,2 Shangsong Liang,1,2,∗ Weizhou Shen,1,2 Zaiqiao Meng1,2
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou 510006, China
{cstengxiao, liangshangsong}@gmail.com, shenwzh3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zqmeng@aliyun.com
2

Abstract

linear regularization term, resulting in the fact that learning latent representations of users and items is not effective when the auxiliary information is also sparse. Aiming
at learning more effective representations, many CF-based
models using different types of auxiliary information, such
as latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Wang and Blei 2011),
stacked denoising autoencoder (SDAE) (Wang, Wang, and
Yeung 2015; Zhang et al. 2016), variational autoencoder(Li
and She 2017) and marginalized denoising autoencoder (Li,
Kawale, and Fu 2015), have been proposed to obtain items’
latent content representations. Nevertheless, all these models ignore social connections among users.
In order to jointly utilize item contents and social network information, some hybrid MF methods have been proposed, which can be roughly classified into two categories:
i.e., Collaborative Topic Regression (CTR)-based methods
(Wang and Blei 2011; Chen et al. 2014; Purushotham,
Liu, and Kuo 2012; Wang, Chen, and Li 2013; Xu et al.
2017) and Collaborative Deep Learning (CDL)-based methods (Wang, Wang, and Yeung 2015; Zhang et al. 2016;
Nguyen and Lauw 2017). Although CTR-based and CDLbased methods have achieved great performance, the full
Bayesian posterior estimation is intractable in these models. All these models need to maximize a point estimation
for parameter learning. However, in this paper, we point
out that maximizing such a point estimation actually assumes that the variation distributions are discrete from variational Bayesian perspective (will be discussed later), which
leads to a higher variance in prediction and ignores uncertainty in the model parameters (Lim and Teh 2007). This
Bayesian estimation also leads to overly optimistic estimates
of test-set log-likelihood (Welling, Chemudugunta, and Sutter 2008) and easily overfit the observed data, as shown
in the following experiments. These drawbacks limit CTRbased and CDL-based methods to learn better latent representations from sparse datasets.
To tackle the above problems, in this paper, we aim
to build a full Bayesian deep framework to jointly learn
latent factors of users and items from three source data,
i.e., item content, user-item feedback and user social matrices. We propose a Bayesian Deep Collaborative Matrix
Factorization model, abbreviated as BDCMF, which integrates item contents and user social information into probabilistic matrix factorization (PMF). Different from CTR-

In this paper, we propose a Bayesian Deep Collaborative
Matrix Factorization (BDCMF) algorithm for collaborative
filtering (CF). BDCMF is a novel Bayesian deep generative
model that learns user and item latent vectors from users’
social interactions, contents of items as the auxiliary information and user-item rating (feedback) matrix. It alleviates
the problem of matrix sparsity by incorporating items’ auxiliary and users’ social information into the model. It can learn
more robust and dense latent representations by integrating
deep learning into Bayesian probabilistic framework. As being one of deep generative models, it has both non-linearity
and Bayesian nature. Additionally, in BDCMF, we derive an
efficient EM-style point estimation algorithm for parameter
learning. To further improve recommendation performance,
we also derive a full Bayesian posterior estimation algorithm
for inference. Experiments conducted on two sparse datasets
show that BDCMF can significantly outperform the state-ofthe-art CF methods.

Introduction
Social media, e.g., Facebook and Twitter, has greatly influenced people’s daily lives, and thus building an effective
Recommender System (RS) for them has attracted many interests in recent years. The most used technique in RS is collaborative filtering (CF), which makes use of users’ ratings
over items. Matrix factorization (MF) (Mnih and Salakhutdinov 2008) is one of the most commonly used CF methods
due to its effectiveness and scalability. The goal of MF is to
learn latent factors of both users and items from user-item
feedback matrix. However, traditional MF methods suffer
from the matrix sparsity problem – recommendation performance drops dramatically when the user-item feedback matrix is very sparse. In addition, traditional MF methods assume users are independent and identically distributed, and
ignore the social connections among users.
To alleviate the matrix sparsity problem, many social
MF methods such as those in (Park, Kim, and Choi 2013;
Adams, Dahl, and Murray 2014) incorporate auxiliary information, e.g., content information of items, into MF. However, these methods incorporate auxiliary information as a
∗

Shangsong Liang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5474

