The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dual-View Ranking with Hardness Assessment for Zero-Shot Learning
Yuchen Guo,†‡ Guiguang Ding,‡ Jungong Han,§ Xiaohan Ding,‡ Sicheng Zhao,\
Zheng Wang,[ Chenggang Yan,] Qionghai Dai†
†

Department of Automation, ‡ School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YW, UK
\
Department of EE and CS, UC Berkeley, USA; [ Department of CST, USTB, China
]
Institute of Information and Control, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China

§

>

Hardness
Assessment

0.74

>

Image-view
Label Ranking

Lion

Label-view
Image Ranking

>

Hippo

>

Elephant

Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is to build recognition models for
previously unseen target classes which have no labeled data
for training by transferring knowledge from some other related auxiliary source classes with abundant labeled samples
to the target ones with class attributes as the bridge. The key is
to learn a similarity based ranking function between samples
and class labels using the labeled source classes so that the
proper (unseen) class label for a test sample can be identified
by the function. In order to learn the function, single-view
ranking based loss is widely used which aims to rank the true
label prior to the other labels for a training sample. However,
we argue that the ranking can be performed from the other
view, which aims to place the images belonging to a label before the images from the other classes. Motivated by it, we
propose a novel DuAl-view RanKing (DARK) loss for zeroshot learning simultaneously ranking labels for an image by
point-to-point metric and ranking images for a label by pointto-set metric, which is capable of better modeling the relationship between images and classes. In addition, we also notice that previous ZSL approaches mostly fail to well exploit
the hardness of training samples, either using only very hard
ones or using all samples indiscriminately. In this work, we
also introduce a sample hardness assessment method to ZSL
which assigns different weights to training samples based on
their hardness, which leads to a more accurate and robust ZSL
model. Experiments on benchmarks demonstrate that DARK
outperforms the state-of-the-arts for (generalized) ZSL.

>

Abstract

0.21

……

>

……

Figure 1: Dual-view ranking with hardness assessment.

2016). In these scenarios, it becomes difficult to collect sufficient labeled training samples for these categories to train
recognition models in a conventional supervised learning
way (Bishop and others 2006) and thus necessitates ZSL.
The problem of ZSL can be described as: how to tell
whether a sample belongs to a previously unseen class? If
there is no information about the unseen class, this problem is obviously unsolvable. The key assumption in previous
ZSL literatures is that each class label can be represented as
a label feature vector, such as manually defined attribute vector (Farhadi et al. 2009; Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling
2014), word embedding representation (Socher et al. 2013),
or their combinations (Fu et al. 2015b; Akata et al. 2015).
Now denote x ∈ Rp is the p-dimensional image feature vector like the deep feature (He et al. 2016), and yj ∈ Rq is the
q-dimensional feature vector for class cj . Zero-shot recognition is performed by computing the cross-modality similarity between these features (Xian, Schiele, and Akata 2017):

Introduction

c(x) = argmaxcj F (φ(x), ϕ(yj ), θF )

The recent years have witnessed the tremendous progress
in zero-shot learning (ZSL) and there is an increasing number of new ZSL approaches every year (Xian, Schiele, and
Akata 2017). ZSL is an emerging task of object recognition
and image classification whose goal is to recognize categories whose visual exemplars are not given for model training (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2014). It is a practical learning task in real-world applications, like Web-image
classification, because there are potentially infinite number
of categories and new concepts may emerge every day. In
addition, since the exemplars for different categories follow a long-tailed distribution such that many uncommon
categories have limited visual samples (Changpinyo et al.

(1)

where φ and ϕ are the image specific and label specific feature transformations respectively, F is the similarity function and θF is the function parameter of F . One simple function is the linear similarity F (φ(x), ϕ(yj ), θF ) = xW yj0 .
Given some auxiliary related classes with many labeled samples as knowledge source, one can train the model (φ, ϕ, and
θF ) by minimizing a loss function. Since the training source
classes and the unseen target classes are related in the label
feature space, the function learned with source classes can
be transferred and applied to the target classes. Then with
the learned function F and the feature vector y of an unseen class, the image-class similarity is produced by F and
the classification can be performed, even though there is no
labeled visual samples of this class available for training.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8360

