The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Borda Count in Collective Decision
Making: A Summary of Recent Results
Jörg Rothe
Institut für Informatik
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
40225 Düsseldorf, Germany
rothe@cs.uni-duesseldorf.de
Abstract

decision making in general, such as the allocation of indivisible goods and coalition formation in hedonic games.
The first and foremost purpose of this paper is to present
the standard attacks that have been proposed within computational social choice to model strategic behavior in voting,
such as manipulation, control, and bribery attacks of various
types. While we will focus on Borda’s voting rule to illustrate each such attack and to discuss how resistant Borda
is to them in terms of computational complexity, we will
also mention in passing some related results for other voting
rules. This will give an overview of some of the most exciting work in computational social choice—having evolved to
become an established subarea of distributed AI and multiagent systems—during the last decades (see Section 2).
Next, in Section 3, we leave voting behind and first show
how Borda can be used to maximize social welfare when
indivisible goods are to be allocated to agents with ordinal
preferences. Then we turn to hedonic games where a number of players, each having preferences over the coalitions
they can join, are faced with the problem of coalition formation. Again, we will show how Borda can be used in this
context and present some recent results. All three fields—
preference aggregation by voting, the allocation of indivisible goods, and hedonic games—are central to certain AI
applications. Voting, for example, has been employed in AI
subareas as diverse as automated scheduling (Haynes et al.
1997), collaborative filtering (Pennock, Horvitz, and Giles
2000), computational linguistics (Oflazer and Tür 1997), information extraction (Sigletos et al. 2005), planning (Ephrati
and Rosenschein 1997), recommender systems (Ghosh et al.
1999), and web searching (Dwork et al. 2001).
Finally, we highlight some open questions in Section 4.

Borda Count is one of the earliest and most important voting rules. Going far beyond voting, we summarize recent
advances related to Borda in computational social choice
and, more generally, in collective decision making. We first
present a variety of well known attacks modeling strategic behavior in voting—including manipulation, control, and
bribery—and discuss how resistant Borda is to them in terms
of computational complexity. We then describe how Borda
can be used to maximize social welfare when indivisible
goods are to be allocated to agents with ordinal preferences.
Finally, we illustrate the use of Borda in forming coalitions
of players in a certain type of hedonic game. All these approaches are central to applications in artificial intelligence.

1

Introduction

More than 230 years ago, Borda (1781) proposed one of
the most important and influential voting rules up to date.
It is simple and strikingly elegant: When there are m candidates, the voters rank them by a linear order according
to their preferences; a candidate in ith position of a voter’s
ranking scores m − i points; and the candidates with the
most points win. Borda and its modifications have been
widely used in political elections (e.g., in Slovenia or to
elect the leader of the Irish Green Party) or by academic
institutions. For instance, the French Academy of Sciences
adopted this rule to elect its members for about two decades
in the 18th century. The debates between the Chevalier de
Borda and the Marquis de Condorcet, both members of
this Academy, about whose voting method is better are legendary. Social choice theorists have continued to fiercely
dispute this question up to now; for example, Saari (2003;
2006) champions Borda, a view that Risse (2005) strongly
disagrees with. The goal of this survey, however, is not
a social-choice-theoretic treatise of Borda compared with
other voting rules;1 rather, our goal is to summarize recent
advances related to Borda within the field of computational
social choice and, going far beyond voting alone, collective

2

How Resistant is Borda to Manipulative
Attacks in Voting?

In this section we survey some of the most exciting work
in computational social choice of the previous decades: the
study of strategic behavior in voting, and how computational
complexity can be used as a barrier against such attacks that
aim at influencing the outcome of an election. Three basic
attack types are distinguished in the literature: manipulation,
control, and bribery. While focusing on Borda when explaining them, we will also consider various other voting rules.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For more details about the social-choice-theoretic properties
of Borda, we refer to the recent book chapters by Zwicker (2016)
and Baumeister and Rothe (2015).

9830

