The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Soft Facial Landmark Detection by Label Distribution Learning
Kai Su, Xin Geng∗
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration,
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{sukai, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

(Cristinacce and Cootes 2008; Zhu and Ramanan 2012) is
another widely-used class of model based approaches for
the facial landmark detection. The shape model of CLM is
the same point distribution model as the one used by ASM
and AAM. Unlike AAM building holistic appearance model,
CLM uses a set of local appearance patches cropped around
each current landmark to represent a face. Generally speaking, model based methods attempt to optimize the model parameters by maximizing the probability of a facial image
being reconstructed by their deformable models. However,
building powerful deformable models requires a massive
amount of training images with carefully annotated landmarks (Sagonas et al. 2013b), while most existing model
based methods have not taken into consideration the issue
of inaccurate “ground truth” landmarks.
The most representative way of regression based methods is the Cascaded Shape Regression (CSR) framework
(Cao et al. 2014; Ren et al. 2014; Trigeorgis et al. 2016;
Xiong and De la Torre 2013; Zhang et al. 2014), which directly learns a set of regressors to update the estimated shape
iteratively in a coarse-to-fine manner. For example, ESR
(Cao et al. 2014) tries to directly learn a regression function
with shape-indexed features to infer the whole facial shape
for an image. SDM (Xiong and De la Torre 2013) learns a
cascaded descent direction to minimize the shape residuals
on the hand-crafted SIFT features. LBF (Ren et al. 2014)
learns a set of local binary features for each landmark independently, and then uses these features to jointly learn a linear regressor to minimize errors between the predicted and
ground truth shape. In recent years, deep learning techniques
have also been applied to the CSR framework. For example,
CFAN (Zhang et al. 2014) uses cascaded Auto-Encoder networks with different resolution image inputs to predict accurate landmarks. MDM (Trigeorgis et al. 2016) adopts powerful CNN-based features and RNN-based memory units to
perform coarse-to-fine shape refinement. The optimization
target of the shape regression methods is to directly minimize the residuals between the predicted and ground truth
shapes in a cascaded manner. That is to say, accurate ground
truth landmarks are essential to their training process.
However, obtaining accurate facial landmarks for a face
image may be a serious issue. Currently, there are two kinds
of landmark annotation methods (Sagonas et al. 2013b):
manual and semi-automatic. Manual annotation of facial im-

Most existing facial landmark detection algorithms regard the
manually annotated landmarks as precise hard labels, therefore, the accurate annotated landmarks are essential to the
training of these algorithms. However, in many cases, there
exist deviations in manual annotations, and the landmarks
marked for facial parts with occlusion and large poses are not
always accurate, which means that the “ground truth” landmarks are usually not annotated precisely. In such case, it is
more reasonable to use soft labels rather than explicit hard
labels. Therefore, this paper proposes to associate a bivariate label distribution (BLD) to each landmark of an image. A
BLD covers the neighboring pixels around the original manually annotated point, alleviating the problem of inaccurate
landmarks. After generating a BLD for each landmark, the
proposed method firstly learns the mappings from an image
patch to the BLD of each landmark, and then the predicted
BLDs are used in a deformable model fitting process to obtain
the final facial shape for the image. Experimental results show
that the proposed method performs better than the compared
state-of-the-art facial landmark detection algorithms. Furthermore, the proposed method appears to be much more robust
against the landmark noise in the training set than other compared baselines.

Introduction
Facial landmark detection aims to localize feature points on
a face image, such as the nose, chin, eyes and mouth. It is a
prerequisite of many automatic facial analysis systems, e.g.,
face recognition (Zhao et al. 2003) and facial age estimation
(Geng, Yin, and Zhou 2013). Thus, this task has attracted
more and more attention in recent years. A large number of
approaches have been proposed for facial landmark detection, which can be roughly classified into two families, i.e.,
model based methods and regression based methods.
Active Shape Models (ASM) (Cootes et al. 1995) and
Active Appearance Models (AAM) (Matthews and Baker
2004) are two early typical model based methods. ASM
applies Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to a set of
aligned training shapes to build its shape model. AAM is an
extension of ASM, generating both shape and appearance
models for an image. Constrained Local Models (CLM)
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5008

