The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Instance-Level Facial Attributes Transfer with Geometry-Aware Flow
Weidong Yin

Ziwei Liu

Chen Change Loy

University of British Columbia
wdyin@cs.ubc.ca

Chinese University of Hong Kong
zwliu@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Nanyang Technological University
ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Semantic Level
Transfer

Abstract

Target Image

Source Image

StarGAN

Ours (w.o flow subnetwork)

Ours (w.o refinement
sub-network)

Ours (full)

Instance Level
Transfer

We address the problem of instance-level facial attribute
transfer without paired training data, e.g., faithfully transferring the exact mustache from a source face to a target
face. This is a more challenging task than the conventional
semantic-level attribute transfer, which only preserves the
generic attribute style instead of instance-level traits. We propose the use of geometry-aware flow, which serves as a wellsuited representation for modeling the transformation between instance-level facial attributes. Specifically, we leverage the facial landmarks as the geometric guidance to learn
the differentiable flows automatically, despite of the large
pose gap existed. Geometry-aware flow is able to warp the
source face attribute into the target face context and generate a warp-and-blend result. To compensate for the potential appearance gap between source and target faces, we propose a hallucination sub-network that produces an appearance
residual to further refine the warp-and-blend result. Finally,
a cycle-consistency framework consisting of both attribute
transfer module and attribute removal module is designed,
so that abundant unpaired face images can be used as training data. Extensive evaluations validate the capability of our
approach in transferring instance-level facial attributes faithfully across large pose and appearance gaps. Thanks to the
flow representation, our approach can readily be applied to
generate realistic details on high-resolution images1 .

Figure 1: (First row) Semantic-level facial attribute transfer,
and (second row) instance-level facial attribute transfer. The
former only models the generic attribute style while the latter additionally preserves sample-dependant traits.

2015), i.e., making the target face possess certain attributes
(e.g., ‘mustache’) perceptually, as shown in Figure 1 (first
row). There is, however, no guarantee that the transferred
‘mustache’ on the target face will look alike the one on the
source face.
In this work, we address the problem of instance-level facial attribute transfer without paired training data. For example, given an unordered collection of images with and without mustache for training, our approach learns to faithfully
transfer the exact mustache from the target face to the source
face. This is a more challenging task than the conventional
semantic-level attribute transfer. In particular, besides capturing the generic attribute style that are shared by all ‘mustache’ samples, instance-level attribute transfer requires the
extraction and preservation of sample-dependant traits, e.g.,
, the mustache from the source image and the lip of the target
image, as shown in Figure 1 (second row).
The main contribution of our paper is a novel notion of
geometry-aware flow, which is well-suited as a representation to model the transformation between instance level attributes. Unlike the conventional differentiable flow (Jader-

Introduction
Modeling and manipulating facial attributes have been a
long quest in computer vision (Liu et al. 2015; Nguyen et
al. 2008; Huang et al. 2018; Loy, Luo, and Huang 2017). On
the one hand, facial attributes are one of the most prominent
visual traits we perceive in daily life, thus constituting an
important visual element to understand. On the other hand,
the ability to manipulate facial attributes can enable lots of
useful real-world applications, such as targeted face editing (Shu et al. 2017; Shen and Liu 2017; Brock et al. 2016;
Yeh et al. 2016).
Existing studies on facial attribute manipulation mainly
focus on semantic-level attribute transfer (Perarnau et al.
2016; Lample et al. 2017; Choi et al. 2017; Gardner et al.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Project
page:
http://mmlab.ie.cuhk.edu.hk/projects/
attribute-transfer/

9111

