The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Temporal Planning with Temporal Metric Trajectory Constraints
Andrea Micheli

Enrico Scala

Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, 38123, Italy
amicheli@fbk.eu

Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, 38123, Italy
escala@fbk.eu

Abstract

problem is traditionally solved by domain-specific scheduling techniques; our interest is tackling it from a domain independent standpoint.
In the HSP, it is very natural to model the hoist behaviors using the durative-actions of PDDL 2.1 (Fox and
Long 2003). Unfortunately, the cross-action temporal constraints (e.g., the time window between the immersion of
an item and its picking), cannot be easily expressed in current action-based representations, even with the use of the
state-trajectory constraints offered by PDDL3 (Gerevini et
al. 2009). This is in stark difference with scheduling, where
temporal constraints are usually imposed over the intervals or the events of the schedule, not the states. Other
planning formalisms, such as timeline-based temporal planning (Frank and Jónsson 2003; Cesta et al. 2009), do offer
rich temporal constraint support, but are not well suited for
problems with prominent causal structure.
Motivated by real-world industrial applications (e.g.,
the HSP), this paper proposes a novel planning framework aimed at taking the best from both action-based and
timeline-based approaches. We start with a classical planning model where all actions are instantaneous and extend it
with “temporal knowledge”. A temporal knowledge is a set
of quantified temporal metric axioms predicating over the
execution timings of action instances. This way, the encoding of the HSP becomes very natural: the hoist dynamic is
modeled using classical actions, while the immersion timings are preserved through our temporal knowledge using
a formula with precise temporal metric constraints. Differently from action-based planning - where temporal constraints are implied by action-selection, and from timelinebased planning - where, instead, the actions are the implicit
part of the problem, our paradigm collocates both planning
goals and temporal constraints on the same level.
We make the following contributions. First, we provide a
formal account to encode quantified temporal formulae over
actions combined with classical planning; we detail the syntax and the semantics of this formalism, along with compilation schemata for encoding temporal constructs presented
in other planning formalisms. Second, we present a heuristic search framework to handle the arising planning problem in a systematic and practical way. This encompasses
the definition of a search space that intertwines planning
with reasoning over our temporal knowledge. To explore this

In several industrial applications of planning, complex temporal metric trajectory constraints are needed to adequately
model the problem at hand. For example, in production
plants, items must be processed following a “recipe” of steps
subject to precise timing constraints. Modeling such domains
is very challenging in existing action-based languages due to
the lack of sufficiently expressive trajectory constraints.
We propose a novel temporal planning formalism allowing
quantified temporal constraints over execution timing of action instances. We build on top of instantaneous actions borrowed from classical planning and add expressive temporal
constructs. The paper details the semantics of our new formalism and presents a solving technique grounded in classical, heuristic forward search planning. Our experiments prove
the proposed framework superior to alternative state-of-theart planning approaches on industrial benchmarks, and competitive with similar solving methods on well known benchmarks took from the planning competition.

1

Introduction

Several real world industrial problems, such as the automatic
synthesis of a controller for an industrial plant, yield computational problems that would be naturally represented and
solved using action-based planning (e.g., PDDL (Fox and
Long 2003)). However, even very expressive language proposals (Gerevini et al. 2009; Fox and Long 2006) are inadequate to express and reason over the temporal constraints
that are often an essential part of this class of problems.
Consider for example an electroplating plant (Phillips and
Unger 1976), where the items need to be treated in a sequence of chemical baths (“recipe”) with immersion timings constrained in precise time windows. The problem is
to orchestrate a set of hoists moving a certain number of
items according to a given recipe whilst keeping the immersion timing constraints in check, and ensuring hoists do
not collide among each other. This problem is known in the
literature as the Hoist Scheduling Problem (HSP) (Manier
and Bloch 2003). For non-cyclic productions (e.g. heterogeneous recipes or the plant need to change production) this
problem becomes a natural fit for planning techniques. This
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7675

