The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

AutoZOOM: Autoencoder-Based Zeroth Order Optimization Method
for Attacking Black-Box Neural Networks
Chun-Chen Tu,1∗ Paishun Ting,1∗ Pin-Yu Chen,2∗ Sijia Liu,2
Huan Zhang,3 Jinfeng Yi,4 Cho-Jui Hsieh,3 Shin-Ming Cheng5,6
1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
3
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
4
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
5
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taiwan
6
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
2

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that adversarial examples in stateof-the-art image classifiers trained by deep neural networks
(DNN) can be easily generated when the target model is transparent to an attacker, known as the white-box setting. However,
when attacking a deployed machine learning service, one can
only acquire the input-output correspondences of the target
model; this is the so-called black-box attack setting. The major
drawback of existing black-box attacks is the need for excessive model queries, which may give a false sense of model
robustness due to inefficient query designs. To bridge this gap,
we propose a generic framework for query-efficient blackbox attacks. Our framework, AutoZOOM, which is short for
Autoencoder-based Zeroth Order Optimization Method, has
two novel building blocks towards efficient black-box attacks:
(i) an adaptive random gradient estimation strategy to balance
query counts and distortion, and (ii) an autoencoder that is
either trained offline with unlabeled data or a bilinear resizing
operation for attack acceleration. Experimental results suggest
that, by applying AutoZOOM to a state-of-the-art black-box
attack (ZOO), a significant reduction in model queries can be
achieved without sacrificing the attack success rate and the
visual quality of the resulting adversarial examples. In particular, when compared to the standard ZOO method, AutoZOOM
can consistently reduce the mean query counts in finding successful adversarial examples (or reaching the same distortion
level) by at least 93% on MNIST, CIFAR-10 and ImageNet
datasets, leading to novel insights on adversarial robustness.

1

Figure 1: AutoZOOM significantly reduces the number of
queries required to generate a successful adversarial Bagel
image from the black-box Inception-v3 model.

also offer an ideal environment for testing malicious attempts.
Even worse, the risks can be amplified when these services
are used to build derived products such that the inherent
security vulnerability could be leveraged by attackers.
In many computer vision tasks, DNN models achieve the
state-of-the-art prediction accuracy and hence are widely deployed in modern machine learning services. Nonetheless,
recent studies have highlighted DNNs’ vulnerability to adversarial perturbations. In the white-box setting in which the
target model is entirely transparent to an attacker, visually
imperceptible adversarial images can be easily crafted to
fool a target DNN model towards misclassification by leveraging the input gradient information (Szegedy et al. 2014;
Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). However, in the
black-box setting in which the parameters of the deployed
model are hidden and one can only observe the input-output
correspondences of a queried example, crafting adversarial
examples requires a gradient-free (zeroth order) optimization
approach to gather necessary attack information. Figure 1
displays a prediction-evasive adversarial example crafted via
iterative model queries from a black-box DNN (the Inceptionv3 model (Szegedy et al. 2016)) trained on ImageNet.
Albeit achieving remarkable attack effectiveness by the
use of gradient estimation, current black-box attack methods,

Introduction

In recent years, “machine learning as a service” has offered
the world an effortless access to powerful machine learning
tools for a wide variety of tasks. For example, commercially
available services such as Google Cloud Vision API and Clarifai.com provide well-trained image classifiers to the public.
One is able to upload and obtain the class prediction results
for images at hand at a low price. However, the existing and
emerging machine learning platforms and their low modelaccess costs raise ever-increasing security concerns, as they
∗

equal contribution
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

742

