The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DeepTileBars: Visualizing Term Distribution for Neural Information Retrieval
Zhiwen Tang, Grace Hui Yang
InfoSense, Department of Computer Science
Georgetown University
zt79@georgetown.edu,huiyang@cs.georgetown.edu

Abstract

The second category is interaction-focused. They first produce an interaction matrix, a.k.a. a matching matrix, between a query and a document. Each entry in the matrix is
usually a simple relevance measurement, such as the cosine
similarity, between the query term vector and the document
term vector. The matrix is then fed into a deep neural network to learn the document relevance score. Models in this
family include PACRR (Hui et al. 2017), DeepRank (Pang
et al. 2017), DRMM (Guo et al. 2016), K-NRM (Xiong et
al. 2017), MatchPyramid (Pang et al. 2016b) and HiNT (Fan
et al. 2018). There are also hybrid models, such as DUET
(Mitra, Diaz, and Craswell 2017), that combine the scores
generated by the two categories.
The interaction-focused models are more popular. Partly,
it is because of their close connection to the widely used
learning-to-rank method. Also, they benefit from the interaction matrix’s ability to reveal relevance signals visually,
just like what a query highlighting function can do. For human readers, visualization could help accelerate the processing of information (Byrd 1999; Hornbæk and Frøkjær 2001).
In real-world search engine development, there is also a high
demand for visualization functions, such as query term highlighting and thumbnail images (Hearst 2009). These visualizations offer efficient, direct, and informative feedback to a
search engine user. We think what makes visualization practically valuable to humans might also be valuable to a deep
neural network for its resemblance to human neurons.
In the history of IR, visualizing relevance signals is not
a new idea. In the 1990s, Hearst proposed TileBars (Hearst
1995) to help users better understand ad-hoc retrieval and
the role played by each query term. TileBars visualizes
how query terms distribute within a document and produce a compact image to explicitly show the relevance (the
matches) to the user. In TileBars, a document is segmented
with an algorithm called TextTiling (Hearst 1994). TextTiling splits the document at positions where a change in topic
is detected. After that, query term hits are computed per
term per segment and the distribution is plotted on a twodimensional grid.
Given a query, TileBars attempts to capture the relevance
patterns in the discourse structure of a document. Common patterns include chained, ringed, monolith, piecewise
and hierarchical (Skorochod’ko 1971; Hearst 1994). TileBars focuses on the coarse patterns, especially the piece-

Most neural Information Retrieval (Neu-IR) models derive query-to-document ranking scores based on term-level
matching. Inspired by TileBars, a classical term distribution
visualization method, in this paper, we propose a novel NeuIR model that handles query-to-document matching at the
subtopic and higher levels. Our system first splits the documents into topical segments, “visualizes” the matchings between the query and the segments, and then feeds an interaction matrix into a Neu-IR model, DeepTileBars, to obtain the
final ranking scores. DeepTileBars models the relevance signals occurring at different granularities in a document’s topic
hierarchy. It better captures the discourse structure of a document and thus the matching patterns. Although its design and
implementation are light-weight, DeepTileBars outperforms
other state-of-the-art Neu-IR models on benchmark datasets
including the Text REtrieval Conference (TREC) 2010-2012
Web Tracks and LETOR 4.0.

Introduction
Numerous efforts have been devoted to advance Information
Retrieval (IR) with deep neural networks (Guo et al. 2016;
Pang et al. 2017; Hui et al. 2017; Fan et al. 2017; Pang et al.
2016b; Mitra, Diaz, and Craswell 2017; Xiong et al. 2017;
Huang et al. 2013; Shen et al. 2014). These neural Information Retrieval (Neu-IR) models are often combined with a
learning-to-rank framework (Liu and others 2009) to derive
document relevance scores. Early experiments (Nguyen et
al. 2017; Pang et al. 2016a) reported only marginal gains or
even inferior performance to traditional IR methods such as
BM25 (Robertson, Zaragoza, and others 2009) and language
modeling (Zhai and Lafferty 2017). The more recent NeuIR models attempted to incorporate well-known information
retrieval principles and have started to show improvements
over traditional IR methods.
The state-of-the-art Neu-IR models can be grouped into
two categories (Guo et al. 2016). The first category is
representation-focused. These models map the texts into a
low-dimensional space and then compute document relevance scores in that space. Models in this family include
DSSM (Huang et al. 2013) and CDSSM (Shen et al. 2014).
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

289

