The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Qualitative Spatial Logic over 2D Euclidean Spaces Is Not Finitely Axiomatisable
Heshan Du

Natasha Alechina

University of Nottingham Ningbo China
Ningbo, China
heshan.du@nottingham.edu.cn

University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
nza@cs.nott.ac.uk

Abstract

of each other. Objects are defined to be near if they can conceivably be in the same location (if both are shifted towards
each other by at most σ) and are far if even after such shifting they are not near each other. In spite of somewhat arbitrary definitions, the resulting qualitative spatial logic was
successfully used for debugging matches as reported in (Du
et al. 2015).
However, 2D Euclidean spaces are a much more appropriate semantics for geospatial data, as geospatial data is usually represented using geometries or coordinates and visualized as a map. The question is open whether a more precise
debugging tool could be developed using the same approach.
In other words, is the axiomatisation presented in (Du et al.
2013; Du and Alechina 2016) still complete with respect to
2D Euclidean spaces, and if not, what are the missing axioms?
In this paper, we use recent results from graph theory (Atminas and Zamaraev 2018) to answer this question. Unfortunately, the answer is negative: with respect to 2D Euclidean
spaces, a finite complete axiomatisation of LNF (LBPT,
LNFS) does not exist.

Several qualitative spatial logics used in reasoning about
geospatial data have a sound and complete axiomatisation
over metric spaces. It has been open whether the same axiomatisation is also sound and complete for 2D Euclidean
spaces. We answer this question negatively by showing that
the axiomatisations presented in (Du et al. 2013; Du and
Alechina 2016) are not complete for 2D Euclidean spaces
and, moreover, the logics are not finitely axiomatisable.

1

Introduction

The spatial logics LNF (a logic of NEAR and FAR for
buffered points), LNFS (a logic of NEAR and FAR for
buffered geometries), LBPT (a logic of part and whole for
buffered geometries) were introduced in (Du et al. 2013;
Du and Alechina 2016) to aid in debugging matches between different geospatial datasets (Du et al. 2015). They
are sound and complete for metric spaces. The axiomatisation was used to develop a reasoner which together with
a truth maintenance system could pinpoint minimal reasons
for contradictions. Contradictions arise from interactions between two kinds of statements: statements that two geospatial objects are the same, and statements that two objects in
the same dataset are near each other or far from each other.
The first kind of statements are treated as assumptions that
can be withdrawn if they lead to inconsistency. For example,
suppose that in the process of matching two datasets S1 and
S2 two assumptions are generated, that a1 in S1 is the same
as a2 in S2 , and b1 in S1 is the same as b2 in S2 . A contradiction would arise if a1 and b1 are near each other in S1 and a2
and b2 are far from each other in S2 . The notions of near and
far are expressed in a qualitative language where the semantics uses a metric distance measure and a positive constant
σ to define what it means to be near (within 2σ distance)
and far (more than 4σ). The intuition behind the semantics
is that errors of measurement may position the same object
in two different datasets in different locations, but the difference between these two locations should be within some
margin of error σ (depending on the precision of positioning
available to the dataset creators). Assumptions of matching
are generated only for objects which are within σ distance

2

Background

In (Du et al. 2013; Du and Alechina 2016), the languages
L(LN F ) and L(LN F S) are defined as
φ, ψ := BEQ(a, b) | N EAR(a, b) | F AR(a, b) | ¬φ | φ∧ψ
where a, b are individual names. φ → ψ ≡def ¬(φ ∧ ¬ψ).
BEQ stands for ‘BufferedEqual’. L(LBP T ) is defined as
φ, ψ := BP T (a, b) | N EAR(a, b) | F AR(a, b) | ¬φ | φ∧ψ
L(LBP T ) contains BP T instead of BEQ. BP T stands
for ‘BufferedPartOf’.
L(LN F ), L(LN F S) and L(LBP T ) are all interpreted
over models based on a metric space. Every individual name
involved in an LNF formula is mapped to a point, whilst
every individual name in an LNFS/LBPT formula is mapped
to an arbitrary geometry or a non-empty set of points.
Definition 1 (Metric Space) A metric space is a pair
(∆, d), where ∆ is a non-empty set (of points) and d is a
metric on ∆, i.e. a function d : ∆ × ∆ −→ R≥0 , such that
for any x, y, z ∈ ∆, the following axioms are satisfied:
1. identity of indiscernibles: d(x, y) = 0 iff x = y;

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2776

