The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Optimizing Discount & Reputation Trade-Offs in
E-Commerce Systems: Characterization and Online Learning
Hong Xie,1,2 Yongkun Li,3 John C.S. Lui2
1

College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
hongx87@gmail.com, ykli@ustc.edu.cn, cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract

reputable label), a seller must increase her reputation score
to at least 500 (eBay 1995).
Often, buyers are less willing to buy products from low
reputation sellers. Authors in (Xie and Lui 2015) found that
new sellers need to spend at least seven hundred days (on average) to earn a reputable label. Hence, some sellers resort to
“illegal means” to increase their reputation, i.e., authors in
(Xu et al. 2015) found that more than eleven thousand sellers
in Tabobao have conducted fake transactions. A number of
companies, e.g., Lantian, Shuake and Kusha, even provide
professional fake transaction services and the per-year fake
transaction volume is estimated to be more than six million
per company (Xu et al. 2015). Fake transactions are illegal,
and this motivates us to explore “legitimate means” to enhance (new) sellers’ reputation.
We propose to enhance sellers’ reputation via “price discounts”. To illustrate, consider the eBay reputation system
and that a seller is reputable if and only if her reputation
score is no less than 500. A seller can attract 10 transactions
per day if she is reputable, otherwise, she can only attract 1
transaction per day. Assume each transaction earns a positive rating of 1. Suppose the price of a product is $1 and its
cost is $0.8. We have the following two cases:

Feedback-based reputation systems are widely deployed in
E-commerce systems. Evidences showed that earning a reputable label (for sellers of such systems) may take a substantial amount of time and this implies a reduction of profit. We
propose to enhance sellers’ reputation via price discounts.
However, the challenges are: (1) The demands from buyers depend on both the discount and reputation; (2) The demands are unknown to the seller. To address these challenges,
we first formulate a profit maximization problem via a semiMarkov decision process (SMDP) to explore the optimal
trade-offs in selecting price discounts. We prove the monotonicity of the optimal profit and optimal discount. Based on
the monotonicity, we design a QLFP (Q-learning with forward projection) algorithm, which infers the optimal discount
from historical transaction data. We conduct experiments on
a dataset from to show that our QLFP algorithm improves the
profit by as high as 50% over both the classical Q-learning
and speedy Q-learning algorithm. Our QLFP algorithm also
improves the profit by as high as four times over the case of
not providing any price discount.

Introduction
Nowadays, E-commerce systems, e.g., Alibaba, Amazon,
eBay and Taobao, are becoming increasingly popular. Such
systems have generated tremendous economic values, e.g.,
Amazon and eBay were ranked 29th and 172nd in a Fortune
500 ranking (Fortune500 2015) in terms of the total revenue.
This paper considers the eBay like E-commerce systems,
where a large number of sellers and buyers transact online.
To reflect the trustworthiness of sellers, a reputation system
is maintained. In particular, the feedback-based reputation
system (Resnick et al. 2000) is the most widely deployed,
e.g., in eBay, Taobao, etc. Sellers of such systems are initialized with a low reputation and they must obtain a sufficiently
large number of positive feedbacks from buyers to earn a
reputable label. For example, eBay and Taobao use threelevel feedbacks, i.e., {−1 (Negative), 0 (Neutral), 1 (Positive) }. Each seller is initialized with a reputation score of
zero. A positive (or negative) rating increases (or decreases)
the reputation score by one, while a neutral rating does not
change the reputation score. To earn a 4-star label (i.e., a

Case 1 (No discounts) For a new seller (initialized with a
reputation score of zero) who does not provide any discount,
she needs to spend 500 days to earn a reputable label. The
total profit in the first 500 days is (1 − 0.8) × 1 × 500 = 100.
Case 2 (With discounts) A new seller provides a discount
of 40% before she earns a reputable label, i.e., the price becomes 0.6, and she does not provide any discount after becoming reputable. Assume this discount increases the transaction volume to 2 per day. She needs to spend 250 days
to earn a reputable label. The profit in the first 250 days is
(0.6−0.8)×2×250 = −100. The total profit in the first 500
days is (0.6 − 0.8) × 2 × 250 + (1 − 0.8) × 10 × 250 = 400.
The above cases illustrate: (1) Price discounts can enhance
sellers’ reputation; (2) Price discounts may lead to profit
losses in the short run, but the reputation effect can compensate the profit in subsequent days. Note that in real-world
E-commerce systems, the demands (i.e., per-day transaction
volumes) are dynamic, buyers may provide biased ratings,
and the discount-dependent demands (i.e., buyers’ preferences over discounts) are unknown, etc. This paper studies

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7992

