The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Wasserstein Soft Label Propagation on
Hypergraphs: Algorithm and Generalization Error Bounds
Tingran Gao, Shahab Asoodeh, Yi Huang, James Evans
The University of Chicago
trg17@uchicago.edu, shahab@uchicago.edu, yhuang10@uchicago.edu, jevans@uchicago.edu

Abstract

and Niyogi 2004), in which labels of interest are typically
numerical or categorical variables, Wasserstein propagation
aims at inferring unknown soft labels, such as histograms or
probability distributions, from known ones, based on pairwise similarities qualitatively characterized by edge connectivity and quantitatively measured using Wasserstein distances. Compared with traditional “hard labels,” soft labels
are built with extra flexibility and informativeness, rendering themselves naturally to applications where uncertainty
or distributional information is crucial. For instance, the traffic density at routers in the Internet network or topic distributions in the co-authorship network are more naturally
modeled as probability distributions.
Briefly speaking, semi-supervised learning is a paradigm
that leverages unlabelled data to improve the generalization performance for supervised learning, under generic,
unsupervised structural assumptions (e.g. the manifold assumption) on the dataset; see (Seeger 2001; Zhu 2008;
Chapelle, Schölkopf, and Zien 2006) for an overview. Given
a graph G = (V, E) and a subset of vertices V0 ⊂ V , label
propagation is the procedure of extending an assignment of
labels on V0 , denoted as a map f0 : V0 → D valued in an
arbitrary set D, to a map f : V → D on the entire vertex set
V . Borrowing an analogy with classical heat equations, this
extension procedure is reminiscent of heat propagation from
“boundary” V0 to the “entire domain” V . For soft label propagation, the label set D is the probability distributions P (N )
modeled on a complete separable metric space (N, dN ).
Among the first works addressing semi-supervised learning with soft labels are (Corduneanu and Jaakkola 2005;
Tsuda 2005; Subramanya and Bilmes 2011). In all these
works, the similarity between two soft labels is quantitatively measured using the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, which often incurs instability and discontinuity in the
inferred soft labels. In (Solomon et al. 2014) the authors proposed to replace the KL divergence with 1- or 2-Wasserstein
distance. The resulting soft label propagation algorithm is
thus termed “Wasserstein propagation.” Specifically, given a
measure-valued map f0 : V0 → P (N ) defined on V0 ⊂ V ,
Wasserstein propagation extends f0 to f : V → P (N ) by
solving the variational problem
X
min
Wpp (f (v) , f (w))
(1)

Inspired by recent interests of developing machine learning
and data mining algorithms on hypergraphs, we investigate in
this paper the semi-supervised learning algorithm of propagating ”soft labels” (e.g. probability distributions, class membership scores) over hypergraphs, by means of optimal transportation. Borrowing insights from Wasserstein propagation
on graphs [Solomon et al. 2014], we re-formulate the label propagation procedure as a message-passing algorithm,
which renders itself naturally to a generalization applicable to
hypergraphs through Wasserstein barycenters. Furthermore,
in a PAC learning framework, we provide generalization error bounds for propagating one-dimensional distributions on
graphs and hypergraphs using 2-Wasserstein distance, by establishing the algorithmic stability of the proposed semisupervised learning algorithm. These theoretical results also
shed new lights upon deeper understandings of the Wasserstein propagation on graphs.

Introduction
Recent decades have witnessed a growing interest in developing machine learning and data mining algorithms on hypergraphs (Zhou, H., and Schölkopf 2007; Jost and Mulas
2018; Bulò and Pelillo 2009; Li and Ramchandran 2015;
Li and Milenkovic 2017; Hein et al. 2013; Huang, Zhang,
and Yu 2015). As a natural generalization of graphs, a hypergraph is a combinatorial structure consisting of vertices
and hyperedges, where each hyperedge is allowed to connect any number of vertices. This additional flexibility facilitates capturing higher order interactions among objects; applications have been found in many fields such as computer
vision (Govindu 2005), network clustering (Demir, Aykanat,
and Cambazoglu 2008), folksonomies (Ghoshal et al. 2009),
cellular networks (Klamt, Haus, and Theis 2009), and community detection (Kim, Bandeira, and Goemans 2018).
This paper develops a probably approximately correct
(PAC) learning framework for soft label propagation or
Wasserstein propagation (Solomon et al. 2014), a recently
proposed semi-supervised learning algorithm based on optimal transport (Villani 2003; 2008), on graphs and hypergraphs. Different from the prototypical semi-supervised
learning algorithm of label propagation (Belkin, Matveeva,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

f :V →P(N )

3630

(v,w)∈E

