The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Understanding Pictograph with Facial Features:
End-to-End Sentence-Level Lip Reading of Chinese
Xiaobing Zhang,1,2 Haigang Gong,1 Xili Dai,1 Fan Yang,1 Nianbo Liu,1 Ming Liu1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, UESTC
2
CETC Big Data Research Institute Co.,Ltd, Guizhou, China
{zhangxiaobing, daixili, yangfan}@std.uestc.edu.cn {hggong, liunb, csmliu}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

tation in public places, improved hearing, silent-movie processing, and so on. Now, such automation is promising due
to the progress across computer vision tasks: the application
of deep neural network models and the use of large datasets
for training. Recently, proposed deep learning architectures
surpass professional lip readers by a large margin, at least for
the constrained vocabulary defined by the database (Chung
et al. 2017) (Assael et al. 2016).
Existing lip reading approaches can be classified into two
categories according to their modeling units: (1) wordsbased (Wand, Koutnik, and Schmidhuber 2016) and (2)
phonemes or visemes-based (Assael et al. 2016). A phoneme
is the smallest distinguishable unit of sound which continuously form a spoken word and a viseme is its corresponding
visual equivalent. The former approach is considered more
related to tasks of single word detection, recognition and
classification, while the latter to large vocabulary continuous
speech recognition and sentence-level classification. However, the majority of related works focus on English or other
languages, as opposed recognising to Chinese sentence-level
sequences.
In this paper, we present LipCH-Net, which is to the
best of our knowledge, the first unconstrained sentence-level
Chinese lip reading model. Linguistically, Chinese is not
English. In English, all words are made up of 26 letters,
and the exact word can be roughly determined according
to its pronunciation. On the contrary, the elements of Chinese pronunciation are composed of 23 initials, 24 vowels
and 4 kinds of intonation marks. On average, each syllable
corresponds to almost 3-90 different Hanzi. Moreover, there
exist homophones and polyphones for most Hanzi. According to a survey (Tian 2012), Chinese is the language with the
largest information entropy, which means each basic unit in
Chinese carries much more information than any other languages. Thus, extracting discriminative features from this
highly ambiguous language is a critical but challenging task
for Chinese lip reading.
Based on the distinct characteristics of Chinese, we implement Chinese lip reading in a two-step architecture, in which
two different neural models are employed to solve the recognition of Picture-to-Pinyin and Pinyin-to-Hanzi respectively
before being jointly optimized to improve the overall performance finally. During experiments, we tried many tricks
(such as scheduled sampling, attention mechanism, and so

With the breakthrough of deep learning, lip reading technologies are under extraordinarily rapid progress. It is well-known
that Chinese is the most widely spoken language in the world.
Unlike alphabetic languages, it involves more than 1,000 pronunciations as Pinyin, and nearly 90,000 pictographic characters as Hanzi, which makes lip reading of Chinese very challenging. In this paper, we implement visual-only Chinese lip
reading of unconstrained sentences in a two-step end-to-end
architecture (LipCH-Net), in which two deep neural network
models are employed to perform the recognition of Pictureto-Pinyin (mouth motion pictures to pronunciations) and the
recognition of Pinyin-to-Hanzi (pronunciations to texts) respectively, before having a jointly optimization to improve
the overall performance. In addition, two modules in the
Pinyin-to-Hanzi model are pre-trained separately with large
auxiliary data in advance of sequence-to-sequence training to
make the best of long sequence matches for avoiding ambiguity. We collect 6-month daily news broadcasts from China
Central Television (CCTV) website, and semi-automatically
label them into a 20.95 GB dataset with 20,495 natural
Chinese sentences. When trained on the CCTV dataset, the
LipCH-Net model outperforms the performance of all stateof-the-art lip reading frameworks. According to the results,
our scheme not only accelerates training and reduces overfitting, but also overcomes syntactic ambiguity of Chinese
which provides a baseline for future relevant work.

Introduction
Lip reading is the task of decoding what is being said from
the movement of a speaker’s mouth, which plays an important role in speech comprehension and human communication. It is a proverbially difficult skill, and very challenging for humans, especially applied to the Chinese language.
Chinese lip reading actuations, besides the face, lip, tongue
and teeth, are actually latent and hard to disambiguate. For
example, it is intrinsically ambiguous at the Pinyin letter
level - different letters share exactly the same lip shape (e.g.
‘m’ and ‘f’, ‘p’ and ‘b’). However, these ambiguities can be
largely solved when using a language model to capture the
context and inherent relationship in a sentence.
Automatic lip reading has enormous practical applications: speech recognition in noisy environment, silent dicCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9211

