The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Equivalence between Wagering and Fair-Division Mechanisms
Rupert Freeman

David M. Pennock

Jennifer Wortman Vaughan

Microsoft Research
rupert.freeman@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
dpennock@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
jenn@microsoft.com

Abstract

class of weakly budget-balanced wagering mechanisms—
those for which the principal is guaranteed no loss—and
the class of allocation mechanisms for divisible goods under additive valuations. Furthermore, we show that commonly studied properties of wagering mechanisms correspond precisely to commonly studied properties of fair division. Individual rationality, which ensures that risk-neutral
agents benefit in expectation from participation in a wagering mechanism, corresponds to the notion of proportionality in fair division, which, loosely speaking, guarantees each
agent at least a minimal share of allocated goods. And properties common to the literature in both settings, including
incentive compatibility and Pareto optimality, carry over immediately, with minor caveats.
This correspondence has implications for both fair division and wagering. For example, weighted score wagering mechanisms (Lambert et al. 2008; 2015), which build
on the machinery of proper scoring rules (Gneiting and
Raftery 2007), can be imported into the fair division setting
to yield allocation mechanisms that are proportional, envyfree, and strictly incentive compatible—to the best of our
knowledge, the first strictly incentive compatible allocation
mechanisms. On the flip side, the strong demand matching
allocation mechanism (Cole, Gkatzelis, and Goel 2013) can
be imported into the wagering setting to produce a mechanism that, in our simulations, outperforms standard wagering mechanisms in terms of amount of trade facilitated and
agent utility. As another example, since the constrained serial dictatorship (Aziz and Ye 2014) allocation mechanism
requires only ordinal agent preferences, the correspondence
yields the first wagering mechanism that allows agents to
report ordinal beliefs.
The correspondence we show builds on an earlier observation that the output of a wagering mechanism can be interpreted as a sale of Arrow-Debreu securities to bettors (Freeman, Pennock, and Vaughan 2017). Once all wagers have
been collected, a wagering mechanism can be viewed as
allocating a fixed number of securities of different types
among the bettors (possibly with some leftover for the principal), with a bettor’s value for each security proportional to
her belief about the likelihood of a future event. Under this
interpretation, it is natural to consider the use of an allocation mechanism to allocate the securities. Perhaps more surprisingly, our correspondence shows that the class of weakly

We draw a surprising and direct mathematical equivalence between the class of allocation mechanisms for divisible goods
studied in the context of fair division and the class of weakly
budget-balanced wagering mechanisms designed for eliciting probabilities. The equivalence rests on the intuition that
wagering is an allocation of financial securities among bettors, with a bettor’s value for each security proportional to
her belief about the likelihood of a future event. The equivalence leads to theoretical advances and new practical approaches for both fair division and wagering. Known wagering mechanisms based on proper scoring rules yield fair allocation mechanisms with desirable properties, including the
first strictly incentive compatible fair-division mechanism. At
the same time, allocation mechanisms make for novel wagering rules, including one that requires only ordinal uncertainty
judgments and one that outperforms existing rules in a range
of simulations.

1

Introduction

Consider the following two scenarios. In the first, an
information-seeking principal would like to elicit credible
probabilistic forecasts from a group of agents. She does so
by collecting wagers from the agents along with their predictions, and redistributing these wagers in such a way that
agents with more accurate predictions are more highly rewarded, potentially keeping a cut for herself. In the second,
a neutral mediator needs to allocate a set of divisible goods
or resources, such as plots of land or compute cycles, to a
group of agents who all have different preferences over the
goods and potentially different entitlements. His top priority
is ensuring that each agent walks away with her fair share.
On the surface, these scenarios appear quite distinct. Central to wagering is the idea of money changing hands, with
each agent’s rewards contingent on an uncertain future state
of the world. In contrast, the fair division of goods or resources typically involves no exchange of money and no inherent uncertainty.
Despite these apparent differences, we show that these
scenarios are two sides of the same coin. In particular, we
show that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1957

