The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Large-Scale Heterogeneous Feature Embedding
Xiao Huang, Qingquan Song, Fan Yang, Xia Hu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
{xhuang, song 3134, nacoyang, xiahu}@tamu.edu

Abstract

Salakhutdinov 2012). Learning a representation jointly from
all types of features is potentially helpful to make it more
informative, since they often complement each other. For
example, Facebook users have multiple types of features
such as attributes in the introductions, words in posts, contents in photos, and rich friend relationships (Tang et al.
2015). These features are all highly correlated with each
other (Smith, Fischer, and Yongjian 2012), i.e., the contents posted by users would reflect their status described
in the introductions; in turn, the social status have a significant impact on users’ words (Hogg and Terry 2000);
and friends tend to share posts with similar topics (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001). In addition, recent work
such as multiview learning (Ding and Fu 2014; Gong et al.
2014) and attributed network embedding (Huang, Li, and
Hu 2017a; Liu, Huang, and Hu 2017) have demonstrated the
benefits of joint learning. Therefore, it is promising to perform feature embedding based on instance features collected
from multiple aspects.
However, as it becomes increasingly easier and cheaper to
collect data, existing heterogeneous feature embedding algorithms (Zhang et al. 2015c) face many challenges when
applied to real-world systems. Three major ones are summarized as follows. First, the ever-growing data volume
along with the complex data properties put demands on the
scalability of algorithms. For example, there are 2.23 billion1 monthly active Facebook users in the second quarter of 2018, and each user could have thousands of posts
and friends. Capacities of existing algorithms such as coupled matrix factorization (Yang et al. 2015) and canonical correlation analysis (Foster, Kakade, and Zhang 2008;
Yuan, Sun, and Ge 2014) are highly restricted under largescale settings. Second, real-world instance features often are
heterogeneous sources or even might be within a different
modality such as networks (Yang et al. 2015). High computational costs of fusing heterogeneous information limit
the applications of existing algorithms. A widely used approach is to calculate the instance proximity, i.e., similarities between instances, based on each source, and conduct
joint learning based on these homogeneous instance proximities (Huang, Li, and Hu 2017b). But the computations of

Feature embedding aims to learn a low-dimensional vector
representation for each instance to preserve the information
in its features. These representations can benefit various offthe-shelf learning algorithms. While embedding models for
a single type of features have been well-studied, real-world
instances often contain multiple types of correlated features
or even information within a different modality such as networks. Existing studies such as multiview learning show that
it is promising to learn unified vector representations from all
sources. However, high computational costs of incorporating
heterogeneous information limit the applications of existing
algorithms. The number of instances and dimensions of features in practice are often large. To bridge the gap, we propose a scalable framework FeatWalk, which can model and
incorporate instance similarities in terms of different types
of features into a unified embedding representation. To enable the scalability, FeatWalk does not directly calculate any
similarity measure, but provides an alternative way to simulate the similarity-based random walks among instances to
extract the local instance proximity and preserve it in a set
of instance index sequences. These sequences are homogeneous with each other. A scalable word embedding algorithm
is applied to them to learn a joint embedding representation
of instances. Experiments on four real-world datasets demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of FeatWalk.

Introduction
Feature embedding (Zhang et al. 2015b), aka representation
learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013) or dimensionality reduction (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006), aims
to learn low-dimensional vectors for all instances, such that
instances with similar original features tend to have similar
vector representations. By reducing the redundancy and extracting meaningful information, it could be efficiently utilized to and enhance the performance of various real-world
applications such as syntactic analysis (Chen, Zhang, and
Zhang 2014), human action recognition (Guo et al. 2017),
and person re-identification (Wu et al. 2018).
Beyond a single data source, real-world systems are often imbued with multiple types of correlated instance features (Guo 2013) or even data of a distinct modality such
as networks (Yang et al. 2015) and images (Srivastava and

1
www.statista.com/statistics/264810/number-of-monthlyactive-facebook-users-worldwide/

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3878

