The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Show, Attend and Read: A Simple and
Strong Baseline for Irregular Text Recognition
Hui Li,∗1 Peng Wang,∗2 Chunhua Shen,1 Guyu Zhang2
1

School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia, 5000
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
hui.li02@adelaide.edu.au, peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn, chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au, zhangguyu@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Recognizing irregular text in natural scene images is challenging due to the large variance in text appearance, such
as curvature, orientation and distortion. Most existing approaches rely heavily on sophisticated model designs and/or
extra fine-grained annotations, which, to some extent, increase the difficulty in algorithm implementation and data
collection. In this work, we propose an easy-to-implement
strong baseline for irregular scene text recognition, using offthe-shelf neural network components and only word-level annotations. It is composed of a 31-layer ResNet, an LSTMbased encoder-decoder framework and a 2-dimensional attention module. Despite its simplicity, the proposed method
is robust. It achieves state-of-the-art performance on irregular
text recognition benchmarks and comparable results on regular text datasets. The code will be released.

high

low

Introduction

(a)
Original
Image

Text information in images is of indispensable value in semantic visual understanding. Reading text in natural scene,
however, compared to traditional OCR, is still a challenging
problem. One of the main reasons is the potential irregularity and diversity of in text shape and layout, which can be
curved, oriented or distorted. With the application of deep
neural networks, the performance of regular (mostly horizontal) text recognition has been improved rapidly. Taking
the ICDAR 2013 benchmark (Karatzas et al. 2013) as example, the best-reported accuracy (Bai et al. 2018) has been
94.4%, to our knowledge. Nonetheless, most regular text
recognizers (Shi, Bai, and Yao 2017; Wang and Hu 2017)
treat text as horizontal lines, which makes them difficult to
be extended directly to irregular text. The performance of
existing irregular text recognizers is far from being satisfactory. For instance, the current top-performing approach (Shi
et al. 2018) only achieves 76.1% accuracy on the ICDAR
2015 benchmark (Karatzas et al. 2015).
Existing irregular text recognizers can be roughly categorized into three groups: rectification based (Shi et al. 2016;
2018; Liu et al. 2016; Liu, Chen, and Wong 2018), attention based (Yang et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2017) and multi-

MANCHESTER

for

CHRISTMAS

shoulds

CINERAMA

civeram

pizza

Dizza

GRANDSTAND

chandstand

RTFM

RTFN

(b)
2D attention
(ours)

(c)
Rectification
(Shi et al. 2018)

Figure 1: The comparison of our proposed 2D attention
based and the rectification based (Shi et al. 2018) irregular text recognizers. The second column gives the predictions of our approach and the heat map by aggregating attention weights at all character decoding steps; the third column demonstrates the rectified images and the corresponding predictions using the authors’ implementation. Rectification based methods may encounter difficulties when the
input image is severely curved or distorted. In contrast, we
do not transform images and propose a tailored 2D attention module to localize individual characters in a weaklysupervised manner.
direction encoding based (Cheng et al. 2018) approaches.
The rectification based methods attempt to transform irregular text patches into regular ones and then recognize them
using regular text recognizers. However, as shown in Figure 1, severe distortions or curvatures give rise to difficulties for rectification. (Yang et al. 2017) proposed an attention mechanism to select local 2D features when decoding
individual characters. Nevertheless, it needs extra characterlevel annotations to supervise the attention network and a

∗
The first two authors equally contributed to this work. C. Shen
is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8610

