The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Communicate and Solve Visual Blocks-World Tasks
Qi Zhang,1 Richard Lewis,2 Satinder Singh,1 Edmund Durfee1
1

Computer Science and Engineering, 2 Department of Psychology, University of Michigan
{qizhg,rickl,baveja,durfee}@umich.edu

Abstract

Our work makes three novel contributions to languageemergence research. First, we introduce a collaborative
blocks-world construction task involving communication of
discrete symbol sequences that is challenging, systematically structured, and affords interesting analyses of the
emergent communication. Second, we demonstrate that,
when representing speaker and listener policies as recurrent
neural networks, how they are trained affects how well their
emergent protocols support generalization to unseen configuration sizes (defined by the number of blocks in the configurations). Specifically, we find that using Bandit for training
supports greater flexibility in construction to improve performance over using supervised learning (SL), and that when
using reinforcement learning (RL) more structured communication emerges to overcome the harder problem induced
by delayed rewards. Third, we demonstrate the emergence
of interesting linguistic properties that distinguish the RLtrained agent from the other two. Specifically, we provide
evidence for the emergence of subsequences (N-grams) of
symbols with a power-law frequency distribution similar to
that found in natural human languages, and that are important in carrying meaning in way that is consistent with some
degree of compositionality.

We study emergent communication between speaker and listener recurrent neural-network agents that are tasked to cooperatively construct a blocks-world target image sampled from
a generative grammar of blocks configurations. The speaker
receives the target image and learns to emit a sequence of discrete symbols from a fixed vocabulary. The listener learns to
construct a blocks-world image by choosing block placement
actions as a function of the speaker’s full utterance and the
image of the ongoing construction. Our contributions are (a)
the introduction of a task domain for studying emergent communication that is both challenging and affords useful analyses of the emergent protocols; (b) an empirical comparison
of the interpolation and extrapolation performance of training
via supervised, (contextual) Bandit, and reinforcement learning; and (c) evidence for the emergence of interesting linguistic properties in the RL agent protocol that are distinct from
the other two.

Introduction
We are interested in the challenging problem of learning
effective communication protocols for collaborative multiagent settings in which limited bandwidth communication
channels can be exploited by agents for task performance,
but where no protocols are provided to the agents in advance. This topic, sometimes called language emergence,
has attracted interest in multiple fields over several decades
(we briefly review some of this work below), including recent progress in the application of neural networks (NNs).
We empirically study language emergence in a two-agent,
speaker-listener NN-based architecture, where the speaker
observes the task goal and takes communication actions that
sequentially emit symbols, and the listener (never seeing
the goal) receives the utterance and acts on the task environment. We investigate the degree to which the agents
converge on communication protocols that have interesting
linguistic structure, and that can successfully lead the listener to (at least partially) achieve the goal. We compare the
speaker-listener architecture to a baseline architecture where
a single-agent both sees the goal and acts on the environment.

Related Work
Research on language emergence spans many fields. Linguistics and cognitive science are particularly interested in
the origins of properties of natural human language such as
hierarchical structure (Nowak, Plotkin, and Jansen 2000;
Nowak, Komarova, and Niyogi 2001; Steels 2003; Kirby,
Griffiths, and Smith 2014). The role of evolutionary processes and pressures in shaping human language remains
a controversial topic (Berwick and Chomsky 2015), but a
point of agreement among most cognitive scientists and linguists is that language to some degree is shaped by the
structure of the human cognitive architecture (Bratman et
al. 2010). A potential beneficial outcome of computational
explorations such as our work is to provide tools for cognitive science to explore the implications of agent architecture
for emergent linguistic capacities.
Recent work on learning communication among cooperative agents has proposed deep learning techniques for endto-end learning of communication protocols. In Sukhbaatar
et al. (2016), a population of homogeneous agents based on

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5781

