The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Performance Evaluation in Machine Learning:
The Good, the Bad, the Ugly, and the Way Forward
Peter Flach
Intelligent Systems Laboratory, University of Bristol, UK
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
Peter.Flach@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

to give a balanced view of where we are in machine learning performance evaluation, where we should aim to be, and
how we might get there. This short paper is therefore in part
a review of my own and others’ work on evaluation measures, in part a critique of current practice in empirical machine learning, and in part a suggested way forward towards
a well-founded measurement theory for machine learning.

This paper gives an overview of some ways in which
our understanding of performance evaluation measures for
machine-learned classifiers has improved over the last twenty
years. I also highlight a range of areas where this understanding is still lacking, leading to ill-advised practices in classifier evaluation. This suggests that in order to make further
progress we need to develop a proper measurement theory of
machine learning. I then demonstrate by example what such
a measurement theory might look like and what kinds of new
results it would entail. Finally, I argue that key properties such
as classification ability and data set difficulty are unlikely to
be directly observable, suggesting the need for latent-variable
models and causal inference.

1

2

Performance Evaluation in Machine
Learning

I will start by reviewing and critiquing current practice in
performance evaluation of machine learning algorithms. I
will highlight some good things, some not so good things,
and some things to be avoided. This is intended to demonstrate, by example, the need for a more careful treatment of
performance evaluation and the development of a specific
measurement framework for machine learning, but should
not be taken as complete in any sense.

Introduction

Data-driven AI systems typically operate in a rich ecosystem
involving many different components and actors, between
which a multitude of signals and messages are passed. Important signals include the predicted target value for a particular data case as estimated by a model (e.g., a class label in
classification, or a real number in regression); the variability or uncertainty in these estimates (e.g., confidence intervals, calibrated class probabilities); and performance measurements of a machine learning model on a test data set
(e.g., classification accuracy or F-score). The latter kind of
signals will be our main concern in this paper.
It may appear that performance measurements and related signals are well-understood, at least in supervised machine learning. For example, classification performance can
be measured by a range of evaluation measures including
accuracy, true and false positive rate, precision and recall,
F-score, Area Under (ROC) Curve, and Brier score. Each of
these evaluation measures has a clear technical interpretation that can be linked to particular use cases. There are furthermore well-defined relationships between many of these
evaluation measures.
However, one only has to dig a little deeper in the machine
learning literature for problematic issues to emerge, often
stemming from a limited appreciation of the importance of
the scale on which evaluation measures are expressed. Several examples will be given later in the paper, which aims

ML Evaluation: The Good
An important development in the last twenty years has been
the realisation that, even in the simplest scenarios, a single
aggregated measurement is insufficient to accurately reflect
the performance of a machine learning algorithm. Provost,
Fawcett, and Kohavi (1998) pointed out the limitations of
using predictive accuracy as the gold standard in classification and were among the early proponents of ROC analysis in this context. Provost and Fawcett (2001) demonstrated
the usefulness of ROC analysis for dealing with changing
class and cost distributions, and introduced the ROC convex hull method, which was later shown to be equivalent
to using isotonic regression to obtain calibrated probabilities from a classifier (Fawcett and Niculescu-Mizil 2007;
Flach and Matsubara 2007). An example ROC curve with
its convex hull can be seen in Figure 1 (left).
ROC analysis derives its main ethos from multi-objective
optimisation, which is to delay choosing a trade-off between the different objectives to be optimised for as long
as possible. By discarding all dominated points (ones that
cannot be optimal under any trade-off) one is left with
the set of non-dominated solutions (the Pareto front) from
which the optimal operating point can be obtained once a
trade-off is fixed. In classification the optimisation objec-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9808

