The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Ethically Aligned Mobilization of Community Effort to Reposition Shared Bikes
Zelei Liu,1,3 Han Yu,2 Leye Wang,3 Liang Hu,1 Qiang Yang3
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
liuzl13@mails.jlu.edu.cn, han.yu@ntu.edu.sg, wly@cse.ust.hk, hul@jlu.edu.cn, qyang@cse.ust.hk
2

Abstract

solution to maximize the expected number of bikes repositioned while minimizing cost and number of queries.

We consider the problem of mobilizing community effort to
reposition indiscriminantly parked shared bikes in urban environments through crowdsourcing. We propose an ethically
aligned incentive optimization approach WSLS which maximizes the rate of success for bike repositioning while minimizing cost and prioritizing users’ wellbeing. Realistic simulations based on a dataset from Singapore demonstrate that
WSLS significantly outperforms existing approaches.

Revised MMKP Problem Formulation
Assuming that within a bounded area, there are NS shared
bike parking zones. Let there be a total of NB indiscriminately parked bikes {b1 , b2 , ..., bNB }. The objective is to
maximize the number of bikes repositioned into parking
zones while staying within the resource constraints.
At any given time, there can be NU users, each having
his own base price for repositioning a bike. A user’s base
price may vary at different time of a day and is related to
the distance of travel needed to reposition a bike. Therefore, we divide each day into 12 time slots of 2 hours each
{h1 , h2 , ..., h12 }, and consider moving distance d in multiples of a fixed unit distance dunit (e.g. 50m). There are
up to L levels of movement distance {d1 , d2 , ..., dL }, and
dl = l · dunit . Distances longer than dL are categorized as
dL . Denote user i’s base price for a given distance dl and
time slot ht as ci (dl , ht ). We assume that the range of possible values for base prices is ci (dl , ht ) ∈ [cmin , cmax ], where
cmax ⩾ cmin ⩾ 0. Each bikes is treated as a task, τj , which
needs to be delegated to a user. Each τj contains information regarding bike id b, the destination parking zone z, and
distance separating the two dl , τj = {b, z, dl }. We aim to
reposition each bike to its nearest available parking zone.
One obvious resource constraint is the total budget, B.
In addition, we introduce another resource constraint - total
number of queries, P T , for all tasks. One query equals to
one offer presented to one user. The main reason to introduce P T is to prevent the algorithm from spamming users
with lower price queries which negatively impacts user experience. By incorporating this constraint, we follow the ethically aligned design guidelines to prioritize users’ wellbeing while attempting to achieve system objectives (Yu et
al. 2018). We formulate our problem following the Multidimensional Multiple Choice Knapsack (MMKP) model
(Hifi, Michrafy, and Sbihi 2004). We treat the decisions
about each task τj as an item-set Ij which contains |Ij |
items formed by available choices of the posted-price offer p ∈ [cmin , cmax ], the time slot the task is scheduled for
processing h, and expected number of queries to be sent to
nearby users pt = d F (dl1,h,p) e, where F (dl , h, p) is the cumulative probability distribution function of how likely an

Introduction
Today’s biking sharing systems (e.g. ofo) allow users to pick
up and drop off bikes at any location, not limited to parking zones (Figure 1(a)). This flexibility has led to many
cases of indiscriminant parking (Figure 1(b)) despite appeals
to users to park shared bikes at designated parking zones
(Figure 1(c)). This has resulted inconvenience to other road
users. Existing approaches incentivizing users to change
their travel plans to park bikes into parking zones (Singla
et al. 2015) are not suitable for this problem.

Figure 1: Examples of bike parking problems in Singapore.
To address this problem, we develop an incentive optimization approach to mobilize crowdsourcing users to reposition indiscriminately parked bikes into parking zones. We
propose a revised multi-dimensional and multiple choice
Knapsack formalization of this problem, and an efficient
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9983

