The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DyS: A Framework for Mixture Models in Quantification
André Maletzke, Denis dos Reis, Everton Cherman, Gustavo Batista
Instituto de Ciências Matemáticas e de Computação, Universidade de São Paulo
{andregustavo,denismr,evertoncherman}@usp.br, gbatista@icmc.usp.br

Abstract

errors committed by quantification methods are more consistent than those obtained with classifying and counting, since
the absolute quantification error of the latter grows linearly
around a predicted proportion for which the quantification
error is zero (Forman 2008).
Better estimations for the proportion of the classes are
important for applications where the interest is in analyzing tendencies and behaviors of groups of individuals rather
than specific classifications. Examples are quality control for
seminal material (González-Castro, Alaiz-Rodrı́guez, and
Alegre 2013), estimation of insect population in a region
(dos Reis et al. 2018a), and sentiment analysis in social media (Esuli, Sebastiani, and Abbasi 2010).
Among the quantification methods found in literature, a
family of algorithms stands out due to its quantification accuracy, simplicity, and ability to work on imbalanced training samples: Mixture Models (MM) (Forman 2005).
MM methods constitute a family of quantification approaches where the probability distribution of each class is
modeled individually and learned from a training set. As a
test sample contains data from all classes at different proportions, its distribution is a parametric mixture of the classes’
individual distributions, where the parameters are the proportions of the classes. Hence, the MM methods search for
the parameters of such a mixture and, consequently, estimate
the proportions of the classes in the test sample.
MM methods commonly represent the distribution of
the classes using histograms as an approximation of the
discretized Probability Density Function (PDF) (GonzálezCastro, Alaiz-Rodrı́guez, and Alegre 2013). The values
stored in such histograms are scores provided by classifiers
and relate to the probability of each observation belonging
to the positive class. This approach has three main advantages. First, memory compactness, since histograms summarize the original data as multiple examples are aggregated
into a single histogram bin. Second, easiness and low computational cost for mixing distributions, as we use vectors
to represent histograms and these vectors can be interpolated inexpensively. Finally, simplicity and low computational cost for comparing distributions, since we can use any
dissimilarity function that operates on a vectorial space.
However, there are significant disadvantages that need to
be addressed. While histograms with a small number of bins
incur a more compact vision of the original data, they also

Quantification is an expanding research topic in Machine
Learning literature. While in classification we are interested
in obtaining the class of individual observations, in quantification we want to estimate the total number of instances that
belong to each class. This subtle difference allows the development of several algorithms that incur smaller and more
consistent errors than counting the classes issued by a classifier. Among such new quantification methods, one particular
family stands out due to its accuracy, simplicity, and ability
to operate with imbalanced training samples: Mixture Models (MM). Despite these desirable traits, MM, as a class of
algorithms, lacks a more in-depth understanding concerning
the influence of internal parameters on its performance. In
this paper, we generalize MM with a base framework called
DyS: Distribution y-Similarity. With this framework, we perform a thorough evaluation of the most critical design decisions of MM models. For instance, we assess 15 dissimilarity functions to compare histograms with varying numbers
of bins from 2 to 110 and, for the first time, make a connection between quantification accuracy and test sample size,
with experiments covering 24 public benchmark datasets. We
conclude that, when tuned, Topsøe is the histogram distance
function that consistently leads to smaller quantification errors and, therefore, is recommended to general use, notwithstanding Hellinger Distance’s popularity. To rid MM models
of the dependency on a choice for the number of histogram
bins, we introduce two dissimilarity functions that can operate directly on observations. We show that SORD, one of such
measures, presents performance that is slightly inferior to the
tuned Topsøe, while not requiring the sensible parameterization of the number of bins.

Introduction
Quantification is a task that is similar to classification in the
sense that we are provided with a training set with labeled
observations, and a test sample with unlabeled examples.
However, in quantification, our objective is to predict the
proportion of instances that belong to each class, rather than
the label of each observation. The literature has proposed
several methods that yield smaller quantification errors than
simply classifying individual examples and counting the issued classes. González et al. (2017a) present a comprehensive survey of the area. A relevant finding is the fact that the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4552

