The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Vine Copula Models for Synthetic Data Generation
Yi Sun,1 Alfredo Cuesta-Infante,2 Kalyan Veeramachaneni1
1

MIT, 2 Universidad Rey Juan Carlos
yis@mit.edu, alfredo.cuesta@urjc.es, kalyan@csail.mit.edu

Abstract

other, it is safe to be shared openly, preserving the privacy
and confidentiality of the actual data (Li et al. 2014).
The central underlying problem for generative modeling
is to construct a joint probability distribution function, usually high-dimensional and comprising both continuous and
discrete random variables. This is often accomplished by using probabilistic graphical models (PGM) such as Bayesian
networks (BN) and conditional random fields (CRF), to
mention only two of many possible approaches (Jordan
1999; Koller and Friedman 2009). In PGM, the joint probability distribution obtained is simplified due to assumptions
on the dependence between variables, which is represented
in form of a graph. Thus the major task for PGM is the process of learning such a graph; this problem is often understood as a structure learning task that can be solved in a constructive way, adding one node at a time while attempting
to maximize the likelihood or some information criterion. In
PGM, continuous variables are quantized before a structure
is learned or parameters identified, and, due to this quantization, this solution looses information and scales poorly.
Copula functions are joint probability distributions in
which any univariate continuous probability distribution can
be plugged in as a marginal. Thus, the copula captures the
joint behaviour of the variables and models the dependence
structure, whereas each marginal models the individual behaviour of its corresponding variable. In other words, the
choice of the copula and the marginals results in the construction of the joint probability distribution directly (Nelsen
2006). However, in practice, there are many bivariate copula
families but only a few multivariate ones, with the Gaussian copula and the T-copula being the most prominent. For
this reason, these two families have been used extensively,
leading to models that most of the time outperform the multivariate normal (MVN). However, these models still assume
a dependence structure that may only loosely capture the interaction between a subset of variables. The strongest and
most well-known case against the abuse of Gaussian copula can be observed in (MacKenzie and Spears 2014). The
key problem pinpointed in that work is that financial quantities are seldom jointly linear, and even if so, the measure
of such association, i.e. the correlation, is not stable across
time. Therefore, the Gaussian bivariate copula, whose parameter is the correlation between its covariates, is a bad
choice. Other copula families depend on non-linear degrees

A vine copula model is a flexible high-dimensional dependence model which uses only bivariate building blocks. However, the number of possible configurations of a vine copula grows exponentially as the number of variables increases,
making model selection a major challenge in development.
In this work, we formulate a vine structure learning problem
with both vector and reinforcement learning representation.
We use neural network to find the embeddings for the best
possible vine model and generate a structure. Throughout experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets, we show that
our proposed approach fits the data better in terms of loglikelihood. Moreover, we demonstrate that the model is able
to generate high-quality samples in a variety of applications,
making it a good candidate for synthetic data generation.

1

Introduction

The machine learning (ML) community is increasingly interested generative modeling. Broadly, generative modeling
consists of modeling either both the joint distribution of
data and classes for supervised learning or of modeling only
the joint distribution of data for unsupervised learning. In
tasks involving classification, a generative model is useful
to augment smaller, labeled datasets, which are especially
problematic when developing deep learning applications for
novel fields (Wang and Perez 2017).
In unsupervised learning (clustering), a generative model
supports development of model-driven algorithms (where
each cluster is represented by a model). These algorithms
scale better than data-driven algorithms, and are typically
faster and more reliable. Additionally, these algorithms are
crucial tools in tasks that don’t easily fit in the supervised/unsupervised paradigm, including, for example, survival analysis - e.g. predicting when a chronically ill person
will return to the hospital, or how long will a project last in
a Kickstarter (Vinzamuri, Li, and Reddy 2014).
Synthetic data generation - i.e. sampling new instances
from joint distribution - can also be carried out by a generative model. Synthetic data has found multiple uses within
machine learning. On one hand, it is useful for testing the
scalability and the robustness of new algorithms; on the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5049

