The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robust Anomaly Detection in Videos Using Multilevel Representations
Hung Vu,† Tu Dinh Nguyen,‡ Trung Le,‡ Wei Luo,† Dinh Phung‡
†

Center for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
{hungv, wei.luo}@deakin.edu.au
‡
Monash University Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia
{Tu.Dinh.Nguyen, trunglm, Dinh.Phung}@monash.edu

Abstract

Both supervised and unsupervised methods usually work
on low-level features of pixel/edge/motion information to
detect abnormality (Ribeiro, Lazzaretti, and Lopes 2017;
Hasan et al. 2016; Chong and Tay 2017). For example, a
query frame is compared with its reconstructed frame that
is produced by deep Convolutional Autoencoders (CAEs)
(Ribeiro, Lazzaretti, and Lopes 2017; Hasan et al. 2016) or
CAEs/Long Short Term Memories (Chong and Tay 2017;
Luo, Liu, and Gao 2017). Regions with high reconstruction errors (over a given threshold) indicate the presence
of anomaly objects. Madhdyar Ravanbakhsh et al. (Ravanbakhsh et al. 2017a; 2017b) apply the idea of adversarial learning in Generative Aversarial Networks (GANs)
to localize anomaly behaviors. Two conditional GANs are
trained on the data pair of frames and their optical flow features to produce generated frames/optical flow maps given
the other data. An irregular object is usually associated with
a high generation error in (Ravanbakhsh et al. 2017a) or
a low value of GAN’s discriminator (Ravanbakhsh et al.
2017b). Again, the inputs of these GAN-based systems are
raw video frames.

Detecting anomalies in surveillance videos has long been an
important but unsolved problem. In particular, many existing
solutions are overly sensitive to (often ephemeral) visual artifacts in the raw video data, resulting in false positives and
fragmented detection regions. To overcome such sensitivity
and to capture true anomalies with semantic significance, one
natural idea is to seek validation from abstract representations of the videos. This paper introduces a framework of
robust anomaly detection using multilevel representations of
both intensity and motion data. The framework consists of
three main components: 1) representation learning using Denoising Autoencoders, 2) level-wise representation generation using Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks, and
3) consolidating anomalous regions detected at each representation level. Our proposed multilevel detector shows a significant improvement in pixel-level Equal Error Rate, namely
11.35%, 12.32% and 4.31% improvement in UCSD Ped 1,
UCSD Ped 2 and Avenue datasets respectively. In addition,
the model allowed us to detect mislabeled anomalies in the
UCDS Ped 1.

1

Introduction

Detecting abnormality using low-level features encounters two issues: i) low-level detection usually causes fragmented and interrupted regions because an anomalous object
may contains very normal pixels, for example, a white car
also has pixels similar to a white footpath, and ii) low-level
information is sensitive to noise and is significantly affected
by environment changes and thus low-level detectors usually make a lot of false detections. These problems indicate
the unreliability and ineffectiveness of low-level detectors.
To address the first issue, we propose to detect anomaly objects at abstract representation. Such abstractness can be discovered via multilayer architecture of deep networks (Zeiler
and Fergus 2014), where low layers encode visual features
such as edges, corners and colors whilst higher layers describe semantic identities such as objects and their positional relationships. Object-level detection allows us to obtain complete anomaly objects without fragments or interruption. To tackle the second problem of false detections,
we are based on the idea that true anomaly objects should
be highlighted at many levels of detections and therefore we
combine low-level detection with abstract-level detection to
accurately isolate abnormality. This combination has three
benefits: a) increase the reliability of detection; b) reduce

With the increasing popularity of surveillance cameras in
public places, there have been growing interests in systems
that automatically detect anomalous events in videos. Such
systems are crucial in domains like traffic monitoring and security control, where the sheer volume of video data makes
manual video analysis infeasible. Video anomaly detectors
follow two main approaches based on the availability of
data labels. Supervised methods (Singh and Mohan 2017;
Zhang et al. 2016; Li, Mahadevan, and Vasconcelos 2014)
usually learn the regular objects from the set of normal examples. Often the labels for supervised learning are costly
to obtain and are prone to human errors. Without label
information, unsupervised methods assume that abnormality has a lower probability of occurrence than regular objects in reality (Sodemann, Ross, and Borghetti 2012) and
identify any event that rarely occurs in videos to be an
anomaly. Since unsupervised learning can utilize huge unlabeled video archives on a daily basis, this is the approach
we take to design our system.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5216

