The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Lifted Hinge-Loss Markov Random Fields
Sriram Srinivasan

Behrouz Babaki

Golnoosh Farnadi

Lise Getoor

ssriniv9@ucsc.edu
UC Santa Cruz

Behrouz.Babaki@polymtl.ca
Polytechnique Montreal

gfarnadi@ucsc.edu
UC Santa Cruz

getoor@ucsc.edu
UC Santa Cruz

Abstract

successfully in a wide variety of domains including NLP
tasks (Beltagy, Erk, and Mooney 2014; Wang and Ku
2016), image processing (Aditya, Yang, and Baral 2018;
Gridach, Haddad, and Mulki 2017), bioinformatics (Sridhar,
Fakhraei, and Getoor 2016), search (Alshukaili, Fernandes,
and Paton 2016), recommender systems (Kouki et al. 2017;
Lalithsena et al. 2017) and more (Deng and Wiebe 2015;
Ebrahimi, Dou, and Lowd 2016; Chen, Chen, and Qian
2014), with promising results.
For SRL frameworks, exact inference is often computationally expensive because inference is performed over large
grounded graphical models. However, this ground representation is typically derived from a much smaller set of logical rules and, depending on the data, often contains identical substructures. These identical substructures cause unnecessary work for the inference algorithm by repeatedly
performing the same operations.
Lifted inference (Kersting 2012; Kimmig, Mihalkova, and
Getoor 2015; den Broeck et al. 2011; Kazemi and Poole
2016) aims to detect common substructures and uses them
to avoid redundant computations.
Lifted inference in SRL is a well-studied problem. A popular approach is to group objects that are indistinguishable
given evidence, and perform inference by operating on these
groups.
First-order
variable
elimination
(Poole
2003;
de Salvo Braz, Amir, and Roth 2005) extends the standard
variable elimination algorithm by summing over entire
groups of random variables instead of one at a time. Lifted
belief propagation (Singla and Domingos 2008) employs
the same message-passing method as the standard belief
propagation algorithm. It first groups variables and forms
super nodes which are connected via so-called super edges.
Message passing is then performed over the graph with
these super nodes and super edges. A modified version
of belief propagation (BP) called counting BP (Kersting,
Ahmadi, and Natarajan 2009) constructs a compressed
factor graph by creating clusternodes and clusterfactors
and uses a modified BP to perform inference. Some inference algorithms use the logical structure in a model for
problem decomposition (Dechter and Mateescu 2007;
Chavira and Darwiche 2008). The lifted versions
of these algorithms perform this decomposition at
the first-order level (Gogate and Domingos 2010;

Statistical relational learning models are powerful tools that
combine ideas from first-order logic with probabilistic graphical models to represent complex dependencies. Despite their
success in encoding large problems with a compact set of
weighted rules, performing inference over these models is often challenging. In this paper, we show how to effectively
combine two powerful ideas for scaling inference for large
graphical models. The first idea, lifted inference, is a wellstudied approach to speeding up inference in graphical models by exploiting symmetries in the underlying problem. The
second idea is to frame Maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference as a convex optimization problem and use alternating
direction method of multipliers (ADMM) to solve the problem in parallel. A well-studied relaxation to the combinatorial optimization problem defined for logical Markov random
fields gives rise to a hinge-loss Markov random field (HLMRF) for which MAP inference is a convex optimization
problem. We show how the formalism introduced for coloring
weighted bipartite graphs using a color refinement algorithm
can be integrated with the ADMM optimization technique to
take advantage of the sparse dependency structures of HLMRFs. Our proposed approach, lifted hinge-loss Markov random fields (LHL-MRFs), preserves the structure of the original problem after lifting and solves lifted inference as distributed convex optimization with ADMM. In our empirical
evaluation on real-world problems, we observe up to a three
times speed up in inference over HL-MRFs.

1

Introduction

Statistical relational learning (SRL) frameworks compactly
specify a probability distribution over groups of objects using first-order logic. Most commonly, the probability distribution is defined as a template for a graphical model
which is instantiated (or grounded) over the objects in the
domain. A variety of different SRL frameworks have been
developed over the last decade, (see e.g., (De Raedt and
Kersting 2011; Richardson and Domingos 2006; Getoor
and Taskar 2007)). In this paper, we focus on hinge-loss
Markov Random fields (HL-MRFs) (Bach et al. 2017),
a recently introduced SRL framework based on weighted
logical rules which makes inference tractable by defining
a convex inference objective. HL-MRF have been used
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7975

