The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

The Utility of Sparse Representations for Control in Reinforcement Learning
Vincent Liu,1 Raksha Kumaraswamy,1 Lei Le,2 Martha White1
1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
{vliu1, kumarasw, whitem}@ualberta.ca
2
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University Bloomington, Indiana, USA
leile@indiana.edu

SPARSE REPRESENTATION NEURAL NETWORK

Abstract

SUPERVISION
SIGNAL

We investigate sparse representations for control in reinforcement learning. While these representations are widely used in
computer vision, their prevalence in reinforcement learning
is limited to sparse coding where extracting representations
for new data can be computationally intensive. Here, we begin
by demonstrating that learning a control policy incrementally
with a representation from a standard neural network fails
in classic control domains, whereas learning with a representation obtained from a neural network that has sparsity
properties enforced is effective. We provide evidence that the
reason for this is that the sparse representation provides locality, and so avoids catastrophic interference, and particularly
keeps consistent, stable values for bootstrapping. We then discuss how to learn such sparse representations. We explore the
idea of Distributional Regularizers, where the activation of
hidden nodes is encouraged to match a particular distribution
that results in sparse activation across time. We identify a
simple but effective way to obtain sparse representations, not
afforded by previously proposed strategies, making it more
practical for further investigation into sparse representations
for reinforcement learning.

x1
x2

fully

: connected
xn

fully
connected

fully
connected

fully
connected

y

SPARSE
REPRESENTATION

Figure 1: A neural network with dense connections producing a sparse representation: Sparse Representation Neural
Network (SR-NN). The green squares indicate active (nonzero) units, making a sparse last hidden layer where only a
small percentage of units are active. This contrasts a network
with sparse connections—which is often also called sparse.
Sparse connections remove connections between nodes, but
are likely to still produce a dense representation.
given input (Figure 1). Enforcing sparsity promotes identifying key attributes, because it encourages the input to be
well-described by a small subset of attributes. Sparsity, then,
promotes locality, because local inputs are likely to share similar attributes (similar activation patterns) with less overlap
to non-local inputs. In fact, many hand-crafted features are
sparse representations, including tile coding (Sutton 1996;
Sutton and Barto 1998), radial basis functions and sparse distributed memory (Kanerva 1988; Ratitch and Precup 2004).
Other useful properties of sparse representations—which
can be seen as projecting data into a higher-dimensional
space—include invariance (Goodfellow et al. 2009; Rifai et
al. 2011); decorrelated features per instance (Földiák 1990);
improved computational efficiency for updating weights in
the predictor, as only weights corresponding to active features
need to be updates; and enabling linear separability in the
high-dimensional space (Cover 1965), which facilitates the
learning of a simple linear predictor. Further, such sparse, distributed representations have been observed in the brain (Olshausen and Field 1997; Quian Quiroga and Kreiman 2010;
Ahmad and Hawkins 2015).
Traditionally, sparse representations have been common
for control in reinforcement learning, such as tile coding

Introduction
Learning performance in artificial intelligence systems is
highly dependent on the data representation—the features.
An effective representation captures important attributes of
the state (or instance), as well as simplifies the estimation
of predictors. Consider a reinforcement learning agent. A
local representation enables the agent to more feasibly make
accurate predictions for that local region, because the local dynamics are likely to be a simpler function than learning global
dynamics. Additionally, such a representation can help prevent forgetting or interference (McCloskey and Cohen 1989;
French 1991), by only updating local weights, as opposed
to dense representations where any update would modify
many weights. At the same time, it is important to have a
distributed representation (Bengio 2009; Bengio, Courville,
and Vincent 2013), where the representation for an input is
distributed across multiple features or attributes, promoting
generalization and a more compact representation.
Such properties can be well captured by sparse representations: those for which only a few features are active for a
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4384

