The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SAX Breakpoints for Random
Forest Based Real-Time Contrast Control Chart
In-Seok Lee, Jun-Geol Baek*
Department of Industrial Management Engineering
Korea University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
E-mail: dark7710@korea.ac.kr, jungeol@korea.ac.kr (*corresponding author)

Abstract

To resolve the problem, a distance-based RTC control
chart is suggested. These charts are used to calculate the
statistics through the distance between decision boundaries
and the observation using SVM and KLDA as the classifier
(Wei et al., 2016). The control charts using these classifiers
are less effective in process management because these
charts could not find the cause of a fault.
Therefore, we suggest the RF based RTC control chart
with SAX. SAX is famous method to improve the performance of the classification and clustering. We convert the
input data by using SAX. To improve the performance, we
change the parameters: alphabet size and breakpoints. Experiment shows that our method improves the performance
of RTC control chart.

In the manufacturing process, process monitoring is very
important. Real-time contrast (RTC) control chart outperforms existing monitoring methods. However, the performance of RTC control chart depends on the classifier. The
existing RTC charts use random forest (RF), support vector
machine (SVM), or kernel linear discriminant analysis
(KLDA) as a classifier. RF classifier can find cause of faults
but the performance is lower than others. Therefore, we
suggest the data representation method to improve the RF
based RTC control chart. Symbolic aggregate approximation (SAX) is famous method to improve the performance
of classification and clustering. We convert the input data
by using SAX. We change the parameters of SAX such as
alphabet size and breakpoints to improve the performance.
Experiment shows that represented data is efficient method
to improve the performance of RTC control chart.

RTC Control Chart

Introduction

RTC control chart sets reference and contrast to classify
each other. The reference and contrast indicate observations in the normal and abnormal state, respectively. In
Phase I, the reference data
consist of the data in the
normal state and the reference data size is denoted by .
Let be the observation at time t and
be the moving window size. The contrast data ( ) changes by moving the window whenever a new observation occurs at time
t, i.e., ( )
}.
The classifier builds a classification boundary at each
time . and ( ) are labeled Class 0 and Class 1. In the
normal state, and ( ) are similar to each other. Therefore, the classifier has difficulty distinguishing between
and ( ). On the other hand, if the process is out of con( ) are relatively easy to classify.
trol, then
and
𝑝̂𝑘 ( 𝑖 | ) is a predicted probability of the arbitrary observation 𝑖 with class 𝑘 (𝑘 0 1) at time . We compute the
average of to reflect the classification results (Deng et
al, 2012). The monitoring statistics is as follows:

In the process monitoring, RTC control chart outperforms
existing method. The RTC control chart learns a classifier
when new observations are generated and calculates the
statistics by the learned results. The traditional RTC control chart uses random forest as a classifier. This classifier
provides the variable importance that is the degree of the
effect for a variable in the process. The RTC control chart
can analyze the cause of faults by using the variable importance (Deng et al, 2012).
However, the random forest classifier distinguishes observations by using the decision boundary of each variable
and yields the class as an output. Because the output is a
categorical value, it is difficult for the classifier to reflect
the distance between the decision boundary and the observation. Thus, the monitoring statistics have discrete values,
which can degrade the performance (Wei et al., 2016).

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

𝑝(

9959

)

∑𝑥 ∈𝑆0 𝑝̂0 (𝑥𝑖 | )
𝑖

0

(1)

