The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Unit Bilateral Trade
Matthias Gerstgrasser,1 Paul W. Goldberg,2 Bart de Keijzer,3 Philip Lazos,4 Alexander Skopalik5
3

1,2,4
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, University of Essex
5
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Twente
{matthias.gerstgrasser, paul.goldberg, filippos.lazos}@cs.ox.ac.uk
b.dekeijzer@essex.ac.uk
a.skopalik@utwente.nl

Abstract

term “satisfactory” can be tailored to the specific market under consideration, but nonetheless, in economic theory various universal properties have been identified and agreed on
as important. The following three are the most fundamental
ones:
• Incentive Compatibility ((DS)IC): It must be a dominant
strategy for the agents (buyers and sellers) to behave truthfully, hence not “lie” about their valuations for the items
in the market. This enables the market mechanism to
make an informed decision about the trades to be made.
• Individual Rationality (IR): It must not harm the utility of
an agent to participate in the mechanism.
• Strong Budget Balance (SBB): All monetary transfers that
the mechanism executes are among participating agents
only. That is, no money is injected into the market, and no
money is burnt or transferred to any agent outside of the
market.
This paper studies the capabilities of mechanisms that satisfy these three fundamental properties above for a very simple special case of a two-sided market. Bilateral trade is the
most basic such setting comprising a buyer and a seller, together with a single item that may be sold, i.e., transferred
from the seller to the buyer against a certain payment from
the buyer to the seller. The bilateral trade setting is a classical one: It was studied in the seminal paper (Myerson and
Satterthwaite 1983) and has been studied in detail in various other publications in the economics literature. Recent
work in the Algorithmic Game Theory literature (Blumrosen and Dobzinski 2016; Blumrosen and Mizrahi 2016;
Colini-Baldeschi et al. 2017b) has focused on the welfare
properties of bilateral trade mechanisms. These works assume the existence of prior distributions over the valuations
of the buyer and seller, that may be thought of as modelling
an intermediary’s beliefs about the buyer’s and seller’s values for the item.
The present paper studies a generalisation of the classical
bilateral trade setting by allowing the seller to hold multiple units initially. These units are assumed to be of a single resource, so that both agents only express valuations in
terms of how many units they have in possession. The final utility of an agent (buyer or seller) is then determined
by her valuation and the payment she paid or received. We
focus our study on characterising which mechanisms satisfy

We characterise the set of dominant strategy incentive compatible (DSIC), strongly budget balanced (SBB), and ex-post
individually rational (IR) mechanisms for the multi-unit bilateral trade setting. In such a setting there is a single buyer and
a single seller who holds a finite number k of identical items.
The mechanism has to decide how many units of the item are
transferred from the seller to the buyer and how much money
is transferred from the buyer to the seller. We consider two
classes of valuation functions for the buyer and seller: Valuations that are increasing in the number of units in possession,
and the more specific class of valuations that are increasing
and submodular.
Furthermore, we present some approximation results about
the performance of certain such mechanisms, in terms of social welfare: For increasing submodular valuation functions,
we show the existence of a deterministic 2-approximation
mechanism and a randomised e/(1−e) approximation mechanism, matching the best known bounds for the single-item
setting.

1

Introduction

Auctions form one of the most studied applications of game
theory and mechanism design. In an auction setting, a single seller or auctioneer runs a pre-determined procedure or
mechanism (i.e., the auction) to sell one or more goods to
the buyers, and the buyers then have to strategise on the way
they interact with the auction mechanism. An auction setting is rather restrictive in that it involves a single seller that
is monopolistic and is assumed to be non-strategic. While
this is a sufficient assumption in some cases, there are many
applications that are more complex: It is often realistic to assume that a seller expresses a valuation for the items in her
possession and that a seller wants to maximise her profit.
Such settings in which both buyers and sellers are considered as strategic agents are known as two-sided markets,
whereas auction settings are often referred to as one-sided
markets.
The present paper falls within the area of mechanism design for two-sided markets, where the focus is on designing
satisfactory market platforms or intermediation mechanisms
that enable trade between buyers and sellers. In general, the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1973

