The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Online Pandora’s Boxes and Bandits
Hossein Esfandiari,1 MohammadTaghi HajiAghayi,2 Brendan Lucier,3 Michael Mitzenmacher4
1

Google Research, 2 University of Maryland, 3 Microsoft Research, 4 Harvard University
esfandiari@google.com, hajiagha@cs.umd.edu, brlucier@microsoft.com, michaelm@eecs.harvard.edu

Abstract

payoff Pandora seeks to maximize is
X
max vi −
ci .

We consider online variations of the Pandora’s box problem (Weitzman 1979), a standard model for understanding issues related to the cost of acquiring information for
decision-making. Our problem generalizes both the classic
Pandora’s box problem and the prophet inequality framework. Boxes are presented online, each with a random value
and cost drawn jointly from some known distribution. Pandora chooses online whether to open each box given its cost,
and then chooses irrevocably whether to keep the revealed
prize or pass on it. We aim for approximation algorithms
against adversaries that can choose the largest prize over any
opened box, and use optimal offline policies to decide which
boxes to open (without knowledge of the value inside)1 . We
consider variations where Pandora can collect multiple prizes
subject to feasibility constraints, such as cardinality, matroid,
or knapsack constraints. We also consider variations related
to classic multi-armed bandit problems from reinforcement
learning. Our results use a reduction-based framework where
we separate the issues of the cost of acquiring information
from the online decision process of which prizes to keep. Our
work shows that in many scenarios, Pandora can achieve a
good approximation to the best possible performance.

1

i∈S

i∈S

The Pandora’s box problem incorporates two key decision
aspects: the ordering for opening boxes, and when to stop. It
has been proposed for applications such as buying or selling
a house and searching for a job.
The original Pandora’s box problem has a simple and elegant solution. The reservation price vi∗ associated with an
unopened box i is the value for which Pandora would be indifferent taking a prize with that value and opening box i.
That is,
vi∗ = inf{y : y ≥ −ci + E [max vi , y]}
= inf{y : ci ≥ E [max vi − y, 0]}.
This result says that if Pandora is allowed to choose the
ordering, Pandora should keep opening boxes in the order
of decreasing reservation price, but should stop searching
when the largest prize value obtained exceeds the reservation
price of all unopened boxes. An alternative proof to Weitzman’s proof (Weitzman 1979) of this was recently provided
by Kleinberg, Waggoner, and Weyl (Kleinberg and Weyl
2016), who also present additional applications, including
to auctions. Very recently Singla (Singla 2018) generalizes
the approach of Kleinberg et al. (Kleinberg and Weyl 2016)
for more applications in offline combinatorial problems such
as matching, set cover, facility location, and prize-collecting
Steiner tree.
In other similar problems, the ordering is chosen adversarially and adaptively. For example, in the prophet inequality setting first introduced in 1977 by Garling, Krengel, and
Sucheston (Krengel and Sucheston 1978; 1977), the boxes
have no cost, and the prize distributions are known, but
the decision-maker has to decide after each successive box
whether to stop the process and keep the corresponding
prize; if not, the prize cannot be claimed later. It is known
that there exists a threshold-based algorithm that in expectation obtains a prize value within a factor of two of the
expected maximum prize (and the factor of two is tight)
(Krengel and Sucheston 1978; 1977). There have subsequently been many generalizations of the prophet inequality setting, especially to applications in online auctions (see
e.g. (Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi and Sandholm 2007;

Introduction

Information learning costs play a large role in a variety of
markets and optimization tasks. For example, in the academic job market, obtaining information about a potential
match is a costly investment for both sides of the market.
Conserving on information costs is an important component
of efficiency in such settings.
A classic model for information learning costs is the
Pandora’s box problem, attributed to Weitzman (Weitzman
1979), which has the following form. Pandora has n boxes,
where the ith box contains a prize of value vi that has a
known cumulative distribution function Fi . It costs ci to
open the ith box and reveal the actual value vi . Pandora may
open as many boxes as she likes, in any order. The payoff
is the maximum-valued prize, minus the cost of the opened
boxes. That is, if S is the subset of opened boxes, then the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See section 2 for formal definitions.

1885

