The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Emergency Department Online Patient-Caregiver Scheduling
Hanan Rosemarin, Ariel Rosenfeld, Sarit Kraus
Bar-Ilan University
Israel

Abstract

in turn translates into an upper bound on the desired patient’s waiting time, leaving the decision as to when and
which caregiver should provide the treatment entirely in
the hands of the triage nurse(s). Unfortunately, due to the
time-critical environment, the multiple partially-conflicting
objectives of the ED (as discussed next) and multiple interruptions, decisions are often inadequately made and are
mainly based on ad-hoc heuristics and experience which
need not necessarily fully align with optimizing the ED’s
objectives, e.g., (Franklin et al. 2011; Tanabe et al. 2004;
ENA 2017). Specifically, while EDs have been computationally investigated for over 70 years (Saghafian, Austin,
and Traub 2015), mainly focusing on modeling the patient
arrival flow and required staffing levels, to the best of our
knowledge, the patient-caregiver scheduling problem has yet
to be addressed by computational means.
In order to address this shortcoming, we first model
the patient-caregiver scheduling process as a novel online
scheduling problem. Deriving an efficient scheduling policy
to the corresponding problem is hard, therefore we remedy
this hardness by introducing a deep-learning-based pairwise
ranking approach which relies on ED-provided objectives
and leverages real-world data. Our approach provides the
ED with an effective and efficient scheduling policy targeted
at optimizing the hospital-specific objectives given the hospital’s available resources and expected patient flow.
In an extensive empirical evaluation, using real-world
data and medical experts’ input, we show that our proposed
approach can significantly improve the patient-caregiver
scheduling process, which can translate into better ED care
for the greater good.
To ensure the validity of our approach and evaluation from
a medical perspective, we recruited 4 medical caregivers
(who did not co-author this paper) to follow this study: a
triage nurse, a physician’s assistant, an attending physician
and an ED director, from three large hospitals in Israel. We
refer to these caregivers as the expert panel in this study.

Emergency Departments (EDs) provide an imperative source
of medical care. Central to the ED workflow is the patientcaregiver scheduling, directed at getting the right patient to
the right caregiver at the right time. Unfortunately, common
ED scheduling practices are based on ad-hoc heuristics which
may not be aligned with the complex and partially conflicting ED’s objectives. In this paper, we propose a novel online deep-learning scheduling approach for the automatic assignment and scheduling of medical personnel to arriving patients. Our approach allows for the optimization of explicit,
hospital-specific multi-variate objectives and takes advantage
of available data, without altering the existing workflow of
the ED. In an extensive empirical evaluation, using real-world
data, we show that our approach can significantly improve an
ED’s performance metrics.

Introduction
Nearly half of all US hospital-associated medical care is
delivered by Emergency Departments (EDs, also known as
emergency rooms), making EDs a major source of medical care, especially for vulnerable populations (Lewin and
Altman 2000; Marcozzi et al. 2018). EDs are faced with
a dynamic flow of patients who present a wide variety of
conditions, ranging from severe multiple percussive injuries
and drug overdoses to common colds and cuts and scrapes,
all of which seek fast and quality medical attention. Due to
the variability in patients’ conditions, as well as the limited
availability of medical resources and their own variability
(i.e., attending physicians, interns, etc), an efficient patientcaregiver scheduling process is needed, a process which is
often referred to as triage (Christ et al. 2010).
Patient-caregiver scheduling is directed at getting the right
patient to the right caregiver at the right time, given the
ED’s constraints. Specifically, given a preliminary evaluation of the patient upon arrival (commonly done by a triage
nurse) and the available medical staff, a decision has to be
made as to when the patient should receive treatment and
by which caregiver. Today, the patient-caregiver scheduling process focuses almost entirely on assigning each patient a severity level using triage scales (e.g., between 1
and 5, 1 being the highest (Gilboy et al. 2012)), which

The ED Workflow and Purpose
While different EDs deploy slightly different modes of operations, a basic work-flow is common to most modern EDs
(Sinreich and Marmor 2005; Bedoya-Valencia and Kirac
2016), as depicted in Figure 1. In words, when a patient
arrives at the ED, her first stop would be the triage sta-

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

695

