The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

A Theory of State Abstraction for Reinforcement Learning
David Abel
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
david abel@brown.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning presents a challenging problem:
agents must generalize experiences, efficiently explore the
world, and learn from feedback that is delayed and often
sparse, all while making use of a limited computational budget. Abstraction is essential to all of these endeavors. Through
abstraction, agents can form concise models of both their surroundings and behavior, supporting effective decision making
in diverse and complex environments. To this end, the goal
of my doctoral research is to characterize the role abstraction plays in reinforcement learning, with a focus on state
abstraction. I offer three desiderata articulating what it means
for a state abstraction to be useful, and introduce classes of
state abstractions that provide a partial path toward satisfying these desiderata. Collectively, I develop theory for state
abstractions that can 1) preserve near-optimal behavior, 2) be
learned and computed efficiently, and 3) can lower the time
or data needed to make effective decisions. I close by discussing extensions of these results to an information theoretic
paradigm of abstraction, and an extension to hierarchical abstraction that enjoys the same desirable properties.

1

Figure 1: The process of abstraction.
goal of my research is to explain the nature of effective abstraction, hopefully giving rise to a theoretical understanding of what underlies effective RL more generally.
To realize this goal, I propose three desiderata that characterize what it means for an abstraction to be useful for RL:
8

(D1) S UPPORT E FFICIENT D ECISION M AKING: The abstraction enables fast planning and efficient RL.
(D2) P RESERVE S OLUTION Q UALITY: Solutions produced
from the abstracted model should be useful enough for
solving the desired problems.

Introduction

The focus of my doctoral research is on clarifying the representational practices that underlie effective Reinforcement
Learning (RL), drawing on Information Theory, Computational Complexity, and Computational Learning Theory.
The guiding question of my research is: “How do intelligent agents come up with the right abstract understanding
of the worlds they inhabit?”, as pictured in Figure 1. I study
this question by isolating and addressing its simplest unanswered forms through a mixture of theoretical analysis and
experimentation.
My interest in this question stems from its foundational
role in many aspects of learning and decision making: agents
can’t model everything in their environment, but must necessarily pick up on something about their surroundings in order
to explore, plan far into the future, generalize, solve credit
assignment, communicate, and efficiently solve problems.
Abstraction is essential to all of these endeavors: through
abstraction, agents can construct models of both their surroundings and behavior that are compressed and useful. The

(D3) E ASY TO C ONSTRUCT: Creating the abstractions
should not require an unrealistic statistical or computational budget.
To date, no unifying theory of abstraction adheres to all three
desiderata, or clarifies how to flexibly trade-off between the
three prescribed properties.

2

Completed Research

My recent published work focuses on a theory of state abstraction that endeavors to satisfy the desiderata.

2.1

State Abstraction

The goal of state abstraction is to reduce the size of a given
problem’s state space by grouping together similar states
in a way that doesn’t change the essence of the underlying problem being solved (Bertsekas and Castanon 1989;
Singh, Jaakkola, and Jordan 1995; McCallum 1996; Dietterich 2000; Andre and Russell 2002; Givan, Dean, and
Greig 2003; Li, Walsh, and Littman 2006), dating back to
work in approximating dynamic programs (Whitt 1978).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9876

