The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Online Learning for Mapping Kernels on Linguistic Structures
Giovanni Da San Martino Alessandro Sperduti, Fabio Aiolli
Qatar Computing Research Institute,
Hamad Bin Khalifa University
Doha, Qatar
gmartino@hbku.edu.qa

Department of Mathematics,
University of Padova
via Trieste, 63, Padova, Italy
{sperduti, aiolli}@math.unipd.it

Abstract

Amazon
Manhattan Beach, CA, USA
amosch@amazon.com

Moschitti 2006), paraphrase detection (Filice, Da San Martino, and Moschitti 2015), computational argumentation
(Wachsmuth et al. 2017).
One drawback of using tree kernels (and kernels for
structures in general) is the time complexity required both
in learning and classification. Such complexity can sometimes prevent the kernel application in scenarios involving large amount of data. Typical approaches devoted to
the solution of this problem relate to: (1) the use of fast
learning/classification algorithms, e.g. the (voted) perceptron
(Collins and Duffy 2002); (2) the reduction of the computational time required for computing a kernel (see e.g. (ShaweTaylor and Cristianini 2004) and references therein).
The first approach is viable since the use of a large number of training examples can fill the accuracy gap between
fast on-line algorithms, which do not explicitly maximize
margin, and more expensive algorithms like Support Vector
Machines (SVMs), which have to solve a quadratic optimization problem. Therefore, although the latter is supported by a
solid theory and state-of-the-art accuracy on small datasets,
learning approaches able to work with much larger data can
outperform them.
The second approach relates to either the design of more
efficient algorithms based on more appropriate data structures
or the computation of kernels over set of trees, e.g., (Kazama
and Torisawa 2006), (Moschitti and Zanzotto 2007). The latter techniques allow for the factorization/reuse of previously
evaluated subparts leading to a faster overall processing.
Our proposal is in line with the second approach. However, it will be applicable to both online and batch learning
algorithms. One of the most popular approaches to the definition of kernel functions for structured data is the convolution
kernel framework (Haussler 1999). A convolution kernel can
be defined by decomposing a structured object into substructures and then summing the contributions of kernel evaluations on the substructures. We exploit the idea that identical
substructures appearing in different kernel evaluations can
be factorized and thus computed only once, by postulating
a necessary condition of optimality for a data structure and
deriving results from it on an extension of the convolution
kernel framework, the Mapping Kernels (Shin and Kuboyama
2010). Besides the general theoretical result, we show how
to apply our results to a number of popular kernels for trees.
Moreover, we give empirical evidence that such optimal struc-

Kernel methods are popular and effective techniques for learning on structured data, such as trees and graphs. One of their
major drawbacks is the computational cost related to making
a prediction on an example, which manifests in the classification phase for batch kernel methods, and especially in online
learning algorithms. In this paper, we analyze how to speed
up the prediction when the kernel function is an instance of
the Mapping Kernels, a general framework for specifying kernels for structured data which extends the popular convolution
kernel framework. We theoretically study the general model,
derive various optimization strategies and show how to apply
them to popular kernels for structured data. Additionally, we
derive a reliable empirical evidence on semantic role labeling
task, which is a natural language classification task, highly
dependent on syntactic trees. The results show that our faster
approach can clearly improve on standard kernel-based SVMs,
which cannot run on very large datasets.

1

Alessandro Moschitti

Introduction

Many data mining applications involve the processing of
structured or semi-structured objects, e.g. proteins and phylogenetic trees in Bioinformatics, molecular graphs in Chemistry, hypertextual and XML documents in Information Retrieval and parse trees in NLP. In all these areas, the huge
amount of available data jointly with a poor understanding
of the processes generating them, typically enforces the use
of machine learning and/or data mining techniques.
The main complexity on applying machine learning algorithms to structured data resides in the design of effective
features for their representation. Kernel methods seem a valid
approach to alleviate such complexity since they allow to inject background knowledge into a learning algorithm and provide an implicit object representation with the possibility to
work implicitly in very large feature spaces. These interesting
properties have triggered a lot of research on kernel methods
for structured data (Jaakkola, Diekhans, and Haussler 2000;
Haussler 1999) and kernels for Bioinformatics (Kuang et al.
2004). In particular, tree kernels have shown to be very effective for NLP tasks, e.g., parse re-ranking (Collins and Duffy
2002), Semantic Role Labeling (Kazama and Torisawa 2005;
Zhang et al. 2007), Entailment Recognition (Zanzotto and
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3421

