The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Meta-Learning Approach for Custom Model Training
Amir Erfan Eshratifar,1 Mohammad Saeed Abrishami,1 David Eigen,2 Massoud Pedram1
1

Department of Electrical Engineering at University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
2
Clarifai, San Francisco, CA 94105, USA
eshratif@usc.edu, abri442@usc.edu, deigen@clarifai.com, pedram@usc.edu

Abstract

by sampling many different smaller tasks from a large data
source. As a result, one might expect that the meta-learned
model is capable of generalizing well to new unseen tasks
because of task-agnostic way of training.
Shortcomings of meta-learning algorithms. As we
show in the experiments below, models trained using metalearning perform worse than transfer learning in the following two scenarios: 1. When there are many training examples
available for each class in the target task (here we would like
the artificial agent to continue improving its model performance as more data becomes available); and 2. When there
are many different classes in the target task.
The main contribution of this paper is a joint “metatransfer” learning method that performs well for target tasks
of both few and many shots/classes. Our method performs
better than both transfer- and meta-learning baselines on all
target task sizes we evaluate.

Transfer-learning and meta-learning are two effective methods to apply knowledge learned from large data sources to
new tasks. In few-class, few-shot target task settings (i.e.
when there are only a few classes and training examples available in the target task), meta-learning approaches that optimize for future task learning have outperformed the typical
transfer approach of initializing model weights from a pretrained starting point. But as we experimentally show, metalearning algorithms that work well in the few-class setting
do not generalize well in many-shot and many-class cases. In
this paper, we propose a joint training approach that combines
both transfer-learning and meta-learning. Benefiting from the
advantages of each, our method obtains improved generalization performance on unseen target tasks in both few- and
many-class and few- and many-shot scenarios.

Introduction

Meta-Transfer Learning (MTL)

Current deep learning algorithms require a very large
amount of data to learn decent task-specific models, and
acquiring enough labeled data is often expensive and laborious. Moreover, in many mission critical applications,
such as autonomous vehicles and drones, an agent needs to
adapt rapidly to unseen environments. Humans are able to
learn new skills and concepts rapidly by leveraging knowledge learned earlier; therefore, we aim to enable the artificial agents to do the same. Transfer learning transfers the
knowledge obtained from one domain with a large amount
of labeled data to other domains with less labeled data (Pan
and Yang 2010). It achieves this by copying the initial feature extraction layers, and fine-tuning the resulting model on
the target task (Yosinski et al. 2014). However, this method
is still data hungry because gradient-based optimization algorithms need many iterations over numerous examples to
adapt the models for new tasks (Ravi and Larochelle 2016).
On the other hand, meta-learning is a class of machine learning algorithms concerned with the ability of learning process
itself. Introduced by (Schmidhuber 1987), meta-learning
aims to train the model in task space rather than instance
space. While transfer learning methods train a base model
to use as a transfer source by optimizing a single monolithic task, meta-learning algorithms learn their base models

In order to overcome the two issues mentioned earlier,
we propose a new training algorithm, which inherits advantages of both meta-learning and transfer learning. This
joint training method employs two loss functions: 1) taskspecific (transfer learning) 2) task-agnostic (meta-learning).
The task-specific loss, L(x,y) (θ), is defined over the entire
base model’s training dataset. The task-agnostic loss, Lτ (θ),
on the other hand, is a meta-learning loss defined over a distribution of tasks (e.g. 5-ways classification tasks). Two gradient updates are computed independently from these two
loss functions, and the model is updated using the weighted
average of these two update vectors (see Algorithm 1). The
tasks in meta-learning are sampled from a distribution p(τ ),
while all instances in the sampled tasks are used for the
task-specific optimization. For adaptation to a new unseen
task, regular stochastic gradient descent will be used. For
the meta-learner, we evaluate our method using both Model
Agnostic Meta-learning (MAML (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine
2017)) and its first order variant, Reptile (Nichol, Achiam,
and Schulman 2018). The reason that we use this class of
meta-learning algorithms is that as opposed to Matching
Networks (Vinyals et al. 2016) and its variant (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017), they are model agnostic, and can be
directly applied to any model which is trained with a gradient descent procedure. The proposed method is similar to

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9937

