The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SuperVAE: Superpixelwise Variational Autoencoder for Salient Object Detection
Bo Li, Zhengxing Sun,∗ Yuqi Guo
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China

Abstract
Image saliency detection has recently witnessed rapid
progress due to deep neural networks. However, there still
exist many important problems in the existing deep learning based methods. Pixel-wise convolutional neural network
(CNN) methods suffer from blurry boundaries due to the convolutional and pooling operations. While region-based deep
learning methods lack spatial consistency since they deal
with each region independently. In this paper, we propose a
novel salient object detection framework using a superpixelwise variational autoencoder (SuperVAE) network. We first
use VAE to model the image background and then separate
salient objects from the background through the reconstruction residuals. To better capture semantic and spatial contexts
information, we also propose a perceptual loss to take advantage from deep pre-trained CNNs to train our SuperVAE network. Without the supervision of mask-level annotated data,
our method generates high quality saliency results which
can better preserve object boundaries and maintain the spatial consistency. Extensive experiments on five wildly-used
benchmark datasets show that the proposed method achieves
superior or competitive performance compared to other algorithms including the very recent state-of-the-art supervised
methods.

(a)Image

(b)GT

(c)MDF

(d)RFCN

(e)OURS

Figure 1: (a) Input images, (b) Ground truth masks, (c-e)
Results of (c) MDF (Li and Yu 2016b), (d) RFCN (Wang
et al. 2018), and (e) our method.

Conventional saliency detection methods usually utilize
hand-crafted features such as color, texture, contrast to represent the visual properties of pixels or regions. These methods then distinguish salient objects from background according to the extracted features with heuristic priors and
cues. Despite their great success, however, it is rather difficult for these methods to capture the semantic and structural information of salient objects in images because of the
hand-crafted low-level features they use. When encountering complex images, such as images with low-contrast objects or cluttered backgrounds, these methods usually produce unsatisfying saliency results.
Recently, deep learning led a revolution in computer
vision for its superior performance in object recognition
and classification (Russakovsky et al. 2015). By incorporating deep networks, such as CNN, or fully convolutional
neural network (FCN) into salient object detection algorithms (Li and Yu 2016a; Wang et al. 2018), with the extracted semantic features the detection accuracy has been
improved rapidly in comparison with previous state-of-theart results. However, while pixel-wise saliency prediction
networks are good to evaluate objectness in an image, they
lack the capability to generate clear boundary for salient object. As shown in Figure 1(d), after the stridden convolution
and pooling operations, these methods lose much signifi-

Introduction
As a fundamental but challenging problem, salient object detection is derived with the goal of discovering and locating
distinctive objects or regions in an image which attract human attention. It endows many high-level computer vision
systems with the capability to take advantage of human attention for more promising processing and analysis, such as
object recognition (Ren et al. 2014), image semantic segmentation (Wei et al. 2017), visual tracking (Hong et al.
2015) and video summarization (Mademlis, Tefas, and Pitas
2017), etc.
∗

Corresponding author is Zhengxing Sun(szx@nju.edu.cn).
This work was supported by National High Technology Researchand Development Program of China (No.2007AA01Z334), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos.61321491 and
61272219), Innovation Fund of State Key Laboratory for Novel
Software Technology (Nos. ZZKT2013A12, ZZKT2016A11 and
ZZKT2018A09)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8569

