The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Anchors Bring Ease: An Embarrassingly Simple Approach
to Partial Multi-View Clustering
Jun Guo,∗ Jiahui Ye∗
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China
eeguojun@outlook.com, yejiahui079@gmail.com

may be approximately 90% in industrial data (Little and
Rubin 2014). Besides, each view may suffer from missing
some instances (Xiang et al. 2013; Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015;
Yang et al. 2018b). This situation typically refers to partial
multi-view data, which is common in practical applications
(Cai et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2018).
Previous complete multi-view methods such as MultiNMF (Liu et al. 2013) cannot work well in this scenario,
thus partial multi-view clustering has attracted increasing attention recently. Many efforts have been made to solve this
problem. Representative works mainly resort to matrix factorization to exploit latent spaces for clustering. PVC (Li,
Jiang, and Zhou 2014) is a pioneering work using nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) and L1 -norm sparse regularizer to learn common and private latent spaces. IMG (Zhao,
Liu, and Fu 2016) integrates PVC and manifold learning
to adaptively capture the global structure of all instances.
Meanwhile, MIC (Shao, He, and Yu 2015) extends MultiNMF (Liu et al. 2013) via weighted NMF with L2,1 regularization. DAIMC (Hu and Chen 2018) carries forward MIC
through semi-NMF and L2,1 -norm regularized regression.
However, they have several drawbacks to some extent.

Abstract
Clustering on multi-view data has attracted much more attention in the past decades. Most previous studies assume that
each instance appears in all views, or there is at least one view
containing all instances. However, real world data often suffers from missing some instances in each view, leading to the
research problem of partial multi-view clustering. To address
this issue, this paper proposes a simple yet effective Anchorbased Partial Multi-view Clustering (APMC) method, which
utilizes anchors to reconstruct instance-to-instance relationships for clustering. APMC is conceptually simple and easy
to implement in practice, besides it has clear intuitions and
non-trivial empirical guarantees. Specifically, APMC firstly
integrates intra- and inter- view similarities through anchors.
Then, spectral clustering is performed on the fused similarities to obtain a unified clustering result. Compared with existing partial multi-view clustering methods, APMC has three
notable advantages: 1) it can capture more non-linear relations among instances with the help of kernel-based similarities; 2) it has a much lower time complexity in virtue of a noniterative scheme; 3) it can inherently handle data with negative entries as well as be extended to more than two views.
Finally, we extensively evaluate the proposed method on five
benchmark datasets. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of APMC over state-of-the-art approaches.

1

• Few non-linear relations among instances. Almost all of
these partial multi-view clustering approaches inherit the
limitations of matrix factorization, i.e., involving in linear
operations. Therefore, they usually capture various linear
correlations among instances, neglecting the potential and
valuable non-linear relations.

Introduction

Multi-view data has already been widely studied in the past
few years (Lahat, Adali, and Jutten 2015; Bai et al. 2016; Bai
et al. 2017). Various clustering models have been proposed
to solve the problem that grouping unlabeled data from diverse domains into a unified partition (Kumar and Daume
2011; Kumar, Rai, and Daume 2011; Zhang et al. 2018a;
Zhang et al. 2018b). However, real-world data often suffers
from incompleteness, which makes traditional multi-view
clustering methods inevitably degenerate or even fail.
Incompleteness in multi-view data can be roughly divided
into two cases. One is at feature level, in which certain features are missing from particular data points (Williams and
Carin 2005; Williams et al. 2007; Dick, Haider, and Scheffer 2008). The other case is at instance level, where some
instances are not available (Yuan et al. 2012; Shao, Shi,
and Yu 2013). Specifically, the ratio of missing instances

• Relatively high time cost. There are seldom closed-form
solutions for these multi-variable optimization problems.
Hence, iterative algorithms are utilized for the optimal results. Most existing works have a quadratic or even cubic
time complexity due to matrix eigen decomposition and
inverse operation in updating variables. This will harmfully restrict their efficiency in large-scale datasets.
• Limited generalization ability. Some previous studies
such as MIC cannot directly work in the situation where
negative entries exist in features. Besides, most of the
above methods such as PVC and IMG cannot be generalized to data with more than two views. The former is
caused by the usage of NMF which is only applicable to
nonnegative data. The latter is resulted from the specific
design for two-view scenarios in their models.

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

118

