The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

The SpectACl of Nonconvex Clustering:
A Spectral Approach to Density-Based Clustering
Sibylle Hess

TU Dortmund University
Computer Science Faculty
Artificial Intelligence LS VIII
D-44221 Dortmund, Germany
sibylle.hess@tu-dortmund.de

Wouter Duivesteijn

Technische Universiteit Eindhoven
Faculteit Wiskunde & Informatica
Data Mining Group
Eindhoven, the Netherlands
w.duivesteijn@tue.nl

SC

Abstract
When it comes to clustering nonconvex shapes, two paradigms
are used to find the most suitable clustering: minimum cut and
maximum density. The most popular algorithms incorporating these paradigms are Spectral Clustering and DBSCAN.
Both paradigms have their pros and cons. While minimum
cut clusterings are sensitive to noise, density-based clusterings
have trouble handling clusters with varying densities. In this
paper, we propose S PECTAC L: a method combining the advantages of both approaches, while solving the two mentioned
drawbacks. Our method is easy to implement, such as Spectral
Clustering, and theoretically founded to optimize a proposed
density criterion of clusterings. Through experiments on synthetic and real-world data, we demonstrate that our approach
provides robust and reliable clusterings.

1

Philipp Honysz, Katharina Morik
TU Dortmund University
Computer Science Faculty
Artificial Intelligence LS VIII
D-44221 Dortmund, Germany
philipp.honysz@tu-dortmund.de
katharina.morik@tu-dortmund.de

DBSCAN

DBSCAN

S PECTAC L

Figure 1: Performance of Spectral Clustering, DBSCAN, and
S PECTAC L on two concentric circles. Best viewed in color.
Clustering and DBSCAN; the combination can overcome
some of the innate disadvantages of both individual methods.
For all their strengths, even the most advanced clustering
methods nowadays still can be tripped up by some pathological cases: datasets where the human observer immediately
sees what is going on, but which prove to remain tricky for
all state-of-the-art clustering algorithms. One such example
is the dataset illustrated in Figure 1: we will refer to it as
the two circles dataset. It consists of two noisily1 separated
concentric circles, each encompassing the same number of
observations. As the leftmost plot in Figure 1 shows, Spectral Clustering does not at all uncover the innate structure
of the data: two clusters are discovered, but both incorporate about half of each circle. It is well-known that Spectral
Clustering is highly sensitive to noise (Bojchevski, Matkovic,
and Günnemann 2017, Figure 1); if two densely connected
communities are additionally connected to each other via a
narrow bridge of only a few observations, Spectral Clustering
runs the risk of reporting these communities plus the bridge
as a single cluster, whereas two clusters plus a few noise
observations (outliers) would be the desired outcome. The
middle plots in Figure 1 shows how DBSCAN (with minpts
set to 25 and 26, respectively) fails to realize that there are

Introduction

Despite being one of the core tasks of data mining, and despite having been around since the 1930s (Driver and Kroeber
1932; Klimek 1935; Tryon 1939), the question of clustering
has not yet been answered in a manner that doesn’t come with
innate disadvantages. The paper that you are currently reading will also not provide such an answer. Several advanced
solutions to the clustering problem have become quite famous, and justly so, for delivering insight in data where the
clusters do not offer themselves up easily. Spectral Clustering
(Dhillon, Guan, and Kulis 2004) provides an answer to the
curse of dimensionality inherent in the clustering task formulation, by reducing dimensionality through the spectrum of
the similarity matrix of the data. DBSCAN (Ester et al. 1996)
is a density-based clustering algorithm which has won the
SIGKDD test of time award in 2014. Both Spectral Clustering and DBSCAN can find non-linearly separable clusters,
which trips up naive clustering approaches; these algorithms
deliver good results. In this paper, we propose a new clustering model which encompasses the strengths of both Spectral

1

The scikit-learn clustering documentation (cf. https://
scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html) shows how SC and
DBSCAN can succeed on this dataset, but that version contains
barely any noise (scikit’s noise parameter set to 0.05, instead of our
still benign 0.1).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3788

