The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Grammar-Based Structural CNN Decoder for Code Generation
Zeyu Sun,† Qihao Zhu,† Lili Mou,‡ Yingfei Xiong,∗† Ge Li,† Lu Zhang†
†

Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University), MoE;
Software Institute, Peking University, 100871, P. R. China
{szy , zhuqh, xiongyf, lige, zhanglucs}@pku.edu.cn
‡
AdeptMind Research, Toronto, ON, Canada
doublepower.mou@gmail.com
n1 Root

Abstract
Code generation maps a program description to executable
source code in a programming language. Existing approaches
mainly rely on a recurrent neural network (RNN) as the decoder. However, we find that a program contains significantly
more tokens than a natural language sentence, and thus it may
be inappropriate for RNN to capture such a long sequence. In
this paper, we propose a grammar-based structural convolutional neural network (CNN) for code generation. Our model
generates a program by predicting the grammar rules of the
programming language; we design several CNN modules, including the tree-based convolution and pre-order convolution,
whose information is further aggregated by dedicated attentive pooling layers. Experimental results on the HearthStone
benchmark dataset show that our CNN code generator significantly outperforms the previous state-of-the-art method by 5
percentage points; additional experiments on several semantic parsing tasks demonstrate the robustness of our model. We
also conduct in-depth ablation test to better understand each
component of our model.

root → Module

n2

Module

n3

Call
Call → Func Arg

n4

Name
Func

Arg

Func → Name

n6
Arg → Name

n5 Name

Name

n7

x1 init

“a”

x2

Figure 1: The abstract syntax tree (AST) of code: init(a).

It has been pointed out that programs contain rich structural information, which is important to program modeling (Rabinovich, Stern, and Klein 2017; Yin and Neubig
2017). However, traditional Seq2Seq neural networks do not
explicitly model program structures. Figure 1 shows an example of a Python abstract syntax tree (AST), where the
two nodes n3 and n6 should have interacted intensively as
parent-child nodes, but are far away from each other if the
tree is pre-order traversed to a sequence. This brings difficulties to Seq2Seq models.
To address this problem, Dong and Lapata (2016) proposed an approach that generates code along the abstract
syntax tree (AST) of a program, but their generation is
still in the token level. More recent work generates programs by predicting the grammar rule or rewriting rule to
apply at each step (Xiong et al. 2018; Yin and Neubig 2017;
Rabinovich, Stern, and Klein 2017); thus, the generated programs are guaranteed to be syntactically correct. When neural network is used in those approaches, an RNN is used to
capture the autoregressiveness1 of predictions within the decoder.
In the deep learning community, researchers are showing
growing interest in using the convolutional neural network
(CNN) as the decoder (Gehring et al. 2017; Chaturvedi, Pandit, and Garain 2018), because of its efficiency and easiness of training. We further observe that a program is much
larger than a natural language sentence and that RNNs—

Introduction
Generating code from natural language description is an important but challenging task in artificial intelligence (Ling
et al. 2016; Yin and Neubig 2017; Rabinovich, Stern, and
Klein 2017; Mei and Zhang 2018). It is beneficial to various applications. For example, a programmer would like
to “open the file, F1” in Python, but does not know how
to implement it in the programming language. Hopefully,
he or she can obtain the target code “f = open(’F1’,
’r’)” by code generation.
With the prosperity of deep learning, the encoder-decoder
framework becomes a prevailing approach to sequence generation. In particular, recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
typically serve as the encoder and decoder; such architecture is also known as a sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq)
model (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014). When applied to
code generation, it takes the program description as the input sequence and generates the desired code as the output
sequence (Ling et al. 2016).
∗
Yingfei Xiong is the corresponding author. Our code is available at https://github.com/zysszy/GrammarCNN
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
By “autoregressive,” we mean that, during decoding, a step of
prediction is dependent on previous decoded steps.

7055

