The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Chinese NER with Height-Limited Constituent Parsing
Rui Wang,1 Xin Xin,1∗ Wei Chang,1 Kun Ming,1 Biao Li,2 Xin Fan2
1

BJ ER Center of HVLIP&CC, School of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Tencent, Beijing, China
{ruicn,xxin,2220160514,2120171045}@bit.edu.cn, {biotli,hsinfan}@tencent.com

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate how to improve Chinese named
entity recognition (NER) by jointly modeling NER and constituent parsing, in the framework of neural conditional random fields (CRF). We reformulate the parsing task to heightlimited constituent parsing, by which the computational complexity can be significantly reduced, and the majority of
phrase-level grammars are retained. Specifically, an unified
model of neural semi-CRF and neural tree-CRF is proposed,
which simultaneously conducts word segmentation, part-ofspeech (POS) tagging, NER, and parsing. The challenge
comes from how to train and infer the joint model, which
has not been solved previously. We design a dynamic programming algorithm for both training and inference, whose
complexity is O(n · 4h ), where n is the sentence length and h
is the height limit. In addition, we derive a pruning algorithm
for the joint model, which further prunes 99.9% of the search
space with 2% loss of the ground truth data. Experimental
results on the OntoNotes 4.0 dataset have demonstrated that
the proposed model outperforms the state-of-the-art method
by 2.79 points in the F1-measure.

Figure 1: An illustration example of NER with heightlimited constituent parsing (height limit = 2).

Aiming at solving this limitation, we reformulate the
problem, and let the NER be jointly modeled with heightlimited constituent parsing. The ground truth structure of
height-limited constituent parsing is generated by cutting
the nodes, which exceed the height limit, from the original
constituent parsing tree. Figure 1 illustrates an example for
a Chinese sentence, with the height limited to 2. Although
height-limited parsing is not a complete parsing result, many
phrases can indeed be extracted, such as noun phrases and
preposition phrases, which are also informative for upstream
applications. On one hand, for improving the NER accuracy,
our main assumption is if an entity is covered by a subtree
within a certain height from the original parsing tree, the
subtree can also provide supportive information from the aspect of parsing. We conduct a statistical analysis on the Chinese corpus of the OntoNotes 4.0 dataset (Weischedel et al.
2011), which contains 15,700 sentences and 13,372 entity
instances. We show how many entities can be covered by
constituent grammars if the height of the parsing tree is limited, in Fig. 2. It is observed, if the height limit is set to be 3,
near 80% of the entities can be covered by the subtree. This
demonstrates that joint modeling NER and height-limited
constituent parsing subtrees can indeed influence a majority of entities. On the other hand, for improving the computational cost, with the height of the parsing tree limited to
a constant, the complexity of the joint model is reduced to
O(n) theoretically, which is comparable with previous linear CRF models for NER.
In this paper, we investigate how to build a joint model,
in order to utilize height-limited constituent parsing structures to improve Chinese NER. Specifically, we investigate the problem under the graph-based CRF framework,

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) is to identify the boundaries of a named entity in a natural language sentence, and
its corresponding type, such as persons, locations, and organizations. It provides a fundamental support for a wide
range of upstream natural language processing (NLP) tasks,
such as relation extraction (Hendrickx et al. 2009; Tang et
al. 2008), semantic role labeling (Carreras 2004), and coreference resolution (Pradhan et al. 2012).
Jointly modeling NER with constituent parsing has been
demonstrated as an effective way in improving the NER performance (Finkel and Manning 2009). Original joint models
aim at solving both tasks. But in applications, if only NER
is needed, the joint model significantly increases the computational cost from O(n) in linear semi-CRF (Liu et al. 2016;
Sarawagi and Cohen 2004), to O(n3 ) in tree-CRF (Finkel
and Manning 2009; Finkel, Kleeman, and Manning 2008;
Hall, Durrett, and Dan 2003). This makes the joint model
not applicable in many cases in practice.
∗

the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7160

