The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dialogue Generation: From Imitation
Learning to Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Ziming Li,1 Julia Kiseleva,1,2 Maarten de Rijke1
1

University of Amsterdam
2
Microsoft Research AI
{z.li, derijke}@uva.nl, julia.kiseleva@microsoft.com

Abstract

ideal dialogue properties. However, a handcrafted reward
function is expensive to maintain and does not generalize
over different domains (Finn, Levine, and Abbeel 2016;
Fu, Luo, and Levine 2017). Especially for open-domain dialogue systems, it is hard to decide what knowledge is essential to design a proper reward function (Li et al. 2017).
Additionally, the accuracy of defined reward functions can
degrade when the dialogue context becomes more complex.
Li et al. (2017) use adversarial training for dialogue generation where they jointly train two systems, a generative
model to produce response sequences and a discriminator to
distinguish between the human-generated dialogues and the
machine-generated ones. Feedback from the discriminator is
used as a reward to push the generator to produce more realistic replies. The discriminator takes a dialogue consisting of
a context-reply pair as input and outputs the probability that
this dialogue is from real human dialogues.
In Li et al. (2017), during generator training, the reward
of each generated word during decoding should be supplied
and Monte Carlo search is applied to estimate the reward
for each word position. A potential problem is that the returned reward from the discriminator could be very sparse
and unstable, which may lead the generator to produce unintended and nonsense replies. Moreover, Li et al. (2017) put
no constraints on the generator policy, which can result in
two problems. First, the learned policy may prefer to generate general responses. Second, the training step can easily
get stuck in a local optimum, which leads the generator to
produce identical responses regardless of the input context or
even worse – the outputs from the generator are always the
same ungrammatical sentence.
In this paper, we first extend the adversarial dialogue generation method introduced by Li et al. (2017) to a new model,
DG-AIL, which incorporates an entropy regularization term
to the generation objective function. This addition can alleviate the problem of model collapse. Then we adopt adversarial
inverse reinforcement learning to train a dialogue generation
model, DG-AIRL. This method enables us to both make use
of an efficient adversarial formulation and recover a more
precise reward function for open-domain dialogue training.
Unlike Shi et al. (2018), we design a specific reward function
structure to measure the reward of each word in generated
sentences while taking account of the dialogue context. We
also consider two human evaluation settings to assess the

The performance of adversarial dialogue generation models
relies on the quality of the reward signal produced by the
discriminator. The reward signal from a poor discriminator
can be very sparse and unstable, which may lead the generator to fall into a local optimum or to produce nonsense
replies. To alleviate the first problem, we first extend a recently proposed adversarial dialogue generation method to an
adversarial imitation learning solution. Then, in the framework
of adversarial inverse reinforcement learning, we propose a
new reward model for dialogue generation that can provide a
more accurate and precise reward signal for generator training. We evaluate the performance of the resulting model with
automatic metrics and human evaluations in two annotation
settings. Our experimental results demonstrate that our model
can generate more high-quality responses and achieve higher
overall performance than the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

The task of an open-domain dialogue system is to generate sensible dialogue responses given a dialogue context
(Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2010; Shang, Lu, and Li 2015;
Li et al. 2016b; Xing et al. 2017). There are two broad directions for training a dialogue generation system: the first
employs defined rules or templates to construct possible responses and the second builds a chatbot to learn the response
generation model with a machine translation framework
from social dialogue collections (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015;
Sordoni et al. 2015a; Serban et al. 2016; 2017). Sequence-tosequence (Seq2Seq) models enjoy the advantages of scalability and language independence and the maximum likelihood
estimation objectives make it simple to train them. However,
in dialogue generation, the trained model suffers from generating dull and generic responses such as “I don’t know”
(Sordoni et al. 2015a; Serban et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016a;
2017), which are meaningless. Li et al. (2016a) suggest
that “by optimizing for the likelihood of outputs given inputs, neural models assign a high probability to ‘safe’ responses.” To alleviate this problem, Li et al. (2016b) introduced a neural Reinforcement Learning (RL) generation
method to generate coherent and interesting dialogues by
optimizing the manually defined reward function covering
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6722

