The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Forecasting Intra-Hour
Imbalances in Electric Power Systems
Tárik S. Salem,1 Karan Kathuria,2 Heri Ramampiaro,1 Helge Langseth1
1

Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Department of Computer Science, Trondheim, Norway
2
Optimeering AS, Oslo, Norway
tarik.salem@ntnu.no, karan.kathuria@optimeering.com, {heri, helgel}@ntnu.no

Abstract
Keeping the electricity production in balance with the actual
demand is becoming a difficult and expensive task in spite
of an involvement of experienced human operators. This is
due to the increasing complexity of the electric power grid
system with the intermittent renewable production as one of
the contributors. A beforehand information about an occurring imbalance can help the transmission system operator to
adjust the production plans, and thus ensure a high security
of supply by reducing the use of costly balancing reserves,
and consequently reduce undesirable fluctuations of the 50
Hz power system frequency. In this paper, we introduce the
relatively new problem of an intra-hour imbalance forecasting
for the transmission system operator (TSO). We focus on the
use case of the Norwegian TSO, Statnett. We present a complementary imbalance forecasting tool that is able to support
the TSO in determining the trend of future imbalances, and
show the potential to proactively alleviate imbalances with
a higher accuracy compared to the contemporary solution.

Figure 1: A two hours ahead imbalance prediction with prediction intervals.
market place, Nordic market actors exchange bids and offers
and agree on the future production and delivery of physical
power (Wangensteen 2012). Nevertheless, because of structural limitations in the market (mainly the time resolution
being limited to hours) and the uncertainty associated with
both generation and demand, there will always be a need
for a transmission system operator (TSO) to handle instantaneous imbalances (i.e. differences between demand and
supply) within the operating hour. As imbalances ultimately
result in frequency deviations in the synchronous power system, managing these imbalances is a key in ensuring a stable
and secure power supply.
The TSOs work tightly together (e.g. Statnett with their
Nordic counterparts such as Svenska Kraftnät, Energinet and
Fingrid) to mitigate imbalances. Their toolbox for managing
imbalances can be dived into the following categories:

Introduction
The electrical power system is a highly complex system.
One of the main reasons is the need for instantaneous balancing of supply and demand in any synchronous power system. The Nordic power system (consisting of the countries
Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark) is no different. Additionally, it is undergoing a period of significant changes
driven by the developments in the infrastructure and consumer behaviour (Statnett et al. 2016). The volumes of intermittent renewable capacity has increased rapidly over the
past decade, driven by a mix of environmental regulations
and subsidies, and cost reduction. Furthermore, consumers
of power are increasingly generating their own power. The
increased volatility in production and demand resulting from
these developments represent a significant challenge to the
operation of power systems.
Also following the liberalisation of the Nordic power market in the 1990s (Glachant and Ruester 2014), many of the
tasks related to coordinating the supply and demand have
been given to the market through the creation of the Nord
Pool1 , a Nordic market for electric power exchange. In this

• Preventive measures. These are measurements that are
taken several hours before the operating hour, but after the
market has determined the supply and demand. The TSO
can then approximate the upcoming imbalances based on
the supply and demand scheduled on an hourly resolution,
and their intra-hour load forecast. The results of this approximation are presented in a so called Planning Table.
Typically this results in smoothing out big hourly shifts in
the scheduled production since the demand normally does
not follow strict hourly patterns (ENTSO-E 2016).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/

• Operational measures. There are three types of balancing
reserves that can be activated within the operation hour
9595

