The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Ontology-Based Query Answering for Probabilistic Temporal Data
Patrick Koopmann
Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
firstname.lastname@tu-dresden.de

Abstract

to describe information about the health status of a patient.
Specifically, such an application could be used on a smartphone in combination with a sensor that measures the diastolic blood pressure of the patient while he is exercising
(Kumar et al. 2015). As the sensor might be imprecise in
its measurements, it might report information about whether
the blood pressure of the patient is high with an associated
probability, and provide this information to the application
in regular time intervals. If a too high blood pressure was observed for several times during a short period, the application
should give a warning to the patient, and advise him to take a
break from his exercise.
We assume a representation of the data in form of a sequence of probabilistic data sets, which may have been obtained using further preprocessing and windowing operations.
A typical query would then ask whether, with a high probability, the patient had at least twice a high blood pressure
during the last 10 minutes. In order to properly take both the
temporal and the probabilistic aspects of this question into
account when querying the probabilistic stream, we propose
a query language for OBQA that comes with both temporal
and probabilistic operators. In this language, the query would
be expressed as follows, where HighBloodPressure is a
concept defined in the ontology.

We investigate ontology-based query answering for data that
are both temporal and probabilistic, which might occur in
contexts such as stream reasoning or situation recognition
with uncertain data. We present a framework that allows to
represent temporal probabilistic data, and introduce a query
language with which complex temporal and probabilistic patterns can be described. Specifically, this language combines
conjunctive queries with operators from linear time logic as
well as probability operators. We analyse the complexities of
evaluating queries in this language in various settings. While
in some cases, combining the temporal and the probabilistic
dimension in such a way comes at the cost of increased complexity, we also determine cases for which this increase can
be avoided.

Introduction
The internet has become highly dynamic, with information
being frequently added and changed, and new data being
generated from a variety of sources. In addition, new technologies such as smart phones and the internet of things (IoT)
frequently encounter a data environment that is constantly
changing. To make use of these data, there has been an increasing interest in investigating semantic and reasoning techniques that process not only static data, but streams of data,
such as in the semantic stream reasoning paradigm (Margara
et al. 2014). One application is that of situation recognition,
where we want to recognise or query temporal patterns in a
stream of data. As Margara et al. illustrate, frequently, the
data encountered in stream reasoning applications is not only
temporal, but also probabilistic in nature. In ontology-based
query answering (OBQA), queries are evaluated with respect
to an ontology, which specifies background knowledge about
the domain of interest. Using a reasoner, this allows to query
also information that follows implicitly from the data. While
OBQA was originally designed for querying static and precise data, there is good motivation also for semantic stream
reasoning as well as for querying historical data, where data
are temporal and probabilistic.
As an example, consider a health or fitness monitoring
application, for which one may want to use concepts from a
medical ontology such as SNOMED CT (Elkin et al. 2006)

P>.8 (#−10 ♦(HighBloodPressure(x)
∧ #♦HighBloodPressure(x)))

Our language is an extension of the well-investigated temporal query language introduced in (Borgwardt and Thost
2015; Baader, Borgwardt, and Lippmann 2015),which extends conjunctive queries with operators from linear temporal
logic (LTL). Other authors considered using these operators
also as part of the DL, either to describe temporal concepts
(Gabbay et al. 2003), or to make the axioms of the ontology
itself temporal (Baader, Ghilardi, and Lutz 2012). Recently,
this work has been extended also to metric temporal logics
(Baader et al. 2017; Brandt et al. 2017). Temporal reasoning
for streams of data has also been considered in the context
of Datalog (Ronca et al. 2018). A recent survey on temporal
query answering with ontologies can be found in (Artale et
al. 2017).
A major restriction of using temporal concepts in the DL is
that we cannot keep relations between objects stable throughout the timeline (rigid) without making the DL undecidable.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2903

