The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

3D Object Detection Using Scale Invariant and Feature Reweighting Networks
Xin Zhao,1 Zhe Liu,2∗ Ruolan Hu,2 Kaiqi Huang1
1

Center for Research on Intelligent System and Engineering
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 100190
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, 430074
xzhao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, m201772494@hust.edu.cn, huruolan@hust.edu.cn, kqhuang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

the 2D images or fuse the object information from multiple views (Su et al. 2015; Rubino, Crocco, and Del Bue
2018). These approaches are intuitive and have obtained satisfactory results in simple scenes. However, they are limited
in complex scenes for the reason of losing 3D information.
Other methods (Engelcke et al. 2017; Maturana and Scherer
2015) convert point clouds into a 3D voxel grid by quantization and extract each voxel feature by applying 3D convolutional neural networks. However, these approaches have
high computational costs especially on dealing with 3D convolutional operations preventing them for real-world applications.
Since 3D data is usually storaged in the form of point
clouds, we can mainly make use of this kind of data to extract shape features. Recently, Qi et al. provide a unified network architecture named Pointnet (Qi et al. 2017a), which
can represent the permutation invariance of the original input point clouds. It is widely applied in 3D object classification and 3D part segmentation. Pointnet has strong ability to
capture global structure information rather than local information. Therefore, an improved version of Pointnet which
called Pointnet++ (Qi et al. 2017b) is proposed to obtain
local structures by increasing contextual scales in distance
metric space.
Although point clouds have abundant 3D information, as
the complexity of real scenes, it is still very difficult to localize 3D objects only with point clouds especially when
they are highly sparse. It is necessary to combine 3D point
clouds with 2D images which can provide comprehensive
perception information. Some researchers (Wang, Zhan, and
Tomizuka 2017; Ku et al. 2018) utilize the front view images and 3D point clouds to further improve the accuracy of
3D object detection. On the one hand, 2D front view images
have rich appearance information of scenes, but they fail to
obtain the spatial descriptions. On the other hand, 3D point
clouds have accurate location and reflection intensity information, while 3D point clouds are usually very sparse. Thus,
3D point clouds and 2D images are complementary on 3D
object detection tasks. With this observation, F-Pointnet (Qi
et al. 2018) leverages both effective 2D object detectors (Fu
et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2017) and advanced 3D deep neural
networks (Pointnet/Pointnet++) for 3D object detection and
localization. Their method gains the cutting-edge results on
both KITTI and SUN-RGBD 3D object detection bench-

3D object detection plays an important role in a large number
of real-world applications. It requires us to estimate the localizations and the orientations of 3D objects in real scenes.
In this paper, we present a new network architecture which
focuses on utilizing the front view images and frustum point
clouds to generate 3D detection results. On the one hand, a
PointSIFT module is utilized to improve the performance of
3D segmentation. It can capture the information from different orientations in space and the robustness to different
scale shapes. On the other hand, our network obtains the useful features and suppresses the features with less information by a SENet module. This module reweights channel features and estimates the 3D bounding boxes more effectively.
Our method is evaluated on both KITTI dataset for outdoor
scenes and SUN-RGBD dataset for indoor scenes. The experimental results illustrate that our method achieves better performance than the state-of-the-art methods especially when
point clouds are highly sparse.

Introduction
In recent years, remarkable progress has been made on the
task of 2D object detection in complex scenes by deep convolutional neural networks (Girshick 2015; Redmon et al.
2016; Liu et al. 2016). However, it still remains an open
problem on 3D object detection. Such as on the KITTI object detection benchmark (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012),
a great gap of the average precision (AP) still remains between 2D and 3D object detections. The most important
thing of 3D object detection is the way to use the 3D information which represents the depth information of objects in
the estimation task. In addition, different from 2D object detection, we need to consider the orientations of 3D bounding
boxes simultaneously. Since 3D Lidar is limited by the number of horizontal scan lines and has a non-uniform sampling
manner in 3D space, the obtained point clouds are usually
very sparse and uneven distributed. These difficulties on 3D
object detection bring us enormous challenges.
Some existing methods (Li, Zhang, and Xia 2016; Wang,
Zhan, and Tomizuka 2017) project the 3D point clouds to
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9267

