The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Evaluating Recommender System Stability with Influence-Guided Fuzzing
David Shriver,1 Sebastian Elbaum,1 Matthew B. Dwyer,1 David S. Rosenblum2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
{dlshriver, selbaum, matthewbdwyer}@virginia.edu, david@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Determining the stability of a system, however, is extremely challenging, due in part to the size of the input
space that needs to be explored. As an example, the dataset
we use later in the paper has 943 users, 1682 items, and
100,000 ratings on a scale from 1 to 5. A naı̈ve stability assessment approach that simply adds a single random rating
to that dataset would likely overestimate the system stability since finding one addition among the 8 million possible
(943 users × 1682 items × 5 ratings) that can cause instability is very unlikely. Similarly, an exhaustive search for
instability-inducing modifications seems infeasible, especially when considering multiple modifications (i.e., adding
k new ratings to our dataset means exploring a space of at
least 10(6∗k) potential modifications) or when considering
datasets that can contain hundreds of millions of data points.
Furthermore, even if generating all modifications was feasible, the system must then be retrained on the modified
dataset, which is often an even more expensive process.
Our approach to this problem is to exploit the assumptions underlying the design of recommender algorithms as
to how the relationships among items and users influence
recommendation behavior. For instance, a user-based recommender algorithm assumes that influence between users
is important and therefore employs similarity measures between users in order to determine influence. Unfortunately,
these influence relationships are encoded by the training process in complex, internal data structures that are typically
difficult to access and interpret. Nevertheless, we can infer
characteristics of the influence relationships learned by the
system by analyzing the recommendations it produces and
the ratings it was trained on. For instance, we can estimate
the influence of a user based on the number of items rated
by that user that are recommended to other users.
Based on this insight, our approach first infers a model
of influence underlying a recommender system, and then it
performs fuzzing on the training dataset in order to assess
the system’s stability. Fuzzing is a widely-used automated
software testing technique that generates invalid, unexpected
or other directed random inputs to cost-effectively test the
stability a system (Miller, Fredriksen, and So 1990)1 .
As part of its output, the approach includes examples of
changes and types of changes to the dataset that cause in-

Recommender systems help users to find products or services
they may like when lacking personal experience or facing an
overwhelming set of choices. Since unstable recommendations can lead to distrust, loss of profits, and a poor user experience, it is important to test recommender system stability.
In this work, we present an approach based on inferred models of influence that underlie recommender systems to guide
the generation of dataset modifications to assess a recommender’s stability. We implement our approach and evaluate
it on several recommender algorithms using the MovieLens
dataset. We find that influence-guided fuzzing can effectively
find small sets of modifications that cause significantly more
instability than random approaches.

Introduction
Recommender systems filter information to help users make
decisions when lacking personal experience or knowledge (Resnick and Varian 1997) or when the set of choices is
overwhelmingly large (Herlocker et al. 2004). We see them
everywhere, from e-commerce sites such as Amazon, news
article recommendation at the New York Times, and movie
recommendation by Netflix, to guides for venture capital
opportunities (Zhao, Zhang, and Wang 2015), safe combinations of pharmaceutical drugs (Chiang et al. 2018), and
collision avoidance actions for aircraft (Julian et al. 2016).
The robustness of these systems—their ability to make
good recommendations in the presence of noise—can have
significant impact on the end goals of both providers and
users (O’Mahony et al. 2004), such as the profitability of
an e-commerce site, or the safety and effectiveness of recommended drug combinations. In this work, we focus on
a particular dimension of robustness called stability, which
measures how recommendations change when the system is
trained on modified data, regardless of the recommendation
quality. Intuitively, a system lacks stability when there exist a number of changes to the dataset that can have an effect on the recommendations that is disproportionate to the
amount of change. The lack of stability is problematic in
that it causes recommendation inconsistencies that can lead
to loss of user trust and limits system adoption (Adomavicius and Zhang 2012).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4934

A recent survey on fuzzing can be found at (Liang et al. 2018).

