The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Logic-Based Sequential Decision-Making
Daoming Lyu,1 Fangkai Yang,2 Bo Liu,1 Daesub Yoon3
1

Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA
2
Maana Inc., Bellevue, WA, USA
3
ETRI, Daejeon, South Korea
{daoming.lyu, boliu}@auburn.edu, wolfgang.yang@gmail.com, eyetracker@etri.re.kr

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved great success on sequential decision-making problems involving highdimensional sensory inputs such as Atari games (Mnih et al.
2015). The input states of Atari games are usually raw pixel
images, and a deep neural network is used to approximate
Q-values, i.e., “Deep Q-Network” (DQN). This approach
can learn fine granular policies that surpass human experts
but is criticized for the lack of data efficiency and explainability. DRL algorithms usually require several millions of
samples but still cannot learn long-horizon sequential actions
for problems with sparse feedback and delayed rewards, such
as Montezuma’s Revenge (Mnih et al. 2015). The learning
behavior based on the black-box neural network is nontransparent and hard to explain and understand. In real applications of decision-making, however, it is instrumental to make
the system behavior explainable to gain the trust from the
user and provide insights for their decision-making process
(Gilpin et al. 2018) with reasonable less data samples.
In this paper, we introduce the logic-based approach into
DRL and propose a framework of Symbolic Deep Reinforcement Learning (SDRL) by utilizing Symbolic Planning (SP)
(Cimatti, Pistore, and Traverso 2008), which can improve
the data-efficiency and explainability of DRL. In addition,
we propose the intrinsic goal, a measurement of plan quality
based on an internal utility function, to enable reward-driven
planning.

Figure 1: Architecture illustration

function. We extend the reward structure of core MDP by
introducing intrinsic reward and extrinsic reward to facilitate
two levels of learning tasks. The sub-policies for the action
level are learned using DRL algorithms based on intrinsic
reward, with pseudo-rewards to encourage the agent to learn
skills to achieve each subtask. As DRL continues, a metric
is used to evaluate the competence of learned sub-policies,
such as the success ratio over a number of episodes, from
which extrinsic rewards is derived. When the sub-policy is
learned and reliably achieves the subtask, the extrinsic reward
is equivalent to the environmental reward. Using extrinsic
rewards, meta-controller performs R-learning that reflects the
long-term average reward and gains the reward of selecting
each subtask. The learned values are returned to the symbolic
planner and are used to measure plan quality and propose
new intrinsic goals for the planner to improve the plan, by
either exploring new subtasks or by sequencing learned subtasks that supposedly can achieve higher rewards in the next
iteration.
In this process, the components of planner, controllers,
and meta-controller cross-fertilize each other and eventually
converge to an optimal symbolic plan along with the learned
subtasks. While our framework is generic enough so that various planning and DRL techniques can be used, we instantiate
our framework using action language BC for planning and
R-learning for meta-controller learning.

SDRL Framework
SDRL framework can handle both high-dimensional sensory
inputs and symbolic planning, and features a planner – controller – meta-controller architecture, as shown in Figure 1.
With a symbolic representation given by the human expert, a symbolic planner generates high-level plans, i.e., a
sequence of subtasks, to meet its intrinsic goal. An intrinsic goal is a measurement on plan quality, which approximates how much cumulative reward the plan may achieve.
We assume a pre-trained mapping function can associate each
sensory input with a symbolic state, i.e., performing symbol
grounding, so that a set of options on the problem MDP
can be induced based on symbolic states and the mapping

Experiment
The proposed approach is evaluated on Taxi domain and Montezuma’s Revenge, demonstrating improved explainability
through explicitly encoding planning knowledge and learning into human-readable subtasks, and also improved data-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9995

