The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Distribution-Based Semi-Supervised Learning for Activity Recognition
Hangwei Qian,†‡§ Sinno Jialin Pan,† Chunyan Miao†‡£
†

‡

School of Computer Science and Engineering
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly
§
Interdisciplinary Graduate School
£
Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
qian0045@e.ntu.edu.sg, {sinnopan, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

applied to each segment. Extracted features are then fed into
a classifier to recognize different activities. Note that feature
extraction and large amount of labeled training data are crucial in the process, which are discussed in detail hereinafter.
It is well-known that good features can help to discriminate different classes of activities, by increasing the expressiveness of each activity. Generally, feature extraction approaches can be classified into two categories: statistical and
structural (Lara and Labrador 2013). Structural features take
into account the overall information of the data. For example, SAX method transforms continuous data into discrete
symbolic strings (Lin et al. 2007); ECDF method preserves
the overall shape and spatial information of time series
data (Hammerla et al. 2013; Plötz, Hammerla, and Olivier
2011). Therefore, domain knowledge is highly required for
structural features. Statistical features, on the other hand,
aim to capture statistical information underlying each timeseries segment. There are also around twenty commonly
used handcrafted statistical features which are proven to be
beneficial practically, including orders of moments (mean,
variance, skewness, etc), median, etc (Janidarmian et al.
2017). Major limitations of statistical features are the flexibility of handcrafted features and the involvement of domain
knowledge. Recently, Qian, Pan, and Miao (2018) proposed
the SMMAR approach, which is capable of automatically
extracting all orders of moments as statistical features for
activity recognition.
Though SMMAR is able to systematically extract powerful statistical features, as a supervised learning based
method, it requires a plethora of labeled data for training. Note that label annotation on a large-scale dataset on
sensor readings is a costly process. Therefore, growing research interests have been focused on exploring the tradeoff between label ambiguity and human annotation effort.
Some researchers focus on efficient annotation strategies to
reduce labeling effort, including offline and online strategies (Stikic et al. 2011), such as experience sampling, selfrecall and video recording. There also exist several research
works applying semi-supervised learning (Zhu 2005) for activity recognition by exploiting unlabeled data, which is supposed to be easy to collect with very low cost, to learn
a precise classifier even with a limited number of labeled
data (Guan et al. 2007; Stikic, Larlus, and Schiele 2009;
Stikic et al. 2011). Most existing semi-supervised learning

Supervised learning methods have been widely applied to activity recognition. The prevalent success of existing methods,
however, has two crucial prerequisites: proper feature extraction and sufficient labeled training data. The former is important to differentiate activities, while the latter is crucial to
build a precise learning model. These two prerequisites have
become bottlenecks to make existing methods more practical. Most existing feature extraction methods highly depend
on domain knowledge, while labeled data requires intensive
human annotation effort. Therefore, in this paper, we propose
a novel method, named Distribution-based Semi-Supervised
Learning, to tackle the aforementioned limitations. The proposed method is capable of automatically extracting powerful
features with no domain knowledge required, meanwhile, alleviating the heavy annotation effort through semi-supervised
learning. Specifically, we treat data stream of sensor readings
received in a period as a distribution, and map all training distributions, including labeled and unlabeled, into a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) using the kernel mean embedding technique. The RKHS is further altered by exploiting the underlying geometry structure of the unlabeled distributions. Finally, in the altered RKHS, a classifier is trained
with the labeled distributions. We conduct extensive experiments on three public datasets to verify the effectiveness of
our method compared with state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Human activity recognition has spurred a great deal of interest with a wide spectrum of real-world applications, such
as security, personalized health monitoring and assisted living (Janidarmian et al. 2017; Bulling, Blanke, and Schiele
2014; Lara and Labrador 2013; Frank, Mannor, and Precup
2010; Avci et al. 2010). Generally, there are two types of scenarios: wireless-sensor-based and video-based. In this work,
we focus on wireless-sensor-based activity recognition scenarios. In these scenarios, the data is often in the form of
a continuous multivariate time series from multiple sensors.
Therefore, the data needs to be divided into segments first,
each of which corresponding to a single label. Traditionally,
it requires intensive annotation effort with the starting and
ending times of each activity. Further, in order to increase
the expressiveness of data, feature extraction is commonly
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7699

