The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Cross-Spectral Stereo Matching by Learning to Synthesize
Mingyang Liang,1,2∗ Xiaoyang Guo,3∗ Hongsheng Li,3 Xiaogang Wang,3 You Song1†
1

Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
SenseTime Research
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
{liangmingyang,songyou}@buaa.edu.cn, {xyguo, hsli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Unsupervised cross-spectral stereo matching aims at recovering disparity given cross-spectral image pairs without any
depth or disparity supervision. The estimated depth provides
additional information complementary to original images,
which can be helpful for other vision tasks such as tracking,
recognition and detection. However, there are large appearance variations between images from different spectral bands,
which is a challenge for cross-spectral stereo matching. Existing deep unsupervised stereo matching methods are sensitive to the appearance variations and do not perform well on
cross-spectral data. We propose a novel unsupervised crossspectral stereo matching framework based on image-to-image
translation. First, a style adaptation network transforms images across different spectral bands by cycle consistency and
adversarial learning, during which appearance variations are
minimized. Then, a stereo matching network is trained with
image pairs from the same spectra using view reconstruction
loss. At last, the estimated disparity is utilized to supervise the
spectral translation network in an end-to-end way. Moreover,
a novel style adaptation network F-cycleGAN is proposed to
improve the robustness of spectral translation. Our method
can tackle appearance variations and enhance the robustness
of unsupervised cross-spectral stereo matching. Experimental results show that our method achieves good performance
without using depth supervision or explicit semantic information.

(a) Left VIS

(b) Right NIR

(c) Appearance variations

(d) Predicted disparity

Figure 1: The appearance variations between cross-spectral
image pairs. VIS and NIR represent visible and near-infrared
images respectively. Almost invisible light sources in the
VIS turn into a dazzling white in the NIR. Grassland also
shows huge illumination difference between VIS and NIR.
The goal of cross-spectral stereo matching is to overcome
the appearance differences between different spectra and
predict accurate disparity.

Introduction
Multi-camera multi-spectral systems have become very
common in many modern devices like Realsense, Kinect,
and iPhoneX. Moreover, it has been proven that infrared images are very helpful in face recognition (Lezama, Qiu, and
Sapiro 2017), detection (Xu et al. 2017), and scene parsing (St-Charles, Bilodeau, and Bergevin 2017).
Stereo matching is one of the most heavily investigated
topics in computer vision (Scharstein and Szeliski 2002).
Given a rectified image pair (Il for the left image, Ir for the
right image), stereo matching focuses on finding correspondence of each pixel between two images. If the right pixel
Ir (x−d, y) corresponds to the left pixel Il (x, y), then we

can define d as the disparity of the pixel Il (x, y). Moreover,
if we know the camera’s focal length f and the distance B
between the two camera centers, the disparity can be converted into depth by f B/d.
Cross-spectral stereo matching is stereo matching for images from different spectra, for example the left image is a
visible image and the right image is a near-infrared image in
Fig. 1. The recovered depth provides additional information
which is complementary to semantic features of individual
spectrum. In addition, the estimated depth can help improve
missing areas of depth images captured by depth sensors
(e.g. reflection or transparent surfaces) (Chiu, Blanke, and
Fritz 2011).
However, the cross-spectral stereo matching is still a challenging task especially without depth supervision (Zhi et al.
2018), because there are great illumination differences be-

∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8706

