The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Outlier Aware Network Embedding for Attributed Networks
Sambaran Bandyopadhyay ∗

Lokesh N.

M. N. Murty

IBM Research, India
sambaran.ban89@gmail.com

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
nlokeshcool@gmail.com

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
mnm@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

using attribute vectors associated with each node. The attributes and the link structure of the network are highly
correlated according to the sociological theories like homophily (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001). But
embedding attributed networks is challenging as combining
attributes to generate node embeddings is not easy. Towards
this end, different attributed network representation techniques such as (Yang et al. 2015; Huang, Li, and Hu 2017a;
Gao and Huang 2018) have been proposed in literature. They
perform reasonably well when the network is consistent in
its structure and content, and nodes behave as expected.
Unfortunately real world networks are noisy and there are
different outliers which even affect the embeddings of normal nodes (Liu, Huang, and Hu 2017). For example, there
can be research papers in a citation network with few spurious references (i.e., edges) which do not comply with the
content of the papers. There are celebrities in social networks who are connected to too many other users, and generally properties like homophily are not applicable to this type
of relationships. So they can also act like potential outliers in
the system. Normal nodes are consistent in their respective
communities both in terms of link structure and attributes.
We categorize outliers in an attributed network into three
categories and explain them as shown in Figure 1.
One way to detect outliers in the network is to use some
network embedding approach and then use algorithms like
isolation forest (Liu, Ting, and Zhou 2008) on the generated
embeddings. But this type of decoupled approach is not optimal as outliers adversely affect the embeddings of the normal nodes. So an integrated approach to detect outliers and
minimize their effect while generating the network embedding is needed. Recently (Liang et al. 2018) proposes a semi
supervised approach for detecting outliers while generating
network embedding for an attributed network. But in principle, it needs some supervision to work efficiently. For real
world networks, it is difficult to get such supervision or node
labels. So there is a need to develop a completely unsupervised integrated approach for graph embedding and outlier
detection which can be applicable to any attributed network.
Contributions: Following are the contributions we make.

Attributed network embedding has received much interest
from the research community as most of the networks come
with some content in each node, which is also known as node
attributes. Existing attributed network approaches work well
when the network is consistent in structure and attributes,
and nodes behave as expected. But real world networks often
have anomalous nodes. Typically these outliers, being relatively unexplainable, affect the embeddings of other nodes in
the network. Thus all the downstream network mining tasks
fail miserably in the presence of such outliers. Hence an integrated approach to detect anomalies and reduce their overall
effect on the network embedding is required.
Towards this end, we propose an unsupervised outlier aware
network embedding algorithm (ONE) for attributed networks,
which minimizes the effect of the outlier nodes, and hence
generates robust network embeddings. We align and jointly
optimize the loss functions coming from structure and attributes of the network. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first generic network embedding approach which incorporates the effect of outliers for an attributed network without any supervision. We experimented on publicly available
real networks and manually planted different types of outliers to check the performance of the proposed algorithm. Results demonstrate the superiority of our approach to detect the
network outliers compared to the state-of-the-art approaches.
We also consider different downstream machine learning applications on networks to show the efficiency of ONE as a
generic network embedding technique. The source code is
made available at https://github.com/sambaranban/ONE.

1

Introduction

Network embedding (a.k.a. network representation learning)
has gained a tremendous amount of interest among the researchers in the last few years (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena
2014; Grover and Leskovec 2016). Most of the real life
networks have some extra information within each node.
For example, users in social networks such as Facebook
have texts, images and other types of content. Research papers (nodes) in a citation network have scientific content
in it. Typically this type of extra information is captured

• We propose an unsupervised algorithm called ONE
(Outlier aware Network Embedding) for attributed networks. It is an iterative approach to find lower dimensional compact vector representations of the nodes, such

∗

Also affiliated with Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12

