The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Linear Kernel Tests via Empirical Likelihood for High-Dimensional Data
Lizhong Ding,1,∗ Zhi Liu,3 Yu Li,2 Shizhong Liao,4 Yong Liu,5
Peng Yang,2 Ge Yu,6 Ling Shao,1 Xin Gao2,∗
1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
3
University of Macau, China, 4 Tianjin University, China, 5 Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, China
6
Technology and Engineering Center for Space Utilization, CAS, China
∗
Corresponding authors (email: lizhong.ding@inceptioniai.org, xin.gao@kaust.edu.sa)
2

given samples Dx = {xi }ni=1 ⊂ X ⊆ Rd from an unknown
distribution q. Both of these two problems can be formulated
as a hypothesis test, where the null hypothesis H0 : p = q
is tested against the alternative hypothesis H1 : p 6= q. The
knowledge of p is what distinguishes the goodness-of-fit test
from the two-sample test.
The two-sample test and the goodness-of-fit test are generally difficult in practice, since the underlying distributions
(or one of the distributions) are unknown apriori. Kernel
methods provide an effective way to implicitly transform
data into a new feature space with the carefully-chosen kernel functions and kernel parameters (Liu and Liao 2015;
Liu et al. 2017; Ding and Liao 2014a; 2017; Ding et al.
2019). The corresponding reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces
(RKHSs) have strong representative power (Cucker and
Smale 2002; Li et al. 2018). We adopt the unit balls in
universal RKHSs as function classes (Muandet et al. 2017;
Ding and Liao 2014b) to study these two test problems,
since these classes are rich enough to represent all bounded
continuous functions defined on a metric space (Fukumizu, Bach, and Jordan 2004; Sriperumbudur et al. 2010;
Steinwart 2001; Micchelli, Xu, and Zhang 2006).
For the two-sample test problem, the popular statistic,
maximum mean discrepancy (MMD), was designed to measure two distributions by embedding them in an RKHS
(Gretton et al. 2012). MMD has been attracting much attention in two-sample test research due to its solid theoretical
foundation (Sriperumbudur et al. 2009; Gretton et al. 2012;
Song et al. 2012; Zaremba, Gretton, and Blaschko 2013;
Ding et al. 2018). The minimum variance unbiased estimator MMDUnb of MMD was first proposed in (Gretton et al.
2012) on the basis of n samples being observed from each
of p and q. However, the estimation of the asymptotic distribution of MMDUnb under the null distribution requires
bootstrap or moment matching to determine the test threshold, which costs at least O(n2 ). Later, an O(n) unbiased
estimator MMDLin was proposed (Gretton et al. 2012), using a subsampling of the terms in MMDUnb . MMDLin has
higher variance than MMDUnb , but it is computationally
much more appealing.
For the goodness-of-fit test, traditional methods need
to calculate the likelihoods of the models. However, for
large graphical models or deep generative models, this
is often computationally intractable due to the complex-

Abstract
We propose a framework for analyzing and comparing distributions without imposing any parametric assumptions via
empirical likelihood methods. Our framework is used to study
two fundamental statistical test problems: the two-sample test
and the goodness-of-fit test. For the two-sample test, we need
to determine whether two groups of samples are from different distributions; for the goodness-of-fit test, we examine how
likely it is that a set of samples is generated from a known
target distribution. Specifically, we propose empirical likelihood ratio (ELR) statistics for the two-sample test and the
goodness-of-fit test, both of which are of linear time complexity and show higher power (i.e., the probability of correctly
rejecting the null hypothesis) than the existing linear statistics for high-dimensional data. We prove the nonparametric
Wilks’ theorems for the ELR statistics, which illustrate that
the limiting distributions of the proposed ELR statistics are
chi-square distributions. With these limiting distributions, we
can avoid bootstraps or simulations to determine the threshold
for rejecting the null hypothesis, which makes the ELR statistics more efficient than the recently proposed linear statistic,
finite set Stein discrepancy (FSSD). We also prove the consistency of the ELR statistics, which guarantees that the test
power goes to 1 as the number of samples goes to infinity.
In addition, we experimentally demonstrate and theoretically
analyze that FSSD has poor performance or even fails to test
for high-dimensional data. Finally, we conduct a series of experiments to evaluate the performance of our ELR statistics
as compared to state-of-the-art linear statistics.

Introduction
Comparing samples from two probability distributions or
evaluating the goodness-of-fit of models over observed samples without imposing any parametric assumptions on their
distributions are fundamental tasks in machine learning and
statistics, and have a wide spectra of applications in various areas (Lloyd and Ghahramani 2015; Li et al. 2017;
Yang et al. 2018). The goal of the two-sample test problem
is to determine whether two distributions p and q are different on the basis of samples Dx = {xi }ni=1 ⊂ X ⊆ Rd and
d
Dy = {yj }m
j=1 ⊂ Y ⊆ R independently drawn from p and
q, respectively. The aim of the goodness-of-fit test problem
is to determine how well a given model density p fits a set of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3454

