The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fully Convolutional Network with
Multi-Step Reinforcement Learning for Image Processing
Ryosuke Furuta, Naoto Inoue, Toshihiko Yamasaki
Department of Information and Communication Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
{furuta, inoue, yamasaki}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

techniques of the multi-agent RL to pixelRL is impractical
in terms of computational cost because the number of agents
is extremely large. Therefore, we solve the problem by employing the fully convolutional network (FCN). The merit
of using FCN is that all the agents can share the parameters
and learn efficiently. Herein, we also propose reward map
convolution, which is an effective learning method for pixelRL. By the proposed reward map convolution, each agent
considers not only the future states of its own pixel but also
those of the neighbor pixels.
The proposed pixelRL is applied to image denoising, image restoration, and local color enhancement. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work to apply RL to such
low-level image processing for each pixel or each local region. Our experimental results show that the agents trained
with the pixelRL and the proposed reward map convolution
achieve comparable or better performance, compared with
state-of-the-art methods based on supervised learning. Although the actions must be pre-defined for each application,
the proposed method is interpretable by observing the actions executed by the agents, which is a novel and different
point from the existing deep learning-based image processing methods for such applications.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

This paper tackles a new problem setting: reinforcement
learning with pixel-wise rewards (pixelRL) for image processing. After the introduction of the deep Q-network, deep
RL has been achieving great success. However, the applications of deep RL for image processing are still limited. Therefore, we extend deep RL to pixelRL for various image processing applications. In pixelRL, each pixel has an agent, and
the agent changes the pixel value by taking an action. We also
propose an effective learning method for pixelRL that significantly improves the performance by considering not only the
future states of the own pixel but also those of the neighbor
pixels. The proposed method can be applied to some image
processing tasks that require pixel-wise manipulations, where
deep RL has never been applied.
We apply the proposed method to three image processing
tasks: image denoising, image restoration, and local color
enhancement. Our experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method achieves comparable or better performance,
compared with the state-of-the-art methods based on supervised learning.

Introduction
After the introduction of the deep Q-network (DQN) (Mnih
et al. 2013), which can play Atari games on the human
level, much attention has been focused on deep reinforcement learning (RL). Recently, deep RL is also applied
to a variety of image processing tasks (Li et al. 2018;
Lan et al. 2018; Park et al. 2018). However, these methods
can execute only global actions for the entire image and are
limited to simple applications, e.g., image cropping (Li et
al. 2018) and global color enhancement (Park et al. 2018;
Hu et al. 2018). Therefore, these methods cannot be applied
to applications that require pixel-wise manipulations such as
image denoising.
To overcome this drawback, we propose a new problem
setting: pixelRL for image processing. PixelRL is a multiagent RL problem, where the number of agents is equal to
that of pixels. The agents learn the optimal behavior to maximize the mean of the expected total rewards at all pixels.
Each pixel value is regarded as the current state and is iteratively updated by the agent’s action. Applying the existing

• We propose a novel problem setting: pixelRL for image
processing, where the existing techniques for multi-agents
RL cannot be applied.
• We propose reward map convolution, which is an effective
learning method for pixelRL and boosts the performance.
• We apply the pixelRL to image denoising, image restoration, and local color enhancement. The proposed method
is a completely novel approach for these tasks, and shows
better or comparable performance, compared with stateof-the-art methods.
• The actions executed by the agents are interpretable to
humans, which is of great difference from conventional
CNNs.

Related Works
Deep RL for image processing
Very recently, deep RL has been used for some image processing applications. Cao et al. (2017) proposed a super-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3598

