The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Geometric Alignment in Low Doubling Dimension
Hu Ding

Mingquan Ye

School of Computer Science and Technology
School of Data Science
University of Science and Technology of China
He Fei, China, 230026
huding@ustc.edu.cn

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI, USA, 48824
yemingqu@msu.edu

Abstract

2000) has been widely adopted as the metric for measuring the difference of patterns in computer vision, where its
major advantage over other measures is the robustness with
respect to noise in practice. Besides the computer vision applications in 2D or 3D, recent research shows that a number
of high dimensional problems can be solved by geometric
alignments. We briefly introduce several interesting examples below.
(1) The research on natural language processing has revealed that different languages often share some similar
structure at the word level (Youn et al. 2016); in particular, the recent study on word semantics embedding has also
shown the existence of structural isomorphism across languages (Mikolov, Le, and Sutskever 2013), and further finds
that EMD can serve as a good distance for languages or documents (Zhang et al. 2017; Kusner et al. 2015). Therefore,
(Zhang et al. 2017) proposed to learn the transformation between different languages without any cross-lingual supervision, and the problem is reduced to minimizing the EMD
via finding the optimal geometric alignment in high dimension. (2) A Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) network is a
graph representing the interactions among proteins. Given
two PPI networks, finding their alignment is a fundamental bioinformatics problem for understanding the correspondences between different species (Malod-Dognin, Ban, and
Pržulj 2017). However, most existing approaches require to
solve the NP-hard subgraph isomorphism problem and often
suffer from high computational complexities. To resolve this
issue, (Liu et al. 2017) recently applied the geometric embedding techniques to develop a new framework based on
geometric alignment in Euclidean space. (3) Other applications of high dimensional alignment include domain adaptation and indoor localization. Domain adaptation is an important problem in machine learning, where the goal is to
predict the annotations of a given unlabeled dataset by determining the transformation (in the form of EMD) from a labeled dataset (Pan and Yang 2010); as the rapid development
of wireless technology, indoor localization becomes rather
important for locating a person or device inside a building.
Recent studies show that they both can be well formulated as
geometric alignments in high dimension. We refer the reader
to (Courty et al. 2017) and (Yang, Wu, and Liu 2012) for
more details.
Despite of the above studies in terms of applications, the

In real-world, many problems can be formulated as the alignment between two geometric patterns. Previously, a great
amount of research focus on the alignment of 2D or 3D patterns, especially in the field of computer vision. Recently, the
alignment of geometric patterns in high dimension finds several novel applications, and has attracted more and more attentions. However, the research is still rather limited in terms
of algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, most existing approaches for high dimensional alignment are just simple extensions of their counterparts for 2D and 3D cases, and often
suffer from the issues such as high complexities. In this paper, we propose an effective framework to compress the high
dimensional geometric patterns and approximately preserve
the alignment quality. As a consequence, existing alignment
approach can be applied to the compressed geometric patterns and thus the time complexity is significantly reduced.
Our idea is inspired by the observation that high dimensional
data often has a low intrinsic dimension. We adopt the widely
used notion “doubling dimension” to measure the extents of
our compression and the resulting approximation. Finally, we
test our method on both random and real datasets; the experimental results reveal that running the alignment algorithm on
compressed patterns can achieve similar qualities, comparing
with the results on the original patterns, but the running times
(including the times cost for compression) are substantially
lower.

1

Introduction

Given two geometric patterns, the problem of alignment is
to find their appropriate spatial positions so as to minimize
the difference between them. In general, a geometric pattern is represented by a set of (weighted) points in the space,
and their difference is often measured by some objective
function. In particular, geometric alignment finds many applications in the field of computer vision, such as image
retrieval, pattern recognition, fingerprint and facial shape
alignment, etc (Cohen and Guibas 1999; Maltoni et al. 2009;
Cao et al. 2014). For different applications, we may have
different constraints for the alignment, e.g., we allow rigid
transformations for fingerprint alignment. In addition, Earth
Mover’s Distance (EMD) (Rubner, Tomasi, and Guibas
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1460

