The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Relaxing and Restraining Queries for OBDA
Medina Andreşel, Yazmı́n Ibáñez-Garcı́a, Magdalena Ortiz, Mantas Šimkus
{andresel,ibanez,ortiz}@kr.tuwien.ac.at | simkus@dbai.tuwien.ac.at
Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria

Abstract

These DLs are tailored towards FO-rewritability of CQs.
This means that evaluating a query q over a dataset A mediated by an ontology T can be reduced to evaluating a query
qT , incorporating knowledge from T , over A alone, which
amounts to standard query evaluation in relational databases.
In our example, a rewriting of q is the following query

We advocate the use of ontologies for relaxing and restraining
queries, so that they retrieve either more or less answers, enabling the exploration of a given dataset. We propose a set of
rewriting rules to relax and restrain conjunctive queries (CQs)
over datasets mediated by an ontology written in a dialect
of DL-Lite with complex role inclusions (CRIs). The addition of CRI enables the representation of knowledge about
data involving ordered hierarchies of categories, in the style
of multi-dimensional data models. Although CRIs in general
destroy the first-order rewritability of CQs, we identify settings in which CQs remain rewritable.

qTe (x) ← CulturEvt(x) ∨ Exhibition(x) ∨ Concert(x).
In this paper, we advocate a novel use of ontologies complementary to OBDA query answering. Namely, we use ontologies to modify queries, relaxing or restraining them, so that
they can retrieve either more or less answers over a given
dataset. This can help users reflect their information needs
and flexibly explore datasets. We build on the observation
that query restrictions can be obtained using the standard
DL-Lite rewriting rules (Calvanese et al. 2007). For example, qc (x) ← Concert(x) is a restriction of q, and it occurs
as a disjunct in its rewriting qTe . Moreover, these rewriting
rules have natural ‘counterparts’ that produce relaxations.
In our running example, if answers to a query for concerts
are too scarce, one might get more answers by relaxing it to
one asking for all cultural events. Conversely, if a query for
cultural events produces too many answers, it is possible to
restrict it to events of a specific type, for instance concerts.
Notably, there are intuitive answers and reformulations
that cannot be produced with the standard DL-Lite rewriting
rules and their counterparts. For example, consider a query
retrieving concerts occurring in Vienna:

Introduction
In Ontology-based data access (OBDA) an ontology provides a conceptual view of a collection of data sources, and
can describe knowledge about the domain of interest at a
high level of abstraction, using a familiar vocabulary (Poggi
et al. 2008). An advantage of having an ontology is that the
knowledge can be leveraged to retrieve more complete answers from incomplete data. For example, we consider the
following dataset about cultural events and their locations
Ae = {Concert(c1 ), CulturEvt(ev1 ), Exhibition(ex1 ),
Venue(StOpera), Venue(VkTheater), City(Vienna),
Country(Austria), occIn(c1 , StOpera), occIn(ex1 , Vienna),
occIn(ev1 , Austria), locIn(StOpera, Vienna),
locIn(VkTheater, Vienna), locIn(Vienna, Austria)}

q2 (x) ← Concert(x), occIn(x, y), y = Vienna.

and the following ontology that, among other knowledge,
says that concerts and exhibitions are cultural events
Te = {

Concert v CulturEvt,
Exhibition v CulturEvt,
CulturEvt v Event,

Country v Location,
City v Location,
Venue v Location,

∃occIn v Event,

∃occIn− v Location}.

In the presence of standard DL-Lite ontologies, there are no
answers to q2 when evaluated over (Te , Ae ), although c1
may be considered an answer to q2 according to the intuition that if an event occurs in a venue located in a city, then
it occurs in that city. In order to capture this kind of knowledge, we propose to extend the expressive power of DL-Lite
with complex role inclusions (CRIs). For instance, adding

Using this knowledge, all cultural events (ex1 , ev1 and c1 )
can be retrieved with a simple conjunctive query (CQ):

occIn · locIn v occIn

q(x) ← CulturEvt(x).

(1)

to our example captures the intuition above, and makes c1
an answer of q2 . The addition of CRIs enables DL-Lite to
leverage hierarchical knowledge not captured by subclass
relations. Indeed, venues, cities, and countries can be seen
as different levels of a dimension we can call Location. Similarly, a Time dimension could include days, months, and

In OBDA, ontologies are often written in the Description
Logics (DLs) of the DL-Lite family (Calvanese et al. 2007).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2654

