The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Backbone Cannot Be Trained at Once:
Rolling Back to Pre-Trained Network for Person Re-Identification
Youngmin Ro,1 Jongwon Choi,2 Dae Ung Jo,1 Byeongho Heo,1 Jongin Lim,1 Jin Young Choi1
{treeoflife, mardaewoon, bhheo, ljin0429, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr, jw17.choi@samsung.com
1
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
2
Samsung SDS, Korea
80

Abstract
0.5

70

loss(base)
loss(OUR)
mAP(base)
0.05

train loss

mAP(OUR)

60
50
40

Rolling back high-level layers

mAP

In person re-identification (ReID) task, because of its shortage of trainable dataset, it is common to utilize fine-tuning
method using a classification network pre-trained on a large
dataset. However, it is relatively difficult to sufficiently finetune the low-level layers of the network due to the gradient vanishing problem. In this work, we propose a novel
fine-tuning strategy that allows low-level layers to be sufficiently trained by rolling back the weights of high-level
layers to their initial pre-trained weights. Our strategy alleviates the problem of gradient vanishing in low-level layers and robustly trains the low-level layers to fit the ReID
dataset, thereby increasing the performance of ReID tasks.
The improved performance of the proposed strategy is validated via several experiments. Furthermore, without any addons such as pose estimation or segmentation, our strategy
exhibits state-of-the-art performance using only vanilla deep
convolutional neural network architecture.

30

0.005
20
10
0.0005

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

epochs

Figure 1: Training loss and mAP graph changed by introducing our learning strategy. ‘base’ means that the network is
trained by basic strategy. In our method, the training loss escapes from local minimum and the mAP accuracy increases
by utilizing the rolling-back scheme.

Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) refers to the tasks connecting the same person, for instance, a pedestrian, among multiple people detected in non-overlapping camera views. Different camera views capture pedestrians in various poses
with different backgrounds, which interferes with the ability
to correctly estimate the similarity among pedestrian candidates. These obstacles makes it difficult to recognize the
identities of numerous pedestrians robustly by comparing
them with a limited number of person images with known
identities. Furthermore, it is infeasible to obtain large training datasets sufficient to cover the appearance variation of
pedestrians, making the ReID problem difficult to be solved.
When sufficient training data is not available, it is a common approach to fine-tune the network pre-trained by another large dataset (e.g., ImageNet) which contains abundant information. The fine-tuning approach results in better performance than the approaches in which networks are
trained from randomly initialized parameters. This is a practical approach used in many research areas (Ren et al. 2015;
Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) to avoid the problem of
overfitting. Likewise, the previous ReID algorithms (Chang,
Hospedales, and Xiang 2018; Si et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2017)

have utilized the fine-tuning approach. Most of recent works
in ReID research have attempted to utilize semantic information such as pose estimation (Zhao et al. 2017; Xu et al.
2018; Sarfraz et al. 2018), segmentation mask (Song et al.
2018), and semantic parsing (Kalayeh et al. 2018) to improve the accuracy of ReID by considering the additional
pedestrian contexts.
In contrast to the previous studies, we are interested in
incrementally improving the performance of ReID by enhancing the basic fine-tuning strategy applied to the pretrained network. A few attempts have been made to improve
learning methods by the ways designing a new loss function or augmenting data in a novel way (Zhang et al. 2017;
Chen et al. 2017; Zhong et al. 2017b; Sun et al. 2017). However, there has been no research on improving the learning
method to consider the characteristics of each layer filter.
Before suggesting our novel fine-tuning strategy for
ReID, we first empirically analyze the importance of finetuning low-level layers for ReID problems. According to
related research (Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Mahendran and
Vedaldi 2015), the low-level layers concentrate on details of

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8859

