The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Embedding-Based Complex Feature Value Coupling
Learning for Detecting Outliers in Non-IID Categorical Data
Hongzuo Xu, Yongjun Wang, Zhiyue Wu,† Yijie Wang†∗
†

Science and Technology on Parallel and Distributed Processing Laboratory
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, China
{xuhongzuo13,wangyongjun,wangyijie}@nudt.edu.cn, zhiyue.wu@outlook.com

Abstract

weakened to the extent of satisfying the IIDness assumption
of the most of the existing algorithms (Cao 2014).
In non-IID data, data objects and object features are not
independent and identically distributed but coupled and personalised (Cao 2014). For example, in the task of detecting
cancer patients given various of physical signs as features,
cancer is related to multiple abnormal symptoms, such as
persistent lumps, unexpected weight loss, and night sweats,
which means the object features in real-world data are normally dependent or even exist relationships that are beyond
dependency relation. On the other hand, different data objects have their own characteristics and personalities in realworld data, and the assumption that all the objects are identically distributed is often violated.
Besides the non-IIDness, another key complexity is the
unavoidable noise in real-world data. Specifically, a dataset
is often a mixture of relevant features and noisy features
(i.e., features in which outliers behave normally while some
normal objects are abnormal). These noisy features greatly
blur the distinction between outliers and inliers. However,
identification of these noisy features is non-trivial in categorical data since a feature may contain not only relevant
values (i.e., values that can well indicate outliers) but also
infrequent noisy values (i.e., values that randomly occur in
normal objects).
Most of the early attempts for outlier detection in categorical data is based on the IIDness assumption, e.g., patternbased methods like (He et al. 2005; Aggarwal and Yu 2005;
Das, Schneider, and Neill 2008). Note that features in nonIID data have diversified frequency distributions. The generated patterns in these pattern-based methods are derived
from different feature combinations, and thus the semantic
and importance of pattern frequency differ significantly for
different patterns (Pang, Cao, and Chen 2016). In addition,
these methods are easily misled by noisy/irrelevant features
because they are normally based on full space.
To detect outliers in such non-IID categorical data, coupling learning-based outlier detectors (Pang, Cao, and Chen
2016; Pang et al. 2017a; 2017b; Xu et al. 2018a; 2018b) are
the major solution to capture the non-IIDness nature of realworld data. These methods model value couplings through
various techniques to estimate outlierness. They can also
partially resist the negative impact from noise, because investigating value interactions has shown to be an effective

Non-IID categorical data is ubiquitous and common in realworld applications. Learning various kinds of couplings has
been proved to be a reliable measure when detecting outliers
in such non-IID data. However, it is a critical yet challenging
problem to model, represent, and utilise high-order complex
value couplings. Existing outlier detection methods normally
only focus on pairwise primary value couplings and fail to
uncover real relations that hide in complex couplings, resulting in suboptimal and unstable performance. This paper introduces a novel unsupervised embedding-based complex value
coupling learning framework EMAC and its instance SCAN
to address these issues. SCAN first models primary value
couplings. Then, coupling bias is defined to capture complex value couplings with different granularities and highlight
the essence of outliers. An embedding method is performed
on the value network constructed via biased value couplings,
which further learns high-order complex value couplings and
embeds these couplings into a value representation matrix.
Bidirectional selective value coupling learning is proposed to
show how to estimate value and object outlierness through
value couplings. Substantial experiments show that SCAN
(i) significantly outperforms five state-of-the-art outlier detection methods on thirteen real-world datasets; and (ii) has
much better resilience to noise than its competitors.

Introduction
Outlier detection is the process of identifying rare and exceptional data objects that are dramatically different from
the majority of data objects, which is important in many applications including intrusion detection, medical diagnose,
and fraud detection. Non-independent and identically distributed (Non-IID) categorical data is ubiquitous and common in these real-world applications. However, it is still a
challenging problem to detect outliers in such non-IID data
with complex interactions and unavoidable noise.
Non-IID data poses following two major challenges: (i)
Diversified frequency distributions across different features
mean frequencies may have varying semantics. (ii) The sophisticated couplings (Cao, Ou, and Yu 2012) (i.e., different
types and hierarchies of interactions) cannot be abstracted or
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5541

