The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Document Informed Neural
Autoregressive Topic Models with Distributional Prior
Pankaj Gupta,1,2 Yatin Chaudhary,1 Florian Buettner,1 Hinrich Schütze2
1

Corporate Technology, Machine-Intelligence (MIC-DE), Siemens AG Munich, Germany
2
CIS, University of Munich (LMU) Munich, Germany
{pankaj.gupta, yatin.chaudhary, buettner.florian}@siemens.com
pankaj.gupta@campus.lmu.de — inquiries@cislmu.org
Abstract

context, one can determine the actual meaning of “networks”, for instance, “Extracting rules from artificial neural
networks with distributed representations”, or “Spikes from
the presynaptic neurons and postsynaptic neurons in small
networks” or “Studies of neurons or networks under noise
in artificial neural networks” or “Packet Routing in Dynamically Changing Networks”.
Generative topic models such as LDA or DocNADE infer
topic-word distributions that can be used to estimate a document likelihood. While basic models such as LDA do not
account for context information when inferring these distributions, more recent approaches such as DocNADE achieve
amplified word and document likelihoods by accounting
for words preceding a word of interest in a document.
More specifically, DocNADE (Larochelle and Lauly 2012;
Zheng, Zhang, and Larochelle 2016) (Figure 1, Left) is
a probabilistic graphical model that learns topics over sequences of words, corresponding to a language model (Manning and Schütze 1999; Bengio et al. 2003) that can be interpreted as a neural network with several parallel hidden
layers. To predict the word vi , each hidden layer hi takes
as input the sequence of preceding words văi . However, it
does not take into account the following words vąi in the sequence. Inspired by bidirectional language models (Mousa
and Schuller 2017) and recurrent neural networks (Elman
1990; Gupta, Schütze, and Andrassy 2016; Vu et al. 2016b;
2016a), trained to predict a word (or label) depending on its
full left and right contexts, we extend DocNADE and incorporate full contextual information (all words around vi ) at
each hidden layer hi when predicting the word vi in a language modeling fashion with neural topic modeling.
While this is a powerful approach for incorporating contextual information in particular for long texts and corpora with many documents, learning contextual information remains challenging in topic models with short texts
and few documents, due to (1) limited word co-occurrences
or little context and (2) significant word non-overlap in
such short texts. However, distributional word representations (i.e. word embeddings) have shown to capture both
the semantic and syntactic relatedness in words and demonstrated impressive performance in natural language processing (NLP) tasks. For example, assume that we conduct
topic analysis over the two short text fragments: “Goldman
shares drop sharply downgrade” and “Falling market homes

We address two challenges in topic models: (1) Context information around words helps in determining their actual meaning, e.g., “networks” used in the contexts artificial neural networks vs. biological neuron networks. Generative topic models infer topic-word distributions, taking no or only little context into account. Here, we extend a neural autoregressive
topic model to exploit the full context information around
words in a document in a language modeling fashion. The
proposed model is named as iDocNADE. (2) Due to the small
number of word occurrences (i.e., lack of context) in short
text and data sparsity in a corpus of few documents, the application of topic models is challenging on such texts. Therefore, we propose a simple and efficient way of incorporating
external knowledge into neural autoregressive topic models:
we use embeddings as a distributional prior. The proposed
variants are named as DocNADEe and iDocNADEe.
We present novel neural autoregressive topic model variants
that consistently outperform state-of-the-art generative topic
models in terms of generalization, interpretability (topic coherence) and applicability (retrieval and classification) over 7
long-text and 8 short-text datasets from diverse domains.

Introduction
Probabilistic topic models, such as LDA (Blei, Ng, and
Jordan 2003), Replicated Softmax (RSM) (Salakhutdinov
and Hinton 2009) and Document Autoregressive Neural
Distribution Estimator (DocNADE) (Larochelle and Lauly
2012) are often used to extract topics from text collections
and learn document representations to perform NLP tasks
such as information retrieval (IR), document classification
or summarization.
To motivate our first task of incorporating full contextual information, assume that we conduct topic analysis on a
collection of research papers from NIPS conference, where
one of the popular terms is “networks”. However, without
context information (nearby and/or distant words), its actual meaning is ambiguous since it can refer to such different concepts as artificial neural networks in computer
science or biological neural networks in neuroscience or
Computer/data networks in telecommunications. Given the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6505

