The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Counterfactual Randomization:
Rescuing Experimental Studies from Obscured Confounding
Andrew Forney

Elias Bareinboim

Department of Computer Science
Loyola Marymount University
Los Angeles, CA

Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN

Abstract

from the medical domain (White 2005; Brookhart et al. 2010;
Cormack et al. 2018), in which “despite their attention to
evidence, studies repeatedly show marked variability in what
healthcare providers actually do in a given situation” (Stead,
Starmer, and McClellan 2008). In the case where this variability is due to UCs, better treatment policies than those
practiced may exist (Ruberg and Shen 2015).
The focus on more individualized treatment effects (ITEs)
has fallen under a variety of headings in the medical and
statistical sciences, including “personalized medicine” (Hamburg and Collins 2010), the “effect of treatment on the
treated (ETT)” (Pearl 2000; Pearl, Glymour, and Jewell
2016), and “c-specific effects” (Pearl 2017). Yet, for all
of these labels, the data sciences still lack an empirical
methodology for measuring ITEs without strong assumptions within the model, about the UCs, or about the treatments. Closer attempts (Bareinboim, Forney, and Pearl 2015;
Forney, Pearl, and Bareinboim 2017) have come from the online decision-making domain, in which counterfactual treatment effects akin to the ETT are measured, but imply that
UCs have already evaded detection following an offline RCT.
Related work has examined ITEs and attempted to measure
counterfactual outcomes from observational data, but crucially, assume the inexistence of UCs (Papangelou et al. 2018;
Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2016).
The present work takes a data-scientific perspective to
traditional empirical inquiry, acknowledging that the best
tools available to machine learning may yield analyses that
are only as rich as the data provided. As RCTs are likely to
remain the dominant tool for experimentation, the current
effort explores approaches that enhance, rather than replace,
their findings. Specifically, we make three primary contributions: (1) We begin by formalizing a causal interpretation for
the differing treatment policies of actors (e.g., prescribing
physicians) in confounded decision-making scenarios, called
heterogeneous-intent (HI). (2) We then introduce a new experimental procedure for the early detection of UCs and HIs
through a technique that can be layered atop a traditional,
offline RCT; moreover, this technique can be used to salvage
ITEs from existing RCT results. (3) Finally, we algorithmitize an online recommender system that exploits the common
practice of second-opinions in diagnostics, and can employ
the results of (2) to maximize personalized treatment efficacy
with minimal learning and in the presence of UCs.

Randomized clinical trials (RCTs) like those conducted by
the FDA provide medical practitioners with average effects
of treatments, and are generally more desirable than observational studies due to their control of unobserved confounders
(UCs), viz., latent factors that influence both treatment and
recovery. However, recent results from causal inference have
shown that randomization results in a subsequent loss of information about the UCs, which may impede treatment efficacy
if left uncontrolled in practice (Bareinboim, Forney, and Pearl
2015). Our paper presents a novel experimental design that
can be noninvasively layered atop past and future RCTs to not
only expose the presence of UCs in a system, but also reveal
patient- and practitioner-specific treatment effects in order to
improve decision-making. Applications are given to personalized medicine, second opinions in diagnosis, and employing
offline results in online recommender systems.

1

Introduction

Randomized Clinical Trials (RCTs) are considered the goldstandard for evidence generation throughout the empirical sciences; annually, the FDA alone spends billions of
dollars conducting thousands of RCTs to vet new drugs
and medical treatments (Giffin et al. 2010). RCTs are distinctly superior to observational studies in that the assigned
treatment is randomized, as opposed to allowing the actors (e.g., physicians, patients) to decide treatment themselves. This randomization provides control for confounding bias (Pearl 2000, Ch. 6), which appears due to the existence of unobserved confounders (UCs) generating uncontrolled variations to the treatment and outcome. Randomization of the treatment allocation constitutes one of
the pillars of modern experimental design (Fisher 1951;
Wainer 1989) and broadly, within the scientific method itself.
As recent results from causal inference have demonstrated (Bareinboim, Forney, and Pearl 2015), the control
for UCs provided by RCTs may yield population-level treatment outcomes, but comes with a cost: information about
individual- or unit-level patient and prescriber characteristics
is lost, and the treatment selection mechanisms that exist
in practice remain unmeasured. Such scenarios are motivated by many instances of confounded decision-making
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2454

