The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Generating Chinese Ci with Designated Metrical Structure
Richong Zhang,1,2 Xinyu Liu,3 Xinwei Chen,3 Zhiyuan Hu,4 Zhaoqing Xu,2 Yongyi Mao∗3
1

2

SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Beijing Advanced Institution on Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario
4
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China

Abstract

In this work, we consider the problem of generating Ci,
an ancient Chinese poetry form, subject to their metrical requirements. Comparing with many other genres of poetry,
Ci has highly restrictive metrical structures. Specifically, the
metrical structure of a Ci is specified by Cipai. There are
more than 800 Cipai’s in the Ci poetry, each specifying at
least three kinds of rules: a rhythmic rule, a tonal rule and
a rhyming rule. The rhythmic rule dictates the number of
lines in the Ci and the varying number of characters in each
line, the tonal rule prescribes the tones with which characters at given locations must be pronounced, and the rhyming
rule regulates the rhyming pattern. Every Ci must be written
for one of these Cipai’s and is then subject to the restriction
imposed by these metrical rules.
There has been a rich body of literature on automated
poetry generation, for example, (Yi, Li, and Sun 2017;
Nong 2017; Zhang et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2016b; 2016a;
Feigenbaum 2003; Yan 2016; Zhang and Lapata 2014; Yang
et al. 2017; Ghazvininejad et al. 2016; Oliveira et al. 2014;
Rashel and Manurung 2014). These existing methods can
be divided into “template-based” approaches and “learningbased” approaches. The template-based approaches, such as
(Oliveira 2012; Oliveira et al. 2014; Rashel and Manurung
2014), usually involve designing a set of templates and certain scoring functions, in a process often requiring a significant amount of intervention from human experts. The
templates are then used to generate a set of candidate poems, which are further evaluated by the scoring function.
The candidates poem with top scores are then returned as
the output. The learning-based approaches, such as (Yi, Li,
and Sun 2017; Zhang et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2016b; 2016a;
Yan 2016; Zhang and Lapata 2014; Yang et al. 2017), on the
other hand, rely on designing a probabilistic or neural network model and training the model on a large poetry corpus.
The trained models are then used to generate poems.
In general, the template-based approaches are capable of
explicitly importing the metrical rules in the design of templates, but the quality of the generated poems are highly dependent of the poetry expertise of the designer. The learningbased approaches on the other hand aim at “learning” the
poetry expertise from the corpus automatically and rely less
on human experts. However, they largely ignore the known
metrical structure of the poetry and hope that the model can
be sufficiently expressive and learnable to extract the met-

Ci is a lyric poetry form that follows highly restrictive metrical structures. This makes it challenging for a computer
to compose Ci subject to a specified metrical requirement.
In this work, we adapt the CVAE framework to automated
Ci generation under metrical constraints. Specifically, we
present the first neural model that explicitly encodes the designated metrical structure for Ci generation. The proposed
model is shown experimentally to generate Ci with nearly
perfect metrical structures.

Introduction
The revival of neural networks, under the new paradigm
of deep learning, is impacting many areas of natural language processing. In particular, the generation of natural
languages, such as dialogue generation(Moore and Moore
1995), document summarization(Fattah and Ren 2008), machine translation(Bhattacharyya 2015), and poetry generation, has benefited greatly from the methodology of deep
learning. Common to these tasks, the deep model must learn
a distributed representation of semantics, and be able to map
between the semantic representation and a sequence of discrete tokens, i.e., words or characters.
Among these language generation tasks, poetry generation has unique characteristics. That is, not only having
implied semantics, poetry is often associated with metrical structures, which specify certain “sounding” rules that
a poem must follow. Thus the problem of poetry generation
is not only challenged by the need of learning a semantic
representation, it is also complicated by the metrical rules
to which it must conform. It is worth noting that rule-based
learning classically belongs to the symbolist regime of AI, in
which rules are usually expressed by certain logical formulas or via some formal language. Neural networks and distributed representations however belong to the connectionist
regime of AI, which has been largely disconnected from the
symbolist methodology. Thus generating poetry subject to
metrical regulation is a perfect example for studying how
the two worlds may be combined in a common framework.
This has been the motivation behind this work.
∗
First three authors have equal contribution. Corresponding author: yymao@eecs.uottawa.ca
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7459

