The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

From Zero-Shot Learning to Cold-Start Recommendation
Jingjing Li,1 Mengmeng Jing,1 Ke Lu,1 Lei Zhu,2 Yang Yang,1 Zi Huang3
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Shandong Normal University; 3 The University of Queensland
lijin117@yeah.net; jingmeng1992@gmail.com; kel@uestc.edu.cn; leizhu0608@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) and cold-start recommendation
(CSR) are two challenging problems in computer vision and
recommender system, respectively. In general, they are independently investigated in different communities. This paper,
however, reveals that ZSL and CSR are two extensions of the
same intension. Both of them, for instance, attempt to predict
unseen classes and involve two spaces, one for direct feature
representation and the other for supplementary description.
Yet there is no existing approach which addresses CSR from
the ZSL perspective. This work, for the first time, formulates
CSR as a ZSL problem, and a tailor-made ZSL method is
proposed to handle CSR. Specifically, we propose a Lowrank Linear Auto-Encoder (LLAE), which challenges three
cruxes, i.e., domain shift, spurious correlations and computing efficiency, in this paper. LLAE consists of two parts, a
low-rank encoder maps user behavior into user attributes and
a symmetric decoder reconstructs user behavior from user attributes. Extensive experiments on both ZSL and CSR tasks
verify that the proposed method is a win-win formulation, i.e.,
not only can CSR be handled by ZSL models with a significant performance improvement compared with several conventional state-of-the-art methods, but the consideration of
CSR can benefit ZSL as well.

Figure 1: Illustration of ZSL and CSR. It can be seen that
they are two extensions of the same intension. However,
there is no existing work which addresses CSR from the ZSL
perspective. For the first time, CSR is formulated as a ZSL
problem and a tailor-made method is proposed to solve CSR
in this paper.

Introduction

ods (Lin et al. 2013; Li et al. 2017) is to leverage user preferences to generate recommendations for new users. This
is quite reasonable, simply because you cannot deliver the
right thing to a person you barely know. With the user preferences, we will then have two spaces, an attribute (e.g., user
preferences and personal information) space and a behavior
(e.g., purchase behavior and past interactions) space, in the
cold-start recommendation. The attribute space is used to describe the user preferences, and the behavior space is used to
represent the user interactions in the target system. As a result, cold-start recommendation can be defined as a problem
to generate recommendations for a fresh user where we have
nothing about the user in the behavior space but some side
information about the user in the attribute space. With the
assumption that people with the similar preferences would
have the similar consuming behavior, cold-start recommendation can be done by two steps: 1) mapping the behavior
space to the attribute space, so that the new users can be
linked with the old users; 2) reconstructing user behavior
by user attributes, so that we can generate recommendations

From a near-infinity inventory, recommender systems (Bobadilla et al. 2013; Li et al. 2017) pick a
fraction of items which a user might enjoy based on the
user’s current context and past behavior (Smith and Linden
2017). If the past behavior, however, is not available, e.g.,
for a new user, most recommender systems, especially those
popular ones based on collaborative filtering (CF) (Ekstrand
et al. 2011), would be stuck. Different solutions have been
proposed to handle this problem, which is widely known
as cold-start recommendation (CSR) (Lin et al. 2013).
Recently, cross-domain information (Fernández-Tobı́as et
al. 2012), personal information (Fernández-Tobı́as et al.
2016) and social network data (Sedhain et al. 2017) have
been used to facilitate CSR.
If we take a close look at previous work, it is not hard to
find out that the very basic idea behind existing CSR methCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4189

