The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Re2 EMA: Regularized and Reinitialized Exponential
Moving Average for Target Model Update in Object Tracking
Jianglei Huang, Wengang Zhou
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
hjl777@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhwg@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

in the bounding box may accumulate with continuously updating, which will eventually degrade the target model and
make the tracker drift away. The big corruption sources may
be eliminated by some specialized techniques such as occlusion and/or blur detection, but the accumulation of small
errors is hard to avoid.
Recently, there have been works (Bertinetto et al. 2016a;
2016c; Tao, Gavves, and Smeulders 2016) that explore the
possibility of performing no model update at all. In those
methods, visual object tacking is formulated as an one-shot
learning problem. Despite the simplicity, encouraging results are achieved. Essentially, those methods learn to derive
a general model regardless of target variations with large offline datasets. In principle, they intend to learn an invariant
and discriminative feature extractor such that the target is
stable and separable from background in the feature space
(Li et al. 2018). However, learning such an extractor that can
produce an invariant and discriminative representation is intrinsically difficult. Because as time evolves, the appearance
of the target may change drastically and even become irrelevant with that of the given sample. For example, initially
given a frame containing a closed book, when it is opened
up in successive frames, its appearance becomes irrelevant.
As a result, those methods may fail to extract a relevant feature and eventually lose the target. If there is model update,
those kind of failure could be avoided. Besides, with model
update, we may be free of the large scale datasets for offline
training in those algorithms.
The most popular update policy is exponential moving average (EMA). This approach basically adds up all online collected training samples with an exponential decayed weight
for each sample. It can be implemented in a “moving” manner, and thus there is no need to keep the historical samples.
Therefore it can be both memory and computation efficient.
However, it is ad-hoc and its effect is limited. In this work,
we seek a more complicated update method.
We propose to learn a transformation matrix from the last
target model to the one just predicted, which results in a
least square optimization objective. Since the predicted target model is not reliable, we impose a penalty to limit the
dissimilarities between the learned target model and the last
target model. Because this objective is convex, we set its
gradient to zero to find the solution, which degenerates to
EMA and the penalty factor corresponding to the EMA’s

Target model update plays an important role in visual object
tracking. However, performing optimal model update is challenging. In this work, we propose to achieve an optimal target model by learning a transformation matrix from the last
target model to the newly generated one, which results into
a minimization objective. In this objective, there exists two
challenges. The first is that the newly generated target model
is unreliable. To overcome this problem, we propose to impose a penalty to limit the distance between the learned target
model and the last one. The second is that as time evolves,
we can not decide whether the last target model has been
corrupted or not. To get out of this dilemma, we propose a
reinitialization term. Besides, to control the complexity of
the transformation matrix, we also add a regularizer. We find
that the optimization formula’s solution, with some simplifications, degenerates to EMA. Finally, despite the simplicity,
extensive experiments conducted on several commonly used
benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach in relatively long term scenarios.

Introduction
Visual object tracking is a fundamental task of computer vision and has many practical applications such as in monitoring and auto-driving (Smeulders et al. 2014; Zhang et al.
2015; Wu, Lim, and Yang 2013; Han, Sim, and Adam 2017;
Wang et al. 2018; Wang, Zhou, and Li 2018a; 2018b). The
objective of object tracking is to online locate an arbitrary
target with only initial object’s bounding box given, which
implies that there is no prior information about the target
in the offline phase. This requires that the target’s model
should be online constructed from the given bounding box
and updated on the fly with predicted ones in successive
video frames. Therefore, model update plays a crucial role
in object tracking algorithms.
However, in visual object tracking, model update is challenging, since there are distractors and other corrupted situations such as occlusion and blur. The target model generated
based on the current video frame may be unreliable, which
risks corrupting the initial model when used for updating.
Besides, what is even worse is the accumulation of small errors. The small errors such as background pixels included
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8457

