The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Layer Decomposition-Recomposition Framework for
Neuron Pruning towards Accurate Lightweight Networks
Weijie Chen, Yuan Zhang, Di Xie, Shiliang Pu
Hikvision Research Institute
{chenweijie5, zhangyuan, xiedi, pushiliang}@hikvision.com

Before pruning

Abstract
Neuron pruning is an efficient method to compress the network into a slimmer one for reducing the computational cost
and storage overhead. Most of state-of-the-art results are obtained in a layer-by-layer optimization mode. It discards the
unimportant input neurons and uses the survived ones to reconstruct the output neurons approaching to the original ones
in a layer-by-layer manner. However, an unnoticed problem
arises that the information loss is accumulated as layer increases since the survived neurons still do not encode the
entire information as before. A better alternative is to propagate the entire useful information to reconstruct the pruned
layer instead of directly discarding the less important neurons. To this end, we propose a novel Layer DecompositionRecomposition Framework (LDRF) for neuron pruning, by
which each layer’s output information is recovered in an embedding space and then propagated to reconstruct the following pruned layers with useful information preserved. We
mainly conduct our experiments on ILSVRC-12 benchmark
with VGG-16 and ResNet-50. What should be emphasized
is that our results before end-to-end fine-tuning are significantly superior owing to the information-preserving property of our proposed framework. With end-to-end fine-tuning,
we achieve state-of-the-art results of 5.13× and 3× speed-up
with only 0.5% and 0.65% top-5 accuracy drop respectively,
which outperform the existing neuron pruning methods.

l
l+1

After pruning

Approaching

Approaching

Information loss
accumulation during
layer-by-layer
reconstruction from
bottom to top

Figure 1: The information loss of the generic layer-by-layer
neuron pruning method. The less important input neurons
in layer l are pruned, and its output neurons are optimized
to approximate the original ones. Repeatedly, only a part
of important ones are propagated to reconstruct layer l + 1,
which induces information loss during the information propagation. Less importance does not mean absolute uselessness. A subset of neurons by selection is difficult to encode
the entire label-related information especially when aggressive pruning. Such information loss is accumulated layer by
layer, which deeply damages the network accuracy. For instance, (He, Zhang, and Sun 2017) prune VGG-16 up to 5×
acceleration in such layer-by-layer pruning mode with 22%
top-5 accuracy drop before end-to-end fine-tuning.
Neuron pruning is one kind of structure pruning, which
induces channel level and filter level sparsity of weight matrices so that it can directly compress the network into a
slimmer one. To the best of our knowledge, most of state-ofthe-art results are implemented in a layer-by-layer pruning
and optimization manner (Aghasi, Nguyen, and Romberg
2017; He, Zhang, and Sun 2017; Luo, Wu, and Lin 2017).
However, as shown in Fig.1, the survived neurons are inadequate to recover the original output due to the information loss, which accumulates errors as layer increases. In this
way, its accuracy is deeply damaged and is difficult to restore
the original performance. In fact, this is an intrinsic drawback of the existing neuron pruning frameworks. Their proposed greedy neuron selection methods actually attempt to
ease this problem. However, without framework improved,
this problem is unable to avoid, no matter how optimal the
neuron selection is, especially when aggressive pruning.
Intuitively, a better solution is to squeeze the useful information of the discarded neurons into the survived ones
and then propagate to reconstruct the following pruned lay-

Introduction
As the success of convolutional neural networks in computer
vision, more and more researchers pay attention to their deployment on embedded sensors and mobile devices. Due to
the enormous computational cost and storage overhead, it
becomes an appealing subject on how to obtain a more efficient model without performance decline.
Recently, many compression and acceleration methods
have been proposed to solve this problem. One category
of the most popular methods is pruning, which can induce
sparsity to weight matrices so that only the non-zero parts
are involved in computation and storage. (Guo, Yao, and
Chen 2016; Han et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2015; Lebedev and
Lempitsky 2016; Wen et al. 2016; Molchanov et al. 2017;
Li et al. 2017; Ye et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2018).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3355

