The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fast Relational Probabilistic Inference and
Learning: Approximate Counting via Hypergraphs
Mayukh Das

Devendra Singh Dhami

Gautam Kunapuli

University of Texas, Dallas
mayukh.das1@utdallas.edu

University of Texas, Dallas
devendra.dhami@utdallas.edu

University of Texas, Dallas
gautam.kunapuli@utdallas.edu

Kristian Kersting

Sriraam Natarajan

Technical University of Darmstadt
kersting@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

University of Texas, Dallas
sriraam.natarajan@utdallas.edu

Abstract

tions – including MLN-specific formulation and lack of support for partial groundings (Sarkhel et al. 2016) or restricted
arity of relations (Das et al. 2016).
We relax these assumptions and present a general approximate counting technique that transforms the problem
of counting partially instantiated clauses to motif-matching
in equivalent hypergraph. Provably, counting in the original
data corresponds to computing the expected counts of the
motif occurrences in the transformed hypergraph: When
this expectation is computed exactly, one can retrieve the
true counts. In large data sets, this motivates the approximation of the expectation using summary statistics on the hypergraph. Our experimental results across several domains
on both learning and inference tasks demonstrate clearly
that this approximation indeed relaxes the assumptions of
the previous methods and results in more efficient counting
while exhibiting on-par performance to exact counting.
The paper makes the following contributions - (1) We
present a method for converting structured data and relational/logic clauses to hypergraphs and motifs, respectively,
and pose the problem of counting the number of groundings as counting over motifs-matches in the hypergraph. (2)
We present and justify an approximation technique and outline the algorithm for counting the number of motifs based
on the order of the variables that appear in the clauses. (3)
Finally, we demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed approach without sacrificing the effectiveness on standard domains against state-of-the-art baselines on these tasks.

Counting the number of true instances of a clause is arguably
a major bottleneck in relational probabilistic inference and
learning. We approximate counts in two steps: (1) transform
the fully grounded relational model to a large hypergraph, and
partially-instantiated clauses to hypergraph motifs; (2) since
the expected counts of the motifs are provably the clause
counts, approximate them using summary statistics (in/outdegrees, edge counts, etc). Our experimental results demonstrate the efficiency of these approximations, which can be
applied to many complex statistical relational models, and
can be significantly faster than state-of-the-art, both for inference and learning, without sacrificing effectiveness.

Introduction
Significant advancements in research on Statistical Relational Learning (SRL) and AI (Getoor and Taskar 2007;
Raedt et al. 2016) and in lifted inference (Poole 2003;
Kersting, Ahmadi, and Natarajan 2009) have allowed for
exploiting the symmetries of the data and model during
learning and inference. The advantage of these algorithms
is that they can succinctly represent and reason with dependencies among the attributes and relations of related objects. One of the key operations inside most, if not all, algorithms is counting the satisfied groundings (instances) of
a partially instantiated relational rule (a first-order clause).
For instance, when learning the parameters or structure of a
Markov Logic Network (MLN) (Domingos and Lowd 2009;
Khot et al. 2011), or when performing lifted inference (Poole
2003) one has to compute the expected/true counts in the
model/data and inside a given cluster of objects.
Counting is a hard combinatorial search problem (#P complete). Consequently, algorithms for fast, approximate
counting have been developed (Das et al. 2016; Sarkhel et
al. 2016). The key observation is that computing exact counts
is not essential, particularly when the number of groundings
for an object/relation is high. For instance, knowing whether
a Professor published 300 papers or 319 papers does not significantly change the belief over the popularity of the Professor. While reasonably successful, they make a few assump-

Background and Related Work
Our approach for efficient counting in SRL is inspired by
cardinality estimation for query optimization in relational
databases (Schiefer, Strain, and Yan 1998; Seputis 2000),
that use incremental statistics (histograms etc.) across tables and frequently executed queries. While successful on
standard benchmarks, these approaches are not directly applicable to our problem setting where we are interested in
learning from adhoc databases. Probabilistic Database systems, such as ‘Tuffy’ (Niu et al. 2011) exploit the power
of relational databases for persistence and computations in
SRL. Though successful, such systems may encounter challenges of relational databases including arbitrary join costs

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7816

