The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DTMT: A Novel Deep Transition Architecture for Neural Machine Translation
Fandong Meng, Jinchao Zhang
WeChat AI - Pattern Recognition Center Tencent Inc.
{fandongmeng, dayerzhang}@tencent.com

Abstract

NMT (RNMT) with deep stacked architectures (Wu et al.
2016; Zhou et al. 2016; Kalchbrenner et al. 2017; Wang et
al. 2017) first outperforms the conventional shallow RNMT
model, to be the de-facto standard for NMT. Most recently, after absorbing the advanced modeling and training techniques, the RNMT+ (Chen et al. 2018) has shown
its greater potential strength, even surpasses the convolutional seq2seq (ConvS2S) model (Gehring et al. 2017) and
achieves comparable results with the well-known Transformer model (Vaswani et al. 2017). These studies inspire
researchers to make efforts for searching new architectures
for RNMT.
Although the RNMT model can possess very deep architectures through stacking layers, for each recurrent level of
the stacked RNN, the transition between the consecutive hidden states along the sequential axis is still shallow. Since
the state transition between the consecutive hidden states
effectively adds a new input to the summary of the previous inputs represented by the hidden state, this procedure of
constructing a new summary from the combination of the
previous one and the new input should be highly nonlinear,
to allow the hidden state to rapidly adapt to quickly changing modes of the input while still preserving a useful summary of the past (Pascanu et al. 2014). From this perspective,
some researchers (Pascanu et al. 2014; Barone et al. 2017)
investigate deep transition recurrent architectures, which increase the depth of the hidden-to-hidden transition. This
kind of structure extends the conventional shallow RNN in
another aspect different from the stacked RNN, and has been
proven to outperform the stacked one on language modeling
task (Pascanu et al. 2014). Barone et al. (2017) apply this
transition architecture to RNMT, while there is still a large
margin between this transition model and the state-of-the-art
model, e.g. the Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), in terms
of BLEU, which is also confirmed by Tang et al. (2018).
In this paper, we further enhance the RNMT through increasing the transition depth of the consecutive hidden states
along the sequential axis and build a novel and effective
Deep Transition RNN-based Architecture for Neural Machine Translation, named DTMT. We design three deep
transition modules, which correspondingly extend the RNN
modules of shallow RNMT in the encoder and the decoder,
to enhance the non-linear transformation between consecutive hidden states. Since the deep transition increases the

Past years have witnessed rapid developments in Neural
Machine Translation (NMT). Most recently, with advanced
modeling and training techniques, the RNN-based NMT
(RNMT) has shown its potential strength, even compared
with the well-known Transformer (self-attentional) model.
Although the RNMT model can possess very deep architectures through stacking layers, the transition depth between consecutive hidden states along the sequential axis
is still shallow. In this paper, we further enhance the RNNbased NMT through increasing the transition depth between
consecutive hidden states and build a novel Deep Transition RNN-based Architecture for Neural Machine Translation, named DTMT. This model enhances the hidden-tohidden transition with multiple non-linear transformations,
as well as maintains a linear transformation path throughout this deep transition by the well-designed linear transformation mechanism to alleviate the gradient vanishing problem. Experiments show that with the specially designed deep
transition modules, our DTMT can achieve remarkable improvements on translation quality. Experimental results on
Chinese⇒English translation task show that DTMT can outperform the Transformer model by +2.09 BLEU points and
achieve the best results ever reported in the same dataset. On
WMT14 English⇒German and English⇒French translation
tasks, DTMT shows superior quality to the state-of-the-art
NMT systems, including the Transformer and the RNMT+.

Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) with an encoderdecoder (Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014)
framework has made promising progress in recent years.
Generally, this kind of framework consists of two components: an encoder network that encodes the input sentence into a sequence of distributed representations, based
on which a decoder network generates the translation with
an attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015;
Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015). Driven by the breakthrough achieved in computer vision (He et al. 2016), research in NMT have turned towards studying deep architectures (Wu et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2016; Kalchbrenner et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2017; Gehring et al. 2017;
Vaswani et al. 2017). Among these studies, RNN-based
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

224

