The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Non-Ergodic Convergence Analysis of Heavy-Ball Algorithms
Tao Sun,1 Penghang Yin,2 Dongsheng Li,1 Chun Huang,1 Lei Guan,1 Hao Jiang1
1

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China.
2
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
nudtsuntao@163.com, yph@ucla.edu, {dsli,chunhuang}@nudt.edu.cn, guanleics@gmail.com, haojiang@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

nonsmooth function as suggested by (Lessard, Recht, and
Packard 2016). Different from the classical gradient descent methods, the Heavy-ball algorithm fails to generate a Fejér monotone sequence. In the convex and smooth
case, the only result about convergence rate, to our knowledge, is the ergodic O(1/k) rate in terms of the objective
value
Feyzmahdavian, and Johansson 2015), i.e.,
 Pk(Ghadimi,

i

i=1 x
f
− min f ∼ O k1 . The linear convergence of
k
Heavy-ball algorithm was proved under the strongly convexity assumption by (Ghadimi, Feyzmahdavian, and Johansson 2015). But the authors imposed a restrictive assumption on the inertial parameter βk . Specifically, when
the strongly convex constant is tiny, the convergence result
holds only for a small range of βk values. By incorporating
the idea of proximal mapping, the inertial proximal gradient algorithm (iPiano) was proposed in (Ochs et al. 2014),
whose convergence in nonconvex case was thoroughly discussed. Locally linear convergence of iPiano and Heavy-ball
method was later proved in (Ochs 2016). In the strongly
convex case, the linear convergence was proved for iPiano
with fixed βk (Ochs, Brox, and Pock 2015). In the paper
(Pock and Sabach 2016), inertial Proximal Alternating Linearized Minimization (iPALM) was introduced as a variant
of iPiano for solving the two-block regularized problem. (Xu
and Yin 2013) analyzed the Heavy-ball algorithm in tensor minimization problems. Stochastic versions of heavyball have also been introduced (Loizou and Richtárik 2017b;
2017a). A multi-step heavy-ball algorithm was analyzed
in (Liang, Fadili, and Peyré 2016). The inertial methods
are also developed and studied in the operator research
by (Combettes and Glaudin 2017). None of the aforementioned Heavy-ball based algorithms, however, provides a
non-ergodic convergence rate.

In this paper, we revisit the convergence of the Heavy-ball
method, and present improved convergence complexity results in the convex setting. We provide the first non-ergodic
O(1/k) rate result of the Heavy-ball algorithm with constant
step size for coercive objective functions. For objective functions satisfying a relaxed strongly convex condition, the linear
convergence is established under weaker assumptions on the
step size and inertial parameter than made in the existing literature. We extend our results to multi-block version of the
algorithm with both the cyclic and stochastic update rules.
In addition, our results can also be extended to decentralized
optimization, where the ergodic analysis is not applicable.

Introduction
In this paper, we study the Heavy-ball algorithm first proposed by (Polyak 1964), for solving the following unconstrained minimization problem
min f (x),

x∈Rm

(1)

where f is convex and differentiable, and ∇f is Lipschitz
continuous with constant L. The Heavy-ball method iterates
xk+1 = xk − γk ∇f (xk ) + βk (xk − xk−1 ),

(2)

where γk is the step size and βk is the inertial parameter.
Different from the gradient descent algorithm, the sequence
generated by Heavy-ball method is not Fejér monotone due
to the inertial term βk (xk − xk−1 ). This poses a challenge
in proving the convergence rate of {f (xk )}k≥0 in the convex case. In the existing literature, the sublinear convergence
rate of the Heavy-ball has been proved only in the sense of
ergodicity.
When the objective function is twice continuously differentiable and strongly convex (i.e., almost quadratic),
the Heavy-ball method provably converges linearly. Under
a weaker assumption that the objective function is nonconvex but Lipschitz differentiable, (Zavriev and Kostyuk
1993) proved that the sequence generated by the Heavyball method will converge to a critical point, yet without
specifying the convergence rate. The smoothness of objective function is crucial for convergence of the Heavyball. Indeed, it can be divergent for a strongly convex but

Contributions
In this paper, we establish the first non-ergodic O(1/k) convergence result in general convex case. More precisely, we
prove that f (xk ) − min f ∼ O( k1 ) for convex and coercive
f 1 . Compared with existing result in (Ghadimi, Feyzmahdavian, and Johansson 2015), ours allows a larger step size γk .
We also prove a linear convergence result under a restricted

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5033

We say f is coercive, if f (x) → +∞ as x → +∞.

