The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Cognitive Deficit of Deep Learning in Numerosity
Xiaolin Wu,⋆† Xi Zhang,⋆ Xiao Shu⋆†
⋆

†

Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, McMaster University, Canada
xwu@ece.mcmaster.ca, zhangxi 19930818@sjtu.edu.cn, shux@mcmaster.ca

Abstract

even shrouded by their functional prowess in many applications.
In this work we are intrigued by and try to understand
the uncomforting contrast between the abundance that DL
can accomplish in visual recognition tasks, some of which
are quite challenging even for humans (e.g., judging if two
face images are of the same person (Lu and Tang 2015)),
and how severely handicapped it becomes when tested on
cognitive tasks as simple and basic as learning the concept
of numbers. We conduct a family of cognitive experiments
to test if DL can, under various levels of supervision, learn
the simple concept of natural numbers by observing sample
images containing a varying number of objects in different
positions, orientations, sizes, shapes and colors.
The awareness of numbers, or numerosity perception is
a neurocognitive function possessed by human infants prior
to speech and any symbolic learning and even by animals
(Reas 2014; Harvey et al. 2013; Brannon and Terrace 1998;
Burr and Ross 2008; Dehaene 2011; Nieder and Miller 2003;
Xu 2003). Furthermore, numerosity perception is innate very
much like taste, sight, touch, smell and sound, although it
seems to be a higher order cognitive construct than the common five senses. Arguably, numerosity is the simplest task
of cognitive computing and thus it serves as an ideal Turingtype test to challenge whether DL, or any AI machinery for
that matter, can match humans.

Subitizing, or the sense of small natural numbers, is an innate cognitive function of humans and primates; it responds
to visual stimuli prior to the development of any symbolic
skills, language or arithmetic. Given successes of deep learning (DL) in tasks of visual intelligence and given the primitivity of number sense, a tantalizing question is whether DL can
comprehend numbers and perform subitizing. But somewhat
disappointingly, extensive experiments of the type of cognitive
psychology demonstrate that the examples-driven black box
DL cannot see through superficial variations in visual representations and distill the abstract notion of natural number, a
task that children perform with high accuracy and confidence.
The failure is apparently due to the learning method not the
CNN computational machinery itself. A recurrent neural network capable of subitizing does exist, which we construct
by encoding a mechanism of mathematical morphology into
the CNN convolutional kernels. Also, we investigate, using
subitizing as a test bed, the ways to aid the black box DL by
cognitive priors derived from human insight. Our findings are
mixed and interesting, pointing to both cognitive deficit of
pure DL, and some measured successes of boosting DL by
predetermined cognitive implements. This case study of DL
in cognitive computing is meaningful for visual numerosity
represents a minimum level of human intelligence.

1
1.1

Introduction

Background and motivation

1.2

In the past decade deep neural networks have rapidly developed into a powerful problem-solving paradigm that has
found a wide gamut of applications, spanning almost all academic disciplines. In particular, deep convolutional neural
networks (DCNNs) are lauded for their apparent visual intelligence, by which we refer to the successes enjoyed by DCNNs in visual pattern analysis, recognition and classification
tasks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al. 2015; He et al. 2016;
Sun et al. 2014; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015;
Sun et al. 2015). Although convolutional neural networks
were originally inspired by the knowledge of animal cortex
(Hubel and Wiesel 1968), our understanding of the inner
working mechanism of DCNNs is outstepped or arguably

Related work

Stoianov and Zorzi proposed a forward neural network of
two hidden layers to learn numerosity estimation (Stoianov
and Zorzi 2012). The learnt neural network model was found
to exhibit a numerosity estimation behavior. However, the
authors did not push far enough when testing their neural
network for cognitive power in numerosity. The synthetic
objects of test images do not vary in shape, color, or orientation; the size variation of objects remain in the same range
of the training images. As such, the success of the neural
network in making statistical inference under the i.i.d. condition is expected. In addition, the numerosity discussed in
(Stoianov and Zorzi 2012) did not include subitizing (the
precise judgement of small numbers) that is a key topic in
our study.
Very recently, Ritter et al. investigated the interpretability
problem in DCNNs using the methods of cognitive psychol-

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1303

