The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Certifying the True Error: Machine Learning in Coq with
Verified Generalization Guarantees
Alexander Bagnall, Gordon Stewart
Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701
{ab667712, gstewart}@ohio.edu

data	
  set

Abstract
We present MLC ERT, a novel system for doing practical
mechanized proof of the generalization of learning procedures,
bounding expected error in terms of training or test error. MLC ERT is mechanized in that we prove generalization bounds
inside the theorem prover Coq; thus the bounds are machine
checked by Coq’s proof checker. MLC ERT is practical in that
we extract learning procedures defined in Coq to executable
code; thus procedures with proved generalization bounds can
be trained and deployed in real systems. MLC ERT is well
documented and open source; thus we expect it to be usable
even by those without Coq expertise. To validate MLC ERT,
which is compatible with external tools such as TensorFlow,
we use it to prove generalization bounds on neural networks
trained using TensorFlow on the extended MNIST data set.

1

TensorFlow
prove

MLCert

𝑒𝑟𝑟 ≤ 6
𝑒𝑟𝑟 + 𝜖

executable	
  model

Figure 1: MLC ERT
Our technical approach (Figure 1) composes tools from interactive theorem proving, learning theory and statistics, and
quantized neural networks (Hubara et al. 2016), those that
learn low-precision weights. We train models either in MLC ERT, which is embedded in the Coq theorem prover (Bertot
and Castéran 2013) or using an external tool such as TensorFlow (Abadi et al. 2016). We prove generalization bounds,
relating expected to experimental error, using mechanized
libraries of results from learning theory and statistics such as
Chernoff inequalities, treating learning procedures as probabilistic programs with a denotational semantics in the style
of (Kozen 1985). To validate experimental error of the Coq
implementation of a model when run on a set of examples,
we extract models to executable OCaml or Haskell code,
which we then compile and run against an input data set.
Statistical techniques for proving generalization are dependent on the complexity of the hypothesis class being learned.
To tighten bounds without compromising performance, we
use techniques from neural network quantization (Jacob et
al. 2017) to learn accurate models with nontrivial generalization bounds for the extended MNIST (EMNIST) digit
classification task (Cohen et al. 2017).
Contributions. To summarize, the primary technical contributions of this paper are as follows:

Introduction

There is great optimism regarding the potential of artificial
intelligence, and machine learning in particular, to automate
tasks currently performed by humans. But there are also attendant challenges. In adversarial contexts, recent work at
the intersection of machine learning and security has demonstrated that an attacker can exploit the sensitivity of a network to small input perturbations, so-called adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013), in order to force misclassifications
with high confidence. More broadly, machine learning systems can go wrong or be exploited in a variety of ways, at
both training and inference time, as Papernot et al. comprehensively survey (Papernot et al. 2016). As machine learning
becomes critical infrastructure in systems like autonomous
vehicles, practitioners must ensure that machine-learned components do not invalidate high-level safety and security properties of the systems in which they are embedded.
In this paper, we make progress toward securing the foundations of machine learning practice by presenting a new
system, MLC ERT, for building certified implementations of
learning procedures, those with machine-checked generalization guarantees in a theorem prover. With respect to related
work, which is primarily SMT-based (e.g., (Katz et al. 2017)),
we target deeper functional specifications such as generalization error, or the expected error of a learned model when
deployed on the distribution against which it was trained.

• We present MLC ERT (§§ 3 and 4), the first system for
learning executable classifiers with certified generalization
guarantees, bounding with mechanical proof in a theorem
prover the expected error of machine-learned models.
• MLC ERT certifies generalization of the resulting classifiers, not of the training process, and thus is parametric in,
and therefore compatible with, deep learning frameworks
such as TensorFlow and PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2017). We

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2662

