The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Rational Delegations in Liquid Democracy
Daan Bloembergen

Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Davide Grossi

Bernoulli Institute
University of Groningen
Groningen, The Netherlands

Abstract

Martin Lackner
TU Wien
Vienna, Austria

accurate vote, face between voting directly, and thereby incurring a cost in terms of effort invested to learn about the
issue at hand, or delegating to another voter in their network,
thereby avoiding costs. We define a game-theoretic model,
called delegation game, to represent this type of interaction.
We establish pure strategy Nash equilibrium existence results for classes of delegation games, and study the quality
of equilibria in terms of the average accuracy they enable for
the population of voters, both analytically and through simulations. Proofs of the two main results (Theorems 1 and 2)
are presented in full, while we provide proofs of the simpler
secondary results only as supplementary material.4
By means of simulations we also study the effects of different network structures on delegation games in terms of:
performance against direct voting, average accuracy and the
probability of a correct majority vote, the number and quality of voters acting as ultimate proxies (so-called gurus) and,
finally, the presence of delegation cycles. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first paper providing a comprehensive
study of liquid democracy from a game-theoretic angle.

Liquid democracy is a proxy voting method where proxies are
delegable. We propose and study a game-theoretic model of
liquid democracy to address the following question: when is
it rational for a voter to delegate her vote? We study the existence of pure-strategy Nash equilibria in this model, and how
group accuracy is affected by them. We complement these
theoretical results by means of agent-based simulations to
study the effects of delegations on group’s accuracy on variously structured social networks.

Introduction
Liquid democracy (Blum and Zuber 2016) is an influential proposal in recent debates on democratic reforms in
both Europe and the US. Several grassroots campaigns, as
well as local parties, experimented with this novel type of
decision making procedure. Examples include the German
Piratenpartei1 and the EU Horizon 2020 project WeGovNow (Boella et al. 2018), which have incorporated the LiquidFeedback2 platform in their decision making, as well
as grass-roots organizations such as the Democracy Earth
Foundation3 . Liquid democracy is a form of proxy voting
(Miller 1969; Tullock 1992; Alger 2006; Green-Armytage
2015; Cohensius et al. 2017) where, in contrast to classical
proxy voting, proxies are delegable (or transitive, or transferable). Suppose we are voting on a binary issue, then each
voter can either cast her vote directly, or she can delegate her
vote to a proxy, who can again either vote directly or, in turn,
delegate to yet another proxy, and so forth. Ultimately, the
voters that decided not to delegate cast their ballots, which
now carry the weight given by the number of voters who
entrusted them as proxy, directly or indirectly.

Related Work Although the idea of delegable proxy was
already sketched by Dodgson (1884), only a few very recent papers have studied aspects of liquid democracy in the
(computational) social choice theory (Brandt et al. 2016)
literature. Kling et al. (2015) provide an analysis of election data from the main platform implementing a liquid
democracy voting system (Liquid Feedback) for the German Piratenpartei. They focus on network theoretic properties emerging from the structure of delegations—with particular attention to the number of highly influential gurus
or ‘super-voters’. Inspired by their experimental analysis,
Gölz et al. (2018) propose and analyze a variant of the liquid
democracy scheme able to restrict reliance on super-voters.
Skowron et al. (2017) study an aspect of the Liquid Feedback platform concerning the order in which proposals are
ranked and by which they are brought to the attention of
the community. Boldi et al. (2011) investigate applications
of variants of the liquid democracy voting method (called
viscous democracy) to recommender systems. Brill (2018)
presents some research directions in the context of liquid
democracy. A general, more philosophical discussion of liquid democracy is provided by Blum and Zuber (2016).

Contribution The starting point of our analysis is an often cited feature of liquid democracy: transitive delegations
reduce the level of duplicated effort required by direct voting, by freeing voters from the need to invest effort in order
to vote accurately. The focus of the paper is the decisionmaking problem that voters, who are interested in casting an
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.piratenpartei.de/
2
https://liquidfeedback.org/
3
https://www.democracy.earth/

4

1796

https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.08020

