The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

The Kelly Growth Optimal Portfolio with Ensemble Learning∗
Weiwei Shen,1,2 Bin Wang,3 Jian Pu,1 Jun Wang1
1

Shanghai Key Lab for Trustworthy Computing, School of Computer Science and Software Engineering
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
GE Global Research Center, Niskayuna, NY, USA
3
Credit and Portfolio Risk Management, Citigroup, St. Louis, MO, USA
realsww@gmail.com, vince.wang@citi.com, jianpu@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, jwang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract

oretically proved dominating the value of any other portfolio over the long haul and requiring the least time to reach
a preassigned wealth target (Breiman 1961). On the other
hand, however, with the advent of the growth optimal portfolio its overly high risk in the short term serves as one
major source of enduring debates on its merit as a normative investment rule in portfolio research (Samuelson 1979;
Ziemba 2015). Moreover, in contrast to the unremitting
efforts expended to improve the poor out-of-sample performance for the classical mean-variance portfolio (Kolm,
Tütüncü, and Fabozzi 2014), empirical studies and enhancing methods for the growth optimal portfolio are surprisingly
scarce (Estrada 2010; Bottazzi and Santi 2017).
In portfolio construction, balancing stationarity and estimation accuracy of model input parameters has been one
practical conundrum (Broadie 1993). On the one hand, since
return data from 20 years ago might have little bearing on returns this year, parameters are unlikely to be stationary over
a long period of time. On the other hand, while the estimation errors decrease when more data are used, more data
demand a longer time horizon when the data frequency is
fixed. To overcome this dilemma between stationarity and
accuracy, one oft-quoted approach in Markowitz’s framework is the resampled mean-variance portfolio proposed in
(Michaud 1989). In effect, it applies a parametric bootstrap
aggregating algorithm to reduce estimation risk and advance
out-of-sample performance. However, its efficacy has been
continually called into question due to its limited or even no
improvement over Markowitz’s portfolio (Wolf 2013).
As yet, to the best of our knowledge, no work exists on applying appropriate ensemble methods into Kelly’s portfolio
to boost its performance. Intuitively, as the growth optimal
strategy essentially relies on the complete knowledge of the
joint distribution of asset returns, insufficient data for estimation would dramatically deteriorate its performance. Its
degeneration is more severe than that of the mean-variance
portfolio, where only the first two moments of asset returns
need estimation. Meanwhile, ensemble learning as a rich
area for tools has achieved impressive success in heightening performance of a vast class of existing algorithms (Zhou
2012). Hence, how to exploit ensemble learning in Kelly’s
portfolio deserves a thorough and fresh investigation.
Motivated by the preceding consideration, in this paper,
we propose an ensemble growth optimal portfolio strategy.

As a competitive alternative to the Markowitz mean-variance
portfolio, the Kelly growth optimal portfolio has drawn sufficient attention in investment science. While the growth optimal portfolio is theoretically guaranteed to dominate any
other portfolio with probability 1 in the long run, it practically
tends to be highly risky in the short term. Moreover, empirical
analysis and performance enhancement studies under practical settings are surprisingly short. In particular, how to handle
the challenging but realistic condition with insufficient training data has barely been investigated. In order to fill voids,
especially grappling with the difficulty from small samples,
in this paper, we propose a growth optimal portfolio strategy
equipped with ensemble learning. We synergically leverage
the bootstrap aggregating algorithm and the random subspace
method into portfolio construction to mitigate estimation error. We analyze the behavior and hyperparameter selection
of the proposed strategy by simulation, and then corroborate
its effectiveness by comparing its out-of-sample performance
with those of 10 competing strategies on four datasets. Experimental results lucidly confirm that the new strategy has
superiority in extensive evaluation criteria.

1

Introduction

How to wisely construct an investment portfolio with access
to multiple assets has been a long-lasting question of great
concern to both individual and institutional investors (Brandt
2010). The seminal work by (Markowitz 1952) presents a
mean-variance framework as one prevalent answer to this
question. Meanwhile, the growth optimal portfolio, which is
originally considered for gambling by (Kelly 1956) and introduced into investment by (Latané 1959), offers a valuable
alternative. In addition, various successful investors, such as
Warren Buffet, James Simons and John Maynard Keynes,
are reported to have adopted Kelly-type strategies to manage
their funds (MacLean, Thorp, and Ziemba 2011). Briefly,
different from the myopic and risk-return tradeoff consideration in the mean-variance framework, the Kelly growth
optimal portfolio is designed to maximize the long-term exponential growth rate of an investment capital over multiple
periods. On the one hand, in mild conditions it has been the∗

This work was supported in part by NSFC (No. 61672236).
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1134

