The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exploiting the Contagious Effect for Employee Turnover Prediction
Mingfei Teng,1,2 Hengshu Zhu,2,∗ Chuanren Liu,4 Chen Zhu,2 Hui Xiong1,2,3,∗
1

Rutgers University, 2 Baidu Talent Intelligence Center, 3 Baidu Business Intelligence Lab, 4 Drexel University
{mingfei.teng, hxiong}@rutgers.edu, {zhuhengshu, zhuchen02}@baidu.com, chuanren.liu@drexel.edu

Abstract

Previous approaches on turnover analysis focused on the
ease and the desirability of job movement (March and Simon 1958). Specifically, the ease of movement is related
to factors such as job market availability, unemployment
rate, and personal skill level. Factors related to desirability
of movement include job satisfaction, salary growth, promotions, organization’s commitment, etc. A series of work
(Mobley, Horner, and Hollingsworth 1978; Jackofsky and
Peters 1983; Mcevoy and Cascio 1987; Trevor, Gerhart, and
Boudreau 1997) analyzed the relationships of talent turnover
and theses various factors. Later, different psychological
paths that employees would follow when they quit their jobs
were analyzed for modeling turnover behaviors (Lee and
Mitchell 1994; Lee et al. 1996; Lee et al. 1999). These analyses were mainly based on linear statistical models for testing
theoretical hypothesis. Recently, survival analysis has been
extended to predict the timing of turnovers with multiple
sources of information (Li et al. 2017).
All the above research efforts focus on the variables associated with the turnover employees and their working environments, while the social influence among them, specifically the contagious influence of prior turnovers on the following ones, as shown in Figure 1, is rarely explored and
exploited. The contagious influence effect, or simply contagious effect, has a complex nature in several ways:
• The contagious effect varies from people to people and is
shaped by factors such as the positions in the organization
and the connection strength between employees;
• The contagious effect is time variant due to its broadcasting and decaying mechanisms on the social network of
employees in a company;
• A series of prior turnovers may produce a cumulative effect in the time window for prediction. This effect is even
stronger for larger teams.
Given these challenges, it is a non-trivial endeavor to incorporate dynamic contagious effect with comprehensive factors for effective talent turnover prediction. Indeed, the profiling of employees and their working environments is both
heterogeneous and dynamic in nature. Therefore, the modeling framework should be able to process multiple sources of
sequential information with different length, granularity, and
format to effectively predict turnover behaviors and support
proactive talent management.

Talent turnover often costs a large amount of business time,
money and performance. Therefore, employee turnover prediction is critical for proactive talent management. Existing
approaches on turnover prediction are mainly based on profiling of employees and their working environments, while the
important contagious effect of employee turnovers has been
largely ignored. To this end, in this paper, we propose a contagious effect heterogeneous neural network (CEHNN) for
turnover prediction by integrating the employee profiles, the
environmental factors, and more importantly, the influence
of turnover behaviors of co-workers. Moreover, a global attention mechanism is designed to evaluate the heterogeneous
impact on potential turnover behaviors. This attention mechanism can improve the interpretability of turnover prediction
and provide actionable insights for talent retention. Finally,
we conduct extensive experiments and case studies on a realworld dataset from a large company to validate the effectiveness of the contagious effect for turnover prediction.

Introduction
Talent turnover will affect business performance of companies. When an unexpected turnover request is raised in
a company, significant effort is required to search for a replacement, and there is a risk that the operation of the company will be disrupted if a suitable replacement is not found.
The situation becomes even worse due to the contagious effect of external talent turnover when a group of employees
influence each other and quit their jobs collectively (Felps
et al. 2009). Indeed, talent plays an important role in daily
business operation, not only because of its abilities and expertise, but also related to its collective influence on each
other and the whole company. The quit of a talent often costs
a large amount of business time, money, and performance,
and the contagious effect of talent turnover will deconstruct
the organizational structure and cause a dysfunction in the
company. To alleviate the negative impact of talent turnover,
it is critical for an employer to proactively predict potential
turnovers, which in turn allows effective talent retention or
successful talent replacement.
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1166

