The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exploiting Synthetically Generated Data with
Semi-Supervised Learning for Small and Imbalanced Datasets
R. Mantiuk

P. Tiňo

M. Pérez-Ortiz

C. Hervás-Martı́nez

Department of Computer Department of Computer Science
School of Computer Science
Department of Computer
and Numerical Analysis,
Science and Technology,
University of Birmingham (UK)
Science and Technology,
University of Cambridge (UK) University of Córdoba (Spain)
Edgbaston
University of Cambridge (UK)
Rabanales Campus
15 JJ Thomson Avenue
Birmingham B15 2TT
15 JJ Thomson Avenue
C2 building 14071
Cambridge CB3 0FD
p.tino@cs.bham.ac.uk
Cambridge CB3 0FD
chervas@uco.es
rkm38@cam.ac.uk
mp867@cam.ac.uk

Abstract

The most straightforward over-sampling approach is to
randomly replicate data. However, this can lead to overfitting (Galar et al. 2012). Another common approach is to
do over-sampling taking into account the data distribution. A
convex combination of patterns close in the input space has
been successfully used for that purpose (Chawla et al. 2002;
Hongyi Zhang 2018; Pérez-Ortiz et al. 2016).
In this paper we investigate the benefits and limitations of
this simple data augmentation technique coupled with SSL
support vector machines. The motivations for such an approach are: i) when performing over-sampling one of the
biggest challenges is how to label synthetic examples (potentially alleviated when using SSL as no label is assumed)
and ii) the hypothesis that over-sampling by convex combination of patterns can support the cluster assumption in
SSL and help to simplify the classification task. The cluster assumption states that high density regions with different class labels must be separated by a low density region.
Given this, two patterns are likely to have the same class label if they can be connected by a path passing through high
density regions. The method proposed here is based on the
synthetic generation of high density regions as an inductive
bias for the classifier. We perform a thorough set of experiments over 27 synthetic and 26 benchmark binary datasets,
showing how this approach helps to mitigate the effect of
small, high-dimensional and imbalanced datasets.

Data augmentation is rapidly gaining attention in machine
learning. Synthetic data can be generated by simple transformations or through the data distribution. In the latter case,
the main challenge is to estimate the label associated to new
synthetic patterns. This paper studies the effect of generating synthetic data by convex combination of patterns and the
use of these as unsupervised information in a semi-supervised
learning framework with support vector machines, avoiding
thus the need to label synthetic examples. We perform experiments on a total of 53 binary classification datasets. Our
results show that this type of data over-sampling supports
the well-known cluster assumption in semi-supervised learning, showing outstanding results for small high-dimensional
datasets and imbalanced learning problems.

1

Introduction

One of the current challenges in machine learning is the lack
of sufficient data (Forman and Cohen 2004). In this scenario,
over-fitting becomes hard to avoid, outliers and noise represent an important issue and the model generally has high
variance. Several approaches have been proposed to deal
with small datasets, although the work in this matter is still
scarce. From all the proposed approaches, synthetic sample generation or data augmentation techniques (Li and Wen
2014; Wong et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2011) have shown competitive performance, acting as a regulariser (Hongyi Zhang
2018), preventing over-fiting and improving the robustness
of both classifiers and regressors.
The generation of virtual examples is highly nontrivial
and has been studied from different perspectives. Proposed
methods use prior information (Niyogi, Girosi, and Poggio 2002), add noise (Hongyi Zhang 2018), apply simple
transformations (Cireşan et al. 2010; Simard, Steinkraus,
and Platt 2003; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Szegedy et al. 2015) or use data over-sampling approaches
(Chawla et al. 2002; Pérez-Ortiz et al. 2016).

2
2.1

Methodology

Data over-sampling by convex combination

Assume that data forms a finite sample X
=
{x1 , . . . , xn } ∼ i.i.d. from a distribution F and that
our aim is to construct a finite-sample function of X.
Resampling approximates the finite-sample distribution of
the function computed over X by the exact distribution of
the function over X ∗ :
X ∗ = {x∗1 , . . . , x∗m } ∼ F ∗ (x1 , . . . , xn ),
∗

(1)

where F is defined as the resampling distribution and explicitly depends on the observations in X. Resampling is

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4715

