The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi3 Net: Segmenting Flooded Buildings via Fusion of Multiresolution,
Multisensor, and Multitemporal Satellite Imagery
1

Tim G. J. Rudner,1 † Marc Rußwurm,2 † Jakub Fil,3 † Ramona Pelich,4 † Benjamin Bischke,5,6 †
Veronika Kopačková,7 Piotr Biliński1,8

University of Oxford, 2 Technical University of Munich, 3 University of Kent, 4 Luxembourg Institute of Science & Technology
5
Technical University of Kaiserslautern, 6 DFKI, 7 Czech Geological Survey, 8 University of Warsaw
tim.rudner@cs.ox.ac.uk, marc.russwurm@tum.de, jf330@kent.ac.uk, ramona.pelich@list.lu, benjamin.bischke@dfki.de,
veronika.kopackova@seznam.cz, piotrb@robots.ox.ac.uk
When a region is hit by heavy rainfall or a hurricane,
authorized representatives of national civil protection, rescue, and security organizations can activate the International
Charter ‘Space and Major Disasters’. Once the Charter has
been activated, various corporate, national, and international
space agencies task their satellites to acquire imagery of the
affected region. As soon as images are obtained, satellite
imagery specialists visually or semi-automatically interpret
them to create flood maps to be delivered to disaster relief
organizations. Due to the semi-automated nature of the map
generation process, delivery of flood maps can take several
hours after the imagery was provided.
We propose Multi3 Net, a novel approach for rapid and accurate flood damage segmentation by fusing multiresolution
and multisensor satellite imagery in a convolutional neural network (CNN). The network consists of multiple deep
encoder-decoder streams, each of which produces an output
map based on data from a single sensor. If data from multiple sensors is available, the streams are combined into a
joint prediction map. We demonstrate the usefulness of our
model for segmentation of flooded buildings as well as for
conventional building footprint segmentation.
Our method aims to reduce the amount of time needed
to generate satellite imagery-based flood maps by fusing
images from multiple satellite sensors. Segmentation maps
can be produced as soon as at least a single satellite image acquisition has been successful and subsequently be improved upon once additional imagery becomes available.
This way, the amount of time needed to generate satellite imagery-based flood maps can be reduced significantly,
helping first responders and local authorities make swift and
well-informed decisions when responding to flood events.
Additionally, by incorporating multitemporal satellite imagery, our method allows for a speedy and accurate postdisaster damage assessment, helping governments better coordinate medium- and long-term financial assistance programs for affected areas.
The main contributions of this paper are (1) the development of a new fusion method for multiresolution, multisensor, and multitemporal satellite imagery and (2) the creation
and release of a dataset containing labeled multisensor and
multitemporal satellite images of multiple disaster sites.1

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for rapid segmentation of
flooded buildings by fusing multiresolution, multisensor, and
multitemporal satellite imagery in a convolutional neural network. Our model significantly expedites the generation of
satellite imagery-based flood maps, crucial for first responders and local authorities in the early stages of flood events.
By incorporating multitemporal satellite imagery, our model
allows for rapid and accurate post-disaster damage assessment and can be used by governments to better coordinate
medium- and long-term financial assistance programs for affected areas. The network consists of multiple streams of
encoder-decoder architectures that extract spatiotemporal information from medium-resolution images and spatial information from high-resolution images before fusing the resulting representations into a single medium-resolution segmentation map of flooded buildings. We compare our model to
state-of-the-art methods for building footprint segmentation
as well as to alternative fusion approaches for the segmentation of flooded buildings and find that our model performs
best on both tasks. We also demonstrate that our model produces highly accurate segmentation maps of flooded buildings using only publicly available medium-resolution data
instead of significantly more detailed but sparsely available
very high-resolution data. We release the first open-source
dataset of fully preprocessed and labeled multiresolution,
multispectral, and multitemporal satellite images of disaster
sites along with our source code.

Introduction
In 2017, Houston, Texas, the fourth largest city in the United
States, was hit by tropical storm Harvey, the worst storm to
pass through the city in over 50 years. Harvey flooded large
parts of the city, inundating over 154,170 homes and leading to more than 80 deaths. According to the US National
Hurricane Center, the storm caused over 125 billion USD in
damage, making it the second-costliest storm ever recorded
in the United States. Floods can cause loss of life and substantial property damage. Moreover, the economic ramifications of flood damage disproportionately impact the most
vulnerable members of society.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Equal contribution.

1

702

https://github.com/FrontierDevelopmentLab/multi3net.

