The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Topic-Aware Reinforced Model for Weakly Supervised Stance Detection
Penghui Wei, Wenji Mao, Guandan Chen
†

SKL-MCCS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
‡
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{weipenghui2016, wenji.mao, chenguandan2014}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Target: Atheism
Tweet: Be still. Be patient. Watch and let God work.
Stance: against
Overall sentiment: positive

Analyzing public attitudes plays an important role in opinion
mining systems. Stance detection aims to determine from a
text whether its author is in favor of, against, or neutral towards a given target. One challenge of this task is that a text
may not explicitly express an attitude towards the target, but
existing approaches utilize target content alone to build models. Moreover, although weakly supervised approaches have
been proposed to ease the burden of manually annotating largescale training data, such approaches are confronted with noisy
labeling problem. To address the above two issues, in this paper, we propose a Topic-Aware Reinforced Model (TARM) for
weakly supervised stance detection. Our model consists of two
complementary components: (1) a detection network that incorporates target-related topic information into representation
learning for identifying stance effectively; (2) a policy network
that learns to eliminate noisy instances from auto-labeled data
based on off-policy reinforcement learning. Two networks are
alternately optimized to improve each other’s performances.
Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed model
TARM outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches.

Figure 1: Twitter stance detection: An example.

author is opposed to “Atheism”. As we can see, a tweet
may not explicitly express an attitude towards the target
of interest, which is a major difference between stance detection and aspect-level sentiment classification. Because
the semantic information carried by target content itself is
limited, it may not be able to provide enough information
for classifying stance accurately. Existing approaches for
Twitter stance detection usually utilize target content alone
to build models (Augenstein et al. 2016; Du et al. 2017;
Zhou, Cristea, and Shi 2017; Wei, Mao, and Zeng 2018;
Dey, Shrivastava, and Kaushik 2018). Therefore, capturing
target-related implicit expression in text has become a challenging research issue in targeted stance detection task.
Meanwhile, as manually annotating large-scale training
data is time-consuming and labor-intensive, weakly supervised approaches for stance detection are in great need. In
real-world scenarios, it is often required to tackle new targets
which do not have ready-made labeled data. For instance, in a
general election, the candidates are probably new targets and
there is no labeled data with respect to them. Through building detection models on auto-labeled large-scale datasets,
weakly supervised stance detection approaches are advantageous in such scenarios.
Related studies that focus on weakly supervised stance
detection (Wei et al. 2016; Augenstein et al. 2016; Ebrahimi,
Dou, and Lowd 2016a; 2016b) adopt Distant Supervision
(DS) (Go, Bhayani, and Huang 2009) to construct autolabeled training data based on manually-selected stanceindicative patterns. For instance, if a tweet content contains
the pattern “#blessed”, its author is probably opposed to
“Atheism” and DS will annotate the tweet with an against
label. Obviously, DS avoids the drawback of manual annotation, however, it also brings noisy instances annotated with
incorrect stance labels. Thus, reducing the negative impact of
noisy stance labeling problem is another challenging research
issue in weakly supervised stance detection.

Introduction
Analyzing and mining public attitudes has attracted increasing attention from opinion mining research community. Stance detection is the task of automatically inferring
from an opinionated text whether its author is in favor of,
against, or neither of them towards a given target. The target
of interest may be a person, a government policy, a product,
a claim and so on (Mohammad et al. 2016). Unlike sentiment analysis which centers on identifying the sentiments
towards entities (Liu 2012), stance analysis aims to mine the
essential viewpoints people stand, which reflects what people
think and believe intrinsically. Thus, mining the stances in
user-generated contents has broad applications such as social
media monitoring and government decision making.
Recent stance detection studies have focused on analyzing online contents from social media platforms, and typically Twitter (Rajadesingan and Liu 2014; Sasaki et al.
2018). Figure 1 shows an example of Twitter stance detection task defined by Mohammad et al. (2016). According
to the tweet content, we can infer from it that the tweet
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7249

