The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Separator-Based Pruned Dynamic Programming for Steiner Tree
Yoichi Iwata

Takuto Shigemura

National Institute of Informatics
yiwata@nii.ac.jp

The University of Tokyo
sigma@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

competitions of Steiner tree solvers, the 11th DIMACS Implementation Challenge (2014) and the 3rd Parameterized
Algorithms and Computational Experiments (PACE) Challenge (2018), were held, and development of practically fast
Steiner tree solvers has attracted a lot of attention.
In theory, the Steiner tree problem is known to be fixed
parameter tractable (FPT) parameterized by the number of
terminals k; i.e., it can be solved in f (k)poly(n) time for
some computable function f . This means that, although the
problem is NP-hard in general, it is easy when the number
of terminals is small. The first FPT algorithm was obtained
by Dreyfus and Wagner (Dreyfus and Wagner 1971) and
has a time complexity O(3k nm). This algorithm has been
improved in two directions: in terms of the poly(n) factor,
the current fastest FPT algorithm runs in O(3k n + 2k (m +
n log n)) time (Erickson, Monma, and Veinott 1987), and
in terms of the f (k) factor, the current fastest one runs in
O((2 + )k ng() ) time for any  > 0 for some function g
(Fuchs et al. 2007).
All of these FPT algorithms solve the problem as follows.
Let T be a minimum Steiner tree for terminals A and pick a
terminal u ∈ A. If u has degree one in T , T is the union of
the unique incident edge uv and the minimum Steiner tree
for terminals (A \ {u}) ∪ {v}. If u has degree at least two,
T is the union of the minimum Steiner tree for A1 ∪ {u}
and the minimum Steiner tree for A2 ∪ {u} for some partition A = A1 ∪ A2 ∪ {u}. Conversely, any minimum Steiner
tree can be obtained by recursively applying these two operations, and therefore, we can solve the problem by computing a minimum Steiner tree for terminals S ∪ {u} for
every subset S ⊆ A and every vertex u ∈ V in a bottomup from small to large by using the dynamic programming
(DP). This is why the dependence on k is exponential. It
has been theoretically proved that avoiding the exponential
dependence on k is difficult; under the Set Cover Conjecture, the Steiner tree with k terminals cannot be solved in
(2 − )k poly(n) time for any  > 0 (Cygan et al. 2016),
and under the Exponential-Time Hypothesis, it cannot be
solved in 2o(k) poly(n) time even for planar graphs (Marx,
Pilipczuk, and Pilipczuk 2017).
In practice, due to the exponential dependence on k, the
FPT algorithms have been used only against inputs with a
small number of terminals (usually less than ten). For solving general inputs, the state-of-the-art approach is a com-

Steiner tree is a classical NP-hard problem that has been extensively studied both theoretically and empirically. In theory,
the fastest approach for inputs with a small number of terminals uses the dynamic programming, but in practice, stateof-the-art solvers are based on the branch-and-cut method. In
this paper, we present a novel separator-based pruning technique for speeding up a theoretically fast DP algorithm. Our
empirical evaluation shows that our pruned DP algorithm is
quite effective against real-world instances admitting small
separators, scales to more than a hundred terminals, and is
competitive with a branch-and-cut solver.

Introduction
For an undirected graph G = (V, E) and a terminal set A ⊆
V , a tree in G is called a Steiner tree if it connects all the
terminals in A. An input to the Steiner tree problem is an
undirected graph G = (V, E) with an edge-weight function
w : E → R>0 and a terminal set A ⊆ V , and the task is
to find a Steiner tree with the minimum total weight. We use
n, m, and k to denote the number of vertices, edges, and
terminals, respectively.
The Steiner tree problem has been extensively studied
both theoretically and empirically. In theoretical studies,
Steiner tree is known as one of the Karp’s 21 NP-complete
problems and has been studied from various theoretical
viewpoints including approximation algorithms and fixedparameter-tractable algorithms. In empirical studies, Steiner
tree is known to have many applications in various fields including the VLSI design of microchips (Held et al. 2011),
the design of fiber-optic networks (Leitner et al. 2014), keyword search in relational databases (Ding et al. 2007), and
team formulation in social networks (Lappas, Liu, and Terzi
2009)1 . Due to its practical importance, in recent years, two
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The latter two applications use the following variant of Steiner
tree, called group Steiner tree: given a set of groups of vertices instead of the terminals, find a minimum-weight connected tree containing at least one vertex from each group. We can solve this variant by a reduction to the standard Steiner tree (for details, see, e.g.,
(Zachariasen and Rohe 2003) or (Gamrath et al. 2017)). Actually,
the datasets we use in the experiments contain instances obtained
by this reduction.

1520

