The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Relating the Structure of a Problem and Its Explanation
Eugene C. Freuder
Insight Centre for Data Analytics, School of Computer Science & Information Technology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
eugene.freuder@insight-centre.org

able
CSPs
are all alike; every
unsolvable
CSP
is unsolvable in its own way.
Thus the primary focus here is on explaining failure. A
number of approaches have been taken to providing explanations for constraint satisfaction failure. We restrict ourselves here to efforts to provide explanations to users as
opposed to explanations intended to make algorithms more
efficient or to aid programmers (Freuder 2017). Given the
exponential threat, and to address specific needs, these
efforts generally start with an abstracted or higher-level
form of explanation, e.g. sets of unsatisfiable constraints,
and then quickly limit their focus, e.g. to minimal sets of
unsatisfiable constraints.
The position taken here is to start with truly complete
explanations (Freuder 2018) and abstract and limit from
there. The approach taken here is straightforward, and at
least at this point, not very deep or technical; but one that,
perhaps for that reason, may be well-suited to the goal of
providing a high-level “big picture” of the structure of the
problem, in a form readily meaningful to a human user.
The hope is that this approach may, as well, lead to general
insights into the structure of constraint satisfaction problems.

Abstract
As AI becomes more ubiquitous there is increasing interest
in computers being able to provide explanations for their
conclusions. This paper proposes exploring the relationship
between the structure of a problem and its explanation. The
nature of this challenge is introduced through a series of
simple constraint satisfaction problems.

Introduction
As AI becomes more ubiquitous there is increasing interest
in computers being able to provide explanations for their
conclusions (Aha et al. 2018; Magazenni et al. 2018), and
the European GPDR provides special impetus (Goodman
and Flaxmanar 2016). Many years ago I began exploring
the relationship between the structure of a problem and the
complexity of its solution (Freuder 1982). This paper proposes exploring the relationship between the structure of a
problem and its explanation. The nature of this challenge is
introduced through a series of simple constraint satisfaction problems.
A constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) involves choosing a value for each problem variable, subject to restrictions (constraints) on allowable combinations of values. CSPs have many uses in AI and in real-world applications. In fact, in an earlier AAAI Senior Track paper I argued that constraints can serve as a unifying force in AI
(Freuder 2006).
In constraint satisfaction, on the one hand we are fortunate in that an explanation for a successful solution is very
straightforward: “see, the constraints are satisfied”.
(Though one may want a further explanation as to how the
solution was obtained, or a characterization of a set of solutions). However, when a constraint satisfaction problem
is unsolvable, explanations are difficult, as there can be an
exponential number of reasons for failure, corresponding to
every way that the constraints cannot be satisfied, and there
can be many different routes to arriving at the conclusion
that satisfaction is impossible. To misquote Tolstoy: Solv-

Complete
A CSP can be represented by a constraint network, with a
node for each variable, each with a set of possible values,
and edges (or more generally hyperedges) representing
constraints. We will use the problem represented by the
following constraint network as an initial example. It represents a simple, unsolvable “coloring problem”. The problem is to choose a color (r)ed or (b)lue for each node (X,
Y, Z) such that any two nodes connected by a constraint
(A, B, or C) have different colors. Each constraint is a “not
equals” constraint.

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9765

