The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MR-NET: Exploiting Mutual Relation for Visual Relationship Detection
Yi Bin,1 Yang Yang,1 Chaofan Tao,1 Zi Huang,2 Jingjing Li,1 Heng Tao Shen1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
The University of Queensland

Abstract

Input
image

Inferring the interactions between objects, a.k.a visual relationship detection, is a crucial point for vision understanding,
which captures more definite concepts than object detection.
Most previous work that treats the interaction between a pair
of objects as a one way fail to exploit the mutual relation between objects, which is essential to modern visual application. In this work, we propose a mutual relation net, dubbed
MR-Net, to explore the mutual relation between paired objects for visual relationship detection. Specifically, we construct a mutual relation space to model the mutual interaction
of paired objects, and employ linear constraint to optimize
the mutual interaction, which is called mutual relation learning. Our mutual relation learning does not introduce any parameters, and can adapt to improve the performance of other
methods. In addition, we devise a semantic ranking loss to
discriminatively penalize predicates with semantic similarity,
which is ignored by traditional loss function (e.g., cross entropy with softmax). Then, our MR-Net optimizes the mutual
relation learning together with semantic ranking loss with a
siamese network. The experimental results on two commonly
used datasets (VG and VRD) demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed approach.

Object
detection

Relationship
prediction

person1-near-person2, shirt-on-person3, bear-sit on-chair,
bear-wear-jacket, person2-wear-jeans, chair-contain-bear,
jacket-on-bear, …

Figure 1: A general process for visual relationship detection.
Given an image, the model detects all the objects, and infers
the relationships between object pairs.

with more details and semantics, which is helpful to other
visual understanding tasks, such as visual captioning (Bin et
al. 2017; 2018; Gao et al. 2017), and visual question answering (Peng et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2018).
Sadeghi and Farhadi (Sadeghi and Farhadi 2011) first
define a triplet subject-predicate-object as a
visual phrase, and train classifiers for every triplet
phrase. Such pattern enables the model to predict
person-eating-bread and man-eating-bread as
two different phrases, though they share very similar entities and the same predicate. In other words, one may need
O(N 2 K) classifiers for N unique object categories and K
relationship categories. Moreover, because of the combination of infrequent subject, object and predicate, many triplet
phrases cannot be well discriminated suffering from the long
tail distribution. To address these problems, Lu et al. (Lu
et al. 2016) propose to detect objects and predicates separately, and combine the results together to jointly learn
the relationships. In this way, different triplet phrases share
the same predicate, such as person-eating-bread and
man-eating-bread, can be detected by the same classifier. Even more, horse-eating-grass with very different objects context can share the same classifier, and
an unseen triplet (e.g., dog-ride-bike) can be handled if the objects and predicate are in the training set.
Therefore, O(N 2 K) classifiers reduce to O(N + K) ones.
Most of recent work (Lu et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2018a;

Introduction
Visual understanding is a challenging task, as it requires
machines not only to recognize the concepts in the visual data (e.g., image or video), but also to analyse the
semantic meaning of the image/video. In the past decade,
visual understanding, especially in the fields of recognition, classification and object detection (Ren et al. 2015;
Li et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2017b; 2018b), has achieved
remarkable accomplishments thanks to the flourish of deep
learning and CNN (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Zhu et al. 2018). Recently, it moves forward to further infer the interactions and relationships between concepts by
going beyond object detection, which is termed as visual
relationship detection (Lu et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2017a;
Zhu and Jiang 2018; Zhuang et al. 2017). Specifically, as
shown in Figure 1, given an image, visual relationship detection aims to locate and recognize the visual entities, and then
infer all the possible triplet phrases. Detecting such relationships enables the artificial intelligence to understand vision
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8110

