The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

PVRNet: Point-View Relation Neural Network for 3D Shape Recognition
Haoxuan You,1 Yifan Feng,2 Xibin Zhao,1 Changqing Zou,3 Rongrong Ji,2 Yue Gao1∗
1

BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China
3
UMIACS, University of Maryland, College Park, United States
{haoxuanyou, evanfeng97, aaronzou1125}@gmail.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, {zxb, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Relation score to the category

Abstract
Multi-view

Three-dimensional (3D) shape recognition has drawn much
research attention in the field of computer vision. The advances of deep learning encourage various deep models for
3D feature representation. For point cloud and multi-view
data, two popular 3D data modalities, different models are
proposed with remarkable performance. However the relation between point cloud and views has been rarely investigated. In this paper, we introduce Point-View Relation Network (PVRNet), an effective network designed to well fuse
the view features and the point cloud feature with a proposed
relation score module. More specifically, based on the relation score module, the point-single-view fusion feature is first
extracted by fusing the point cloud feature and each single
view feature with point-singe-view relation, then the pointmulti-view fusion feature is extracted by fusing the point
cloud feature and the features of different number of views
with point-multi-view relation. Finally, the point-single-view
fusion feature and point-multi-view fusion feature are further
combined together to achieve a unified representation for a
3D shape. Our proposed PVRNet has been evaluated on ModelNet40 dataset for 3D shape classification and retrieval. Experimental results indicate our model can achieve significant
performance improvement compared with the state-of-the-art
models.

Point Cloud

High

Strong

PV Fusion
Desk?
Table?
TV stand?

Low

Weak

Classification/
Retrieval

Figure 1: Illustration of the motivation of PVRNet.

search interests are concentrated on dealing with multi-view
data and point cloud data.
For view based deep models, multiple views captured by
cameras with different angles are employed to represent 3D
shape as the input. These views can be efficiently processed
with 2D CNN (Su et al. 2015) (Feng et al. 2018). However,
limited by camera angles, each view only presents partial
local structures of an entire 3D shape, and thus some view
features may not be discriminative for shape recognition. For
point cloud based deep models, the input data are irregular
point clouds obtained from 3D sensors, which well reserves
the original spatial structure by 3D coordinates. While conventional CNN is not suitable for disordered data, making
extracted feature ineffective.
Considering the pros and cons of the view based models
and point cloud based models, the fusion of point cloud and
multi-view features may obtain a better representation for
3D shape. Existing work (You et al. 2018) fuses the global
view feature after view-pooling with the point cloud feature
for 3D shape recognition. However, multi-view features are
equally treated when combined with the point cloud feature.
We argue that this kind of fusion cannot fully exploit the relation between multi-view features and the point cloud feature. Our point is based on the fact that each view presenting
various amount of local structures certainly brings different
effect in the feature fusion process with the point cloud feature. Generally, the views with discriminative descriptors are
more beneficial for the fused 3D shape representation than

Introduction
With the proliferation of image and 3D vision data, 3D shape
recognition has grown into an important problem in the field
of computer vision with a wide range of applications from
AR/VR to self-driving. Several modalities are used to represent 3D shape and the recent development of deep learning enables various deep models to tackle different modalities. For volumetric data, 3D convolutional neural networks
(CNN) (Maturana and Scherer 2015)(Wu et al. 2015)(Qi et
al. 2016) are generally used, but the sparse structure of volumetric data and the high computation cost constrain the performance. For view based and point cloud based models, the
input data respectively are multiple views from cameras and
point clouds from sensors and LiDARs, which have rich information and can be easily acquired. More and more re∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9119

