The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

End-to-End Knowledge-Routed
Relational Dialogue System for Automatic Diagnosis
Lin Xu,1† Qixian Zhou,1† Ke Gong,1 Xiaodan Liang,1∗ Jianheng Tang,3 Liang Lin1,2
1

Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Dark Matter AI Inc. , 3 Soochow University
cathyxl2016@gmail.com, qixianzhou.mail@gmail.com, gongk3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
xdliang328@gmail.com, sqrt3tjh@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract

Self-report
P: Baby vomited last night. What is the reason?
Baseline Conversation
A: Dose baby have diarrhea?
P: Maybe not.
A: Does baby have running nose?
P: Not sure.
P: Not sure.
A: Does baby have sputum?
A: Baby have sputum, doesn’t he?
P: Not sure.
A: Your baby may have children dyspepsia.
KR-DS Conversation
A: Does baby have fever?
P: Not sure.
A: Baby doesn’t want to eat (anorexia), is it? P: Right!
P: Baby does have.
A: Does he have bloating?
A: Your baby may have children dyspepsia.

Beyond current conversational chatbots or task-oriented dialogue systems that have attracted increasing attention, we
move forward to develop a dialogue system for automatic
medical diagnosis that converses with patients to collect additional symptoms beyond their self-reports and automatically makes a diagnosis. Besides the challenges for conversational dialogue systems (e.g. topic transition coherency and
question understanding), automatic medical diagnosis further
poses more critical requirements for the dialogue rationality
in the context of medical knowledge and symptom-disease
relations. Existing dialogue systems (Madotto, Wu, and Fung
2018; Wei et al. 2018; Li et al. 2017) mostly rely on datadriven learning and cannot be able to encode extra expert
knowledge graph. In this work, we propose an End-to-End
Knowledge-routed Relational Dialogue System (KR-DS) that
seamlessly incorporates rich medical knowledge graph into
the topic transition in dialogue management, and makes it
cooperative with natural language understanding and natural language generation. A novel Knowledge-routed Deep
Q-network (KR-DQN) is introduced to manage topic transitions, which integrates a relational refinement branch for
encoding relations among different symptoms and symptomdisease pairs, and a knowledge-routed graph branch for topic
decision-making. Extensive experiments on a public medical
dialogue dataset show our KR-DS significantly beats stateof-the-art methods (by more than 8% in diagnosis accuracy).
We further show the superiority of our KR-DS on a newly collected medical dialogue system dataset, which is more challenging retaining original self-reports and conversational data
between patients and doctors.

Table 1: A conversation example between the patient (P) and
the agent (A). We underline all symptoms and highlight the
symptoms related to the diagnosed disease (italic). Superior
to the baseline method (Wei et al. 2018) that asks irrelevant
and repeated symptoms, our KR-DS generates more reasonable results thanks to the relational refinement and guidance
of knowledge-routed graph, as presented in Fig. 2.

symptoms and make a diagnosis automatically, which has
significant potential to simplify the diagnostic procedure and
reduce the cost of collecting information from patients (Tang
et al. 2016). Besides, patient condition reports and preliminary diagnosis reports generated by the dialogue system may
assist doctors to make a diagnosis more efficiently.
However, the dialogue system for medical diagnosis poses
stringent requirements not only on the dialogue rationality in
the context of medical knowledge but the comprehension of
symptom-disease relations. The symptoms which dialogue
system inquiries should be related with underlying disease and consistent with medical knowledge. Current taskoriented dialogue systems (Lei et al. 2018; Lukin et al. 2018;
Bordes, Boureau, and Weston 2016) highly rely on the complex belief tracker (Wen et al. ; Mrkšić et al. 2016) and
pure data-driven learning, which are unable to apply to automatic diagnosis directly for the lack of considering medical
knowledge. A very recent work (Wei et al. 2018) made the
first move to build a dialogue system for automatic diagnosis, which cast dialogue systems as Markov Decision Process and trained the dialogue policy via reinforcement learn-

Introduction
Task-oriented dialogue aims to achieve specific task through
interactions between the system and users in natural language, which is gaining research interest in the different
application domain, including movie booking (Lipton et
al. 2017), restaurant booking (Wen et al. ), online shopping (Yan et al. 2017), and technical support (Lowe et al.
2015). In the medical domain, A dialogue system for medical diagnosis converses with patients to obtain additional
∗
Lin Xu and Qixian Zhou contribute equally to this work and
share first-authorship. Corresponding author is Xiaodan Liang.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7346

