The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

VPDS: An AI-Based Automated Vehicle
Occupancy and Violation Detection System
Abhinav Kumar,1∗† Aishwarya Gupta,2∗ Bishal Santra,3∗† Lalitha KS,2∗
Manasa Kolla,2∗ Mayank Gupta,2∗ Rishabh Singh2∗
1

School of Computing, University of Utah, 2 Computer Vision and Media Analytics Group, Conduent Labs
3
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
abhinav.kumar@utah.edu, aishwarya.gupta@conduent.com, bsantraigi@gmail.com, lalitha.ks@conduent.com
manasa.manasa@conduent.com, mgmayank18@gmail.com, rishabh.singh@conduent.com
Abstract

agencies allow cars with a single occupant to use carpool
lanes by paying a toll. These High Occupancy Toll (HOT)
lanes have a variable toll. Generally, agencies try to maintain a minimum speed of 45 miles per hour (mph) on such
lanes, so they need to monitor the number of single occupant
vehicles allowed to enter HOV lanes. This is done typically
by charging a toll adjusted to the dynamic congestion in the
lane. The toll price is increased if the average traffic speed in
the HOT lane decreases below the accepted minimum speed.
However, to gain the benefits offered by HOV/HOT lanes,
the entry rules (number of occupants in the vehicle) need
to be be enforced vigilantly. The declaration of the occupancy status of a vehicle is a voluntarily compliance by the
driver. But in most cases, this declaration is falsified in order
to avoid the toll. The current practice is to rely on visual
inspection by road-side officers to enforce these rules, but
the process is found to be inefficient, costly and potentially
dangerous (Artan et al. 2016). Typical violation rates can exceed 50-80%, while manual enforcement rates are typically
less than 10% (Schijns and Mathews 2005). While tagging
genuine passengers as violators causes discomfort among the
consumer base, allowing too many violators in an HOV lane
nullifies its purpose. In either case, the loss is incurred by
the transportation agency providing the service. Therefore,
an automated way of counting the number of occupants of
a vehicle is extremely necessary for fair tolling and violator
detection.
In this paper, we address the above challenge by proposing
a Vehicle Passenger Detection System (VPDS) - a deep neural
network based solution for counting the number of passengers
inside a vehicle by processing its front and side images. Our
contribution to the problem is two-fold. We first apply a stateof-the-art object detection technique, YOLOv3 (Redmon and
Farhadi 2018), for the front and the rear window detection.
This enables a fast and accurate localization of the region of
interest (ROI) in the image. Next, we perform classification
(to count number of people) separately for the front and rear
regions of interest, i.e. windows using GoogleNet (Szegedy
et al. 2015) based models. Further, we combine the outputs
to arrive at the decision of HOV/not-HOV violator for a
vehicle. We show the robustness of the proposed solution in
terms of better performance to existing approaches within
the constraints of poor image quality and significant external
factors like illumination, occlusion and traffic congestion.

High Occupancy Vehicle/High Occupancy Tolling
(HOV/HOT) lanes are operated based on voluntary HOV
declarations by drivers. A majority of these declarations are
wrong to leverage faster HOV lane speeds illegally. It is a
herculean task to manually regulate HOV lanes and identify
these violators. Therefore, an automated way of counting the
number of people in a car is prudent for fair tolling and for
violator detection.
In this paper, we propose a Vehicle Passenger Detection System (VPDS) which works by capturing images through Near
Infrared (NIR) cameras on the toll lanes and processing them
using deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) models.
Our system has been deployed in 3 cities over a span of two
years and has served roughly 30 million vehicles with an accuracy of 97% which is a remarkable improvement over manual
review which is 37% accurate. Our system can generate an
accurate report of HOV lane usage which helps policy makers
pave the way towards de-congestion.

Introduction
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) improve safety and
mobility through the integration of sensing, computational
power and advanced communications into the transportation
infrastructure (Xu et al. 2014). Such systems enable efficient
management of lanes by incorporating various aspects like
carpooling, tolling, traffic management and transit in a multipurpose roadway. This creates novel avenues for agencies
in terms of congestion pricing in order to generate revenue
and manage demand dynamically. Population growth has
resulted in heavy congestion on highway lanes, leading to
both economic and environmental concerns. Recent statistics
reveal a monotonic increase in the number of vehicles on
highways from 193 million in 1990 to approximately 268.8
million vehicles registered in 2016 in USA (sta 2018).
HOV lanes are standard car-pool lanes where a minimum
of two (HOV2+) or three (HOV3+) vehicle occupants are required to use the lane legally, making them lesser congested
and enabling efficient rapid transit (Daley et al. 2011). In
order to avoid congestion yet still encourage car-pooling,
∗

Equal contribution by all the authors
This work was carrried out at Conduent Labs
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

9498

