The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SAFE: A Neural Survival Analysis Model for Fraud Early Detection
Panpan Zheng,∗ Shuhan Yuan,∗ Xintao Wu
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, USA
{pzheng, sy005, xintaowu}@uark.edu

Abstract

take fraudulent actions. For example, using twitter streaming
API and crawler can easily collect the suspended time information of fraudsters in addition to a variety of dynamically
changing features (e.g., the number of posts or the number
of followers). However, there is no ground truth about when
fraudulent activities occur from the collected data. Hence,
the algorithms trained on such datasets cannot achieve intime or even early detection if they do not take into consideration the gap between suspended time and fraudulent
activity time. In this work, we aim to develop effective fraud
early detection algorithms over such training data that contains time-varying features and late response labels.
Fraud early detection has attracted increasing attention in
the research community (Kumar, Spezzano, and Subrahmanian 2015; Yuan et al. 2017b; Wu et al. 2017; Zhao, Resnick,
and Mei 2015). The existing approaches for fraud early detection are usually based on classification models (e.g., neural network, SVM). Given a sequence of user activities that
contain intermittent fraudulent activities, the prediction at
each timestamp from the built classifier is often independent to each other. Hence, these classification models tend
to make inconsistent and ad-hoc predictions along the time.
Figure 1 shows an illustrative example. A user takes a fraudulent action at time t2 , the classification model predicts the
user as a fraudster at t2 and t4 but as normal user at t3 . This
is because the prediction probabilities between consecutive
timestamps do not have any relations.

Many online platforms have deployed anti-fraud systems to
detect and prevent fraudulent activities. However, there is
usually a gap between the time that a user commits a fraudulent action and the time that the user is suspended by the
platform. How to detect fraudsters in time is a challenging
problem. Most of the existing approaches adopt classifiers to
predict fraudsters given their activity sequences along time.
The main drawback of classification models is that the prediction results between consecutive timestamps are often inconsistent. In this paper, we propose a survival analysis based
fraud early detection model, SAFE, which maps dynamic
user activities to survival probabilities that are guaranteed to
be monotonically decreasing along time. SAFE adopts recurrent neural network (RNN) to handle user activity sequences
and directly outputs hazard values at each timestamp, and
then, survival probability derived from hazard values is deployed to achieve consistent predictions. Because we only
observe the user suspended time instead of the fraudulent activity time in the training data, we revise the loss function of
the regular survival model to achieve fraud early detection.
Experimental results on two real world datasets demonstrate
that SAFE outperforms both the survival analysis model and
recurrent neural network model alone as well as state-of-theart fraud early detection approaches.

Introduction
Due to the openness and anonymity of the Internet, online
platforms (e.g., online social media or knowledge bases) attract a large number of malicious users, such as vandals,
trolls, and sockpuppets. These malicious users impose severe security threats to online platforms and their legitimate
participants. For example, the fraudsters on Twitter can easily spread fake information or post harmful links on the platform. To protect legitimate users, most web platforms deploy tools to detect fraudulent activities and further take actions (e.g., warning or suspending) against those malicious
users. However, there is usually a gap between the time that
fraudulent activities occur and the time that response actions
are taken. Training datasets collected and used for building
new detection algorithms often contain the labeled information about when users are suspended instead of when users

Figure 1: Comparison of the survival analysis-based approach and classification-based approach for fraud early detection. Red square indicates that the user is predicted as
fraudsters at time t while the green circle indicates the user
is predicted as normal.
In this work, we propose to use the survival analysis
(Klein and Moeschberger 2006) to achieve consistent predictions along the time. Survival analysis models the time
until an event of interest occurs and incorporates two types

∗

Equal contribution.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1278

