The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Pareto-Optimal Allocation of Indivisible Goods with Connectivity Constraints
Ayumi Igarashi

Dominik Peters

Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
igarashi@agent.inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp

University of Oxford
Oxford, U.K.
dominik.peters@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

efficient), that is, a connected allocation such that there is no
other connected allocation which makes some agent strictly
better off while making no agent worse off. Now, in the
standard setting without connectivity constraints and with
additive valuations, it is straightforward to find Pareto-optima:
For example, we can allocate each item to a person who has
the highest valuation for it (maximizing utilitarian social
welfare in the process), or we can run a serial dictatorship.
Neither of these approaches respects connectivity constraints.
In fact, we show that it is NP-hard to construct a Paretooptimal allocation under connectivity constraints, unless G
is extremely simple.
Recent work on the allocation of indivisible items has focussed particularly on ensuring fairness. Two well-studied
fairness notions are due to Budish (2011), who introduced
the maximin fair share (MMS) and envy-freeness up to one
good (EF1). Both concepts have natural analogues in the
setting with connectivity constraints (Bouveret et al. 2017;
Bilò et al. 2018). An important question is whether there is a
tradeoff between efficiency and fairness, or whether both are
simultaneously achievable. Without connectivity constraints,
these notions tend to be compatible: For example, with additive valuations, the maximum Nash welfare solution satisfies
EF1 and is also Pareto-optimal (Caragiannis et al. 2016). We
investigate these tradeoffs in the connected setting.
Contributions.
• For additive valuations, we show that one can find a Paretooptimum in polynomial time when G is a path or a star.
• We show that, unless P = NP, there is no polynomial-time
algorithm that finds a Pareto-optimum when G is a tree,
even if valuations are additive and binary, and even if the
tree has bounded pathwidth, bounded diameter, or bounded
maximum degree. Finding a Pareto-optimum is also hard
when valuations are 2-additive and G is a path or a star.
• When G is a tree, there always exists an allocation which
is both Pareto-optimal and satisfies MMS. However, such
an allocation is NP-hard to find, even when G is a path; the
problem stays hard when weakening MMS to α-MMS for
any α > 0. For a restricted class of binary valuations (nonnested intervals), we give a polynomial-time algorithm.
• When G is a path, we give examples with binary additive
valuations for which no Pareto-optimal EF1 allocation
exists, and show that it is NP-hard to decide existence.

We study the problem of allocating indivisible items to agents
with additive valuations, under the additional constraint that
bundles must be connected in an underlying item graph. Previous work has considered the existence and complexity of fair
allocations. We study the problem of finding an allocation that
is Pareto-optimal. While it is easy to find an efficient allocation
when the underlying graph is a path or a star, the problem is
NP-hard for many other graph topologies, even for trees of
bounded pathwidth or of maximum degree 3. We show that on
a path, there are instances where no Pareto-optimal allocation
satisfies envy-freeness up to one good, and that it is NP-hard
to decide whether such an allocation exists, even for binary
valuations. We also show that, for a path, it is NP-hard to find
a Pareto-optimal allocation that satisfies maximin share, but
show that a moving-knife algorithm can find such an allocation
when agents have binary valuations that have a non-nested
interval structure.

1

Introduction

In mechanism design, Pareto-optimality is a basic desideratum: if we select an outcome that is Pareto-dominated by
another, users will justifiably complain. In simple settings,
it is computationally trivial to find a Pareto-optimum (e.g.,
via serial dictatorship). Thus, it is usually sought to be satisfied together with other criteria (like fairness or welfare
maximisation). However, in more complicated settings, even
Pareto-optimality may be elusive.
We study the classical problem of allocating indivisible
items among agents who have (typically additive) preferences over bundles. Following a recent model of Bouveret et
al. (2017), we are interested in settings where the set of items
has additional structure specified by a graph G over the items.
Agents are only interested in receiving a bundle of items that
is connected in G. This model is particularly relevant when
the items have a spatial or temporal structure, for example,
if we wish to allocate land, rooms, or time slots to agents.
Time slots, for instance, are naturally ordered in a sequence,
and agents will often only value being allocated a contiguous
chunk of time, particularly when restart costs are prohibitive.
Given agents’ preferences over (connected) bundles, we
wish to find an allocation that is Pareto-optimal (or ParetoCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2045

