The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Approximation and Hardness of Shift-Bribery
Piotr Faliszewski

Pasin Manurangsi

Krzysztof Sornat

AGH University
Krakow, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

UC Berkeley, USA
pasin@berkeley.edu

University of Wrocław, Poland and
IDSIA, USI-SUPSI, Switzerland
krzysztof.sornat@cs.uni.wroc.pl

Abstract

to the smallest speed-up that the driver needed to become
the world champion. As argued by Faliszewski et al. (2017),
such values can be far more informative than the score differences between the drivers. Bribery problems also appear
in the contexts of lobbying (Binkele-Raible et al. 2007;
2014), rating systems (Grandi, Stewart, and Turrini 2018),
or in combinatorial domains (Baumeister et al. 2015).
With the exception of a few simple voting rules, such as
the k-Approval family of rules and the Bucklin rule, S HIFTB RIBERY tends to be NP-hard (see the works of Elkind
et al. (2009) and Schlotter et al. (2017)). Indeed, this is
the case, e.g., for Borda, Copeland, Maximin (Elkind, Faliszewski, and Slinko 2009) and various elimination-based
rules (Maushagen et al. 2018). Yet, in many cases it can
be solved quite effectively. For example, for the case of
Borda there is a polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm
of Elkind et al. (2009; 2010) and several FPT algorithms
of Bredereck et al. (2016a). On the other hand, for the
case of Copeland, S HIFT-B RIBERY is W[1]-hard for many
natural parameters (Bredereck et al. 2016a)1 and the best
known polynomial-time approximation algorithm has linear
approximation ratio (Elkind and Faliszewski 2010).
In fact, the difference between the Borda rule (and, in general, the positional scoring rules) and the Copeland rule is
even more striking. We show that the former can be solved
nearly perfectly in polynomial time, whereas for the latter
we give strong inapproximability results:

In the S HIFT-B RIBERY problem we are given an election, a
preferred candidate, and the costs of shifting this preferred
candidate up the voters’ preference orders. The goal is to find
such a set of shifts that ensures that the preferred candidate
wins the election. We give the first polynomial-time approximation scheme for the case of positional scoring rules, and for
the Copeland rule we show strong inapproximability results.

1

Introduction

We provide approximation algorithms and inapproximability results for the S HIFT-B RIBERY problem, introduced by
Elkind et al. (2009) to capture the idea of campaigning in
elections. Briefly put, we are given an election where each
voter ranks the candidates from the most to the least appealing one, and our goal is to ensure that a given preferred candidate becomes the winner. To this end, we can shift this
candidate up within the voters’ preference orders, but each
such shift comes with a price (which, for example, measures
the difficulty of convincing the voter that our candidate is
more appealing than the voter originally thought). Naturally,
we are interested in finding as cheap a solution as possible.
In fact, bribery problems also have a number of applications beyond campaign management and voting (see,
e.g., the works on the margin of victory problem (Magrino, Rivest, and Shen 2011; Cary 2011; Xia 2012) and
on measuring candidate success (Faliszewski, Skowron,
and Talmon 2017); see also the survey of Faliszewski and
Rothe (2016)). For example, a Formula 1 season consists
of about 20 races, where each race can be seen as a voter
ranking the candidates (the drivers) in the order in which
they finished the race. For each finishing position, there is
an associated number of points and the driver who collects
most points becomes the world champion (i.e., this “election” uses a positional scoring rule as a voting rule). We
can use the S HIFT-B RIBERY problem to measure how close
each driver was to winning the world championship. For
example, we can set the price for shifting a driver up by
some t positions in a given race to be the difference between
the finishing times of the driver and whoever ranked t positions higher. Then, the cheapest shift bribery corresponds

1. Our main contribution is the first polynomial-time approximation scheme (PTAS) for S HIFT-B RIBERY for positional scoring rules (in fact, our algorithm works even
for the case where the scoring vectors are different for
different voters). Our algorithm uses linear programming
and, in particular, basic solutions of linear programs. For
the case of unit prices (i.e., for the case where each unit
shift has the same cost) we even obtain an EPTAS, i.e.,
a PTAS for which the non-polynomial factors in the running time depend on the approximation ratio only. We also
show a simple combinatorial PTAS for this case.
2. For the case of the Copeland rule, we give a reduction
that preserves approximation ratios up to some polynomial from the D ENSEST k-S UBGRAPH (DkS) problem to

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
One notable exception is the parametrization by the number of
candidates (Knop, Koutecký, and Mnich 2017).

1901

