The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Recursive Algorithm for Projected Model Counting
Jean-Marie Lagniez, Pierre Marquis?
CRIL, U. Artois & CNRS
Institut Universitaire de France?
F-62300 Lens, France
{lagniez, marquis}@cril.fr

X is large. Indeed, forgetting the variables of X from Σ in
a brute-force way often leads to a formula which is much
larger than Σ (in the worst case, an exponential blow-up may
occur).
Despite the importance of the problem, few algorithms
for projected model counting have been pointed out so far.
An FPT algorithm, where the parameter is the treewidth of
the primal graph of the input instance, has been designed
recently (Fichte et al. 2018), but this algorithm is practical
only for instances having a very small treewidth. Three other
algorithms for the projected model counting task have been
presented in (Aziz et al. 2015), namely dSharpP , #clasp,
and d2c. Those algorithms are quite dissimilar in essence:

Abstract
We present a recursive algorithm for projected model counting, i.e., the problem consisting in determining the number
of models k∃X.Σk of a propositional formula Σ after eliminating from it a given set X of variables. Based on a ”standard” model counter, our algorithm projMC takes advantage
of a disjunctive decomposition scheme of ∃X.Σ for computing k∃X.Σk. It also looks for disjoint components in its input
for improving the computation. Our experiments show that in
many cases projMC is significantly more efficient than the
previous algorithms for projected model counting from the
literature.

Introduction

• dSharpP is an adaptation of the model counter dSharp
(Muise et al. 2012), which computes a Decision-DNNF
representation of its input Σ to determine the number of
models kΣk. dSharpP considers as an additional input a
set P of protected variables (i.e., those variables of Σ
which should not be forgotten). The search achieved by
dSharp is constrained so that the decision variables are
taken in priority from P . Whenever there is no variable
of P in the current formula (i.e., this formula contains
only variables from X), a sat solver is used to determine whether it is consistent. If so, its number of models is 1, otherwise it is equal to 0. This technique has
also been considered in (Klebanov, Manthey, and Muise
2013). Note that the constraint imposed on the variable ordering limits the ability to find cutsets of small size, and
this may have a strong (yet negative) impact on the quality
of the conjunctive decompositions of Σ found by dSharp.

In this paper, we are concerned with the projected model
counting problem. Given a propositional formula Σ and a
set X of propositional variables to be forgotten, one wants
to compute the number of interpretations of the variables
occurring in Σ but not in X, which coincide on X with a
model of Σ. Stated otherwise, the objective is to count the
number of models of the quantified Boolean formula ∃X.Σ
over its variables (i.e., the variables occurring in Σ but not
in X).
The projected model counting problem is a central issue
to a number of AI problems (for instance, in planning, when
the objective is to compute the robustness of a given plan
given by the number of initial states from which the execution of the plan reaches a goal state (Aziz et al. 2015)),
but also outside AI (especially it proves useful in some formal verification problems (Klebanov, Manthey, and Muise
2013)).
Since it generalizes the standard model counting problem (recovered when X = ∅), the projected model counting
problem is at least as hard as the latter (#P-hard). The presence of variables X to be forgotten nevertheless may render
the problem easier in some cases (thus, when every variable
of Σ belongs to X, the problem boils down to deciding the
satisfiability of Σ). That mentioned, a naive approach which
would consist first in forgetting the variables of X from Σ,
then in counting the number of models of the resulting formula would be impractical in many cases, in particular when

• #clasp is an extension of clasp, an algorithm for model
enumeration on a projected set of variables (Gebser, Kaufmann, and Schaub 2009), which basically amounts to
computing a deterministic DNF representation of ∃X.Σ.
Each time an implicant of ∃X.Σ is found, a blocking
clause equivalent to the negation of this implicant is added
to Σ. In #clasp, whenever an implicant of ∃X.Σ is found,
a prime implicant is first extracted from it in a greedy
fashion (this is reminiscent to the approach considered in
(Schrag 1996; Castell 1996)). Compared to clasp, this further extraction step often leads to the adding of far less
blocking clauses to Σ, so that #clasp performs usually
better than clasp.

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1536

