The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Evolving Solutions to Community-Structured Satisfiability Formulas
Frank Neumann

Andrew M. Sutton

Optimisation and Logistics
School of Computer Science
The University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia

Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota Duluth
Duluth, MN, USA

Abstract

mula distributions have been proposed to model the above
characteristics better.
In this paper, we are interested in extending the analysis
to structured formulas that exhibit features that are statistically closer to industrial satisfiability problems. We conduct
an analysis of the (1+1) EA over a generalization of the community attachment model of Giráldez-Cru and Levy (2016)
for modular SAT formulas. Figure 1 illustrates the constraint
graph structure for an industrial formula (from bounded
model checking), a formula generated by the community attachment model, and a formula generated uniformly at random.
We show that the (1+1) EA can solve in polynomial time
a 1 − o(1) fraction of satisfiable formulas drawn from the
community attachment model with constraint density (average degree) that is at least a sufficiently large constant, provided that the density within communities is nonuniform.
This bound covers a larger region of the constraint density spectrum than previous results on evolutionary algorithms on the uniform random model. In particular, analogous results were proved for the (1+1) EA on the uniform
random model, but only for formulas of density at least
Ω(log n) (Doerr, Neumann, and Sutton 2017). For polylogarithmic densities, a more complicated√evolutionary algorithm called the (1+(λ,λ)) GA yields a log n speed up on
formulas with density ω(log2 n), and even further improvements on asymptotically larger densities when the population size is adapted (Buzdalov and Doerr 2017).
Randomized search heuristics such as WalkSAT (Selman,
Kautz, and Cohen 1994), Schöning’s algorithm (Schöning
1999) and evolutionary algorithms are incomplete in the
sense that they can only locate a satisfying assignment if
it exists, and not decide an unsatisfiable formula. A performance guarantee on satisfiable formulas for such algorithms
allows for the construction of a Monte Carlo decision algorithm with one-sided error (Sutton and Neumann 2014). It
therefore suffices to derive time bounds only on satisfiable
formulas.
Ideally, given an instance distribution, one would like to
derive performance guarantees over the distribution conditioned on satisfiability. This is sometimes referred to as filtering (Kautz et al. 2001). Unfortunately, filtering is difficult in practice (as it requires a complete solver to decide satisfiability), and creates complicated dependencies

We study the ability of a simple mutation-only evolutionary algorithm to solve propositional satisfiability formulas
with inherent community structure. We show that the community structure translates to good fitness-distance correlation properties, which implies that the objective function provides a strong signal in the search space for evolutionary
algorithms to locate a satisfying assignment efficiently. We
prove that when the formula clusters into communities of size
s ∈ ω(log n) ∩ O(nε/(2ε+2) ) for some constant 0 < ε < 1,
and there is a nonuniform distribution over communities, a
simple evolutionary algorithm called the (1+1) EA finds a satisfying assignment in polynomial time on a 1 − o(1) fraction
of formulas with at least constant constraint density. This is
a significant improvement over recent results on uniform random formulas, on which the same algorithm has only been
proven to be efficient on uniform formulas of at least logarithmic density.

Introduction
Evolutionary algorithms are a broad class of incomplete
randomized search heuristics that are sometimes applied to
tackling difficult optimization problems that arise in practice. We study the performance of a simple evolutionary algorithm tasked with finding a satisfying assignment to structured (non-uniform) propositional formulas expressed as the
conjunction of m Boolean disjunctive clauses of size exactly k over n variables. A series of recent papers (Sutton and Neumann 2014; Doerr, Neumann, and Sutton 2017;
Buzdalov and Doerr 2017) have derived rigorous running
time bounds on a variety of evolutionary algorithms applied to solving propositional formulas generated uniformly
at random.
One criticism of the uniform random model is that it inadequately characterizes propositional formulas that arise
from practical applications. Industrial SAT instances are far
more complex, and contain complicated structural characteristics. Among these are modularity (Giráldez-Cru and
Levy 2016), heterogeneity (Ansótegui, Bonet, and Levy
2009), self-similarity (Ansótegui et al. 2014), and locality (Giráldez-Cru and Levy 2017). Several non-uniform forCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2346

