The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

HAS-QA: Hierarchical Answer Spans
Model for Open-Domain Question Answering
Liang Pang,† Yanyan Lan,†,∗ Jiafeng Guo,† Jun Xu,† Lixin Su,† Xueqi Cheng†
†CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
†University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
∗Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
{pangliang,lanyanyan,guojiafeng,sulixin,cxq}@ict.ac.cn, junxu@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract

Reading Comprehension
Paragraph: At standard temperature and pressure, two atoms of the

1

Satisfied

This paper is concerned with open-domain question answering (i.e., OpenQA). Recently, some works have viewed this
problem as a reading comprehension (RC) task, and directly
applied successful RC models to it. However, the performances of such models are not so good as that in the RC task. In
our opinion, the perspective of RC ignores three characteristics in OpenQA task: 1) many paragraphs without the answer
span are included in the data collection; 2) multiple answer
spans may exist within one given paragraph; 3) the end position of an answer span is dependent with the start position.
In this paper, we first propose a new probabilistic formulation of OpenQA, based on a three-level hierarchical structure,
i.e., the question level, the paragraph level and the answer
span level. Then a Hierarchical Answer Spans Model (HASQA) is designed to capture each probability. HAS-QA has the
ability to tackle the above three problems, and experiments
on public OpenQA datasets show that it significantly outperforms traditional RC baselines and recent OpenQA baselines.

element bind to form dioxygen, a colorless and odorless diatomic gas
with the formula O2.
Question: How many atoms combine to form dioxygen?
Answer: two

Relevant

Open-domain Question Answering
Question: What does a camel store in its hump?
Paragraph1(multiple-answer-spans): The humps are reservoirs of
fatty tissue: concentrating body fat in their humps minimizes the
insulating effect fat would have if distributed over the rest of their
bodies, helping camels survive in hot climates.

Paragraph2(no-answer-span): Camels with one hump are called
Arabian camels, or Dromedaries, and come from North Africa. Camels
with two humps are from Asia, and are called Bactrian camels.
Answer: fat

Figure 1: Examples of RC task and OpenQA task.
for the OpenQA task (Figure 1 bottom). That’s because the
paragraphs to provide answer for an OpenQA question is
collected from a search engine, where each retrieved paragraph is merely relevant to the question. Therefore, it contains many paragraphs without answer string, for instance, in
Figure 1 Paragraph2. When applying RC models to OpenQA
task, we have to omit these paragraphs in the training phase.
However, during the inference phase, when model meets one
paragraph without answer string, it will pick out a text span
as an answer span with high confidence, since RC model
has no evidence to justify whether a paragraph contains the
answer string.
Secondly, they only consider the first answer span in
the paragraph, but omit the remaining rich multiple answer
spans. In RC task, the answer and its positions in the paragraph are provided by the annotator in the training data.
Therefore RC models only need to consider the unique answer span, e.g., in SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016). However, the OpenQA task only provides the answer string as
the ground-truth. Therefore, multiple answer spans are detected in the given paragraph, which cannot be considered
by the traditional RC models. Take Figure 1 as an example,
all text spans contain ‘fat’ are treated as answer span, so we
detect two answer spans in Paragraph1.
Thirdly, they assume that the start position and end position of an answer span is independent. However, the end po-

Introduction

Open-domain question answering (OpenQA) aims to seek
answers for a broad range of questions from a large knowledge sources, e.g., structured knowledge bases (Berant et
al. 2013; Mou et al. 2017) and unstructured documents from
search engine (Ferrucci et al. 2010). In this paper we focus on the OpenQA task with the unstructured knowledge
sources retrieved by search engine.
Inspired by the reading comprehension (RC) task flourishing in the area of natural language processing (Wang
and Jiang 2016; Seo et al. 2016; Xiong, Zhong, and Socher
2016), some recent works have viewed OpenQA as an
RC task, and directly applied the existing RC models to
it (Chen et al. 2017; Joshi et al. 2017; Wang and Jiang 2016;
Clark and Gardner 2018). However, these RC models do not
well fit for the OpenQA task.
Firstly, they directly omit the paragraphs without answer
string1 . RC task assumes that the given paragraph contains
the answer string (Figure 1 top), however, it is not valid
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The answer string is a piece of text that can answer the question. If the answer string is obtained in a paragraph as a consecutive
text, we call it the answer span.

6875

