The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Location-Based End-to-End Speech
Recognition with Multiple Language Models
Zhijie Lin,1 Kaiyang Lin,2 Shiling Chen,3 Linlin Li,4 Zhou Zhao1
1

College of Computer, Zhejiang University, 2 Department of Philosophy, Sun Yat-Sen University
3
College of Economy, Zhejiang University, 4 alibaba group
linzhijie@zju.edu.cn, linky7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, chenshiling@zju.edu.cn,
linyan.lll@alibaba-inc.com, zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

grammar structure of a sentence. The decoding process can
be divided into two steps. The first step, based on characters,
is to get rid of answers with obvious mispronunciation and
grammatical mistakes by beam searching, and get a set of alternative results. The other step, based on words and classes,
is to analyze both context and grammar structure, rate the alternative answers and select the most applicable result.

End-to-End deep learning approaches for Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR) has been a new trend. In those approaches, starting active in many areas, language model can
be considered as an important and effective method for semantic error correction. Many existing systems use one language model. In this paper, however, multiple language models (LMs) are applied into decoding. One LM is used for
selecting appropriate answers and others, considering both
context and grammar, for further decision. Experiment on a
general location-based dataset show the effectiveness of our
method.

Methodology
The system overview is shown in the Figure 1. Our method
uses a CTC neural network model to learn the pronunciation of each Chinese character. The encoder of the network
has several layers of deep Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN), which are followed by stacked bidirectional Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) layers with CTC (Graves, Mohamed,
and Hinton 2013).
With the pretrained CTC model M (x), we get a possibility sequence P = {p1 , p2 , p3 , ..., pt }, where x is a single
utterance, t is the number of frames in the utterance, pi is a
possibility distribution vector over the vocabulary.
In the first step, by applying prefix beam searching algorithm utilized by a character-based language model LM1
that contains many geographical nouns, we can get an alternative set S1 = {(a1 , s1,1 ), (a2 , s1,2 ), ..., (am , s1,m )},
where m is the beam size, ai is an alternative answer, s1,i is
the evaluated score in the step one. Let cij be the j-th character in ai , N ci be the number of characters in ai . Therefore,
step one is tend to find an alternative set, but also get rid of
obviously wrong answers. We choose the beam size carefully and hope that the correct recognition or nearly correct
recognition will be selected and thrown into the alternative
set S1 . During the beam searching, s1,i of ai can be computed as follows (Hannun et al. 2014a):

Introduction
The End-to-End approach, using Connectionist Temporal
Classification (CTC), has gone into current state-of-the-art
automatic speech recognition pipelines in recent years and
achieved many remarkable results. Because terminology is
always recognized to their homophones, especially when it
comes to a certain area, LMs are also served as powerful utility to get reasonable answers during the process of decoding,
which can greatly improve the accuracy of recognition. Generally, decoding applies prefix beam searching (Hannun et
al. 2014b), a heuristic searching algorithm, with one N-gram
or RNN-based language model(LM) to find the best-path sequence. However, because of complexity of cutting words
of Chinese, Chinese LMs are usually character-based, not
word-based. Although existing methods have achieved good
performance, they are mainly based on characters, which
may ignore the relationship between words.
In this paper, we specifically consider the problem of
location-based ASR from the viewpoint of Deep Neural NetWork (DNN) model with CTC and language models. When
asking for a taxi, we can describe our location by a call with
no need to operate on our cell phones. To improve the accuracy of recognition of geographical terminology, we propose a decoding and scoring method using more than one
language model, which utilizes both character-based LM,
word-based LM and class-based LM to make better use of
both context and grammar information and gain a higher accuracy. The class-based LM applies clustering to analyze the

s1,i = log(p(ai |x)) + α ∗ LM1 (ai ) + β ∗ N ci

(1)

Where
LM1 (ai ) = log(p(ci,1 , .., ci,N ci ))
(2)
The reason why we pick up a character-based language
model as LM1 is demonstrated by the formulas. We don’t
have to look ahead when computing LM1 (ai ) above words
sequence, so we can compute s1,i while moving cursor at pi .
However, character-based LM can’t make full use of context
like word-based LM, so we try to get a set S1 instead of
picking the answer with optimal score up.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9975

