The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Regularizing Fully Convolutional Networks for
Time Series Classification by Decorrelating Filters
Kaushal Paneri,1 Vishnu TV,2 Pankaj Malhotra,2 Lovekesh Vig,2 Gautam Shroff2
1

Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 02115
2
TCS Research, New Delhi, India
1
Corresponding Author: paneri.k@husky.neu.edu

Abstract

pairwise filter similarities. Leveraging the property of decorrelating filters, we propose FCN with filter decorrelations
imposed via a loss function along with the standard classification loss and show that it leads to better classification
performance. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
attempt to show the effectiveness of using filter decorrelation loss for time series classification.

Deep neural networks are prone to overfitting, especially in
small training data regimes. Often, these networks are overparameterized and the resulting learned weights tend to have
strong correlations. However, convolutional networks in general, and fully convolution neural networks (FCNs) in particular, have been shown to be relatively parameter efficient,
and have recently been successfully applied to time series
classification tasks. In this paper, we investigate the application of different regularizers on the correlation between the
learned convolutional filters in FCNs using Batch Normalization (BN) as a regularizer for time series classification (TSC)
tasks. Results demonstrate that despite orthogonal initialization of the filters, the average correlation across filters (especially for filters in higher layers) tends to increase as training
proceeds, indicating redundancy of filters. To mitigate this redundancy, we propose a strong regularizer, using simple yet
effective filter decorrelation. Our proposed method yields significant gains in classification accuracy for 44 diverse time
series datasets from the UCR TSC benchmark repository.

Decorrelating Filters in FCNs
Let L be the number of convolutional layers, and pl be
the number of filters in layer l. Let wil ∈ Rnl represent
the weights of the i-th filter in the l-th layer. Here nl =
tl × 1 × pl−1 , where tl is the length of the filter, pl−1 is the
number of filters in the (l − 1)-th layer. The decorrelation
loss is given by,
PL Ppl Ppl
wil ·wjl
2
LDecorr = l=1 i=1
j=i+1 ( ||wl ||2 ||wl ||2 )
i

j

where ||.||2 denotes the L2 norm, and x · y denotes the
dot-product of the vectors x and y. For a K-class classificaPN PK
tion problem, let LCE = − n=1 k=1 ynk ·log(ŷnk ), where
ŷkn denotes the probability of k-th class for n-th training instance, as given by softmax layer with K units, and N is the
number of training instances. The total loss is then given by
L = LCE + λLDecorr .

Introduction
Time Series Classification (TSC) has been a fundamental
task in signal processing with applications in multiple domains such as healthcare and finance. Traditionally, distance
based methods such as Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) have
been employed for TSC tasks. Recently, deep networks have
consistently outperformed DTW (Malhotra et al. 2017). In
contrast to standard deep networks, Fully Convolutional
Networks (FCNs) utilize fewer parameters and have yielded
very promising results for TSC tasks (Wang, Yan, and Oates
2017). However, these networks still tend to be overparameterized resulting in redundant parameters after training. Orthogonal Initialization (OI) (Mishkin and Matas 2015) of
filters in convolutional layers has also been demonstrated
to improve performance compared to random initialization.
Further, decorrelation of filters (OrthoReg) (Rodrı́guez et al.
2016) and network activations (Cogswell et al. 2015) were
proposed for regularization of CNNs. Specifically, OrthoReg
tries to reduce the redundancy of the filters by minimizing

Experimental Evaluation and Observations
We evaluated our approach on 44 univariate time series
datasets taken from publicly available UCR TSC benchmark
dataset (Chen et al. 2015). To select the best hyperparameter setting, we held out 25% of training data via stratified

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1: FCN Architecture
10003

