The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Heterogeneous Attributed Network
Embedding with Graph Convolutional Networks
Yueyang Wang, Ziheng Duan, Binbing Liao, Fei Wu, Yueting Zhuang
{yueyangw,duanziheng,bbliao,wufei,yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn
College of Computer Science and Technology,Zhejiang University
No.38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China,310027

Abstract

HANE, leverages not only the heterogeneity but also the
rich node attributes. Specifically, we design a GCN-based
method and introduce the attention mechanism to assign different importance of different types of nodes in a neighborhood. We evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on the
node classification task. The experimental results show that
HANE outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Network embedding which assigns nodes in networks to lowdimensional representations has received increasing attention
in recent years. However, most existing approaches, especially the spectral-based methods, only consider the attributes
in homogeneous networks. They are weak for heterogeneous
attributed networks that involve different node types as well
as rich node attributes and are common in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we propose HANE, a novel network embedding method based on Graph Convolutional Networks, that
leverages both the heterogeneity and the node attributes to
generate high-quality embeddings. The experiments on the
real-world dataset show the effectiveness of our method.

Methodology
Problem Definition. Given a heterogeneous attributed network G = (V, E, A) where V is a set of nodes representing
different types of objects, E is a set of edges representing relationships between two objects and A denotes the attributes
of objects, heterogeneous attribute network embedding is to
learn low-dimensional representations in heterogeneous attributed networks.
Learning Embeddings. We design a multi-layer GCNbased method for heterogeneous attributed network embedding, named HANE. The overall view of our model is shown
in Figure 1.
We start by describing the first convolutional layer. To utilize the various types of nodes with different attributes uniformly, we first transform the input attributes to a common
space. For each node vi ∈ V with its type ti ∈ {1, 2, · · · , n}
and its attributes f~i ∈ RFti where n is the number of node
types and Fti is the dimension of attributes for node type ti ,
the transform function g(·) is defined as follow:

Introduction
Network embedding, which learns low-dimensional representations of nodes in networks, has been proved to be
highly effective for a variety of network analysis tasks,
such as recommendation, classification and clustering. Most
network embedding approaches mainly focus on capturing structural correlations in networks. Recently, researchers
proposed some methods based on Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) to encode both the network structure and the
attributes of nodes.
In real-world scenarios, the majority of networks are heterogeneous attributed networks because there are different
types of objects with various features and relationships.
However, these networks cannot be handled efficiently by
existing GCN-based models which only consider the homogeneous networks because of two reasons. On the one
hand, different types of nodes have various attributes which
cannot be directly applied due to the different dimensions
of node attributes. For example, in academic networks, an
“author” is associated with attributes like research interests
and the number of published papers, while a “paper” has
attributes like title and abstract. On the other hand, the influence of distinct relationships are different, which should
not be treated equally. For instance, the correlation between “paper-writtenBy-author” is intuitively stronger than
“paper-citedBy-paper”.
In this paper, we study the problem of network embedding
for heterogeneous attributed networks. Our proposed model,

g(f~i ) = f~i Wti

(1)

where Wti ∈ RFti ×D is the shared transform weight matrix for each node type and D is the dimension of the common space. Then, we introduce attention mechanism to distinguish the effects of different neighbors. For node vi and
its neighbor vj , we define a score function as follow:
si,j = score(f~i , f~j ) = g(f~i )g(f~j )T

(2)

And we apply the softmax function to calculate the normalized impact coefficient:
exp si,j
vk ∈Ni exp si,k

ci,j = P

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

where Ni is the neighbors of node vi .
10061

(3)

