The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Attribute Transfer via Disentangled Representation
Jianfu Zhang,1 Yuanyuan Huang,1 Yaoyi Li,1 Weijie Zhao,2 Liqing Zhang1∗
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Versa

Abstract
Recent studies show significant progress in image-to-image
translation task, especially facilitated by Generative Adversarial Networks. They can synthesize highly realistic images and alter the attribute labels for the images. However,
these works employ attribute vectors to specify the target
domain which diminishes image-level attribute diversity. In
this paper, we propose a novel model formulating disentangled representations by projecting images to latent units,
grouped feature channels of Convolutional Neural Network,
to disassemble the information between different attributes.
Thanks to disentangled representation, we can transfer attributes according to the attribute labels and moreover retain the diversity beyond the labels, namely, the styles inside
each image. This is achieved by specifying some attributes
and swapping the corresponding latent units to “swap” the attributes appearance, or applying channel-wise interpolation to
blend different attributes. To verify the motivation of our proposed model, we train and evaluate our model on face dataset
CelebA. Furthermore, the evaluation of another facial expression dataset RaFD demonstrates the generalizability of our
proposed model.

(a) Attribute swapping

(b) Attribute blending

Figure 1: An illustration of the motivation for our proposed
model. We want to change the source image on the upper
left, a lady with blond hair, to target images with brown
hairs in the upper row. Give the target label, brown hair,
previous methods like StarGAN (Choi et al. 2018) can only
change the hair color to one style. However, for our proposed method, the target attribute is specified with another
image, i.e., the hair color is transferred from the topmost images, and the color shade is retained, as shown in the second
row. Besides, we can blend different attribute values by interpolating hidden units, changing hair color from golden to
brown gradually.

Introduction
Image-to-image translation gains significant popularity in
recent years, benefiting from the progress of generative
models like Generative Adversarial Network (Goodfellow
et al. 2014) and Variational Auto-Encoder (Kingma and
Welling 2013). Generally speaking, image-to-image translation is defined as a task to translate an image from one
domain to another, with representative applications such
as colorization(Isola et al. 2017; Zhang, Isola, and Efros
2016), super-resolution(Ledig et al. 2017; Dong et al. 2016)
and facial attribute transfer(Choi et al. 2018; Bouchacourt,
Tomioka, and Nowozin 2018), etc.
We define a domain as a set of images sharing the same
attribute labels, where the term attribute is denoted as a
meaningful instance-level feature inherent in an image such
as hair color or style, gender or age, and smiles. For each
attribute, there can be different attribute labels such as
black/blond/brown for hair color, or male/female for gender.

Furthermore, beyond the attribute label, there can be imagelevel diversity in the style of different image instances with
the same attribute label which can not simply be depicted by
labels. For example, bang hairs may vary in directions, and
smiles can have different attitudes. We call this diversity as
concept, which can be formulated as a distribution of certain
attribute appearance.
Previous works have explored a lot in image-to-image
translation topic and achieved significant progress (Zhu et
al. 2017; Isola et al. 2017; Choi et al. 2018; Xiao, Hong, and

∗

correspondence author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9195

