The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Bootstrapping Conversational Agents with Weak Supervision
Neil Mallinar, Abhishek Shah, Rajendra Ugrani, Ayush Gupta, Manikandan Gurusankar,
Tin Kam Ho, Q. Vera Liao,1 Yunfeng Zhang,1 Rachel K.E. Bellamy,1
Robert Yates, Chris Desmarais, Blake McGregor
1

IBM Watson, New York, NY 10003, USA
IBM Research AI, Yokrtown Heights, NY 10598, USA

Abstract

However, using chat logs to bootstrap intents requires intensive labeling effort. Several characteristics of the chatbot
development task make the conventional labeling process
prohibitively expensive to apply. First, the intent classes are
usually highly skewed, with a very small portion of positive
examples present in the chat logs. So it would be expensive to obtain enough positive examples if labeling data in
sequence. Second, a chatbot system usually has tens to hundreds of intents. Manually examining every piece of chat
data and selecting one out of tens to hundreds of labels
would be extremely challenging. For these reasons, chatbot
development is often unable to take advantage of historical
chat logs, but still largely relies on manual creation of user
utterances as training data.
In this work, we present a framework and build a system
to drastically reduce the labor required in labeling chat logs,
by harvesting a recently developed weak supervision technique called data programming (Ratner et al. 2016). Specifically, the system allows the chatbot developer or labeler
to explicitly search training examples from chat logs for a
given intent, then with minimum labeling input it uses the
search queries for data programming to automatically propagate the label set. We call this framework SLP–search, label,
and propagate. This framework offers several benefits: 1) it
significantly reduces the labeling effort down to authoring
search queries and providing a minimum number of labels
to guide data programming; 2) it allows the labeler to focus
on one intent at a time, thus making the labeling process easier to follow; 3) it can potentially support collaboration on
labeling, by having multiple people authoring queries; 4) it
can potentially make the management of relabeling process
easier, as the labeler could easily edit or add queries and then
have the system update the label set.
To demonstrate some of these benefits, we built a prototype system and conducted a user study to evaluate the
training results with novice labelers with a merely 8-minute
training session. By empirically studying the usage of a firstof-its-kind system, we also identified areas for future work
to improve this new approach for developing chatbots, as
well as the emerging area of weak supervision applications.
More importantly, our work represents an effort to apply
weak supervision techniques to tackle a real world problem
of training data bottleneck. Data programming allows labelers to express domain heuristics as labeling functions, which

Many conversational agents in the market today follow a standard bot development framework which requires training intent classifiers to recognize user input. The need to create
a proper set of training examples is often the bottleneck in
the development process. In many occasions agent developers have access to historical chat logs that can provide a good
quantity as well as coverage of training examples. However,
the cost of labeling them with tens to hundreds of intents
often prohibits taking full advantage of these chat logs. In
this paper, we present a framework called search, label, and
propagate (SLP) for bootstrapping intents from existing chat
logs using weak supervision. The framework reduces hours
to days of labeling effort down to minutes of work by using
a search engine to find examples, then relies on a data programming approach to automatically expand the labels. We
report on a user study that shows positive user feedback for
this new approach to build conversational agents, and demonstrates the effectiveness of using data programming for autolabeling. While the system is developed for training conversational agents, the framework has broader application in significantly reducing labeling effort for training text classifiers.

Introduction
Many conversational agents or chatbots nowadays are developed with a standard bot framework where a key step
is to define intents and build intent classifiers. An intent in
a conversational model is a concept that represents a highlevel purpose of a set of semantically similar sentences for
which the chatbot can provide the same response. Intents
of user input are recognized by statistical classifiers trained
with sample utterances. For example, utterances like “good
morning”, “hello”, “hi” are all for the intent of greeting, and
they can be used as training examples to train the classifier to recognize greeting. This intent training step is supported by popular chatbot development platforms such as
IBM Watson Assistant and Microsoft Azure Bot Service, but
it is well recognized that high-quality training data is hard
to obtain, resulting in sub-optimal intent recognition performance. A valuable resource is chat logs in relevant task domains, whether they are from conversations between users
and human agents or collected from previous user interactions with a chatbot.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9528

