The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Convolutional Spatial Attention Model for
Reading Comprehension with Multiple-Choice Questions
Zhipeng Chen,† Yiming Cui,‡†∗ Wentao Ma,† Shijin Wang,† Guoping Hu†
†

Joint Laboratory of HIT and iFLYTEK (HFL), iFLYTEK Research, Beijing, China
‡
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval (SCIR),
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{zpchen,ymcui,wtma,sjwang3,gphu}@iflytek.com
Abstract

In this paper, we propose a novel model called Convolutional Spatial Attention (CSA) to fully utilize the hierarchical attention information for reading comprehension with
multiple-choice questions. The proposed model first encode
the passage, question, and candidates into word representations which are enhanced by the additional POS-tag and
matching features. Then we concentrate on enriching the
representation of the candidates by incorporating the passage, question information, and further calculate the attentions between the passage, question, and candidates, forming the spatial attentions. To further extract the representative features in the spatial attentions, we propose to use
convolutional neural network to dynamically conclude adjacent regions with different window size. We mainly test our
CSA model on two multiple-choice reading comprehension
datasets: RACE and SemEval-2018 Task11, and our model
achieves state-of-the-art performances on both of them. The
examples of each dataset are given in Figure 1. The main
contributions of our paper can be summarized as follows.
• We focus on modeling different semantic aspects of the
candidates, by integrating the passage and question information, forming the 3D spatial attention among the passage, question, and candidates.
• We propose a Convolutional Spatial Attention (CSA)
mechanism to dynamically extract representative features
from the spatial attentions.
• The proposed model gives substantial improvements
over various state-of-the-art systems on both RACE and
SemEval-2018 Task11 datasets, showing its generalization and extensibility to other NLP tasks.

Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) with multiplechoice questions requires the machine to read given passage
and select the correct answer among several candidates. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach called Convolutional
Spatial Attention (CSA) model which can better handle the
MRC with multiple-choice questions. The proposed model
could fully extract the mutual information among the passage,
question, and the candidates, to form the enriched representations. Furthermore, to merge various attention results, we propose to use convolutional operation to dynamically summarize the attention values within the different size of regions.
Experimental results show that the proposed model could
give substantial improvements over various state-of- the-art
systems on both RACE and SemEval-2018 Task11 datasets.

Introduction
Owing to the rapid release of various large-scale datasets,
Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) has become enormously popular in Natural Language Processing. For example, cloze-style MRC (such as CNN/DailyMail (Hermann et al. 2015), Children’s Book Test (CBT) (Hill et al.
2015)), span-extraction MRC (such as SQuAD (Rajpurkar
et al. 2016)), and multiple-choice MRC (such as MCTest
(Richardson, Burges, and Renshaw 2013), RACE (Lai et al.
2017), SemEval-2018 Task11 (Ostermann et al. 2018)).
In this paper, we mainly focus on solving the reading
comprehension with multiple-choice questions. At the beginning of the reading comprehension study, this type of
reading comprehension task was not that popular because
there is no large-scale dataset available and thus we cannot
apply neural network approaches to solve them. To bring
more challenges to reading comprehension task and mitigate the absence of large-scale multi-choice reading comprehension dataset, Lai et al.(2017) propose a new dataset
called RACE. Compared to the earlier MCTest (Richardson, Burges, and Renshaw 2013), the RACE dataset is made
from the English examinations for Chinese middle and high
school students, consisting near 100,000 questions generated by human experts, and is far more challenging than the
MCTest.

Related Works
Massive progress has been made on machine reading comprehension field in recent years. The booming of the MRC
can trace back to the release of the large-scale datasets, such
as CNN/DailyMail (Hermann et al. 2015) and CBT (Hill et
al. 2015)). After the release of these datasets, various neural network approaches (Chen, Bolton, and Manning 2016;
Kadlec et al. 2016; Cui et al. 2017; Dhingra et al. 2017)
have been proposed and become fundamental components in
the future studies. Another representative dataset is SQuAD
(Rajpurkar et al. 2016), which was difficult than the clozestyle reading comprehension and requires the machine to

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6276

