The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deriving Subgoals Autonomously to Accelerate Learning
in Sparse Reward Domains
Michael Dann, Fabio Zambetta, John Thangarajah
Computer Science
RMIT University, Australia
{michael.dann, fabio.zambetta, john.thangarajah}@rmit.edu.au

Abstract

games the agent can become stuck in a “chicken-egg” scenario, where it cannot improve its policy until it finds some
reward, but it cannot discover any rewards until it improves
its policy.
It has long been thought that hierarchical reinforcement
learning (Parr and Russell 1998; Sutton, Precup, and Singh
1999; Dietterich 2000), which splits drawn-out tasks into
subtasks, may be key to solving sparse reward problems
efficiently. In fact, it has already been established that hierarchical agents can make rapid progress in sparse reward Atari games, so long as they are provided with appropriate subgoals by a human expert (Kulkarni et al. 2016;
Roderick, Grimm, and Tellex 2018). Of course, the major deficiency of such agents is that they do not address
subgoal identification, which is a very challenging part of
the problem. Despite decades of research (Vezhnevets et
al. 2017; Thrun, Schwartz, and others 1995; Digney 1998;
Şimşek, Wolfe, and Barto 2005; Konidaris and Barto 2009;
Machado, Bellemare, and Bowling 2017; Machado et al.
2018b), identifying subgoals from high-dimensional input,
such as Atari pixel representations, remains a major open
problem.
The main contribution of this work is a new, autonomous
method for deriving subgoals in such domains. The method
operates by partitioning the state space according to a novel
heuristic distance measure, which we term exploration effort. The approach can readily be applied to raw visual input, and the subgoals it identifies in Atari games resemble
those identified by human experts in previous work.
To leverage the subgoals found, we propose a novel intrinsic reward scheme, dubbed pellet rewards. The scheme
encourages the agent to explore via a mechanism similar to
the collectable pellets in Ms. Pacman and the coins in Super
Mario Bros. We apply this approach to three Atari games
with sparse rewards (Venture, Freeway and Montezuma’s
Revenge), achieving similar performance to state-of-the-art
methods based on visual density models (Bellemare et al.
2016a; Ostrovski et al. 2017). This makes ours the first fullyautonomous subgoal-oriented agent to be truly competitive
with state-of-the-art agents on these games. In addition, pellet rewards appear to have relatively little distortion on the
original task objective, causing no discernible harm in two
games (Battlezone and Robot Tank) where Ostrovski et al.’s
(2017) method was detrimental.

Sparse reward games, such as the infamous Montezuma’s
Revenge, pose a significant challenge for Reinforcement
Learning (RL) agents. Hierarchical RL, which promotes efficient exploration via subgoals, has shown promise in these
games. However, existing agents rely either on human domain knowledge or slow autonomous methods to derive suitable subgoals. In this work, we describe a new, autonomous
approach for deriving subgoals from raw pixels that is more
efficient than competing methods. We propose a novel intrinsic reward scheme for exploiting the derived subgoals, applying it to three Atari games with sparse rewards. Our agent’s
performance is comparable to that of state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating the usefulness of the subgoals found.

Introduction
In recent years, videogames have become an increasingly
popular domain for artificial intelligence research. This is in
large part due to the famous Deep Q-Network (DQN) agent
of Mnih et al. (2015), which learned to play many Atari 2600
games to human level from only raw pixel input and a feed
of the game score. Impressive as this was, DQN fared far
better in reflex-driven games with frequent rewards, such
as Video Pinball, than in adventure games with sparse rewards. Notoriously, it failed to learn a path to the first key
in Montezuma’s Revenge after more than a month of experience. DQN’s weakness in sparse reward Atari games has
driven much subsequent research (Bellemare et al. 2016a;
Kulkarni et al. 2016; Osband et al. 2016; Martin et al. 2017;
Ostrovski et al. 2017; Vezhnevets et al. 2017; Roderick,
Grimm, and Tellex 2018), as it is symptomatic of a broader
difficulty in applying reinforcement learning (RL) to longterm, real-time planning problems.
The reason DQN struggles in sparse reward games is that
until the agent has discovered some reward, it sees no incentive to favour one course of action over any other. It
responds to this predicament in a manner typical of many
learning-based agents: by simply choosing actions at random. In games with dense rewards, such as Video Pinball,
random action selection is often sufficient for the agent to
find rewards and start improving. However, in sparse reward
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

881

