The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Walrasian Dynamics in Multi-Unit Markets
Simina Brânzei

Aris Filos-Ratsikas

Purdue University

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

Abstract

While the market equilibrium concept is a powerful abstraction applicable to any economic environment, other
driving forces of the modern digital economy are less well
understood using traditional economic theory. In particular,
online markets have been growing at an extremely high rate
in the recent past, but they pose many conceptual challenging questions such as what guiding principles should be used
for designing them, how to model and use information about
the behavior of the consumers, and even how to understand
the product being sold in the first place (as is arguably the
case with the products sold in ad auctions).
In this paper we will be concerned with the high level
question of deriving a theory for how consumers behave. A
scenario motivating our analysis is an online marketplace
where a seller posts a number of goods for sale, while interested buyers compete for obtaining them by submitting bids
that signal their interest in the goods. The buyers have time
to repeatedly update their bids after seeing the bids submitted by others (i.e., there is a clock that counts the time left
for changing the bids), in order to get better allocations for
themselves or potentially lower the price. This process continues until a stable state is reached (or the time runs out),
and then the seller allocates the goods based on the final
bids. We are interested in understanding the outcomes at the
end states of this dynamic in multi-unit markets, where the
units on sale are identical, and in quantifying the social welfare of the participants and revenue extracted by the seller.
Studying the outcomes of economic environments where
players repeatedly interact falls under the umbrella of learning how to play games, and in particular, learning how to
participate in auctions. There has been an extensive body
of work on understanding dynamics in games and auctions
under various behavioral models of agents, such as bestresponse, multiplicative weight updates, no regret learning
(e.g., (Freund and Schapire 1999; Roughgarden, Syrgkanis,
and Tardos 2017; Daskalakis and Syrgkanis 2016)). Multiunit auctions have been advocated as a lens to the entire
field of (algorithmic) mechanism design (Nisan 2014) and
our scenario is in fact “an environment where repeated bestresponse provides reasonable approximation guarantees”,
stated explicitly as a research question by Nisan et al. (2011).
We will focus on studying fair pricing mechanisms as
captured by (Walrasian) envy-free pricing, where the seller
posts a unique price p per unit and each buyer purchases a

In a multi-unit market, a seller brings multiple units of a
good and tries to sell them to a set of buyers that have monetary endowments. While a Walrasian equilibrium does not
always exist in this model, natural relaxations of the concept
that retain its desirable fairness properties do exist. We study
the dynamics of (Walrasian) envy-free pricing mechanisms
in this environment, showing that for any such pricing mechanism, the best response dynamic starting from truth-telling
converges to a pure Nash equilibrium with small loss in revenue and welfare. Moreover, we generalize these bounds to
capture all the (reasonable) Nash equilibria for a large class
of (monotone) pricing mechanisms. We also identify a natural
mechanism, which selects the minimum Walrasian envy-free
price, in which for n=2 buyers the best response dynamic converges from any starting profile. We conjecture convergence
of the mechanism for any number of buyers and provide simulation results to support our conjecture.

Introduction
The question of allocating valuable resources is one of the
central problems faced by human society, starting from the
division of land to modern variants such as allocating computational resources to the users of an organization or selling
goods in online markets. A crucial development in answer to
the question of how to exchange goods (optimally) occurred
with the invention of money, i.e., of pricing mechanisms that
aggregate information about the supply and demand of the
goods in order to facilitate trade. The price mechanism was
formalized and studied systematically starting with the 19th
century, in the works of Fisher (2000), Walras (1874) and
Arrow and Debreu (1954), but its complexity was understood only much more recently (Nisan et al. editors 2007).
The basic setting in a free market consists of a set of agents
that come to the market with their initial endowments (e.g.
money or products for sale) and aim to purchase goods1 in
a way that maximizes their utility subject to the initial budget constraints. Walrasian (market) equilibria are outcomes
where demand and supply are perfectly balanced, satisfy desirable fairness and efficiency properties, and are guaranteed
to exist under certain conditions (Arrow and Debreu 1954).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Possibly after selling their initial bundles.

1812

