The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Efficient Approach to Informative
Feature Extraction from Multimodal Data
Lichen Wang,1∗ Jiaxiang Wu,2 Shao-Lun Huang,1 Lizhong Zheng,3
Xiangxiang Xu,4 Lin Zhang,1 Junzhou Huang5
1

Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, 2 Tencent AI Lab
3
Department of EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
4
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
5
Department of CSE, The University of Texas at Arlington
Email: wlc16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jonathanwu@tencent.com, shaolun.huang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn,
lizhong@mit.edu, xuxx14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, linzhang@tsinghua.edu.cn, jzhuang@uta.edu
Abstract

Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Hotelling 1936; Akaho 2006;
Andrew et al. 2013), Euclidean distance minimization (Frome
et al. 2013), enforcing partial order (Vendrov et al. 2015), etc.
In statistic, the Hirschfeld-Gebelein-Rényi (HGR) maximal correlation (Hirschfeld 1935; Gebelein 1941; Rényi
1959), as a generalization from the Pearson’s correlation
(Pearson 1895), is well-known for its legitimacy as a measure of dependence. Such notion is appealing to multimodal
feature extraction for many reasons. For example, maximizing the HGR maximal correlation enables us to determine
the nonlinear transformations of two variables that are maximally correlated (Feizi et al. 2017). In the perspective of
the information theory, the HGR transformation carries the
maximum amount of information of X about Y , and vice
versa (Huang et al. 2017). As for generality, CCA (Hotelling
1936) and its variants (Bach and Jordan 2002; Akaho 2006;
Andrew et al. 2013) can be regarded as the realizations of the
HGR maximal correlation with different designs of transformation functions.
However, the HGR maximal correlation suffers from
two limitations. Firstly, HGR maximal correlation involves
whitening constraints which require each feature to be strictly
uncorrelated. Most commonly, the orthogonal geometry is
preserved by a whitening process (Andrew et al. 2013;
Wang et al. 2015b), which relies on the computation of matrix
inversion or decomposition. These operations are of highcomplexity and may have numerical stability issues for large
feature dimensions. Secondly, discriminativeness is not explicitly formulated in the objective of the HGR maximal
correlation. In fact, it can lead to desirable performance in
downstream supervised tasks only if all the discriminative information “accidentally” lies in the common subspace of different modalities. Such assumption may not hold true when
input modalities are weakly correlated and do not possess
much common information. In this case, the underlying discriminative information is more likely to be omitted after
feature mapping, which leads to performance degradation.
To address these problems, we propose Soft-HGR, a novel
framework to learn correlated representation across modalities without hard whitening constraints. The objective of
Soft-HGR consists of two inner products, one between the
feature mappings and the other between feature covariances.

One primary focus in multimodal feature extraction is to find
the representations of individual modalities that are maximally correlated. As a well-known measure of dependence,
the Hirschfeld-Gebelein-Rényi (HGR) maximal correlation becomes an appealing objective because of its operational meaning and desirable properties. However, the strict whitening
constraints formalized in the HGR maximal correlation limit
its application. To address this problem, this paper proposes
Soft-HGR, a novel framework to extract informative features
from multiple data modalities. Specifically, our framework
prevents the “hard” whitening constraints, while simultaneously preserving the same feature geometry as in the HGR
maximal correlation. The objective of Soft-HGR is straightforward, only involving two inner products, which guarantees the
efficiency and stability in optimization. We further generalize
the framework to handle more than two modalities and missing
modalities. When labels are partially available, we enhance the
discriminative power of the feature representations by making
a semi-supervised adaptation. Empirical evaluation implies
that our approach learns more informative feature mappings
and is more efficient to optimize.

Introduction
Human perception is typically more accurate when objects
are presented in multiple modalities, as information from
one sense often augments information from another. The
idea has risen recent interests to develop learning machines
which can extract correlation across modalities, through the
perception of equivalence, dependence or association. However, compared to the ease of human perception, identifying the relationship among multiple sources is much harder
for machines. The reason lies in the facts that the varying
statistic properties carried by data from each source obscure the correlation among modalities, which could be vital
for learning effective feature representations (Baltrušaitis,
Ahuja, and Morency 2018; Sohn, Shang, and Lee 2014).
Existing methods approaches this problem by Canonical
∗
This work was done when Lichen Wang was an intern at Tencent AI Lab.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5281

