The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Temporal Planning Using Metastates
Amanda Coles,∗ Andrew Coles,∗ J. Christopher Beck†
*Department of Informatics, King’s College London, UK.
†Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Canada.
email: {amanda,andrew}.coles@kcl.ac.uk, jcb@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract

there are many cases where states that are not likely to be
interestingly different still have to be considered as such.
In this paper we propose a radically different approach to
dealing with the need to explore classically identical states
in temporal planning. Our approach is based on the idea of
metastates. Instead of inserting multiple copies of a classically identical state (which are reached by different paths)
into the open list for search to explore, we maintain a single metastate that aggregates these. Each time a new state is
generated, we either create a new metastate if it is classically
unique; or if we have previously seen a classically identical
state we add information to the existing metastate to record
that there is an alternative path to the state (which may lead
to different temporal constraints). Now, we search over the
space of metastates, nominally expanding only one member
from each. Since here we are interested in satisficing planning we need only consider expanding the other members of
a metastates, if its descendants are temporally inconsistent.
We empirically evaluate our approach on temporal planning domains and our results show a significant improvement in performance over the state-of-the-art in memoisation for temporal planning.

When performing temporal planning as forward state-space
search, effective state memoisation is challenging. Whereas
in classical planning, two states are equal if they have the
same facts and variable values, in temporal planning this is
not the case: as the plans that led to the two states are subject to temporal constraints, one might be extendable into at
temporally valid plan, while the other might not. In this paper, we present an approach for reducing the state space explosion that arises due to having to keep many copies of the
same ‘classically’ equal state – states that are classically equal
are aggregated into metastates, and these are separated lazily
only in the case of temporal inconsistency. Our evaluation
shows that this approach, implemented in OPTIC and compared to existing state-of-the-art memoisation techniques, improves performance across a range of temporal domains.

1

Introduction

Planning is fundamental to intelligent autonomous behavior
and reasoning about time is essential to planning in many
real-world domains. One of the most popular paradigms for
planning is forward state-space search, and key to its success is memoisation. In classical planning if a given state
(set of propositions and variable assignments) has been seen
before, then it need not be explored again if it is reached by
a different sequence of actions. This reasoning can easily be
extended to a setting where actions have costs, by keeping
only the lowest cost path to a given state.
Temporal planning brings with it further challenges for
memoisation (Coles and Coles 2016). Not only are the values of variables and propositions important, as in classical
planning, but also the path taken to reach a state can determine whether the partial plan can be extended into a temporally valid plan to reach the goal. For example, if we took a
longer path to reach a state, we might no longer be able to
meet a deadline. In the worst case in temporal planning, this
results in the need to keep different states for every possible
path to every classically equal state. Coles and Coles (2016)
made some progress on this issue with a technique to prune
isomorphic plans and to identify special cases where achieving facts earlier can always be proven to be better. However,

2
2.1

Background

Problem Definition

A P DDL 2.1 (Fox and Long 2003) planning problem is defined over a collection of propositions P , and a vector of
numeric variables v. These are manipulated and referred to
by actions. The executability of actions is determined by
their preconditions, conjunctions of conditions. A condition
is either a single proposition p ∈ P , ¬p, or a numeric constraint over v. We assume all such constraints are linear, and
hence can be represented in the form w.v{>, ≥, <, ≤, =}c
where w is a vector of constants and c is a constant).
Each durative action A has three sets of preconditions:
pre` A, pre↔ A, prea A. These represent the conditions that
must hold at its start, throughout its execution (invariants),
and at its end, respectively. Instantaneous effects can oc−
cur at the start or end of A: eff+
` A (eff` A) denote propositions added (resp. deleted) at the start; effnum
A denotes
`
+
−
num
numeric effects. Similarly, effa A, effa and effa
record
effects at the end. We assume numeric effects are of the
form: v{+=, -=, =}w.v + c (v ∈ v). Semantically, the val-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7554

