The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A PSPACE Subclass of Dependency
Quantified Boolean Formulas and Its Effective Solving∗
Christoph Scholl,1 Jie-Hong Roland Jiang,2 Ralf Wimmer,1,3 Aile Ge-Ernst1
1

Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
2
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
3
Concept Engineering GmbH, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
{scholl, wimmer, geernsta}@informatik.uni-freiburg.de, jhjiang@ntu.edu.tw

Janota et al. 2012; Janota and Marques-Silva 2015; Tentrup
and Rabe 2015), have been made to consider the more general
formalism of quantified Boolean formulas (QBFs).
Although QBFs are capable of encoding decision problems in the PSPACE complexity class, they are not powerful enough to succinctly encode many natural and practical problems that involve decisions under partial information. For example, the analysis of games with incomplete information (Peterson, Reif, and Azhar 2001), topologically constrained synthesis of logic circuits (Balabanov,
Chiang, and Jiang 2014), synthesis of safe controllers (Bloem,
Könighofer, and Seidl 2014), synthesis of fragments of
linear-time temporal logic (Chatterjee et al. 2013), and
verification of partial designs (Scholl and Becker 2001;
Gitina et al. 2013) fall into this category and require an
even more general formalism known as dependency quantified Boolean formulas (DQBFs) (Peterson, Reif, and Azhar
2001).
Unlike QBFs, where an existential variable implicitly depends on all the universal variables preceding its quantification level, DQBFs admit the dependency sets being explicitly
specified. Essentially the dependency specifiable quantifications correspond to Henkin quantifiers (Henkin 1961). The semantics of a DQBF can be interpreted from a game-theoretic
viewpoint as a game played by one universal player and
multiple non-cooperative existential players with incomplete
information, each partially observing the moves of the universal player as specified by his/her own dependency set.
A DQBF is true if and only if the existential players have
winning strategies. This specificity of dependencies allows
DQBF encodings to be exponentially more compact than their
equivalent QBF counterparts. In contrast to the PSPACEcompleteness of QBF, the decision problem of DQBF is
NEXPTIME-complete (Peterson, Reif, and Azhar 2001).
Driven by the needs of the applications mentioned above,
research on DQBF solving has emerged in the past few years,
leading to solvers such as I DQ (Fröhlich et al. 2014) and
HQS (Gitina et al. 2015; Wimmer et al. 2015; Wimmer et
al. 2017). Due to the high worst-case complexity of DQBF
solving, identifying special DQBF structures, as we do in this
paper, may provide insights for solver improvement.
As an example for a DQBF, consider the formula
∀x1 ∀x2 ∃y1 (x1 )∃y2 (x2 ) : (x1 ∧ x2 ) ≡ (y1 ≡ y2 )
from (Rabe 2017), which we will use as a running example

Abstract
Dependency quantified Boolean formulas (DQBFs) are a powerful formalism, which subsumes quantified Boolean formulas
(QBFs) and allows an explicit specification of dependencies
of existential variables on universal variables. This enables a
succinct encoding of decision problems in the NEXPTIME
complexity class. As solving general DQBFs is NEXPTIME
complete, in contrast to the PSPACE completeness of QBF
solving, characterizing DQBF subclasses of lower computational complexity allows their effective solving and is of
practical importance.
Recently a DQBF proof calculus based on a notion of fork
extension, in addition to resolution and universal reduction,
was proposed by Rabe in 2017. We show that this calculus
is in fact incomplete for general DQBFs, but complete for a
subclass of DQBFs, where any two existential variables have
either identical or disjoint dependency sets over the universal
variables. We further characterize this DQBF subclass to be
ΣP
3 complete in the polynomial time hierarchy. Essentially using fork extension, a DQBF in this subclass can be converted
to an equisatisfiable 3QBF with only a linear increase in formula size. We exploit this conversion for effective solving of
this DQBF subclass and point out its potential as a general
strategy for DQBF quantifier localization. Experimental results show that the method outperforms state-of-the-art DQBF
solvers on a number of benchmarks, including the 2018 DQBF
evaluation benchmarks.

1

Introduction

During the last two decades an enormous progress in the
solution of quantifier-free Boolean formulas (SAT) has been
observed. Nowadays, SAT solving is successfully used in
many application areas, e. g., in planning (Rintanen, Heljanko,
and Niemelä 2006), automatic test pattern generation (Eggersglüß and Drechsler 2012; Czutro et al. 2010), and formal
verification of hard- and software systems (Biere et al. 2003;
Clarke et al. 2001; Ivancic et al. 2008). Motivated by the success of SAT solvers, efforts, e. g., (Lonsing and Biere 2010;
∗

This work was partly supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) within the project ‘Solving Dependency Quantified
Boolean Formulas’ and the Ministry of Science and Technology of
Taiwan. JHJ was supported in part by the Alexander von Humboldt
Foundation during this work.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1584

