The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Level Deep Cascade Trees for Conversion Rate Prediction in
Recommendation System
Hong Wen,1 ∗ Jing Zhang,2,3 ∗ Quan Lin,1 Keping Yang,1 † Pipei Huang1
1

Alibaba Group
Hangzhou Dianzi University
3
University of Technology Sydney
{qinggan.wh, pipei.hpp}@alibaba-inc.com
{tieyi.lq, shaoyao}@taobao.com, jing.zhang@uts.edu.au
2

Abstract
Developing effective and efficient recommendation methods is very challenging for modern e-commerce platforms.
Generally speaking, two essential modules named “ClickThrough Rate Prediction” (CTR) and “Conversion Rate Prediction” (CVR) are included, where CVR module is a crucial
factor that affects the final purchasing volume directly. However, it is indeed very challenging due to its sparseness nature. In this paper, we tackle this problem by proposing multiLevel Deep Cascade Trees (ldcTree), which is a novel decision tree ensemble approach. It leverages deep cascade structures by stacking Gradient Boosting Decision Trees (GBDT)
to effectively learn feature representation. In addition, we
propose to utilize the cross-entropy in each tree of the preceding GBDT as the input feature representation for next level
GBDT, which has a clear explanation, i.e., a traversal from
root to leaf nodes in the next level GBDT corresponds to
the combination of certain traversals in the preceding GBDT.
The deep cascade structure and the combination rule enable
the proposed ldcTree to have a stronger distributed feature
representation ability. Moreover, inspired by ensemble learning, we propose an Ensemble ldcTree (E-ldcTree) to encourage the model’s diversity and enhance the representation ability further. Finally, we propose an improved Feature learning
method based on EldcTree (F-EldcTree) for taking adequate
use of weak and strong correlation features identified by pretrained GBDT models. Experimental results on off-line data
set and online deployment demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed methods.

User behavior

Trigger
Selection

Candidate
Selection

Matching Stage

Features

Features

CTR Model

CVR Model

Ranking Stage

Figure 1: The framework for online recommendation in our
E-commerce platform.

mended items that people with similar tastes preferred in
the past. Content-based recommendations make users recommended items similar to the ones the user preferred in the
past. Hybrid recommendations integrates two or more types
of recommendation strategies, which helps to avoid certain
limitations of single strategy (?).
Recommender System increasingly plays an essential role
in industry area, which promotes services for many applications (?; ?). In addition, in order to help customers find exactly what they need, recommendation techniques have been
studied and deployed extensively on E-commerce platforms,
which provides good user experience and promotes incredible increment in revenue. Usually, the deployed framework
for our online E-commerce platforms is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Specifically, when a user visits it through a terminal, such
as smart phones, the system firstly analyzes his/her long
and short term behaviors and then his/her interested items,
called Triggers, are selected. Then, massive items closely related with Triggers are generated. Further, top K(e.g., 500)
of them (based on the “matching score”), along with extra information (e.g., user, item, user-item cross features),
are delivered to the next Ranking stage where it mainly contains two core modules, namely CTR and CVR. Finally, the
recommendation results are generated and displayed to the
user. In this paper, we mainly focused on the CVR module.
In the past few decades, deep learning has been witnessed
the tremendous successes in many application areas (?;
?), such as image classification (?; ?) , speech recognition (?;
?) and object detection (?; ?). Meanwhile, recent studies
also demonstrate its efficiency and effectiveness in coping
with recommendation tasks(?; ?; ?; ?; ?; ?; ?). Though deep
learning has been partially overcoming obstacles of con-

Introduction
With the explosive growth of information available online,
Recommender System (RS), as a useful information filtering tool, is used for estimating users’ preferences on items
they have not seen and guides them to discover products
or services they might be interested in from massive possible options. In general, recommender systems are classified into the following three categories based on the forms
of recommendations (?): Collaborative recommendations,
Content-based recommendations and Hybrid recommendations. Collaborative recommendations make users recom∗

The co-first authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

338

