The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Spatio-Temporal Graph Routing for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Bin Li,1 Xi Li,2∗ Zhongfei Zhang,1 Fei Wu2
1

College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{bin li, xilizju, zhongfei}@zju.edu.cn wufei@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Layer 𝐿

Layer 𝐿 + 1

neighbour

With the representation effectiveness, skeleton-based human
action recognition has received considerable research attention, and has a wide range of real applications. In this
area, many existing methods typically rely on fixed physicalconnectivity skeleton structure for recognition, which is incapable of well capturing the intrinsic high-order correlations among skeleton joints. In this paper, we propose a novel
spatio-temporal graph routing (STGR) scheme for skeletonbased action recognition, which adaptively learns the intrinsic high-order connectivity relationships for physicallyapart skeleton joints. Specifically, the scheme is composed
of two components: spatial graph router (SGR) and temporal graph router (TGR). The SGR aims to discover the connectivity relationships among the joints based on sub-group
clustering along the spatial dimension, while the TGR explores the structural information by measuring the correlation degrees between temporal joint node trajectories. The
proposed scheme is naturally and seamlessly incorporated
into the framework of graph convolutional networks (GCNs)
to produce a set of skeleton-joint-connectivity graphs, which
are further fed into the classification networks. Moreover, an
insightful analysis on receptive field of graph node is provided to explain the necessity of our method. Experimental
results on two benchmark datasets (NTU-RGB+D and Kinetics) demonstrate the effectiveness against the state-of-the-art.

(a)
sub-group

correlated

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Illustraion of three routing ways: (a) fixed routing
by physical connections; (b) spatial routing by considering
local clustering; (c) temporal routing by modeling the correlation degrees of node trajectories.

Introduction

aggregation scheme with physical human skeleton, against
the existing literatures such as pseduo images (Wang et al.
2018a; Xie et al. 2018), variants of LSTM (Shahroudy et al.
2016; Song et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017).
In general, the graph-based method applies a fixed human skeleton to graph convolution operation and iteratively
aggregates the hidden feature with neighbourhood features.
However, it is challenging to capture changeable human
structure in complex scene. This brings three-fold problems
for further improvement: 1) The skeleton itself is changeable and depends on specific dataset, e.g., 25 joints in NTURGB+D (Shahroudy et al. 2016) while 18 joints in Kinetics (Kay et al. 2017), resulting in confusion on real human
skeleton; 2) The joint connections are highly unbalanced.
While torso joints become over-smoothing, limb joints may
still be under-smoothing, which causes extreme difficulty on
feature sharing for two limb joints; 3) A global graph structure is applied to each sample, raising the question “one size

As a challenging problem in computer vision, skeletonbased human action recogntion takes 3d human body coordinates as input and outputs action class, which attracts
increasing attention recently (Wang et al. 2018b). Typically,
human body skeletons characterize the geometric body configuration as rigid body, and their dynamics capture motion patterns in a continuous way. This dynamic geometric structure expresses relation among the joints not only
spatially but also temporally. By this means, graph representation is the natural way to express the intrinsic human
structure. Therefore, it is crucial to automatically represent
joints on the given graph. Recent success of Spatial Temporal Graph Convolution Networks (ST-GCN) (Yan, Xiong,
and Lin 2018) has justified the effectiveness by a graph
∗

Corresponding author: Xi Li
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8561

