The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Semantic Sentence Matching with
Densely-Connected Recurrent and Co-Attentive Information
Seonhoon Kim,1,2 Inho Kang,1 Nojun Kwak2
1

Search&Clova, Naver Corp.
2
Seoul National University
{seonhoon.kim, once.ihkang}@navercorp.com, nojunk@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

annotated data such as Quora (Csernai 2017), SNLI (Bowman et al. 2015), and MultiNLI (Williams, Nangia, and
Bowman 2017) have contributed significantly to learning
semantics as well. In the conventional methods, a matching model can be trained in two different ways (Gong, Luo,
and Zhang 2018). The first methods are sentence-encodingbased ones where each sentence is encoded to a fixed-sized
vector in a complete isolated manner and the two vectors for
the corresponding sentences are used in predicting the degree of matching. The others are joint methods that allow to
utilize interactive features like attentive information between
the sentences.
In the former paradigm, because two sentences have no
interaction, they can not utilize interactive information during the encoding procedure. In our work, we adopted a
joint method which enables capturing interactive information for performance improvements. Furthermore, we employ a substantially deeper recurrent network for sentence
matching like deep neural machine translator (NMT) (Wu
et al. 2016). Deep recurrent models are more advantageous
for learning long sequences and outperform the shallower
architectures. However, the attention mechanism is unstable
in deeper models with the well-known vanishing gradient
problem. Though GNMT (Wu et al. 2016) uses residual connection between recurrent layers to allow better information
and gradient flow, there are some limitations. The recurrent
hidden or attentive features are not preserved intact through
residual connection because the summation operation may
impede the information flow in deep networks.
Inspired by Densenet (Huang et al. 2017), we propose
a densely-connected recurrent network where the recurrent
hidden features are retained to the uppermost layer. In addition, instead of the conventional summation operation, the
concatenation operation is used in combination with the attention mechanism to preserve co-attentive information better. The proposed architecture shown in Figure 1 is called
DRCN which is an abbreviation for Densely-connected Recurrent and Co-attentive neural Network. The proposed
DRCN can utilize the increased representational power of
deeper recurrent networks and attentive information. Furthermore, to alleviate the problem of an ever-increasing feature vector size due to concatenation operations, we adopted
an autoencoder and forwarded a fixed length vector to the
higher layer recurrent module as shown in the figure. DRCN

Sentence matching is widely used in various natural language
tasks such as natural language inference, paraphrase identification, and question answering. For these tasks, understanding logical and semantic relationship between two sentences
is required but it is yet challenging. Although attention mechanism is useful to capture the semantic relationship and to
properly align the elements of two sentences, previous methods of attention mechanism simply use a summation operation which does not retain original features enough. Inspired
by DenseNet, a densely connected convolutional network,
we propose a densely-connected co-attentive recurrent neural network, each layer of which uses concatenated information of attentive features as well as hidden features of all the
preceding recurrent layers. It enables preserving the original
and the co-attentive feature information from the bottommost
word embedding layer to the uppermost recurrent layer. To alleviate the problem of an ever-increasing size of feature vectors due to dense concatenation operations, we also propose
to use an autoencoder after dense concatenation. We evaluate
our proposed architecture on highly competitive benchmark
datasets related to sentence matching. Experimental results
show that our architecture, which retains recurrent and attentive features, achieves state-of-the-art performances for most
of the tasks.

Introduction
Semantic sentence matching, a fundamental technology in
natural language processing, requires lexical and compositional semantics. In paraphrase identification, sentence
matching is utilized to identify whether two sentences have
identical meaning or not. In natural language inference
also known as recognizing textual entailment, it determines
whether a hypothesis sentence can reasonably be inferred
from a given premise sentence. In question answering, sentence matching is required to determine the degree of matching 1) between a query and a question for question retrieval,
and 2) between a question and an answer for answer selection. However identifying logical and semantic relationship
between two sentences is not trivial due to the problem of
the semantic gap (Liu et al. 2016).
Recent advances of deep neural network enable to learn
textual semantics for sentence matching. Large amount of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6586

