The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deception in Finitely Repeated Security Games
Thanh H. Nguyen,1 Yongzhao Wang,2 Arunesh Sinha,2 Michael P. Wellman2
1

2

University of Oregon, thanhhng@cs.uoregon.edu
University of Michigan, {wangyzh,arunesh,wellman}@umich.edu

Abstract

defender, therefore, would take into account the attacker’s
manipulative strategy in designing his own strategy. We label an attacker strategy as non-manipulative if it chooses an
action without regard to the defender’s learning, for example if its behavior in each stage is a myopic best response.
Previous work on learning in security games has generally
treated the attacker as non-manipulative in this sense (Blum,
Haghtalab, and Procaccia, 2014; Marecki, Tesauro, and Segal, 2012).

Allocating resources to defend targets from attack is often
complicated by uncertainty about the attacker’s capabilities,
objectives, or other underlying characteristics. In a repeated
interaction setting, the defender can collect attack data over
time to reduce this uncertainty and learn an effective defense.
However, a clever attacker can manipulate the attack data to
mislead the defender, influencing the learning process toward
its own benefit. We investigate strategic deception on the part
of an attacker with private type information, who interacts
repeatedly with a defender. We present a detailed computation and analysis of both players’ optimal strategies given the
attacker may play deceptively. Computational experiments
illuminate conditions conducive to strategic deception, and
quantify benefits to the attacker. By taking into account the
attacker’s deception capacity, the defender can significantly
mitigate loss from misleading attack actions.

We study the strategic deployment of attacker deception
in finitely repeated security games. We adopt an incompleteinformation model, where the defender has underlying uncertainty about the attacker’s type. At each time step, the
defender updates his belief on the attacker’s type based on
attack data collected at previous steps. Based on the updated
belief, the defender chooses an action to play. The attacker
decides its own action, aware that the defender is collecting
attack data to infer about the attacker’s type. The ultimate
goal of both players is to maximize expected utility accumulated over the whole time horizon. A pair of strategies
that best-respond to each other, accounting for observations,
constitutes a Perfect Bayesian Nash Equilibrium (PBNE).

Introduction
Real-worldsecuritydomainsareoftencharacterizedbyimperfect information: uncertainty (particularly on the defender’s
part) about actions taken or underlying characteristics of the
opposing agent. Experience observed through repeated interaction in such domains provides an opportunity for the defender to learn about the behaviors and characteristics of attacker(s) (Kar et al., 2017; Gholami et al., 2017; Haghtalab
et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2016; Xu, Tran-Thanh, and Jennings, 2016; Balcan et al., 2015; Blum, Haghtalab, and Procaccia, 2014; Marecki, Tesauro, and Segal, 2012; Letchford,
Conitzer, and Munagala, 2009). For example, in wildlife protection (Fang et al., 2016), repeated interaction with poachers
allows the defense authorities to observe poaching signs and
patterns over time. From these observations, the defender may
inferfeaturesofthepoacher’scapabilitiesandpreferences,and
thus design more effective patrolling strategies.
To the extent that the defender relies on data, however,
the attacker may choose to modify its behavior to mislead
the defender. That is, in a particular interaction the attacker
may select an action that does not actually yield the best immediate reward, to avoid revealing sensitive private information. Such deceptive behavior could manipulate the outcome
of learning to the long-term benefit of the attacker. A savvy

The paper includes four main contributions. First, we
present a non-linear optimization program to find a PBNE
of the finitely repeated simultaneous-move game. Second,
we present a result that provides an easy technique to find
a sequential equilibrium of the game based on a computed
PBNE. Third, we show that there exists a PBNE in which
players’ equilibrium strategies depend only on histories of
the attacker’s actions. This allows us to represent both players’ strategies in a compact form, which helps in significantly speeding up the equilibrium computation of the game.
Fourth, we provide a preliminary extension to the Stackelberg game (sequential move) setting.
Finally, we present a detailed experimental analysis of
strategic deception, showing how various game factors affect the tendency for the attacker to deviate from myopic
best responses to mislead the defender. Our results show that
the defender and attacker receive significant loss and benefit
respectively if the defender does not address the attacker’s
deception. By taking into account deceptive attacks, such
loss and benefit is reduced drastically.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2133

