The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Image Saliency Prediction in Transformed
Domain: A Deep Complex Neural Network Method
Lai Jiang, Zhe Wang, Mai Xu,∗ Zulin Wang
∗

Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
Corresponding Author: Mai Xu (maixu@buaa.edu.cn)

Abstract

domain features, which may be not well suitable for image
saliency.
Most recently, instead of hand-designed features, deep
neural network (DNN) based methods (Pan et al. 2017;
Cornia et al. 2018; Wang and Shen 2018; Huang et al. 2015;
Cornia et al. 2016; Jetley, Murray, and Vig 2016; Xu et al.
2018b) show the outstanding performance by end-to-end
training for saliency prediction. In these methods, advanced
DNN architectures, e.g., LSTM-based (Cornia et al. 2018),
GAN-based (Pan et al. 2017) and multi-scale (Wang and
Shen 2018) structures, were proposed to extract saliency cues
from images. Besides, others focused on developing effective loss functions, e.g., Kullback CLeibler (KL) divergence
based (Huang et al. 2015), location bias (Cornia et al. 2016)
and Bhattacharyya distance (Jetley, Murray, and Vig 2016)
loss. However, the existing DNNs only focus on pixel domain, ignoring the transformed domain features that highly
contribute to saliency prediction (Li et al. 2013).
Inspired by complex CNN (Trabelsi et al. 2017), this paper proposes a novel Sal-DCNN method, to predict image
saliency by learning features at both pixel and transformed
domains. We first investigate how saliency cues are encoded
in DFT domain, along with the following findings. 1) The
phase spectrum encodes most saliency cues; 2) a certain
pattern of the amplitude spectrum is important for saliency
prediction; 3) the transformed domain spectrum is robust to
noise and down-sampling for saliency prediction. Following
these findings, we propose an encoder-decoder structure for
Sal-DCNN. Specifically, based on the developed complex
components, a complex dense encoder is proposed in this
paper to extract deep features considering both pixel and
transformed domain information. Then, a three-stream multidomain decoder is proposed to predict not only saliency in
pixel domain, but also the spectrums of phase and residual
amplitude for saliency in the transformed domain. Finally,
the saliency map of an image can be generated by fusing
pixel and transformed domain saliency.

The transformed domain fearures of images show effectiveness
in distinguishing salient and non-salient regions. In this paper,
we propose a novel deep complex neural network, named SalDCNN, to predict image saliency by learning features in both
pixel and transformed domains. Before proposing Sal-DCNN,
we analyze the saliency cues encoded in discrete Fourier transform (DFT) domain. Consequently, we have the following
findings: 1) the phase spectrum encodes most saliency cues;
2) a certain pattern of the amplitude spectrum is important
for saliency prediction; 3) the transformed domain spectrum
is robust to noise and down-sampling for saliency prediction.
According to these findings, we develop the structure of SalDCNN, including two main stages: the complex dense encoder
and three-stream multi-domain decoder. Given the new SalDCNN structure, the saliency maps can be predicted under the
supervision of ground-truth fixation maps in both pixel and
transformed domains. Finally, the experimental results show
that our Sal-DCNN method outperforms other 8 state-of-theart methods for image saliency prediction on 3 databases.

1

Introduction

Saliency prediction is a widely studied computer vision task,
aiming to understand and predict human visual attention on
images/videos. The last decade has witnessed the success of
applying transformed domain methods in saliency prediction,
since the transformed domain features has been verified to be
effective in distinguishing salient and non-salient regions. In
the beginning, (Hou and Zhang 2007) proposed predicting image saliency in discrete Fourier transform (DFT) domain, by
subtracting the locally averaged amplitude spectrum from the
original one. Afterwards, a number of transformed domain
methods (Guo and Zhang 2010; Hou, Harel, and Koch 2012;
Li et al. 2015; Leboran et al. 2017) were proposed for saliency
prediction, mainly focusing on 2 aspects. 1) Transform on
input channels, e.g., DFT (Hou and Zhang 2007), quaternion
Fourier transform (QFT) (Guo and Zhang 2010) and discrete
Cosine transform (DCT) (Hou, Harel, and Koch 2012). 2)
Algorithms in the transformed domain, e.g., spectral residual
(Hou and Zhang 2007), phase filtering (Li et al. 2015) and
amplitude spectrum normalization (Guo and Zhang 2010).
But all these methods rely on the hand-designed transformed

2

Related work

Recently, the transformed domain methods (Hou and Zhang
2007; Guo and Zhang 2010; Leboran et al. 2017) have been
widely studied for saliency prediction. The main idea of these
methods is that the salient objects and non-salient background
can be easily distinguished in the transformed domain. Be-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8521

