The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SepNE: Bringing Separability to Network Embedding∗
Ziyao Li,1 Liang Zhang,1 Guojie Song2†
1

2

Yuanpei College, Peking University, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Ministry of Education, Peking University, China
{leeeezy, zl515, gjsong}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Many successful methods have been proposed for learning low dimensional representations on large-scale networks,
while almost all existing methods are designed in inseparable processes, learning embeddings for entire networks even
when only a small proportion of nodes are of interest. This
leads to great inconvenience, especially on super-large or dynamic networks, where these methods become almost impossible to implement. In this paper, we formalize the problem of separated matrix factorization, based on which we
elaborate a novel objective function that preserves both local
and global information. We further propose SepNE, a simple
and flexible network embedding algorithm which independently learns representations for different subsets of nodes in
separated processes. By implementing separability, our algorithm reduces the redundant efforts to embed irrelevant nodes,
yielding scalability to super-large networks, automatic implementation in distributed learning and further adaptations.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach on several
real-world networks with different scales and subjects. With
comparable accuracy, our approach significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines in running times on large networks.

1

Figure 1: Inseparable and separable NE processes.

Efficiency is a major aspect of contemporary NE studies,
and various methods that are applicable to large-scale networks have been proposed (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena
2014; Tang et al. 2015; Grover and Leskovec 2016). Almost
all of these methods embed entire networks with inseparable
processes, in which the representation of one node depends
on represented outcomes of every other node. A globallydefined optimum can be achieved under this framework,
while it also causes great inconvenience: the maximum network size such methods can handle is eventually limited. For
example, it takes LINE (2015), one of the fastest algorithms,
several hours to embed a million-level network. Thousands
of hours may be spent to achieve equivalent performance on
billion-level networks. Another type of methods learns models in an inductive manner and conduct inferences over unseen data (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017). These models have convenient inference processes, while they cannot
variate over time and rely on large training data and time to
achieve good performance.
The efficiency problem over super-scale networks is impossible to solve directly, as the running time of algorithms
inevitably grows proportionally to problem scales. Therefore, we bring up a new perspective of solving efficiency
problems: separability. The separability of an algorithm indicates an ability of being conducted by different workers

Introduction

Learning low dimensional representations of network data,
or network embedding (NE), is a challenging task on large
networks, of which the scales can reach billion-level and
is growing rapidly. For example, the number of monthlyactive users of Facebook reaches 2.23 billion and increases
11% yearly. 1 At the same time, although sizes of networks
may infinitely grow as data accumulates, it is often the case
that only small proportions of nodes are of interest in downstream applications. This is the starting point of this paper:
can we respectively learn representations for different subsets of nodes-very small compared to the collectivity-while
preserving information of the entire network? If so, we can
obtain good representations for the requested nodes without
the redundant efforts to embed irrelevant ones.
∗
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 61876006 and No. 61572041).
†
Corresponding author. Email: gjsong@pku.edu.cn
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://investor.fb.com/investor-news/

4261

