The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Data Point Pruning for One-Class SVM
Yasuhiro Fujiwara,†‡\ Sekitoshi Kanai,† Junya Arai,† Yasutoshi Ida,† Naonori Ueda‡]
†

NTT Software Innovation Center, 3-9-11 Midori-cho Musashino-shi, Tokyo, 180-8585, Japan
‡
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, 2-4 Seika-Cho Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan
\
Osaka University, 1-5 Yamadaoka, Suita-shi, Osaka, Japan
]
RIKEN Center for AIP, 1-4-1 Nihonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 103-0027, Japan
{fujiwara.yasuhiro, kanai.sekitoshi, arai.junya, ida.yasutoshi, ueda.naonori}@lab.ntt.co.jp
Abstract

can reduce the computational cost of SVM by constructing
a random mapping into a low-dimensional feature space for
kernel functions (Rahimi and Recht 2007). However, these
approaches need the high computation cost since they apply
the solver to all the data points. Note that, since the original approaches of the Nyström method and random Fourier
features use simple algorithms (Drineas and Mahoney 2005;
Rahimi and Recht 2007), they are more effective in reducing computation cost comparing to the recent approaches of
the Nyström method and random Fourier features (Li et al.
2016; Musco and Musco 2017; Wu et al. 2016). Noumir
et al. proposed an online learning approach based on the
coherence criterion (Noumir, Honeine, and Richard 2012).
The approach computes the hyper-plane by updating the
Gram matrix and its inverse matrix by exploiting the Woodbury matrix identity. In terms of efficiency, this approach
outperforms the adaptive approach (Gómez-Verdejo et al.
2011). Gao proposed the active-set method based online approach for one-class SVM to improve the efficiency (Gao
2015). It applies the solver to data points only if their distance to the center of the hyper-plane is not less than the radius of the hyper-plane. However, they can erroneously remove data points that are actually support vectors for the
optimal hyper-plane; they sacrifice the optimality of the
hyper-plane to increase the efficiency. Note that there exists a gap between the performance of approximate and the
optimal approaches in terms of accuracy (Li et al. 2016;
Fujiwara et al. 2015; 2013; Yang et al. 2012).

One-class SVM is a popular method for one-class classification but it needs high computation cost. This paper proposes
Quix as an efficient training algorithm for one-class SVM.
It prunes unnecessary data points before applying the SVM
solver by computing upper and lower bounds of a parameter that determines the hyper-plane. Since we can efficiently
check optimality of the hyper-plane by using the bounds, it
guarantees the identical classification results to the original
approach. Experiments show that it is up to 6800 times faster
than existing approaches without degrading optimality.

Introduction
Due to the rapid development of Internet and database technologies, we can improve the effectiveness of applications
by using knowledge from big data (Fujiwara et al. 2017a;
Mishima and Fujiwara 2015; Nakatsuji and Fujiwara 2014).
Machine learning approaches play important role in extracting knowledge from big data (Fujiwara et al. 2017b;
Tanaka et al. 2016; Nakatsuji et al. 2014). One-class SVM
is a popular machine learning approach to achieving oneclass classification (Schölkopf et al. 2001). It computes a
hyper-plane that separates data points of the target class.
Data points are called support vectors if they are representative of the hyper-plane, and they are called outliers if they are
not labeled as the target class. One-class SVM offers the advantage of the desirable properties of traditional SVMs. For
instance, it has a unique solution in computing the hyperplane since its optimization problem is convex. However,
its computation cost is excessive especially for large-scale
data since it needs to solve a quadratic programming problem with n constraints where n is the number of data points.
The shrinking approach is a popular method to reduce the
computation cost of SVM (Joachims 1999). Although it can
compute the optimal hyper-plane, it needs high computation cost in checking the optimality. The Nyström method
approximates a kernel matrix used in the solver by selecting data points as landmarks (Drineas and Mahoney 2005).
Specifically, it computes a small matrix of landmarks where
all data points are projected by using kernel similarities between landmarks and data points. Random Fourier features

We propose a novel efficient approach that guarantees the
optimal hyper-plane. Given parameter ν (0 < ν ≤ 1) that
determines the fraction of outliers and support vectors, this
paper formally addresses the problem of reducing the training time of one-class SVM for parameter ν and given data
points. We prune unnecessary data points in computing support vectors before applying the solver by computing upper and lower bounds of a parameter that determines the
hyper-plane. Since we efficiently check the optimality of an
obtained hyper-plane after applying the solver, we can obtain the same training result as the original algorithm. The
proposed approach can use any solvers such as SMO (Platt
1998) and incremental approaches (Cauwenberghs and Poggio 2000; Laskov et al. 2006) since our approach is solverindependent. Note that the proposed approach itself does not
have hyper-parameters to be tuned by users.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3590

