time/s

160

1430
(a)

The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

(b)

(a)

(b)

time
time Network for Video Based Person Re-Identification
Multi-Scale
3D Convolution

Jianing Li, Shiliang Zhang, Tiejun Huang
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
{ljn-vmc,
slzhang.jdl, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn
(a)
(b)

Abstract
This paper proposes a two-stream convolution network to
extract spatial and temporal cues for video based person ReIdentification (ReID). A temporal stream in this network is
constructed by inserting several Multi-scale 3D (M3D) convolution layers into a 2D CNN network. The resulting M3D
convolution network introduces a fraction of parameters into
the 2D CNN, but gains the ability of multi-scale temporal
feature learning. With this compact architecture, M3D convolution network is also more efficient and easier to optimize
than existing 3D convolution networks. The temporal stream
further involves Residual Attention Layers (RAL) to refine the
temporal features. By jointly learning spatial-temporal attention masks in a residual manner, RAL identifies the discriminative spatial regions and temporal cues. The other stream
in our network is implemented with a 2D CNN for spatial
feature extraction. The spatial and temporal features from two
streams are finally fused for the video based person ReID.
Evaluations on three widely used benchmarks datasets, i.e.,
MARS, PRID2011, and iLIDS-VID demonstrate the substantial advantages of our method over existing 3D convolution
networks and state-of-art methods.

0

0.5

1

(a)

1.5

2

time/s

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of video frames sampled from person
tracklets. (a) shows two persons with similar appearance but
different gaits; (b) shows two persons with similar gait but
totally different appearance.

easier to infer that, extracting and fusing spatial and temporal
cues is important for video based person ReID.
Existing studies on video based person ReID have significantly boosted the performance on existing datasets. Those
works can be summarized into two categories, i.e., 1) extracting frame-level features and generating video feature
thorough pooling or weight learning (Liu et al. 2017a;
Zhou et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018), and 2) extracting framelevel features then applying the Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) to generate video features (Yan et al. 2016;
McLaughlin et al. 2016). Both those two categories of methods first treat each video frame independently. The feature genearted by pooling strategy are generally not affected by the
order of video frames. The RNN only builds temporal connections on high-level features, hence is not capable to capture
the temporal cues on image local details. Therefore, more
effective way of acquiring spatial-temporal feature should
still be investigated.
Recently, 3D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is introduced to learn the spatial-temporal representation in other
video tasks like action recognition (Carreira and Zisserman
2017; Qiu, Yao, and Mei 2017; Tran et al. 2018). Through
sliding convolution kernels on both spatial and temporal dimensions, 3D CNN encodes both the visual appearance and
the temporal cues across consecutive frames. Promising performances have been reported in many studies (Carreira and
Zisserman 2017; Tran et al. 2015; Ji et al. 2013). Because a

Introduction
Current researches on person Re-Identification (ReID) mainly
focus on two lines of tasks depending on still images and
video sequences, respectively. Recent years have witnessed
the impressive progresses in image based person ReID,
e.g., deep visual representations have significantly boosted
the ReID performance on image based ReID datasets (Li,
Zhu, and Gong 2018b; Xu et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018b;
Su et al. 2016; 2015). Being able to explore plenty of spatial and temporal cues, video based person ReID has better
potentials to address some challenges in image based person ReID. Fig. 1 shows several sampled frames from person
tracklets. As shown in Fig. 1(a), solely relying on visual cues
is hard to identify those two persons wearing visually similar
clothes. However, they can be easily distinguished by gait
cues. Meanwhile, video based person ReID could also leverage the latest progresses in image based person ReID. The
two persons in Fig. 1(b) show similar gait cues, but can be
easily distinguished by their spatial and appearance cues. It is
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8618

