The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Identifying Semantics in Clinical Reports Using Neural Machine Translation
Srikanth Mujjiga, Vamsi Krishna, Kalyan Chakravarthi, Vijayananda J
HealthSuite Insights, Philips Healthcare, Bangalore, India
{srikanth.mujjiga,vamsi.krishna,kalyan.chakravarthi.murahari,vijayananda.j}@philips.com

Abstract

benign tumour in patients who have undergone computed
tomography scans.
Information retrieval (IR) is the de facto way to leverage
the knowledge available in large resources of clinical documents like radiology reports, discharge summaries, electronic medical records, etc. However, the effectiveness of
the IR system has a significant impact on the clinical and
academic productivity of the radiologists and clinical researchers. Building effective IR systems for clinical text is
challenging because of large number of clinical terms with
varied use. With abundant interchangeable words in clinical domain, understanding the semantics of the words in the
clinical documents is vital to improve the search results. For
example, search for ”heart attack” should be able to retrieve
the documents containing ”myocardial infarction” as they
both mean the same. The lexicon based IR systems are futile in clinical domain due to different ways of expressing
the same clinical findings. The IR system that retrieves and
prioritizes the clinical reports based on the semantics of the
reports is more likely to provide better search results, rather
than the one based on lexicons. For example, ”cyst found in
left lower lung” is an observation similar to ”calcification of
thorax” and effective IR system should be able to identify
that both the observations are similar.

Clinical documents are vital resources for radiologists when
they have to consult or refer while studying similar cases. In
large healthcare facilities where millions of reports are generated, searching for relevant documents is quite challenging.
With abundant interchangeable words in clinical domain, understanding the semantics of the words in the clinical documents is vital to improve the search results. This paper details
an end to end semantic search application to address the large
scale information retrieval problem of clinical reports. The
paper specifically focuses on the challenge of identifying semantics in the clinical reports to facilitate search at semantic
level. The semantic search works by mapping the documents
into the concept space and the search is performed in the concept space. A unique approach of framing the concept mapping problem as a language translation problem is proposed in
this paper. The concept mapper is modelled using the Neural
machine translation model (NMT) based on encoder-decoder
with attention architecture. The regular expression based concept mapper takes approximately 3 seconds to extract UMLS
concepts from a single document, where as the trained NMT
does the same in approximately 30 milliseconds. NMT based
model further enables incorporation of negation detection
to identify whether a concept is negated or not, facilitating
search for negated queries.

Motivation

Related Work

The adoption of Health Information Systems (Winter et al.
2011), Picture Archiving and Communication Systems and
Electronic Medical Records by healthcare facilities has resulted in large amount of clinical documents in digital form.
The availability of large amount of clinical documents in
digital format is transforming the healthcare facilities from
volume based care providers to value based care providers.
The push is significantly more in the radiology department,
where the radiologists are increasingly using patient’s clinical history and consult the past similar cases for clinical
comparisons and past outcomes to provide targeted healthcare (McEnery 2018). For example, a radiologist might be
interested in consulting the reports of past male patients
above 40 years of age, having no smoking habit and diagnosed with throat cancer. Likewise a clinical researcher
might be interested in knowing the number of findings of

There is an extensive amount of research to identify clinical entities and the relationship between these entities (Raja,
Subramani, and Natarajan 2013), (Rak et al. 2012). Authors
(Wei 2017) proposed a mechanism to map gene variants to
unique identifiers. These text mining approaches form the
basis on which other applications can be build, to make use
of the underlying knowledge. One such application developed by (Kurnit et al. 2017) is a search engine specialised
in cancer therapies. However, these works are focussed on
addressing the information retrieval problem of the clinical
subdomains. They is very sparse work around productisable
IR system in clinical domain which can cater to multiple
modalities and clinical literature.
(Batet, Sánchez, and Valls 2011) and (Mabotuwana, Lee,
and Cohen-Solal 2013) have computed the document similarity of radiology reports by using knowledge-based semantic similarity using ontologies.
Due to the computational limitations in processing large

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9552

