The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Better Accuracy and
Robustness with Localized Adversarial Training
Eitan Rothberg

Tingting Chen, Hao Ji

Computer Science and Engineering
Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio 43210

Computer Science
California State Polytechnic University
Pomona, California 91768

Abstract

amples is a key challenge in image classification, as a solution would provide not only defense, but also insight into the
nature of CNNs (Tsipras et al. 2018). This work outlines the
beginnings of a simple but effective solution: including images with only adversarial backgrounds in the training set.
We successfully implemented this strategy with the MNIST
dataset, creating a model that outperforms a traditional classifier by 6.5% on natural inputs and at least 65.3% on all
attempted adversarial inputs.

As technology and society grow increasingly dependent on
computer vision, it becomes important to make sure that
these technologies are secure. However, even today’s stateof-the-art classifiers are easily fooled by carefully manipulated images. The only solutions that have increased robustness against these manipulated images have come at the expense of accuracy on natural inputs. In this work, we propose a new training technique, localized adversarial training,
that results in more accurate classification of both both natural and adversarial images by as much as 6.5% and 99.7%,
respectively.

Localized Adversarial Training
In this work, we train a classifier on images where only the
backgrounds are set adversarial in a careful way, in order to
improve robustness against adversarial attacks without sacrificing too much accuracy on natural inputs.

Introduction
Since the advent of machine learning to the field of computer
vision, image classification software has surpassed human
capabilities and enabled a slew of new technologies including facial recognition authentication, self-driving cars, and
smart security cameras (Akhtar and Mian 2018). However, a
unique challenge threatens these technologies: the existence
of images which appear normal to humans, but reliably fool
image classifiers (Szegedy et al. 2014). Because convolutional neural networks (CNNs) tend to focus on minor and
easily manipulated details, attacks such as the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM), discovered by Goodfellow et al.
(Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015), and its iterative
counterpart, Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) from Kurakin et al. (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017), have
been able to reliably generate adversarial examples by reverse engineering the training process. In the same way a
classifier’s weights are updated to minimize its loss during
training, an adversarial attack updates a particular image to
maximize the classifier’s error on that image. Adversarial
training, the process of including adversarial examples in
the training set, is one popular defense technique. However,
while this technique has been shown to improve the robustness of a classifier against adversarial examples, the inclusion of adversarial images in the training process weakens
classifiers’ accuracy on natural, unaltered images (Tsipras et
al. 2018) (Su et al. 2018). Building classifiers that maintain
state-of-the-art accuracy on both natural and adversarial ex-

Algorithm 1 Localized Adversarial Training
1: n is a CNN;  is the maximum value that any pixel
may legally change; attack describes which pixels may
legally change
2: repeat for each minibatch B in training data
3:
repeat for each image in B
4:
x ← image
5:
λ ← PGD Attack (x, n) . Noise generated by
PGD attack
6:
x0 ← x + λ
7:
epmatrix is initialized
8:
epmatrix ←Localize (epmatrix, , attack) .
Changes are localized
9:
x0 clipped to within x+epmatrix, x-epmatrix
10:
replace original image in B with x0
11:
until every image in batch is altered
12:
Train n on updated batch B
13: until training is complete
As described in Algorithm 1, localized adversarial training iterates through small batches of the training data, making each image in each batch adversarial. For each image,
a PGD attack generates and adds adversarial perturbations.
Then, the attack is localized by creating a matrix of equal
size to the image, denoted as epmatrix, where each value is
 if the corresponding pixel is altered, or zero otherwise. (In
the next Section, we will describe in detail the different lo-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10017

