The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Character n-Gram Embeddings to Improve RNN Language Models
Sho Takase,†∗ Jun Suzuki,†‡ Masaaki Nagata†
†NTT Communication Science Laboratories
‡Tohoku University
sho.takase@nlp.c.titech.ac.jp, jun.suzuki@ecei.tohoku.ac.jp, nagata.masaaki@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

To incorporate the internal structure, (Verwimp et al. 2017)
concatenated character embeddings with an input word embedding. They demonstrated that incorporating character embeddings improved the performance of RNN language models. Moreover, (Kim et al. 2016) and (Jozefowicz et al. 2016)
applied Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to construct
word embeddings from character embeddings.
On the other hand, in the field of word embedding construction, some previous researchers found that character n-grams
are more useful than single characters (Wieting et al. 2016;
Bojanowski et al. 2017). In particular, (Wieting et al. 2016)
demonstrated that constructing word embeddings from character n-gram embeddings outperformed the methods that
construct word embeddings from character embeddings by
using CNN or a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM).
Based on their reports, in this paper, we propose a neural
language model that utilizes character n-gram embeddings.
Our proposed method encodes character n-gram embeddings
to a word embedding with simplified Multi-dimensional Selfattention (MS) (Shen et al. 2018). We refer to this constructed
embedding as charn-MS-vec. The proposed method regards
charn-MS-vec as an input in addition to a word embedding.
We conduct experiments on the well-known benchmark
datasets: Penn Treebank, WikiText-2, and WikiText-103. Our
experiments indicate that the proposed method outperforms
neural language models trained with well-tuned hyperparameters and achieves state-of-the-art scores on each dataset. In
addition, we incorporate our proposed method into a standard
neural encoder-decoder model and investigate its effect on
machine translation and headline generation. We indicate that
the proposed method also has a positive effect on such tasks.

This paper proposes a novel Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
language model that takes advantage of character information.
We focus on character n-grams based on research in the field of
word embedding construction (Wieting et al. 2016). Our proposed method constructs word embeddings from character ngram embeddings and combines them with ordinary word embeddings. We demonstrate that the proposed method achieves
the best perplexities on the language modeling datasets: Penn
Treebank, WikiText-2, and WikiText-103. Moreover, we conduct experiments on application tasks: machine translation and
headline generation. The experimental results indicate that our
proposed method also positively affects these tasks.

1

Introduction

Neural language models have played a crucial role in recent advances of neural network based methods in natural
language processing (NLP). For example, neural encoderdecoder models, which are becoming the de facto standard
for various natural language generation tasks including machine translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014), summarization (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015), dialogue (Wen et
al. 2015), and caption generation (Vinyals et al. 2015) can be
interpreted as conditional neural language models. Moreover,
neural language models can be used for rescoring outputs
from traditional methods, and they significantly improve the
performance of automatic speech recognition (Du et al. 2016).
This implies that better neural language models improve the
performance of application tasks.
In general, neural language models require word embeddings as an input (Zaremba, Sutskever, and Vinyals 2014).
However, as described by (Verwimp et al. 2017), this approach cannot make use of the internal structure of words
although the internal structure is often an effective clue for
considering the meaning of a word. For example, we can
comprehend that the word ‘causal’ is related to ‘cause’ immediately because both words include the same character
sequence ‘caus’. Thus, if we incorporate a method that handles the internal structure such as character information, we
can improve the quality of neural language models and probably make them robust to infrequent words.

2

RNN Language Model

In this study, we focus on RNN language models, which are
widely used in the literature. This section briefly overviews
the basic RNN language model.
In language modeling, we compute joint probability by
using the product of conditional probabilities. Let w1:T be
a word sequence with length T , namely, w1 , ..., wT . We formally obtain the joint probability of word sequence w1:T as
follows:
TY
−1
p(w1:T ) = p(w1 )
p(wt+1 |w1:t ).
(1)

∗

Current affiliation: Tokyo Institute of Technology.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

t=1

5074

