The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Visual Place Recognition via Robust `2 -Norm
Distance Based Holism and Landmark Integration
Kai Liu, Hua Wang, Fei Han, Hao Zhang
Department of Computer Science, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401
liukaizhijia@gmail.com, huawangcs@gmail.com, fhan@alumni.mines.edu, hzhang@mines.edu

Abstract

out leaves) during long-term autonomy cause the same challenge to place recognition.
Over the past several years, a number of methods have
been proposed to address this critical problem of long-term
place recognition (Lowry et al. 2016). From the perspective
of features, these methods are based either on local (e.g.,
SIFT) or global (e.g., HOG or deep features) features; from
the perspective of localization cues, these methods can be
generally grouped into two categories, based on either holistic layouts or landmarks, respectively. The holistic layout of
the environment is typically represented using global features (Han et al. 2017; Wu and Rehg 2011) that are learned
or manually constructed to encode long-term changes. Very
recently, several techniques take advantages of semantic
landmarks (e.g., traffic lights and buildings) within the
environment as an intermediate representation to address
long-term place recognition (Yuan, Chan, and Lee 2011;
Sunderhauf et al. 2015). Although these methods using either holistic layouts or landmarks have shown promising
place recognition capability, the research problem of how
to integrate these two localization cues in a principled way
has not yet been well addressed.
In this paper, we present a novel method to learn location
representations. It first learns a projection from the semantic landmarks in a place image. Then it projects the holistic image representation of the same place into the learned
subspace. As a result, the learned location representation
simultaneously captures the information from both the semantic landmarks of the place and its holistic characterization. In the proposed objective to learn the projection
from the landmarks of a place image, we aim to preserve
both global and local consistencies of the landmarks in the
projected subspace, which leads to an optimization problem that minimizes the ratio of the matrix traces. By taking
into account the drastic visual variations at the same place
over long period of time, we further develop the proposed
objective by replacing the squared `2 -norm distances used
in most traditional learning models by the non-squared `2 norm distances, such that the robustness of the learned location representations against outlying visual characterizations
is promoted (Gao 2008; Wright et al. 2009; Nie et al. 2011;
Wang, Nie, and Huang 2013b; Nie et al. 2013; Wang, Nie,
and Huang 2014b; Liu and Wang 2015; Liu et al. 2017;
2018; Liu and Wang 2018). The contributions of this paper

Visual place recognition is essential for large-scale simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). Long-term robot
operations across different time of the days, months, and
seasons introduce new challenges from significant environment appearance variations. In this paper, we propose a novel
method to learn a location representation that can integrate
the semantic landmarks of a place with its holistic representation. To promote the robustness of our new model against
the drastic appearance variations due to long-term visual
changes, we formulate our objective to use non-squared `2 norm distances, which leads to a difficult optimization problem that minimizes the ratio of the `2,1 -norms of matrices. To
solve our objective, we derive a new efficient iterative algorithm, whose convergence is rigorously guaranteed by theory.
In addition, because our solution is strictly orthogonal, the
learned location representations can have better place recognition capabilities. We evaluate the proposed method using
two large-scale benchmark data sets, the CMU-VL and Nordland data sets. Experimental results have validated the effectiveness of our new method in long-term visual place recognition applications.

During visual simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM), especially in large-scale loopy environments,
place recognition is essential to detect and close loops to reduced uncertainty for constructing maps and to improve localization accuracy (Lowry et al. 2016). Recently, driven by
several critical applications of SLAM, such as self-driving,
long-term place recognition has attracted increased attentions to improve outdoor localization when a robot (or an
autonomous vehicle) needs to operate in a dynamic environment for long periods of time. Besides traditional perception
difficulties, long-term place recognition introduces additional challenges mainly caused by significant visual appearance changes of the environment over time (Sünderhauf and
Protzel 2011; Zhang, Han, and Wang 2016; Latif et al. 2017;
Han et al. 2018). For example, when an autonomous vehicle drives through the same place at different time of the
day (e.g., noon vs. midnight), the same place can look very
different due to dramatic illumination changes. Similarly,
at different time and seasons, the changing weather (e.g.,
sunny vs. snowy) and vegetation (e.g., trees with or withCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8034

