The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Adaptive Planning with Evidence Based Prediction for
Improved Fluency in Routine Human-Robot Collaborative Tasks
Christopher K. Fourie
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA, 02139

Introduction

itive actions, experimentation and increasing iterations, we
wish the robot to learn how its own behavior affects that of
its partner. To accomplish this, we propose a model that encodes both human and robot actions in a probabilistic space
describing the temporal transition points between activities.
The purpose of such a model is not only in passive predictive power (understanding the future actions of an associate),
but also to encode the latent effect of a robot’s action on the
future actions of the associate.
Further, such a model raises some interesting possibilities: firstly, the development of a planning algorithm that
takes advantage of such a model could, in principle, be used
to improve fluency in repetitive tasks. Secondly, we believe
that the combination of such an algorithm and model could
be used to help a team in training meet long-term behavior
goals and requirements. In this thesis, we wish to focus on
the specific case of a collaborative robotic partner in a jointaction framework, in which the robot is an active participant
in the task and working toward the same goal as the human.

Robotics has seen widespread use in manufacturing environments, particularly in the automotive sector, where their
introduction has alleviated costs, reduced workload and improved throughput. However, limitations exist in what can
be automated, and tasks remain in which the human is not
only required, but of crucial importance to the success of the
task. In such scenarios, a dynamic interface exists between
humans and machines, in which a form of collaboration is
required to ensure effective and fluent interaction. From the
perspective of the human, the effectiveness of this collaboration can be assessed on several criteria, such as trust and
fluency (Hoffman 2013).
Many of the complex scenarios in this domain largely
fall under the concept of a joint action workspace (Sebanz,
Bekkering, and Knoblich 2006), where a human and a robot
are acting together to accomplish a common goal, in a manner that requires them to interact with and influence one another. These principles have been the subject of ongoing investigation - for example, in (Nikolaidis et al. 2017), a gametheoretic approach is taken in which the robot approximates
the human’s perception of its capabilities, while in (Dragan
2017), a series of mathematical and probabilistic models is
discussed for describing human states and actions, often in
response to robot action.
In short, an interpretation of the consequences of a particular action must exist, which either partner must extrapolate
upon or use to adapt to the other.
This is particularly true in repetitive tasks as these help
ensure that a learned model of such behavior remains stationary and interactions remain fluent: in (Harrison et al.
2003), it was found that being familiar with a teammate facilitated performance, and, more importantly, that patterns in
task execution persisted in future iterations, despite changes
in deadline or interventions. This would suggest that performance in repetitive tasks converges to a steady state behavior
that is robust to variations.
This thesis work intends to explore the development of
a shared mental model between an autonomous agent and
a human, where we aim to promote fluency in continuing
interactions defined by repetitive tasks. That is, with repet-

Thesis Plan
Recent Work: Practical Demonstration of an
Assistive Robot on a Factory Floor
Previous work with collaborators (Iqbal et al. 2018) focused
on the development of a robotic assistant on an automotive factory floor, tasked with bringing assembly parts to
an associate for installation. The project was a demonstration of specific capabilities: primarily, it was a showcase
of a state-of-the-art activity recognition system (Hayes and
Shah 2017), but it also included practical additions required
for an actual demonstration. These additions included the
implementation of the required robotic behavior (collecting
and handing over the part, the work of my colleague), and
a dynamic scheduling module to ensure that the part was
handed over at the correct time (my personal contribution to
the project).
For the project, we needed to develop a temporal model
from training segments xj and labels lj = f (xj ) that predicted the times tj that handovers would need to take place,
assuming that activity ordering was known. We needed to
create an appropriate schedule to ensure handovers took
place at the specified times.
I used a Gaussian Mixture Model for the temporal model

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9880

