The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

ACM: Adaptive Cross-Modal Graph
Convolutional Neural Networks for RGB-D Scene Recognition
Yuan Yuan, Zhitong Xiong, Qi Wang
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
{y.yuan1.ieee, xiongzhitong, crabwq}@gmail.com

Abstract
RGB image classification has achieved significant performance improvement with the resurge of deep convolutional
neural networks. However, mono-modal deep models for
RGB image still have several limitations when applied to
RGB-D scene recognition. 1) Images for scene classification
usually contain more than one typical object with flexible
spatial distribution, so the object-level local features should
also be considered in addition to global scene representation.
2) Multi-modal features in RGB-D scene classification are
still under-utilized. Simply combining these modal-specific
features suffers from the semantic gaps between different
modalities. 3) Most existing methods neglect the complex
relationships among multiple modality features. Considering these limitations, this paper proposes an adaptive crossmodal (ACM) feature learning framework based on graph
convolutional neural networks for RGB-D scene recognition.
In order to make better use of the modal-specific cues, this
approach mines the intra-modality relationships among the
selected local features from one modality. To leverage the
multi-modal knowledge more effectively, the proposed approach models the inter-modality relationships between two
modalities through the cross-modal graph (CMG). We evaluate the proposed method on two public RGB-D scene classification datasets: SUN-RGBD and NYUD V2, and the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Image classification

Scene classification

Figure 1: The difference between image classification and
scene classification task. Images for scene classification are
usually not object-centric.

to the object in the image, as shown in Fig. 1. However, the
category of the scene image is related to several typical objects and the spatial layout of the scene. Object-centric image usually contains one object, so the difference between
images mostly relies on the objects. However, in order to
classify a scene from another, we need recognize all the key
objects in the scene and consider the relationships between
them. Thus deep learning methods for common image classification are not suitable for scene classification. Considering this, to learn more robust and effective scene image representation, we propose to extract local object-level features
and model their relationships for scene classification.
Recently, depth sensors have been widely used in our
daily life such as Microsoft Kinect. As RGB-D image can
provide additional robust geometric cues which is not sensitive to illumination variability, more and more research
focuses on the RGB-D image scene classification. Conventional RGB images only provide the appearance texture information and have difficulty in understanding the spatial
layouts of complex scenes without the depth information.
With the extra geometric information in RGB-D images, the
performance of scene recognition can be improved promisingly. Although the depth information provided by RGB-D
images can help to extract more discriminative features, how
to make the extracted depth cues complementary to the RGB
information is still a hard problem.
Exacting complementary information from RGB and
depth modality effectively is a typical multi-modal feature
learning problem. The method of Wang et al. (2015b) pro-

Image classification has been researched for years, and excellent performance has been obtained with the development
of deep learning methods. With the advent of large scale
image dataset ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015) and advanced graphics processing unit (GPU), more and more excellent deep learning architectures have been proposed, such
as VGG (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), ResNet (He et al.
2016) and DenseNet (Huang et al. 2017). Image classification is one of the basic tasks in computer vision research,
and the main difficulty is how to learn effective image representations. As the learned image features can be applied to
other high-level image analysis tasks, other computer vision
research such as scene classification can benefit from the improvement of image recognition (Wang et al. 2018b). However, there is significant difference between scene classification and general image classification. For general image
classification, the category of each image is highly related
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9176

