The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Sparse Adversarial Perturbations for Videos
Xingxing Wei, Jun Zhu,∗ Sha Yuan, Hang Su
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{xwei11, dcszj, yuansha, suhangss}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

plored during training. Thus, investigating adversarial samples not only helps understand the working mechanism of
deep networks, but also provides opportunities to improve
the networks’ robustness (Xie et al. 2017; Dong et al. 2018;
Ma, Xu, and Cao 2019).
Up to now, many studies about adversarial samples have
been investigated, such as adversarial perturbations for a single image (Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016),
universal adversarial perturbations (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al.
2016) and adversarial samples for object detection and segmentation (Xie et al. 2017). However, these studies are all
based on images, while leaving videos unexplored. Investigating adversarial samples on videos is of both theoretical and practical values, as deep neural networks have been
widely applied in video analysis tasks (Donahue et al. 2017;
Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015; Wang et al. 2016).
Technically, the main difference between videos and images lies in the temporal structure contained in videos.
Therefore, a properly designed attacking method should explore the temporal information to achieve efficiency and effectiveness. We expect that the perturbations added on one
frame can propagate to other frames via temporal interactions, which will be called the propagation of perturbations. Besides, a video have many frames, computing perturbations for each frame is time-consuming, and actually
not necessary. Whether it is possible that perturbations are
added on only few frames, and then are propagated to other
frames to misclassify the whole video. In this way, the generated adversarial videos also have high imperceptibility and
are hard to be detected. Because perturbations are added on
sparse frames rather than the whole video, we call it the
sparsity of perturbations. Actually, the propagation and
sparsity interact with each other, propagation helps boost
the sparsity, meanwhile the sparsity constraint will lead
to better propagation.
For these reasons, in this paper, we aim to attack the
video action recognition task (Poppe 2010), where the temporal cue is a key component for the predicted label. This is
naturally suitable to explore the temporal adversarial perturbations. For the threat model, we choose the networks
with a CNN+RNN architecture, which is widely used in
action recognition, such as Long-term Recurrent Convolu-

Although adversarial samples of deep neural networks
(DNNs) have been intensively studied on static images, their
extensions in videos are never explored. Compared with images, attacking a video needs to consider not only spatial cues
but also temporal cues. Moreover, to improve the imperceptibility as well as reduce the computation cost, perturbations
should be added on as few frames as possible, i.e., adversarial
perturbations are temporally sparse. This further motivates
the propagation of perturbations, which denotes that perturbations added on the current frame can transfer to the next
frames via their temporal interactions. Thus, no (or few) extra perturbations are needed for these frames to misclassify
them. To this end, we propose the first white-box video attack method, which utilizes an l2,1 -norm based optimization
algorithm to compute the sparse adversarial perturbations for
videos. We choose the action recognition as the targeted task,
and networks with a CNN+RNN architecture as threat models to verify our method. Thanks to the propagation, we can
compute perturbations on a shortened version video, and then
adapt them to the long version video to fool DNNs. Experimental results on the UCF101 dataset demonstrate that even
only one frame in a video is perturbed, the fooling rate can
still reach 59.7%.

Introduction
In the past decade, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have
shown great superiority in computer vision tasks, like image recognition (He et al. 2016), image restoration (Dong
et al. 2014) and visual tracking (Wang and Yeung 2013).
Although DNNs obtain the state-of-the-art performance in
these tasks, they are known to be vulnerable to adversarial
samples (Szegedy et al. 2013), i.e., the images with visually
imperceptible perturbations that can mislead the network to
produce wrong predictions. The adversarial samples are usually calculated by the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM)
(Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014) and optimizationbased methods (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2016). One reason
for adversarial samples is that they are fell on some areas in the high-dimensional feature space which are not ex∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8973

