The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Machine Teaching for Inverse
Reinforcement Learning: Algorithms and Applications
Daniel S. Brown, Scott Niekum
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
{dsbrown,sniekum}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

provides a lower bound on the number of samples needed by
active IRL algorithms (Lopes, Melo, and Montesano 2009;
Brown, Cui, and Niekum 2018); (3) optimal teaching can be
used to design algorithms that better leverage highly informative demonstrations which do not follow the i.i.d. assumption
made by many IRL algorithms; (4) studying optimal teaching
can help humans better teach robots through demonstration
(Cakmak and Lopes 2012) and help robots better communicate their intentions (Huang et al. 2017); and (5) optimal
teaching can give insight into how to design (Mei and Zhu
2015) and defend against (Alfeld, Zhu, and Barford 2017)
demonstration poisoning attacks in order to design IRL algorithms that are robust to poor or malicious demonstrations.
We formulate the problem of optimal teaching for sequential decision making tasks using the recently popularized machine teaching framework (Zhu 2015). The machine teaching problem is the inverse of the machine learning problem. In machine teaching, the goal is to select
the optimal training set that minimizes teaching cost, often defined as the size of the training data set, and the
loss or teaching risk between the model learned by the student and the learning target. While machine teaching has
been applied to regression and classification (Zhu 2015;
Liu and Zhu 2016), little work has addressed machine teaching for sequential decision-making tasks such as learning
from demonstration via IRL.
The contributions of this paper are fourfold: (1) a formal
definition of machine teaching for IRL, (2) an efficient algorithm to compute optimal teaching demonstrations for IRL,
(3) an application of machine teaching to find the lower bound
on the number of queries needed to learn a task using active
IRL, and (4) a novel Bayesian IRL algorithm that learns more
efficiently from informative demonstrations than a standard
IRL approach by leveraging the non-i.i.d. nature of highly
informative demonstrations from a teacher.

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) infers a reward function
from demonstrations, allowing for policy improvement and
generalization. However, despite much recent interest in IRL,
little work has been done to understand the minimum set of
demonstrations needed to teach a specific sequential decisionmaking task. We formalize the problem of finding maximally
informative demonstrations for IRL as a machine teaching
problem where the goal is to find the minimum number of
demonstrations needed to specify the reward equivalence class
of the demonstrator. We extend previous work on algorithmic
teaching for sequential decision-making tasks by showing a
reduction to the set cover problem which enables an efficient
approximation algorithm for determining the set of maximallyinformative demonstrations. We apply our proposed machine
teaching algorithm to two novel applications: providing a
lower bound on the number of queries needed to learn a policy
using active IRL and developing a novel IRL algorithm that
can learn more efficiently from informative demonstrations
than a standard IRL approach.

1

Introduction

As robots and digital personal assistants become more prevalent, there is growing interest in developing algorithms that
allow everyday users to program or adapt these intelligent systems to accomplish sequential decision-making tasks, such
as performing household chores, or carrying on a meaningful
conversation. A common way to teach sequential decisionmaking tasks is through Learning from Demonstration (LfD)
(Argall et al. 2009), in which the goal is to learn a policy
from demonstrations of desired behavior. More specifically,
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) (Ng and Russell 2000;
Arora and Doshi 2018) is a form of LfD that aims to infer the
reward function that motivated the demonstrator’s behavior,
allowing for reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 1998)
and generalization to unseen states. Despite much interest in
IRL, there is not a clear, agreed-upon definition of optimality
in IRL, namely, the size of the minimal set of demonstrations
needed to teach a sequential decision-making task.
There are many compelling reasons to study optimal teaching for IRL: (1) it gives insights into the intrinsic difficulty
of teaching certain sequential decision-making tasks; (2) it

2

Related work

Determining the minimum number of demonstrations needed
to teach a task falls under the fields of Algorithmic Teaching
(Goldman and Kearns 1995; Balbach and Zeugmann 2009)
and Machine Teaching (Zhu 2015; Zhu et al. 2018). However,
almost all previous work has been limited to optimal teaching
for classification and regression tasks. The work of Singla
et al. (2014) bears a strong resemblance to our work: they

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7749

