The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Temporal Bilinear Networks for Video Action Recognition
Yanghao Li, Sijie Song, Yuqi Li, Jiaying Liu∗
Peking University
lyttonhao@gmail.com, ssj940920@pku.edu.cn, liyuqi.ne@gmail.com, liujiaying@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

temporal pooling (Karpathy et al. 2014) or recurrent layers (Ng et al. 2015; Karpathy et al. 2014) on the top of
the 2D CNNs. However, the visual features are extracted
independently by CNNs in a frame-wise manner, and the
recurrent layers are fed in merely one-dimensional highlevel semantic features without spatial information. It makes
the temporal dynamics ignored in the preceding CNNs,
especially for subtle motion dynamics. (2) Following the
two-stream architecture (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Wang et al. 2016), many methods capture appearance and motion information separately by different stream networks with
RGB and optical flow as input. Despite of the good results,
it also potentially prevents the model from fully utilizing
the appearance and motion information in a single network.
Furthermore, the estimation of optical flow is very time- and
resource-consuming. Thus, they are unsuitable for existing
large-scale datasets (Kay et al. 2017). (3) Different from the
above methods which use 2D CNNs, methods like C3D (Tran
et al. 2015) adopt 3D convolution operators to learn spatiotemporal structures directly from RGB frames. Recently, 3D
CNNs start to present their effectiveness on some large-scale
action recognition datasets (Carreira and Zisserman 2017),
but the temporal modeling in 3D convolution operators is still
limited in linear transformation. It is unclear whether 3D convolution operators are effective enough to capture complex
temporal relations across frames. In addition, 3D convolution
operators also introduce much more parameters.
In this paper, we propose a new Temporal Bilinear (TB)
model to enhance the capacities of CNNs to model spatiotemporal dependencies. Specifically, TB model employs bilinear transformation to capture pairwise interactions among
CNN features of adjacent frames for video action recognition.
We believe this explicit temporal quadratic transformations
on adjacent frames are more powerful to model complex motion relations in the temporal domain. We insert the TB model
into the original 2D CNNs to model appearance and motion
information simultaneously. At the same time, through multiple TB blocks embedded in different layers of TBNs, multiple
levels of temporal dynamics could be captured with different
temporal receptive fields.
To avoid the explosion of quadratic parameters in bilinear models, we explore the factorized bilinear model (Li et
al. 2017) in the temporal domain for video data. To further
reduce the complexity of our TB model, we build the tempo-

Temporal modeling in videos is a fundamental yet challenging problem in computer vision. In this paper, we propose
a novel Temporal Bilinear (TB) model to capture the temporal pairwise feature interactions between adjacent frames.
Compared with some existing temporal methods which are
limited in linear transformations, our TB model considers
explicit quadratic bilinear transformations in the temporal domain for motion evolution and sequential relation modeling.
We further leverage the factorized bilinear model in linear
complexity and a bottleneck network design to build our TB
blocks, which also constrains the parameters and computation
cost. We consider two schemes in terms of the incorporation
of TB blocks and the original 2D spatial convolutions, namely
wide and deep Temporal Bilinear Networks (TBN). Finally,
we perform experiments on several widely adopted datasets
including Kinetics, UCF101 and HMDB51. The effectiveness
of our TBNs is validated by comprehensive ablation analyses
and comparisons with various state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016) have witnessed
the tremendous progress in computer vision over the past few
years. CNNs have demonstrated their power in many visual
tasks, from image classification (Russakovsky et al. 2015;
He et al. 2016), object detection (Girshick et al. 2014;
Ren et al. 2015), semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer,
and Darrell 2015) and video action recognition (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014; Tran et al. 2015). However, the progress
of video action recognition is relatively much slower. One of
the main challenges in this area is the modeling of both spatial appearance and temporal motion across different frames.
Therefore, researchers in video action recognition recently
devote most efforts to the effective modeling of temporal
dynamics in the deep architectures.
There are three typical schemes of temporal motion modeling for deep learning methods in action recognition. (1)
Some methods capture temporal dependencies by utilizing
∗

Corresponding author. This work was supported by National
Natural Science Foundation of China under contract No. 61772043
and Peking University – Tencent Rhino Bird Innovation Fund.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8674

