The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Group Decision Diagram (GDD):
A Compact Representation for Permutations
Takanori Maehara,1 Yuma Inoue2
1

RIKEN AIP, 2 Google Japan
takanori.maehara@riken.jp, yumai@google.com

Abstract

are recursively computed by
S i = S i−1 {e, F, B, R, L, D, U}

= sg : s ∈ S i−1 , g ∈ {e, F, B, R, L, D, U} ,

Permutation is a fundamental combinatorial object appeared
in various areas in mathematics, computer science, and artificial intelligence. In some applications, a subset of a permutation group must be maintained efficiently. In this study,
we develop a new data structure, called group decision diagram (GDD), to maintain a set of permutations. This data
structure combines the zero-suppressed binary decision diagram with the computable subgroup chain of the permutation
group. The data structure enables efficient operations, such
as membership testing, set operations (e.g., union, intersection, and difference), and Cartesian product. Our experiments
demonstrate that the data structure is efficient (i.e., 20–300
times faster) than the existing methods when the permutation
group is considerably smaller than the symmetric group, or
only subsets constructed by a few operations over generators
are maintained.

1

(1)

where F, B, R, L, D, and U are the basic permutations that
rotate the front, back, right, left, down, and up faces, respectively, and sg denotes the composition of s and g.
If we have a data structure that stores a set of permutations compactly, and permits union and multiplication operations efficiently, we can implement the above breadth-first
search procedure using the data structure. Minato (Minato
2011) proposed such a data structure called permutation decision diagram (πDD), which represents a permutation by a
sequence of transpositions and stores them using the zerosuppressed binary decision diagram (ZDD) (Minato 1993).
Inoue and Minato (Inoue and Minato 2014) proposed another data structure called rotation permutation decision diagram (ρDD), which uses left-rotations instead of transpositions; see Section 2. These data structures perform well
on several problems including the Rubik’s cube (Minato
2011), circuit design (Tague et al. 2013), and topological
sorting (Matsumoto, Hatano, and Takimoto 2018).
However, in the Rubik’s cube problem, using the πDD or
ρDD appears redundant. These data structures can represent
any subset of Sym(48); here, Sym(48) has a cardinality of
48! ≈ 1061 . On the other hand, the number of possible configurations of the Rubik’s cube is 227 314 53 72 11 ≈ 1019 ,
which is significantly smaller than 48!. This may imply that
πDD and ρDD are “too powerful” to represent a subset of
the possible configurations of the Rubik’s cube; therefore,
there can be more “suitable” data structures to maintain the
possible configurations of the Rubik’s cube.
The above question is generalized in the notion of computational group theory (Seress 2003; Holt, Eick, and O’Brien
2005). Let Sym(n) be the set of all permutations of [n] =
{1, . . . , n}, called the symmetric group of degree n. Then,
the πDD and ρDD are data structures that can store any subset of Sym(n). Now, we are interested in subgroup G of
Sym(n), and want to maintain a subset of G efficiently. Our
research question is as follows.

Introduction

Background and Motivation A permutation is a bijection on a (finite) set. It is a fundamental object in combinatorics (Knuth 1997), and is applied in several areas, such as
sorting (Waksman 1968), scheduling (Pruesse and Ruskey
1994), and puzzles (Egner and Püschel 1998; Mulholland
2013). In certain applications, a subset of permutations must
be maintained (i.e., stored and manipulated) efficiently.
For example, let us consider a 3 × 3 × 3 Rubik’s cube. We
want to count the number of configurations that can be generated by at most k moves from the initial configuration. As
the configuration of the cube is represented by a permutation
of 48 non-center facets, the problem is equivalent to count
the number of permutations on [48] = {1, . . . , 48}, denoted
by Sym(48), that can be generated by at most k-fold compositions of the basic permutations, i.e., by the rotations of the
faces. We can enumerate such configurations by the breadthfirst search: Let S 0 = {e} be the singleton set of the identity
permutation, which is associated with the initial configuration. Then, the configurations obtained by at most i moves
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This work is done at JSPS KAKENHI (S) 15H05711 and not
related to Google.

Is there an efficient data structure for maintaining a subset of G that is a subgroup of Sym(n)? Is it beneficial
to considering G instead of Sym(n)?
2986

