The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hierarchically Structured Reinforcement
Learning for Topically Coherent Visual Story Generation
Qiuyuan Huang,1* Zhe Gan,1∗ Asli Celikyilmaz,1 Dapeng Wu,2 Jianfeng Wang,1 Xiaodong He3
1

Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, 2 University of Florida, 3 JD AI Research
{qihua, zhe.gan, aslicel, jianfw}@microsoft.com; dpwu@ieee.org; xiaodong.he@jd.com

Abstract
We propose a hierarchically structured reinforcement learning approach to address the challenges of planning for generating coherent multi-sentence stories for the visual storytelling task. Within our framework, the task of generating a
story given a sequence of images is divided across a two-level
hierarchical decoder. The high-level decoder constructs a plan
by generating a semantic concept (i.e., topic) for each image
in sequence. The low-level decoder generates a sentence for
each image using a semantic compositional network, which
effectively grounds the sentence generation conditioned on
the topic. The two decoders are jointly trained end-to-end using reinforcement learning. We evaluate our model on the visual storytelling (VIST) dataset. Empirical results from both
automatic and human evaluations demonstrate that the proposed hierarchically structured reinforced training achieves
significantly better performance compared to a strong flat
deep reinforcement learning baseline.

Figure 1: Overview of the Hierarchically Structured Reinforcement Learning, consisting of a Manager, a high-level
decoder that generates topic (subgoal) sequences g1 ,g2 ,..,
and a Worker, a low-level decoder which generates word sequences al,1 ,..al,T conditioned on the selected topic gl .
Although the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is
commonly used as the training loss for encoder-decoder
RNNs, it may not be an appropriate surrogate for coherent long span generation task such as story generation. By
only maximizing the ground truth probability, MLE can easily fail to exploit the wealth of information offered by the
task specific losses. Most recent work in image captioning
use reinforcement learning (RL) by providing sentence-level
evaluation metrics for RNN training using global reward signals (Rennie et al. 2017; Ren et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017a)
(e.g, BLEU score). Motivated by the success of these work,
we use RL to train our hierarchically structured model.
More specifically, we propose the hierarchically structured reinforcement learning (HSRL) model to realize a twolevel generation mechanism (schematic overview is shown
in Fig. 1). Our model consists of a high-level decoder (i.e.,
Manager) and a low-level decoder (i.e., Worker). The Manager aims to produce a sequence of semantically coherent
topics for an image stream so that the overall theme is distributed among each sentence in the generated story. The
topics assigned by the Manager are then supplied to the
Worker for performing the task of sentence generation, given
the surrounding image and textual context. Our Manager is
a long short-term memory (LSTM) network (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997), while the Worker is a semantic compositional network (SCN) (Gan et al. 2017), which effectively
incorporates the topical information into the sentence generation process. The Manager and Worker are trained end-toend jointly using a mixed MLE and self-critical reinforcement learning loss (Rennie et al. 2017) to generate focused
and coherent stories.
Empirical results on the VIST dataset from both automatic and human evaluations demonstrate that the two-level

Introduction
Visual storytelling is the task of generating a sequence
of coherent sentences (i.e., a story) for an ordered image
stream (Park and Kim 2015; Huang et al. 2016; Liu et al.
2017b). Inspired by the successful use of recurrent neural
network (RNN) based encoder-decoder models employed
in machine translation tasks (Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014), variants of encoder-decoder models
have shown promising results on the task of story generation (Huang et al. 2016).
The fundamental challenge, however, is that the strong
performance of neural encoder-decoder models does not
generalize well for visual storytelling. The task requires a
full understanding of the content of each image as well
as the relation among different images. The motivation behind our approach is to build a context-aware text-synthesis
model that can efficiently encode the sequence of images
and generate a topically coherent multi-sentence paragraph
(see Fig. 2). We design a two-level hierarchical structure,
where a high-level decoder constructs a plan by generating a
topic for each image in sequence, and the low-level decoder
generates a sentence conditioned on that topic.
∗

Equal Contribution.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8465

