The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Combining Axiom Injection and Knowledge Base
Completion for Efficient Natural Language Inference
Masashi Yoshikawa

Koji Mineshima

Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Nara, Japan
yoshikawa.masashi.yh8@is.naist.jp

Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan
mineshima.koji@ocha.ac.jp

Hiroshi Noji

Daisuke Bekki

Artificial Intelligence Research Center, AIST, Tokyo, Japan
hiroshi.noji@aist.go.jp

Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan
bekki@is.ocha.ac.jp

Abstract

promising approach in past work is on-demand axiom injection (abduction mechanism; Martı́nez-Gómez et al. 2017),
which allows one to construct knowledge between words in
P and H as lexical axioms, and feed them to a logic prover
when necessary. Combined with ccg2lambda (Mineshima et
al. 2015), a higher-order logic-based system, their method
demonstrates that injecting lexical knowledge from WordNet (Miller 1995) and VerbOcean (Chklovski and Pantel
2004) significantly improves the performance.
Although their method provides a basis for handling external knowledge with a logic-based RTE system, there still
remains a practical issue in terms of scalability and efficiency. Their abduction mechanism generates relevant axioms on-the-fly for a present P and H pair, but this means
we have to maintain a large knowledge base inside the system. This is costly in terms of memory, and it also leads
to slower search due to a huge search space during inference. WordNet already contains relations among more than
150,000 words, and in practice, we want to increase the
coverage of external knowledge more by adding different
kinds of database such as Freebase. To achieve such a scalable RTE system, we need a more efficient way to preserve
database knowledge.
In this paper, we present an approach to axiom injection,
which, by not holding databases explicitly, allows handling
of massive amount of knowledge without losing efficiency.
Our work is built on Knowledge Base Completion (KBC),
which recently has seen a remarkable advancement in the
machine learning community. Although KBC models and
logic-based approaches to RTE have been studied separately
so far, we show that they can be combined to improve the
overall performance of RTE systems. Specifically, we replace the search of necessary knowledge on the database
with a judgment of whether the triplet (s, r, o) is a fact or
not in an n-dimensional vector space that encodes entities s
and o and relation r. For each triplet, this computation is efficient and can be done in O(n) complexity. To this end we
construct a new dataset from WordNet for training a KBC
model that is suitable for RTE. We then show that this approach allows adding new knowledge from VerbOcean without losing efficiency.
Throughout this paper, we will focus on inferences that
require lexical knowledge such as synonym and antonym
and its interaction with the logical and linguistic structure

In logic-based approaches to reasoning tasks such as Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE), it is important for a system
to have a large amount of knowledge data. However, there
is a tradeoff between adding more knowledge data for improved RTE performance and maintaining an efficient RTE
system, as such a big database is problematic in terms of the
memory usage and computational complexity. In this work,
we show the processing time of a state-of-the-art logic-based
RTE system can be significantly reduced by replacing its
search-based axiom injection (abduction) mechanism by that
based on Knowledge Base Completion (KBC). We integrate
this mechanism in a Coq plugin that provides a proof automation tactic for natural language inference. Additionally, we
show empirically that adding new knowledge data contributes
to better RTE performance while not harming the processing
speed in this framework.

1

Introduction

RTE is a challenging NLP task where the objective is
to judge whether a hypothesis H logically follows from
premise(s) P . Advances in RTE have positive implications
in other areas such as information retrieval, question answering and reading comprehension. Various approaches have
been proposed to the RTE problem in the literature. Some
methods are based on deep neural networks (Rocktäschel
et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2018; Nie and Bansal 2017),
where a classifier is trained to predict using H and P
encoded in a high-dimensional space. Other methods are
purely symbolic (Bos et al. 2004; Mineshima et al. 2015;
Abzianidze 2015), where logical formulas that represent H
and P are constructed and used in a formal proof system.
In this paper, we adopt a strategy based on logic, encouraged by the high-performance that these systems achieve
in linguistically complex datasets (Mineshima et al. 2015;
Abzianidze 2015), which contain a variety of semantic phenomena that are still challenging for the current neural models (Wang et al. 2018).
Contrary to the end-to-end machine learning approaches,
a logic-based system must explicitly maintain lexical knowledge necessary for inference. A critical challenge here is to
deal with such knowledge in an efficient and scalable way. A
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7410

