The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Induction of Non-Monotonic Logic
Programs to Explain Boosted Tree Models Using LIME
Farhad Shakerin, Gopal Gupta
Computer Science Department, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, USA
{farhad.shakerin,gupta}utdallas.edu

Abstract

the entire model to be re-learned. Meanwhile, the comprehensibility of symbolic rules makes it easier for users to understand and verify induced models and even edit them.
The ILP learning problem can be regarded as a search
problem for a set of clauses that deduce the training examples. The search is performed either top down or bottom-up.
A bottom-up approach builds most-specific clauses from the
training examples and searches the hypothesis space by using generalization. This approach is not applicable to largescale datasets, nor it can incorporate Negation-As-Failure
into the hypotheses. A survey of bottom-up ILP systems
and their shortcomings can be found at (Sakama 2005). In
contrast, top-down approach starts with the most general
clauses and then specializes them. A top-down algorithm
guided by heuristics is better suited for large-scale and/or
noisy datasets (Zeng, Patel, and Page 2014).
The FOIL algorithm by Quinlan (Quinlan 1990) is a popular top-down algorithm. FOIL uses heuristics from information theory called weighted information gain. The use
of a greedy heuristic allows FOIL to run much faster than
bottom-up approaches and scale up much better. For instance, the QuickFOIL system (Zeng, Patel, and Page 2014)
can deal with millions of training examples in a reasonable
time. However, scalability comes at the expense of losing accuracy if the algorithm is stuck in local optima and/or when
the number of examples is insufficient. The former is an inherent problem in hill climbing search and the latter is due to
the shrinking of examples during clause specialization. Also,
elimination of already covered examples from the training
set (to guarantee the termination of FOIL) causes a similar
impact on the quality of heuristic search for the best clause.
Therefore, the predicates picked-up by FOIL are not always
globally optimal with respect to the concept being learned.
Based on our research, we believe that a successful ILP algorithm must satisfy the following criteria:

We present a heuristic based algorithm to induce nonmonotonic logic programs that will explain the behavior of XGBoost trained classifiers. We use the technique based on the
LIME approach to locally select the most important features contributing to the classification decision. Then, in
order to explain the model’s global behavior, we propose
the LIME-FOLD algorithm —a heuristic-based inductive
logic programming (ILP) algorithm capable of learning nonmonotonic logic programs—that we apply to a transformed
dataset produced by LIME. Our proposed approach is agnostic to the choice of the ILP algorithm. Our experiments with
UCI standard benchmarks suggest a significant improvement
in terms of classification evaluation metrics. Meanwhile, the
number of induced rules dramatically decreases compared to
ALEPH, a state-of-the-art ILP system.

Introduction
Dramatic success of machine learning has led to a torrent of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications. However, the effectiveness of these systems is limited by the machines’ current inability to explain their decisions and actions to human
users. That’s mainly because the statistical machine learning
methods produce models that are complex algebraic solutions to optimization problems such as risk minimization or
data likelihood maximization. Lack of intuitive descriptions
makes it hard for users to understand and verify the underlying rules that govern the model. Also, these methods cannot
produce a justification for a prediction they compute for a
new data sample.
The Explainable AI program (Gunning 2015) aims to create a suite of machine learning techniques that: a) Produce
more explainable models, while maintaining a high level of
prediction accuracy. b) Enable human users to understand,
appropriately trust, and effectively manage the emerging
generation of artificially intelligent partners.
Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) (Muggleton 1991) is
one Machine Learning technique where the learned model
is in the form of logic programming rules (Horn Clauses)
that are comprehensible to humans. It allows the background
knowledge to be incrementally extended without requiring

• It must employ heuristic-based search for clauses for the
sake of scalability.
• It should be able to figure out relevant features, regardless
of the number of current training examples.
• It should be able to learn from incomplete data, as well as
be able to distinguish between noise and exceptions.
Unlike top-down ILP algorithms, statistical machine
learning methods are bound to find the relevant features be-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3052

