The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Gaussian-Induced Convolution for Graphs
Jiatao Jiang, Zhen Cui,∗ Chunyan Xu, Jian Yang
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{jiatao, zhen.cui, cyx, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

RNNs would have the explosive number of combinatorial
paths in the recursive stage.

Learning representation on graph plays a crucial role in numerous tasks of pattern recognition. Different from gridshaped images/videos, on which local convolution kernels
can be lattices, however, graphs are fully coordinate-free on
vertices and edges. In this work, we propose a Gaussianinduced convolution (GIC) framework to conduct local convolution filtering on irregular graphs. Specifically, an edgeinduced Gaussian mixture model is designed to encode variations of subgraph region by integrating edge information into
weighted Gaussian models, each of which implicitly characterizes one component of subgraph variations. In order to
coarsen a graph, we derive a vertex-induced Gaussian mixture model to cluster vertices dynamically according to the
connection of edges, which is approximately equivalent to the
weighted graph cut. We conduct our multi-layer graph convolution network on several public datasets of graph classification. The extensive experiments demonstrate that our GIC is
effective and can achieve the state-of-the-art results.

Recently convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015) have achieved breakthrough
progresses on representing grid-shaped image/video data.
In contrast, graphs are with irregular structures and fully
coordinate-free on vertices and edges. The vertices/edges
are not strictly ordered, and can not be explicitly matched
between two graphs. To generalize the idea of CNNs onto
graphs, we need to solve this problem therein that the
same responses should be produced for those homomorphic graphs/subgraphs when performing convolutional filtering. To this end, recent graph convolution methods (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Atwood and
Towsley 2016; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017) attempted to aggregate neighbor vertices as shown in Fig. 1e.
This kind of methods actually employ a fuzzy filtering (i.e.,
a tied/shared filter) on neighbor vertices because only firstorder statistics (mean) is used. Two examples are shown in
Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b. Although they have different structures,
the responses on them are fully equal. Oppositely, Niepert
et.al (Niepert, Ahmed, and Kutzkov 2016) ranked neighbor
vertices according to weights of edges, and then used different filters on these sorted vertices, as shown in Fig. 1f.
However, this rigid ranking method will suffer some limitations: i) probably consistent responses to different structures
(e.g., Fig. 1b and Fig. 1c) because weights of edges are out
of consideration after ranking; ii) information loss of node
pruning for a fixed-size receptive field as shown in Fig. 1b;
and iii) ranking ambiguity for equal connections as shown
in Fig. 1d; and iv) ranking sensitivity to (slightly) changes
of edge weights/connections.

Introduction
As witnessed by the widespread applications, graph is one of
the most successful models to conduct structured and semistructured data, ranging from text (Defferrard, Bresson,
and Vandergheynst 2016), bioinformatics (Yanardag and
Vishwanathan 2015; Niepert, Ahmed, and Kutzkov 2016;
Song et al. 2018) and social network (Gomez, Chiem, and
Delvenne 2017; Orsini, Baracchi, and Frasconi 2017) to
images/videos (Marino, Salakhutdinov, and Gupta 2016;
Cui et al. 2018; Cui, Yang, and others 2017). Among these
applications, learning robust representations from structured
graphs becomes the main topic. To this end, various methods have come forth in recent years. Graph kernels (Yanardag and Vishwanathan 2015) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Scarselli et al. 2009) are the most representative ones. Graph kernels usually take the classic Rconvolution strategy (Haussler 1999) to recursively decompose graphs into atomic sub-structures and then define local similarities between them. RNNs based methods sequentially traverse neighbors with tied parameters in depth. With
the increase of graph size, graph kernels would suffer diagonal dominance of kernels (Schölkopf et al. 2002) while

In this paper we propose a Gaussian-induced graph convolution framework to learn graph representation. For a
coordinate-free subgraph region, we design an edge-induced
Gaussian mixture model (EI-GMM) to implicitly coordinate
the vertices therein. Specifically, the edges are used to regularize Gaussian models such that variations of subgraph can
be well-encoded. In analogy to the standard convolutional
kernel as shown in Fig. 1h, EI-GMM can be viewed as a
coordinate normalization by projecting variations of subgraph into several Gaussian components. For example, the
four subgraphs w.r.t. Fig. 1a∼1d will have different repre-

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4007

