The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Sublinear Time Numerical Linear Algebra for Structured Matrices
Xiaofei Shi,1 David P. Woodruff1
1

Carnegie Mellon University
xiaofei.shi@andrew.cmu.edu, dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu


P
2 1/2
. Typically the
where for a vector y, kyk2 =
i |yi |
n rows of A correspond to observations, and one would
like the prediction hAi , xi to be close to the observation
bi , where Ai denotes the i-th row of A. While it can be
solved exactly via the normal equations, one can solve it
much faster using oblivious sketching. Indeed, for overconstrained least squares where n  d, one can choose S to
be a subspace embedding, meaning that simultaneously for
all vectors x ∈ Rd , kSAxk2 = (1 ± )kAxk2 . In such applications, S has only poly(d/) rows, independent of the
large dimension n. By computing SA and Sb, and solving
x0 = argminx kSAx−Sbk2 , one has that x0 satisfies (1) with
high probability. Thus, much of the expensive computation
is reduced to the “sketch space”, which is independent of n.
Another example is low rank approximation, in which one
is given an n × d matrix A and would like to find an n × k
matrix U and a k × d matrix V so that

Abstract
We show how to solve a number of problems in numerical linear algebra, such as least squares regression, `p -regression for
any p ≥ 1, low rank approximation, and kernel regression,
in time T (A)poly(log(nd)), where for a given input matrix
A ∈ Rn×d , T (A) is the time needed to compute A · y for an
arbitrary vector y ∈ Rd . Since T (A) ≤ O(nnz(A)), where
nnz(A) denotes the number of non-zero entries of A, the time
is no worse, up to polylogarithmic factors, as all of the recent
advances for such problems that run in input-sparsity time.
However, for many applications, T (A) can be much smaller
than nnz(A), yielding significantly sublinear time algorithms.
For example, in the overconstrained (1 + )-approximate
polynomial interpolation problem, A is a Vandermonde matrix and T (A) = O(n log n); in this case our running time
is n · poly(log n) + poly(d/) and we recover the results of
Avron, Sindhwani, and Woodruff (2013) as a special case. For
overconstrained autoregression, which is a common problem
arising in dynamical systems, T (A) = O(n log n), and we
immediately obtain n·poly(log n)+poly(d/) time. For kernel autoregression, we significantly improve the running time
of prior algorithms for general kernels. For the important case
of autoregression with the polynomial kernel and arbitrary
target vector b ∈ Rn , we obtain even faster algorithms. Our
algorithms show that, perhaps surprisingly, most of these optimization problems do not require much more time than that
of a polylogarithmic number of matrix-vector multiplications.

kU V − Ak2F ≤ (1 + )kA − Ak k2F ,
(2)
P
P
n
d
2
where for a matrix B ∈ Rn×d , kBk2F = i=1 j=1 Bi,j
,
2
and where Ak = argminrank-k B kA − BkF is the best rank-k
approximation to A. While it can be solved via the singular value decomposition (SVD), one can solve it much faster
using oblivious sketching. In this case one chooses S so that
the row span of SA contains a good rank-k space, meaning
that there is a matrix V ∈ Rk×d whose row span is inside
of the row span of SA, so that there is a U for which this
pair (U, V ) satisfies the guarantee of (2). Here SA only has
poly(k/) rows, independent of n and d. Several known algorithms approximately project the rows of A onto the row
span of SA, then compute the SVD of the projected points to
find V , and then solve a regression problem to find U . Other
algorithms compute the top k directions of SA directly. Importantly, the expensive computation involving the SVD can
be carried out in the much lower poly(k/)-dimensional
space rather than the original d-dimensional space.
While there are numerous other examples, such as `p regression and kernel variations of the above problems (see
Woodruff (2014) for a survey), they share the same flavor
of first reducing the problem to a smaller problem in order to save computation. For this reduction to be effective,
the matrix-matrix product SA needs to be efficiently computable. One typical sketching matrix S that works is a matrix of i.i.d. Gaussians; however since S is dense, comput-

Introduction
A number of recent advances in randomized numerical linear algebra have been made possible by the technique of
oblivious sketching. In this setting, given an n × d input
matrix A to some problem, one first computes a sketch SA
where S is a random matrix drawn from a certain random
family of matrices. Typically S is wide and fat, and therefore applying S significantly reduces the number of rows of
A. Moreover, SA preserves structural information about A.
For example, in the least squares regression problem one
is given an n × d matrix A and an n × 1 vector b and one
would like to output a vector x ∈ Rd for which
kAx − bk2 ≤ (1 + ) min kAx − bk2 ,
x

(1)

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4918

