The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Active Learning of Multi-Class Classification Models from Ordered Class Sets
Yanbing Xue, Milos Hauskrecht
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
yax14@pitt.edu, milos@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract

tures (symptoms, observations, etc.) of a patient, the physician considers not only the leading diagnosis (class), but also
other alternative diagnoses (classes) that are possible and
may fit the patient’s case. The gist of our approach is to utilize such information to learn multi-class classifiers. More
specifically, apart from the top class label for each data instance, we let the annotator provide also information about
other alternative classes, and express these in terms of the
ordered set of classes representing the descending priorities
(or confidence) in these classes.

In this paper, we study the problem of learning multi-class
classification models from a limited set of labeled examples obtained from human annotator. We propose a new machine learning framework that learns multi-class classification models from ordered class sets the annotator may use to
express not only her top class choice but also other competing
classes still under consideration. Such ordered sets of competing classes are common, for example, in various diagnostic
tasks. In this paper, we first develop strategies for learning
multi-class classification models from examples associated
with ordered class set information. After that we develop an
active learning strategy that considers such a feedback. We
evaluate the benefit of the framework on multiple datasets.
We show that class-order feedback and active learning can
reduce the annotation cost both individually and jointly.

To translate this idea into a working framework we first
develop and present a new multi-class support vector classifier method that lets us incorporate the ordered class set
(OCS) information into the model learning process. Since
data instances may not be initially labeled, we then explore active learning strategies to further reduce the annotation effort. Briefly, active learning (Lewis and Gale 1994;
Settles 2010; Roy and McCallum 2001) helps us reduce the
number of examples necessary to train a high quality classifier by repeatedly identifying and annotating the data instance with the greatest potential to improve the quality of
the classification model. The effectiveness of active learning is, however, highly dependent on the instance-selection
strategy, and such a strategy is highly related to the format
of the labels in the data. Hence, the instance-selection strategy for ordered class set feedback may not be a straightforward modification of strategies for a single class feedback.
In this paper, we develop a new active learning strategy that
considers ordered class set feedback. Specifically, our active
learning strategy calculates the expected prediction change
for an unlabeled instance by calculating and combining the
estimate of the prediction change for the different OCSs one
can assign to the instance. Since the estimate of the expected
change requires one to repeat the retraining by considering each unlabeled instance, we propose new approximation
strategies that reduce the running time of the estimate.

Introduction
In recent years, the world has witnessed remarkable increase
in the number and quality of classification models built from
data. One important factor contributing to this progress and
improvement is the amount of labeled data instances available to train these models. However, this improvement may
not be possible when the original data are unlabeled and
when the labels are obtained through additional human annotation effort. To alleviate this problem, we study various
ways of reducing the annotation effort, while keeping the
quality of the classification models built from data high. Our
specific focus in this work is on construction of multi-class
classification models.
Multi-class classification models are typically learned
from annotated data in which every data instance is associated with one class label indicating the top class choice
assigned to it by a human annotator. However, human annotators can often express and provide additional information
about the top class and its relation to other class choices. For
example, when the instance is not a clearcut case, there are
other likely class choices the annotator may have in mind.
Associating multiple competing classes with one instance is
common in various diagnostic tasks. For example, in medical domain, a list of competing diagnostic classes is referred to as a differential diagnosis. Briefly, given the fea-

We experiment with our new framework on both synthetic
and real-world datasets with class-order feedback. We show
the effectiveness of the ordered class set feedback and active
learning for reducing the annotation effort both individually
and jointly. We also show that our solution outperforms existing multi-class classification methods that consider oneclass-per-example labels.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5589

