The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bayesian Graph Convolutional Neural
Networks for Semi-Supervised Classification
Yingxue Zhang∗

Soumyasundar Pal,∗ Mark Coates

Deniz Üstebay

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Montreal Research Centre
7101 Avenue du Parc, H3N 1X9
Montreal, QC Canada

Dept. Electrical and Computer Engineering
McGill University
3480 University St, H3A 0E9
Montreal, QC, Canada

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Montreal Research Centre
7101 Avenue du Parc, H3N 1X9
Montreal, QC Canada

Abstract

paper suggest that this formulation, although computationally more demanding, can lead to an ability to learn more
from less data, a better capacity to represent uncertainty,
and better robustness and resilience to noise or adversarial
attacks.
In this paper, we present the novel Bayesian GCNN
framework and discuss how inference can be performed. To
provide a concrete example of the approach, we focus on
a specific random graph model, the assortative mixed membership block model. We address the task of semi-supervised
classification of nodes and examine the resilience of the
derived architecture to random perturbations of the graph
topology.

Recently, techniques for applying convolutional neural networks to graph-structured data have emerged. Graph convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) have been used to address node and graph classification and matrix completion.
Although the performance has been impressive, the current
implementations have limited capability to incorporate uncertainty in the graph structure. Almost all GCNNs process
a graph as though it is a ground-truth depiction of the relationship between nodes, but often the graphs employed in
applications are themselves derived from noisy data or modelling assumptions. Spurious edges may be included; other
edges may be missing between nodes that have very strong
relationships. In this paper we adopt a Bayesian approach,
viewing the observed graph as a realization from a parametric family of random graphs. We then target inference of the
joint posterior of the random graph parameters and the node
(or graph) labels. We present the Bayesian GCNN framework
and develop an iterative learning procedure for the case of
assortative mixed-membership stochastic block models. We
present the results of experiments that demonstrate that the
Bayesian formulation can provide better performance when
there are very few labels available during the training process.

1

2

Related work

A significant body of research focuses on using neural networks to analyze structured data when there is an underlying
graph describing the relationship between data items. Early
work led to the development of the graph neural network
(GNN) (Frasconi, Gori, and Sperduti 1998; Scarselli, Gori,
and others 2009; Li et al. 2016b). The GNN approaches
rely on recursive processing and propagation of information across the graph. Training can often take a long time to
converge and the required time scales undesirably with respect to the number of nodes in the graph, although recently
an approach to mitigate this has been proposed by (Liao,
Brockschmidt, and others 2018).
Graph convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) have
emerged more recently, with the first proposals in (Bruna
et al. 2013; Henaff, Bruna, and LeCun 2015; Duvenaud,
Maclaurin, and others 2015). A spectral filtering approach
was introduced in (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016) and this method was simplified or improved in (Kipf
and Welling 2017; Levie, Monti, and others 2017; Chen,
Ma, and Xiao 2018). Spatial filtering or aggregation strategies were adopted in (Atwood and Towsley 2016; Hamilton,
Ying, and Leskovec 2017). A general framework for training neural networks on graphs and manifolds was presented
by (Monti, Boscaini, and others 2017) and the authors explain how several of the other methods can be interpreted as
special cases.
The performance of the GCNNs can be improved by incorporating attention nodes (Veličković et al. 2018), leading to the graph attention network (GAT). Experiments

Introduction

Novel approaches for applying convolutional neural networks to graph-structured data have emerged in recent
years. Commencing with the work in (Bruna et al. 2013;
Henaff, Bruna, and LeCun 2015), there have been numerous developments and improvements. Although these graph
convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) are promising, the
current implementations have limited capability to handle
uncertainty in the graph structure, and treat the graph topology as ground-truth information. This in turn leads to an inability to adequately characterize the uncertainty in the predictions made by the neural network.
In contrast to this past work, we employ a Bayesian
framework and view the observed graph as a realization
from a parametric random graph family. The observed adjacency matrix is then used in conjunction with features and
labels to perform joint inference. The results reported in this
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5829

