The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Reasoning over Streaming Data in Metric Temporal Datalog
Przemysław Andrzej Wał˛ega,1,2 Mark Kaminski,1 Bernardo Cuenca Grau1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
2
Institute of Philosophy, University of Warsaw, Poland
{przemyslaw.walega, mark.kaminski, bernardo.cuenca.grau}@cs.ox.ac.uk

tional numbers, which hold at time t if ϕ holds at each (respectively, some) moment in [t − k2 , t − k1 ]. In particular,
we can capture our previous example using an MTL formula
[0,k1 ] [0,k2 ] signal , which holds if the signal has been received continuously over an interval lasting at least k1 with
gaps between consecutive readings of length at most k2 .
MTL satisfiability checking, however, cannot be used to
capture analysis tasks involving recursive propagation of information. Query answering in a recursive rule language
with metric operators such as datalogMTL (Brandt et al.
2018) is better suited to that effect.
Example 1. Consider a network where nodes are monitoring
different signals. A node receiving readings for a signal with
sufficiently high frequency flags the signal by sending a message to all neighbouring nodes in the network, which will
then also monitor the signal for a fixed period of time. The
analyst is interested in tracking which nodes are monitoring
which signals at any point in time. This generic monitoring
task involves analysing how information propagates recursively over time throughout the topology of the network, and
can be captured by the following datalogMTL rules:
flags(x, z) ← node(x) ∧ monitors(x, z) ∧

Abstract
We study stream reasoning in datalogMTL—an extension of
Datalog with metric temporal operators. We propose a sound
and complete stream reasoning algorithm that is applicable to
a fragment datalogMTLFP of datalogMTL, in which propagation of derived information towards past time points is precluded. Memory consumption in our algorithm depends both
on the properties of the rule set and the input data stream;
in particular, it depends on the distances between timestamps
occurring in data. This is undesirable since these distances
can be very small, in which case the algorithm may require
large amounts of memory. To address this issue, we propose
a second algorithm, where the size of the required memory
becomes independent on the timestamps in the data at the expense of disallowing punctual intervals in the rule set. Finally,
we provide tight bounds to the data complexity of standard
query answering in datalogMTLFP without punctual intervals in rules, which yield a new PS PACE lower bound to the
data complexity of the full datalogMTL.

Introduction
Decisions in industry increasingly depend on the analysis
of large volumes of streaming data. Algorithmic trading requires real-time processing of stock tickers and news items
(Nuti et al. 2011); oil companies monitor sensor readings
to detect equipment malfunction and predict maintenance
needs (Cosad et al. 2009); network providers analyse flow
data to identify traffic anomalies (Münz and Carle 2007);
and IoT applications such as Smart Cities analyse data coming from multiple devices (Lécué 2017).
Data analysis in these applications typically relies on the
ability to recognise interesting events. For example, an analyst in a diagnostics centre could be interested in identifying
whether a certain signal has been received with high frequency over a period of time. Metric Temporal Logic (MTL)
has been proposed as a suitable formalism for specifying
and reasoning over such complex events in real-time systems
(Heintz and Doherty 2004; Thati and Roşu 2005; Doherty,
Kvarnström, and Heintz 2009; Ničković and Piterman 2010;
Baldor and Niu 2012; Ho, Ouaknine, and Worrell 2014;
Basin, Klaedtke, and Zălinescu 2018). MTL allows for formulas such as [k1 ,k2 ] ϕ and [k1 ,k2 ] ϕ, with k1 and k2 ra-

[0,k1 ]

[0,k2 ] signal (z);

[0,k] monitors(x, z) ← connected (x, y) ∧ flags(y, z).

Here, the MTL formula [0,k1 ] [0,k2 ] signal (z) is as before,
whereas [0,k] monitors(x, z) indicates that x will monitor
signal z continuously for a period of time of length k.
In contrast to the standard query answering problem,
where input data is assumed to be finite, streaming data is
seen as an unbounded sequence of facts that flow through
the system and must be processed incrementally. Stream
reasoning—the problem of answering queries over streaming data in the presence of background knowledge—has received a great deal of attention in the literature, and we
refer the reader to our Related Work section for a detailed discussion (Barbieri et al. 2009; Anicic et al. 2011;
Dell’Aglio et al. 2014; Özçep, Möller, and Neuenstadt 2014;
Margara et al. 2014; Zaniolo 2012; Ronca et al. 2018b;
Beck, Dao-Tran, and Eiter 2018). Stream reasoning in a
recursive metric temporal language such as datalogMTL,
however, has not been studied to the best of our knowledge,
and raises a number of technical challenges discussed next.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3092

