The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Primarily about Primaries
Allan Borodin

Omer Lev

University of Toronto
bor@cs.toronto.edu

Ben-Gurion University
omerlev@bgu.ac.il

Nisarg Shah

Tyrone Strangway

University of Toronto
nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

University of Toronto
tyrone@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

most important (especially in presidential systems) – is to select the candidates which are voted for by the general public.
The mechanisms by which parties make this selection are
varied, and they have evolved significantly throughout the
past 150 years. But in the past few decades there has been
a marked shift by parties throughout the world towards increasing the ability of individual party (or unaffiliated) members to influence the outcome, and in some cases, to be the
only element to determine party candidates (Cross and Blais
2011). In particular, US parties have changed their election
methods since the 1970s to focus the selection of presidential, congressional and state-wide candidates on popular support by party members via primaries (Cohen et al. 2008).
Despite this long and established role of parties in whittling down the candidate field in elections, the treatment of
a parties’ role in elections within the multiagent systems
community has been quite limited. While various candidate
manipulation attacks have been investigated (e.g., Sybil attacks (Conitzer and Yokoo 2010)), and there is recent research into parties as a collection of similar minded candidates (e.g., in gerrymandering, across different districts), the
role of parties in removing candidates has not been explored.
The focus of this paper is the primary voting system, in
which each party’s electorate selects a winner from among
the party’s candidates, and among these primary winners, an
ultimate election winner is selected by the general public.
Our goal is to compare this system to the direct voting system, in which all voters directly vote over all candidates.

Much of the social choice literature examines direct voting
systems, in which voters submit their ranked preferences over
candidates and a voting rule picks a winner. Real-world elections and decision-making processes are often more complex
and involve multiple stages. For instance, one popular voting
system filters candidates through primaries: first, voters affiliated with each political party vote over candidates of their
own party and the voting rule picks a candidate from each
party, which then compete in a general election.
We present a model to analyze such multi-stage elections, and
conduct the first quantitative comparison (to the best of our
knowledge) of the direct and primary voting systems with two
political parties in terms of the quality of the elected candidate. Our main result is that every voting rule is guaranteed to
perform almost as well (i.e., within a constant factor) under
the primary system as under the direct system. Surprisingly,
the converse does not hold: we show settings in which there
exist voting rules that perform significantly better under the
primary system than under the direct system.

Introduction
If I could not go to heaven but with a party, I would
not go there at all.
– Thomas Jefferson, 1789

Thomas Jefferson, like many of the US constitution’s authors, believed that political parties and factions are a bad
thing (see also Hamilton, Madison, and Jay (1787)). This
view stemmed from a long history of British and English
political history, in which prison sentences and executions
were possible outcomes in the battle between factions for
supremacy at the Royal court (Simms 2007). However, both
in Britain and in the Unites States, once their respective legislative assemblies gained political force, parties turned out
to be quite unavoidable. Even Jefferson had to start his own
party, which ended up quite successful, and was able to vanquish the opposing party from political existence (Wilentz
2005).
Fast forwarding to today, political parties have become
the bedrock of parliamentary politics throughout the world.
In particular, one of political parties’ main roles – if not the

Our Results
Our contribution is twofold. First, we formulate a model
which allows a quantitative comparison of the two voting
systems. Our model is a spatial model of voting in which
voters and candidates lie in an underlying multi-dimensional
space, and voter preferences are single-peaked. This allows
us to compare each candidate’s social utility in terms of its
total distance to the voters. We make the evaluation metric formal using the notion of distortion advocated by a
recent line of research (Procaccia and Rosenschein 2006;
Boutilier et al. 2015). Our results focus on 2 parties, each
selecting a single candidate, with both candidates presented
to the general voting public.
Second, we use this model to present a comparison of the
direct and primary voting systems. In particular, we show

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1804

