The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Graph Based Translation Memory for Neural Machine Translation
Mengzhou Xia∗

Guoping Huang

Lemao Liu

Carnegie Mellon University
mengzhox@andrew.cmu.edu

Tencent AI Lab
donkeyhuang@tencent.com

Tencent AI Lab
redmondliu@tencent.com

Shuming Shi
Tencent AI Lab
shumingshi@tencent.com
Abstract

in a TM. In addition, it introduces an additional hyperparameter to balance the contribution of a TM and the NMT
model. The sensitive hyperparameter is required to be tuned
manually for each specific task by selecting a suitable development set. On the other hand, Gu et al. (2018) propose an
alternative approach to making full use of the global information in a TM. The method encodes all bilingual sentences
in a TM into a key-value memory, in which each target word
and its corresponding context vector represent a pair of value
and key. Nevertheless, the integration of the memory leads
to considerable inefficiency in terms of both computational
time and space occupation due to redundant words in both
source and target side of a TM.
In this paper, we propose a new approach to integrating
a translation memory into NMT which utilizes global information within a TM in an efficient fashion. The key to the
proposed approach is to represent a TM using a compact
structure. Specifically, our approach retrieves a translation
memory consisting of multiple bilingual sentences from our
training corpus. As the source sentences in a TM are similar
to the input sentence, we directly ignore the source side of a
TM and only focus on representing the target side. To avoid
redundancy in the target side of a TM, we further pack the
target side into a directed graph, where each target sentence
in a TM indicates a path from the beginning to the end. Then
we incorporate this packed graph into the decoding network
by performing a self-attention mechanism over the graph inspired by Veličković et al. (2018).
Our approach is more efficient while keeping global information because it performs an attention mechanism over
fewer attentive nodes in the packed graph, compared with
the large key-value memory in Gu et al. (2018). Furthermore, our approach is more robust in practice because it
does not introduce additional sensitive hyperparameters to
be manually tuned like Zhang et al. (2018).
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach,
we implement our idea on top of the state-of-the-art model
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017). Extensive experiments
on six translation tasks demonstrate the following advantages of the proposed approach:

A translation memory (TM) is proved to be helpful to
improve neural machine translation (NMT). Existing approaches either pursue the decoding efficiency by merely accessing local information in a TM or encode the global information in a TM yet sacrificing efficiency due to redundancy.
We propose an efficient approach to making use of the global
information in a TM. The key idea is to pack a redundant TM
into a compact graph and perform additional attention mechanisms over the packed graph for integrating the TM representation into the decoding network. We implement the model by
extending the state-of-the-art NMT, Transformer. Extensive
experiments on three language pairs show that the proposed
approach is efficient in terms of running time and space occupation, and particularly it outperforms multiple strong baselines in terms of BLEU scores.

Introduction
A translation memory (TM) typically consists of bilingual
sentence pairs that are most similar to the sentence to be
translated (Robinson 2012). In computer-aided translation,
professional translators are able to quickly figure out the
faithful translation by standing on top of a TM instead
of translating from scratch. In statistical machine translation (SMT), various research work have also been devoted to making use of a TM to improve translation quality (Simard and Isabelle 2009; Koehn and Senellart 2010;
Ma et al. 2011).
Recent years have witnessed an evolutionary shift from
SMT to neural machine translation (NMT), and many notable works investigate on how to integrate a TM into neural
translation models (Li, Zhang, and Zong 2016; Zhang et al.
2018; Gu et al. 2018). For example, Zhang et al. (2018) propose a simple approach which defines a quantity over a TM
to bias word selection for NMT decoding. The quantity is
calculated based on n-gram matching between a TM and the
sentence to be translated. This method indeed captures helpful local patterns from a TM while inescapably omitting significant global information such as long distance reordering
∗
Work was done when Mengzhou Xia was interning at Tencent
AI Lab.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• It is more efficient than the approach in Gu et al. (2018)
in terms of both running time and space occupation;
• It delivers BLEU improvements over strong baselines in7297

