The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Video Inpainting by Jointly Learning Temporal Structure and Spatial Details
Chuan Wang,1 Haibin Huang,1 Xiaoguang Han,‡2 Jue Wang1
1

Megvii (Face++)
{wangchuan, huanghaibin, wangjue}@megvii.com
2
Shenzhen Research Inst. of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn
Project Page:http://wangchuan.github.io/archive/research/videoinp/
Abstract
We present a new data-driven video inpainting method for
recovering missing regions of video frames. A novel deep
learning architecture is proposed which contains two subnetworks: a temporal structure inference network and a spatial detail recovering network. The temporal structure inference network is built upon a 3D fully convolutional architecture: it only learns to complete a low-resolution video volume given the expensive computational cost of 3D convolution. The low resolution result provides temporal guidance to
the spatial detail recovering network, which performs imagebased inpainting with a 2D fully convolutional network to
produce recovered video frames in their original resolution.
Such two-step network design ensures both the spatial quality of each frame and the temporal coherence across frames.
Our method jointly trains both sub-networks in an end-to-end
manner. We provide qualitative and quantitative evaluation
on three datasets, demonstrating that our method outperforms
previous learning-based video inpainting methods.

Figure 1: Video inpainting results by our approach. Row 1,
3: input frames with missing regions (shown in gray). Row
2, 4: our results. Note that the filled regions contain rich image details and are temporally coherent.

Introduction
Given an image or a video with holes inside (e.g. generated
by object removal), inpainting (also called completion) techniques try to recover the missing video content to produce
a natural looking result. This problem has drawn great attention in the past two decades due to strong industrial demands on image and video editing applications. Inpainting
is a very challenging task as the requirements are two-fold:
(1) the generated content in the missing regions must be semantically correct given their surrounding content; and (2)
the missing regions need to be filled in a seamless way so
that the original holes are visually unnoticeable.
In this work, we focus on video inpainting, an extended
problem from image inpainting with the added temporal dimension. Such extension brings new technical challenges
that are difficult to resolve. First, recovering missing video
content requires the understanding of not only the spatial
context of each frame, but also the motion context across
frames. Second, the output video must maintain high spatiotemporal consistency, in both global context-level and local image-feature-level. Although there has been tremen-

dous progress in image inpainting, e.g. patch-based image synthesis (Barnes et al. 2009; 2010) and deep learning
based approaches (Pathak et al. 2016; Iizuka, Simo-Serra,
and Ishikawa 2017), a direct extension of those methods in
3D would not work well for video inpainting. Specifically,
(Wexler, Shechtman, and Irani 2007; Venkatesh, Cheung,
and Zhao 2009; Newson et al. 2014; Huang et al. 2016) have
tried to extend spatial 2D patch synthesis to spatial-temporal
3D patch synthesis. However, local synthesis, even in 3D
space, cannot guarantee global semantic correctness. Moreover, directly applying image inpainting networks to each
frame individually often leads to temporally jittering results
that are visually unacceptable, as we will demonstrate later.
We present a novel end-to-end deep learning architecture
to tackle the above issues for high quality video inpainting.
As shown in Fig. 2, the network consists of a temporal structure prediction sub-network and a spatial detail recovering
sub-network. The former sub-network treats a video as a
3D volume. It takes a down-sampled version of the original
video as input, and fill the holes in it using 3D CNN with an

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡
Corresponding Author.

5232

