The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Teach in Cooperative Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
Shayegan Omidshafiei1,2

Dong-Ki Kim1,2

Miao Liu2,3

Gerald Tesauro2,3

shayegan@mit.edu

dkkim93@mit.edu

miao.liu1@ibm.com

gtesauro@us.ibm.com

Matthew Riemer2,3

Christopher Amato4

Murray Campbell2,3

Jonathan P. How1,2

mdriemer@us.ibm.com

camato@ccs.neu.edu

mcam@us.ibm.com

jhow@mit.edu

1

LIDS, MIT

2

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

3

IBM Research

Abstract

4

CCIS, Northeastern University

teaching heuristics created by domain experts. The benefit of
learned peer-to-peer teaching is that it can accelerate learning even without relying on the existence of “all-knowing”
teachers. Despite these potential advantages, no algorithms
exist for learning to teach in multiagent systems.
This paper targets the learning to teach problem in the
context of cooperative Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL). Cooperative MARL is a standard framework for
settings where agents learn to coordinate in a shared environment. Recent works in cooperative MARL have shown final
task performance can be improved by introducing inter-agent
communication mechanisms (Sukhbaatar, Fergus, and others 2016; Foerster et al. 2016; Lowe et al. 2017). Agents in
these works, however, merely communicate to coordinate in
the given task, not to improve overall learning by teaching
one another. By contrast, this paper targets a new multiagent
paradigm in which agents learn to teach by communicating action advice, thereby improving final performance and
accelerating teamwide learning.
The learning to teach in MARL problem has unique inherent complexities that compound the delayed reward, credit
assignment, and partial observability issues found in general multiagent problems (Oliehoek and Amato 2016). As
such, there are several key issues that must be addressed.
First, agents must learn when to teach, what to teach, and
how to learn from what is being taught. Second, despite
coordinating in a shared environment, agents may be independent/decentralized learners with privacy constraints (e.g.,
robots from distinct corporations that cannot share full policies), and so must learn how to teach under these constraints.
A third issue is that agents must estimate the impact of each
piece of advice on their teammate’s learning progress. Delays in the accumulation of knowledge make this credit assignment problem difficult, even in supervised/unsupervised
learning (Graves et al. 2017). Nonstationarities due to agent
interactions and the temporally-extended nature of MARL
compound these difficulties in our setting. These issues are
unique to our learning to teach setting and remain largely
unaddressed in the literature, despite being of practical importance for future decision-making systems. One of the main
reasons for the lack of progress addressing these inherent
challenges is the significant increase in the computational
complexity of this new teaching/learning paradigm compared
to multiagent problems that have previously been considered.

Collective human knowledge has clearly benefited from the
fact that innovations by individuals are taught to others through
communication. Similar to human social groups, agents in
distributed learning systems would likely benefit from communication to share knowledge and teach skills. The problem
of teaching to improve agent learning has been investigated
by prior works, but these approaches make assumptions that
prevent application of teaching to general multiagent problems, or require domain expertise for problems they can apply
to. This learning to teach problem has inherent complexities
related to measuring long-term impacts of teaching that compound the standard multiagent coordination challenges. In
contrast to existing works, this paper presents the first general framework and algorithm for intelligent agents to learn to
teach in a multiagent environment. Our algorithm, Learning
to Coordinate and Teach Reinforcement (LeCTR), addresses
peer-to-peer teaching in cooperative multiagent reinforcement
learning. Each agent in our approach learns both when and
what to advise, then uses the received advice to improve local
learning. Importantly, these roles are not fixed; these agents
learn to assume the role of student and/or teacher at the appropriate moments, requesting and providing advice in order
to improve teamwide performance and learning. Empirical
comparisons against state-of-the-art teaching methods show
that our teaching agents not only learn significantly faster, but
also learn to coordinate in tasks where existing methods fail.

Introduction
In social settings, innovations by individuals are taught to
others in the population through communication channels
(Rogers 2010), which not only improves final performance,
but also the effectiveness of the entire learning process (i.e.,
rate of learning). There exist analogous settings where learning agents adapt behaviors while interacting in a shared environment (e.g., autonomous cars and assistive robots). While
any given agent may not be an expert during learning, it may
have local knowledge that teammates may be unaware of.
Similar to human social groups, these learning agents would
likely benefit from communication to share knowledge and
teach skills, thereby improving the effectiveness of systemwide learning. It is also desirable for agents in such systems
to learn to teach one another, rather than rely on hand-crafted
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6128

