The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Natural Option Critic
Saket Tiwari

Philip S. Thomas

College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
sakettiwari@umass.edu

College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
pthomas@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

have a property that intuitively might make for good skills
for some problems, but which do not follow directly from
the primary objective of optimizing the expected discounted
return (Machado, Bellemare, and Bowling 2017; Simsek
and Barto 2008; Thrun and Schwartz 1995; Konidaris and
Barto 2009).
The option-critic architecture (Bacon, Harb, and Precup
2017), stands out from other attempts at developing a general framework for skill discovery in that it searches for the
skills that directly optimize the expected discounted return.
Specifically, the option critic uses the aforementioned options
framework, wherein a skill is called an option, and it proposes
parameterizing all aspects of the option and then performing
stochastic gradient descent on the expected discounted return
with respect to these parameters. The key insight that enables
the option-critic architecture is a set of theorems that give
expressions for the gradient of the expected discounted return
with respect to the different parameters of an option.
One limitation of the option critic is that it uses ordinary
(stochastic) gradient descent. In this paper we show how the
option critic can be extended to use natural gradient descent
(Amari 1998), which exploits the underlying structure of the
option-parameter space to produce a more informed update
direction. The primary contributions of this work are theoretical: we define the natural gradients associated with the
option critic, derive the Fisher information matrices associated with an option’s parameterized policy and termination
function, and show how the natural gradients can be estimated with per-time-step time and space complexity linear
in the total number of parameters. This is achieved by means
of compatible function approximations. We also analyze the
performance of natural gradient descent based approach on
various learning tasks.

The recently proposed option-critic architecture (Bacon, Harb,
and Precup 2017) provides a stochastic policy gradient approach to hierarchical reinforcement learning. Specifically, it
provides a way to estimate the gradient of the expected discounted return with respect to parameters that define a finite
number of temporally extended actions, called options. In
this paper we show how the option-critic architecture can be
extended to estimate the natural gradient (Amari 1998) of the
expected discounted return. To this end, the central questions
that we consider in this paper are: 1) what is the definition
of the natural gradient in this context, 2) what is the Fisher
information matrix associated with an option’s parameterized
policy, 3) what is the Fisher information matrix associated
with an option’s parameterized termination function, and 4)
how can a compatible function approximation approach be
leveraged to obtain natural gradient estimates for both the parameterized policy and parameterized termination functions
of an option with per-time-step time and space complexity
linear in the total number of parameters. Based on answers
to these questions we introduce the natural option critic algorithm. Experimental results showcase improvement over the
vanilla gradient approach.

Introduction
Hierarchical reinforcement learning methods enable agents to
tackle challenging problems by identifying reusable skills—
temporally extended actions—that simplify the task. For
example, a robot agent that tries to learn to play chess by
reasoning solely at the level of how much current to give to
its actuators every 20ms will struggle to correlate obtained rewards with their true underlying cause. However, if this same
agent first learns skills to move its arm, grasp a chess piece,
and move a chess piece, then the task of learning to play chess
(leveraging these skills) becomes tractable. Several mathematical frameworks for hierarchical reinforcement learning
have been proposed, including hierarchies of machines (Parr
and Russell 1998), MAXQ (Dietterich 2000), and the options
framework (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999). However, none
of these frameworks provides a practical mechanism for skill
discovery: determining what skills will be useful for an agent
to learn. Although skill discovery methods have been proposed, they tend to be heuristic in that they find skills that

Preliminaries and Notation
A reinforcement learning (RL) agent interacts with an environment, modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP),
over a sequence of time steps t ∈ N≥0 . A finite MDP
is a tuple (S, A, P, R, d0 , γ). S is the finite set of possible states of the environment. St is the state of the environment at time t. A is the finite set of possible actions
the agent can take. At is the action taken by the agent at
time t. P : S × A × S → [0, 1] is the transition function:
P (s, a, s0 ) = Pr(St+1 =s0 |St =s, At =a), for all t. Meaning,

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5175

