The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Competitive and Discriminative Reconstructions for Anomaly Detection
1

Kai Tian,1 Shuigeng Zhou,1∗ Jianping Fan,2 Jihong Guan3

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC 28223 USA
3
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
1
{ktian14, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn; 2 jfan@uncc.edu; 3 jhguan@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract

2000; Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009; Liu, Hua, and
Smith 2014; Malhotra et al. 2016). Generally, these methods
either build a model configuration for normal data examples
and identify the examples that disobey the normal profiles as
outliers, or explicitly isolate outliers based on statistical or
geometric measures of abnormality. Usually, different models have different capacities to characterize the data distribution. Most of the traditional methods are linear models
which have limited model capacity. Although kernel function can be used to improve their capacities, it is not suitable
for the context of high-dimensional and large-scale data.
Recently, deep learning methods have shown their powerful representation ability and gained immense success
in many applications (Vincent et al. 2010; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). However, due to the unavailability of negative
data, it is hard to train a supervised deep neural network for
one-class classification directly. Although some efforts have
been made to learn one-class classifier, most of them could
not establish a discriminative model for anomaly detection.
The detection is done by choosing a pre-defined threshold.
From the probability perspective, it can be explained as that
outliers should lie on the low-density regions of the model’s
distribution. However, since the outliers are not predictable,
it is hard to determine a threshold that works for all cases.
Meanwhile, as the model is only trained on the positive data,
overfitting is another key factor that may destroy the model’s
generalization performance. That is the reason why we cannot simply train a DNN classifier based on positive data. Although one can use some strategies such as early stopping
to avoid overfitting, it is very tricky and one can not decide
when to stop is best for the test data.
To address those issues, we propose a new model
named Competitive Reconstruction Autoencoder (CoRA).
Our model has the benefits of both supervised and unsupervised approaches. We formulate a transductive semisupervised method for anomaly detection, which uses positive training data and unlabeled test data for learning.
Fig. 1 demonstrates the differences of the learning procedure between our method and most existing approaches. The
proposed architecture, different from classical auto-encoder,
comprises one encoder and two decoders. These two decoders are designed to compete during the reconstruction
procedure, one of them is learned to reconstruct positive

Most of the existing methods for anomaly detection use only
positive data to learn the data distribution, thus they usually
need a pre-defined threshold at the detection stage to determine whether a test instance is an outlier. Unfortunately, a
good threshold is vital for the performance and it is really
hard to find an optimal one. In this paper, we take the discriminative information implied in unlabeled data into consideration and propose a new method for anomaly detection
that can learn the labels of unlabelled data directly. Our proposed method has an end-to-end architecture with one encoder and two decoders that are trained to model inliers and
outliers’ data distributions in a competitive way. This architecture works in a discriminative manner without suffering
from overfitting, and the training algorithm of our model is
adopted from SGD, thus it is efficient and scalable even for
large-scale datasets. Empirical studies on 7 datasets including
KDD99, MNIST, Caltech-256, and ImageNet etc. show that
our model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction

Anomaly detection is to identify the data that do not conform
to the expected normal patterns. These data may come from
a new class or some noisy data that has no meaning. Usually, we call these abnormal data outliers, and inliers for the
normal data. Anomaly detection is closely related with many
real-world applications such as outlier detection, novelty detection in computer vision area (Khan and Madden 2009;
Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009; Khan and Madden
2014) and medical diagnoses, drug discovery in bioinformatics (Wei et al. 2018). It can be categorized into one-class
learning, where the profile of negative class is not well defined. According to the real application contexts, the negative data could be hard to collect or verify. Besides, there
could be any kind of abnormal data that are unpredictable.
Thus, those data are considered as novelties (or outliers),
while the positive data (or inliers) are well characterized by
the training data. It is hard to use traditional multiple class
classification methods to learn from only positive labeled
data due to the inertness of classifiers.
Over the past decades, researchers have proposed lots of
methods to deal with anomaly detection problems (Eskin
∗

Correspondence author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5167

