The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Attribute-Specific Representations for Visual Tracking
Yuankai Qi,1 Shengping Zhang,1 Weigang Zhang,1,2 Li Su,2 Qingming Huang,1,2 Ming-Hsuan Yang3
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of California at Merced, America
{yk.qi, s.zhang, wgzhang}@hit.edu.cn, {suli, qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn, mhyang@ucmerced.edu
2

Abstract
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved great success in visual tracking. Most of existing
methods train or fine-tune a binary classifier to distinguish the
target from its background. However, they may suffer from
the performance degradation due to insufficient training data.
In this paper, we show that attribute information (e.g., illumination changes, occlusion and motion) in the context facilitates training an effective classifier for visual tracking. In
particular, we design an attribute-based CNN with multiple
branches, where each branch is responsible for classifying the
target under a specific attribute. Such a design reduces the appearance diversity of the target under each attribute and thus
requires less data to train the model. We combine all attributespecific features via ensemble layers to obtain more discriminative representations for the final target/background classification. The proposed method achieves favorable performance
on the OTB100 dataset compared to state-of-the-art tracking
methods. After being trained on the VOT datasets, the proposed network also shows a good generalization ability on
the UAV-Traffic dataset, which has significantly different attributes and target appearances with the VOT datasets.

1

Figure 1: The proposed attribute-based CNN is trained by
two stages. In the first stage, five attribute branches are
trained individually to learn representations under different attributes. In the second stage, two ensemble layers are
trained to learn how to effectively combine attribute-specific
representations together.

Introduction

fication. As like other applications, their success relies on
the amount of the training data. However, existing tracking
datasets, such as VOT (Kristan et al. 2015), OTB100 (Wu,
Lim, and Yang 2015) and UAV123 (Mueller, Smith, and
Ghanem 2016), are far smaller than image classification
datasets such as ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015). The
insufficient training data may cause the trained model ineffective when facing all kinds of tracking challenges, such as
illumination changes, occlusion, and motion. In this paper,
we show that tracking challenges (also known as attributes)
are able to facilitate the training of the network with insufficient training data.
Different from existing CNN-based trackers, we propose
to first train specific CNN branches under individual attributes as shown in the top panel of Figure 1. Such a design
reduces the appearance diversity of the target under each attribute and thus eases the learning of the network parameters. Since the attribute is not known in testing and one frame
may have multiple attributes, we propose to feed the input
image into all branches to avoid explicitly recognizing the

Visual tracking has attracted increasing attention in the past
decades due to its key roles in numerous applications such
as automatic driving, surveillance, and video analysis. While
considerable effort has been devoted to developing robust algorithms, tracking a target in a complex environment is still
a challenging task due to factors such as heavy occlusion,
shape deformations, fast motion, etc.
Recently, features learned from CNNs have shown effectiveness for numerous vision tasks (Ren et al. 2016;
Jiang et al. 2018b; Wang et al. 2018; Fan et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2018). Several CNN-based trackers have since
been proposed (Nam and Han 2016; Valmadre et al. 2017;
Danelljan et al. 2017; Yun et al. 2017; Park and Berg 2018;
Luo et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018) for visual tracking and
achieved state-of-the-art performances. Most of these methods formulate visual tracking as a target/background classification problem and train CNNs to perform the classiCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8835

