The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Strength Adjustment for MCTS-Based Programs
I-Chen Wu,* Ti-Rong Wu,* An-Jen Liu,* Hung Guei, Tinghan Wei
Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung University, 1001 University Road, Hsinchu, Taiwan, ROC
{icwu,kds285,andyliu,ghung,ting}@aigames.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract

Since AlphaGo Zero, many other programs such as
FineArt (Tencent AI Lab 2018), Leela Zero (Pascutto
2018), and ELF OpenGo (Tian et al. 2018) have successfully reproduced the AlphaGo Zero algorithm. AlphaGo
Zero’s method was also applied to other games such as
chess and shogi, reaching strength levels much higher than
human champions and other top programs (Silver et al.
2017a).
Super-human level game playing programs capture the
imagination and fascination of society at large; for human
players, these programs pose an interesting challenge and
offer opportunities for learning (Hunicke and Chapman
2004; Demediuk et al. 2017; Paulsen and Fürnkranz 2010;
Sephton, Cowling, and Slaven 2015). However, it is also
important to fit program difficulty to appropriate levels for
human players. On the one hand, human players may lose
interest if the game program is too weak; on the other
hand, excessive difficulty tends to lead to frustration (Hunicke and Chapman 2004). From our observation, in the
context of learning with programs, it is difficult to offer
feedback for human players if they are constantly on the
losing side. Thus, in order to achieve an overall better
game experience, and to improve the learning process for
players, it is imperative to balance program difficulty accordingly. The fundamental goal is to offer programs with
a wide variety of strength levels.
A simple and straightforward method to offer different
program strengths is to reduce the total thinking time, or
the total simulation count in MCTS, if MCTS is used.
However, with this method, the search tree’s relatively
smaller size leaves the program vulnerable to tactical traps.
For example, the ladder problem in Go is one of the most
elementary shapes taught to human players; for programs,
however, search is often required to handle ladders properly. It has been shown that when adjusting program strength
through reduction, simulation count and playing strength
do not form a linear relationship (Sephton, Cowling, and
Slaven 2015). In fact, once the number of simulations fall
below a certain threshold, the program playing strength
drops catastrophically.

This paper proposes an approach to strength adjustment for
MCTS-based game-playing programs. In this approach, we
use a softmax policy with a strength index to choose
moves. Most importantly, we filter low quality moves by
excluding those that have a lower simulation count than a
pre-defined threshold ratio of the maximum simulation
count. We perform a theoretical analysis, reaching the result
that the adjusted policy is guaranteed to choose moves exceeding a lower bound in strength by using a threshold ratio.
The approach is applied to the Go program ELF OpenGo.
The experiment results show that is highly correlated to
the empirical strength; namely, given a threshold ratio 0.1,
is linearly related to the Elo rating with regression error
47.95 Elo where
. Meanwhile, the covered
strength range is about 800 Elo ratings in the interval of in
. With the ease of strength adjustment using , we
present two methods to adjust strength and predict opponents’ strengths dynamically. To our knowledge, this result
is state-of-the-art in terms of the range of strengths in Elo
rating while maintaining a controllable relationship between
the strength and a strength index.

Motivation
Artificial intelligence in computer games has made significant progress in recent years, especially after DeepMind’s
AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016) defeated human Go champions by a large margin in 2016. DeepMind then followed up
their success with AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al. 2017b) to
further improve the playing strength without requiring human knowledge, resulting in much stronger programs
against earlier versions of AlphaGo. Both AlphaGo and
AlphaGo Zero incorporate deep neural networks into Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) (Browne et al. 2012; Coulom
2006; Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006), which itself had been a
major breakthrough that was responsible for more than ten
years of rapid growth in computer games, particularly
computer Go, before AlphaGo was announced.
*
Equal Contribution.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1222

