The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Expert Guided Rule Based Prioritization of Scientifically Relevant
Images for Downlinking over Limited Bandwidth from Planetary Orbiters
Srija Chakraborty,1 Subhasish Das,1 Ayan Banerjee,1
Sandeep K. S. Gupta,1 Philip R. Christensen2
1

School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
2
School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
{schakr34, sdas48, abanerj3, sandeep.gupta, phil.christensen}@asu.edu
Abstract

clouds (Castano et al. 2008) to determine scientific value.
We introduce a methodology that also considers contextual
attributes, such as relevance of a class or landform to experts, co-occurrence of landforms and its spatial and temporal properties to determine its relevance. This resembles
expert like interpretation more closely instead of determining relevance from the presence or absence of interesting
features alone. We then determine the relative importance
of the instances based on these attributes, where it is crucial for the module to understand the content in the image
like an expert. Prioritization has been studied with planetary
rover data to select rocks with a specific target signature (Estlin et al. 2012), for autonomous exploration by integrating
past orbital datasets with a science hypothesis (Thompson
et al. 2018). We focus on formulating a generalized representation of the already observed data and allow the module to determine if a new instance is unusual. We combine
strategies such as rule based knowledge repository construction and novelty detection to form a meaningful representation of interesting classes and identify outliers with respect
to these representations to favor exploration. Additionally,
what makes an instance interesting is subjective to expert
interests. Our strategy therefore allows expert guidance to
refine the rules with domain knowledge.
The objective of the proposed method is to emulate
expert-like identification of relevant datasets to maximize
the return of high value data over limited bandwidth. We
only focus on geological features in planetary images interesting to experts. All observations with these expert identified interesting landforms (ILFs) have a high downlink priority. Additionally, downlink priority also depends on how
novel or anomalous the instance is with respect to expert selected attributes. The more anomalous the instance is with
respect to expert defined attributes, the higher is its value for
analysis and is hence assigned a higher priority.
We introduce an expert guided rule formation methodology where the rules represent the expected characteristics of
each ILF with respect to the attributes. Deviation of an ILF
bearing instance from its rule causes it to be more significant
for further investigation. We quantify this deviation as relevance score to characterize the degree of novelty of an ILF
bearing instance. In order for the proposed approach to generate an expert acceptable priority order, the rules have to
be aware of domain knowledge. We elicit this knowledge by

Instruments onboard spacecraft acquire large amounts of data
which is to be transmitted over a very low bandwidth. Consequently for some missions, the volume of data collected
greatly exceeds the volume that can be downlinked before
the next orbit. This necessitates the introduction of an intelligent autonomous decision making module that maximizes
the return of the most scientifically relevant dataset over the
low bandwidth for experts to analyze further. We propose an
iterative rule based approach, guided by expert knowledge, to
represent scientifically interesting geological landforms with
respect to expert selected attributes. The rules are utilized to
assign a priority based on how novel a test instance is with
respect to its rule. High priority instances from the test set
are used to iteratively update the learned rules. We then determine the effectiveness of the proposed approach on images
acquired by a Mars orbiter and observe an expert-acceptable
prioritization order generated by the rules that can potentially
increase the return of scientifically relevant observations.

Introduction
Vast amounts of data acquired by instruments onboard
spacecraft offer rich insights that improve our understanding of the observed planetary surfaces. However, as the data
from deep space missions are to be transmitted over a limited bandwidth before the next orbit, the available downlink
volume is significantly lower than acquired data volume.
Under the current setting, only a subset of observations is
targeted such that it can be transmitted over the available
bandwidth to Earth. This subset selection does not leverage
any intelligent decision making strategy aimed at identifying the datasets that are scientifically more significant for
analysis by domain experts. This minimizes the possibility
of discovering novel instances to expand the existing knowledge base and may result in the loss of scientifically valuable
observations for experts to analyze. Thus, it is crucial to introduce an intelligent autonomous decision making module
operating remotely onboard the spacecraft, to prioritize the
transmission of datasets that have higher significance for further analysis. Efforts in this domain have focused on detecting application specific classes of interest such as Martian
polar ice caps (Castano et al. 2007), dust devil tracks and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9440

