The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Spatially Invariant Unsupervised Object
Detection with Convolutional Neural Networks
Joelle Pineau

Eric Crawford

Facebook AI Research,
Mila, McGill University
Montreal, QC

Mila, McGill University
Montreal, QC

transfer learning (Kansky et al. 2017); since the world decomposes naturally into objects, a common source of novel tasks
will involve familiar objects in new configurations. In such
settings, we can expect improved transfer performance from
algorithms that learn about objects, as object-level knowledge learned from source tasks is likely to be useful for target
tasks. Finally, machine learning models that reason in terms
of objects may be more interpretable, since they are forced
to use a representation that is well understood by humans
(Zambaldi et al. 2018). x0
For systems that take raw pixels as input, reasoning and
learning in terms of objects requires an initial object detection step wherein the pixel-level information is transduced
into high-level object representations. Past machine learning
methods that reason in terms of objects have obtained objects
either using ad hoc, task/environment specific object detection methods (Garnelo, Arulkumaran, and Shanahan 2016;
Diuk, Cohen, and Littman 2008), or, in settings where it
is possible, using object representations provided directly
by the environment (Kansky et al. 2017). Alternatively, if
one has access to a large dataset of images annotated with
ground-truth bounding boxes for the objects therein, one
could use it to train any of a large number of sophisticated
supervised object detection architectures (Ren et al. 2015;
Redmon et al. 2016). However, obtaining such an annotated
dataset is expensive in terms of human labor. Thus, in the
current work, we are interested in a general-purpose object detection method that can be applied in a wide range of settings
without supervision; in particular, without bounding box annotations. We call this task, which involves both discovering
which objects are common in a dataset and learning to detect
those objects in images, unsupervised object detection.
A recent approach called Attend, Infer, Repeat (AIR) (Eslami et al. 2016) has shown promise at unsupervised object
detection, but (as we show empirically) has difficulty scaling up to handle large images containing many objects. In
this paper we propose an alternative architecture that avoids
these scaling issues by taking inspiration from recent work
on supervised object detection, which has relied heavily on
spatially invariant computations, particularly convolutions
(LeCun et al. 1998; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015).
YOLO networks, for example, use a convolutional neural network to map directly from an input image to a set of detected
objects (Redmon et al. 2016).

Abstract
There are many reasons to expect an ability to reason in terms
of objects to be a crucial skill for any generally intelligent
agent. Indeed, recent machine learning literature is replete with
examples of the benefits of object-like representations: generalization, transfer to new tasks, and interpretability, among
others. However, in order to reason in terms of objects, agents
need a way of discovering and detecting objects in the visual
world - a task which we call unsupervised object detection.
This task has received significantly less attention in the literature than its supervised counterpart, especially in the case
of large images containing many objects. In the current work,
we develop a neural network architecture that effectively addresses this large-image, many-object setting. In particular, we
combine ideas from Attend, Infer, Repeat (AIR), which performs unsupervised object detection but does not scale well,
with recent developments in supervised object detection. We
replace AIR’s core recurrent network with a convolutional
(and thus spatially invariant) network, and make use of an
object-specification scheme that describes the location of objects with respect to local grid cells rather than the image as
a whole. Through a series of experiments, we demonstrate
a number of features of our architecture: that, unlike AIR, it
is able to discover and detect objects in large, many-object
scenes; that it has a significant ability to generalize to images that are larger and contain more objects than images
encountered during training; and that it is able to discover and
detect objects with enough accuracy to facilitate non-trivial
downstream processing.

1

Introduction

The physical world can be naturally sub-divided into discrete objects. Consequently, in the pursuit of constructing
ever more intelligent agents, devising methods for reasoning
and learning about objects should be regarded as an important sub-goal. Indeed, recent work in machine learning is
replete with examples of the benefits of object-like representations (Diuk, Cohen, and Littman 2008; Chang et al. 2016;
Kansky et al. 2017; Santoro et al. 2017). For example, learning algorithms that operate on objects can yield significantly
improved sample complexity and generalizability (Chang
et al. 2016). Moreover, learning about objects can facilitate
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3412

