The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Revisiting Projection-Free Optimization for Strongly Convex Constraint Sets
Jarrid Rector-Brooks

Jun-Kun Wang*

Barzan Mozafari

2260 Hayward St
Ann Arbor, MI, 48104
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
jrectorb@umich.edu

226 Ferst Drive NW
Atlanta, GA, 30332
Georgia Institute of Technology
jimwang@gatech.edu

2260 Hayward St
Ann Arbor, MI, 48104
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
mozafari@umich.edu

Abstract

Frank-Wolfe (FW) optimization — In this paper, we focus on (FW) approaches, also known as projection-free or
conditional gradient algorithms (Frank and Wolfe 1956). Unlike gradient descent, these algorithms avoid the projection
step altogether by ensuring that the update vector always
lies within the feasible set. At each iteration, FW solves a
linear program over a constraint set. Since linear programs
have closed-form solutions for most constraint sets, each iteration of FW is, in many cases, more cost effective than
conducting a gradient descent step and then projecting it
back to the constraint set (Jaggi 2013; Hazan and Kale 2012;
Hazan and others 2016).
Another main advantage of FW is the sparsity of its solution. Since the solution of a linear program is always
a vertex (i.e., extreme point) of the feasible set (when
the set itself is convex), each iteration of FW can add, at
most, one new vertex to the solution vector. Thus, at iteration t, the solution is a combination of, at most, t + 1
vertices of the feasible set, thereby guaranteeing the sparsity of the eventual solution (Clarkson 2010; Jaggi 2013;
Jaggi 2011).
For these reasons, FW optimization has drawn growing interest in recent years, especially in matrix completion, structural SVM, computer vision, sparse PCA, metric learning, and many other settings (Jaggi, Sulovsk, and
others 2010; Lacoste-Julien et al. 2013; Osokin et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2016; Chari et al. 2015; Harchaoui et al. 2012;
Hazan and Kale 2012; Shalev-Shwartz, Gonen, and Shamir
2011). Unfortunately, while faster in each iteration, standard
FW requires many more iterations to converge than gradient
descent, and therefore is slower overall.
( 1 ) This is because FW’s
convergence rate is typically
O
( ) t while that of (accelerated) gradient descent is O t12 , where t is the number of
iterations (Jaggi 2013).
We make several contributions (summarized in Table 1):
1. We revisit a non-conventional variant of FW optimization,
called Primal Averaging (PA) (Lan 2013), which has been
largely neglected in the past, as it was believed to have
the same convergence rate as FW without line search, yet
incurring extra computations (i.e., matrix averaging step)
at each iteration. However, we discover that, when the
constraint set is strongly convex, this non-conventional
variant enjoys a much faster convergence rate with high
probability, O( t12 ) versus O( 1t ), which more than com-

We revisit the Frank-Wolfe (FW) optimization under strongly
convex constraint sets. We provide a faster convergence rate
for FW without line search, showing that a previously overlooked variant of FW is indeed faster than the standard variant.
With line search, we show that FW can converge to the global
optimum, even for smooth functions that are not convex, but
are quasi-convex and locally-Lipschitz. We also show that,
for the general case of (smooth) non-convex functions, FW
with line search converges with high probability to a stationary
point at a rate of O( 1t ), as long as the constraint set is strongly
convex—one of the fastest convergence rates in non-convex
optimization.

1

Introduction

A popular family of optimization algorithms are so-called
gradient descent algorithms: iterative algorithms that are comprised of a gradient descent step at each iteration, followed
by a projection step when there is a feasibility constraint. The
purpose of the projection is to ensure that the update vector
remains within the feasible set.
In many cases, however, the projection step may have
no closed-form and thus requires solving another optimization problem itself (e.g., for l1.5 norm balls or matroid polytopes (Hazan and others 2016; Hazan and Kale 2012)), the
closed-form may exist but involve an expensive computation
(e.g., the SVD of the model matrix for Schatten-1, Schatten2, and Schatten-∞ norm balls (Hazan and others 2016)),
or there may simply be no method available for computing
the projection in general (e.g., the convex hull of rotation
matrices (Hazan, Kale, and Warmuth 2010), which arises
as a constraint set in online learning settings (Hazan, Kale,
and Warmuth 2010)). In these scenarios, each iteration of
the gradient descent may require many “inner” iterations to
compute the projection (Jaggi, Sulovsk, and others 2010;
Lacoste-Julien and Jaggi 2015; Hazan and Kale 2012). This
makes the projection step quite costly, and can account for
much of the execution time of each iteration (see our technical report (Rector-Brooks, Wang, and Mozafari 2018)).
* Work performed while a PhD student at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1576

