The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adaptive Region Embedding for Text Classification
Liuyu Xiang,1 Xiaoming Jin,1 Lan Yi,2 Guiguang Ding1
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of DevNet, Cisco Systems
xiangly17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xmjin@tsinghua.edu.cn,
layi@cisco.com, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Subsequently, several simple and effective models have
been proposed to improve the text classification by learning a specially designed high-level representation that contains the necessary regional context information. Here we
loosely refer to these learned compositional representations
as ‘Region Embedding’. Among these methods, (Johnson
and Zhang 2015b) learn three types of region embeddings
and feed them to a CNN as extra inputs. The region embeddings help to improve the error rates by a significant margin
compared to vanilla CNN. Qiao et al. (2018) propose a twolayer architecture, and introduce a matrix called ‘Local Context Unit’ to produce region embeddings. They achieve comparable or even superior performances to a 29-layer CNN
(Conneau et al. 2017), which is the current state-of-the-art
method.
Although Qiao et al. (2018)’s region embedding method
is able to effectively capture rich context information, it still
has the following limitations. First, the region embedding
is generated by word embedding and Local Context Unit,
where both of them are only and uniquely determined by
word indices in the vocabulary. Such embedding method
lacks the capability to capture the semantic ambiguity since
each word has the same unique region embedding even under different contexts.
Second, its representation capability is limited by the fact
that the Local Context Unit is generated within just a fixedlength region. This leads to the negligence of richer dependencies outside the region. Third, the embedding look-up
tensor that generates Local Context Unit is of size E ∈
Rv×h , where v, h are sizes of vocabulary and embedding
dimension, respectively. For dataset such as Yahoo Answer
with ˜300k words in the vocabulary, i.e. v ≈ 300k, the
storage of embedding matrix E requires large memory resources.
To address the limitations of Qiao et al. (2018)’s method,
we need to design a light-weighted and flexible network
component which is able to take the whole sequence into
account, and produce effective region embedding adaptive
to different contexts.
Inspired by the recent work of dynamic parameter generation (Bertinetto et al. 2016; Jia et al. 2016; Ha, Dai, and Le
2016), we propose a novel region embedding method in this
paper. First we use a meta-network (Ha, Dai, and Le 2016) to
distill meta knowledge from the whole sequence and gener-

Deep learning models such as convolutional neural networks
and recurrent networks are widely applied in text classification. In spite of their great success, most deep learning models neglect the importance of modeling context information,
which is crucial to understanding texts. In this work, we propose the Adaptive Region Embedding to learn context representation to improve text classification. Specifically, a metanetwork is learned to generate a context matrix for each region, and each word interacts with its corresponding context
matrix to produce the regional representation for further classification. Compared to previous models that are designed to
capture context information, our model contains less parameters and is more flexible. We extensively evaluate our method
on 8 benchmark datasets for text classification. The experimental results prove that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performances and effectively avoids word ambiguity.

Introduction
Text classification is a fundamental task in many NLP
applications such as web searching, information retrieval
and sentiment analysis. One key challenge in text classification is to understand the compositionality in text sequences for which the modeling of regional relationships
between words and their neighbours is crucial. Traditional
methods usually exploit n-grams as composition function,
which proves to be effective by directly gathering adjacent words. With the emerging development of deep learning, a variety of deep models are recently used for text
classification. The most commonly used models are Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Tang, Qin, and Liu 2015;
Yang et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2016) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Kim 2014; Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun
2015). RNN and its variants LSTM/GRU model the regional
relationships by encoding the previous words into its hidden
unit while CNN captures the compositional structure by layers of convolution and pooling. In spite of their success on
various NLP tasks, RNNs and CNNs are only generic models for sequences or images. They may neglect the intrinsic
semantic relations in text sequences and often require large
computational cost and memory space.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7314

