The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Modeling Local Dependence in Natural
Language with Multi-Channel Recurrent Neural Networks
Chang Xu,1 Weiran Huang,2 Hongwei Wang,3 Gang Wang,4 Tie-Yan Liu5
1,4

College of Computer Science, Nankai University, {changxu, wgzwp}@nbjl.nankai.edu.cn
2
Tsinghua University, huang.inbox@outlook.com
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, wanghongwei55@gmail.com
5
Microsoft Research, tie-yan.liu@microsoft.com
Abstract

exhibit strong local structures in terms of semantics. For example, in sentence “We must find the missing document at
all costs.”, word “at”,“all” and “cost” form a phrase and
are strongly related to each other, so do word “missing” and
“document”. In contrast, “document” and “at” have no such
strong semantic correlation, although they are also neighbors. This indicates that phrase structures are very important
and essential for capturing a wealth of semantic information
and understanding the meaning of sentences. However, they
are hard to be modeled by traditional RNNs in the uniformly
sequential way.
To capture and leverage the semantic structure information, there are two main challenges. First, since there are
diverse word dependence patterns, flexible and learnable
structure modeling method is preferred than predefined connections or fixed topology. Second, the local structures and
word dependence patterns in sentences are discrete symbols
rather than regular learnable model parameters, so it is nontrivial to capture and parameterize them.
In this paper, we propose Multi-Channel RNN (MCRNN), a novel RNN structure that makes full use of local structure information and dependency patterns of natural
language, without requiring additional grammar knowledge.
To tackle the first challenge, MC-RNN enumerates possible
local structure patterns in a sentence. Different from the simple dependence among hidden states in conventional RNNs
(i.e., a hidden state connects directly only to its immediate
predecessor), MC-RNN is designed with multiple channels,
each channel is partitioned into multiple blocks. With such
a multi-block design, a hidden state takes the outputs of several direct/indirect predecessors as inputs. Different partitions of the nodes in different channels focus on different
local structures at each step. Together, many possible local dependency patterns can be enumerated. Compared with
the methods of predefined connections or fixed topology,
our proposed MC-RNN with multiple channels and multiple
blocks is more representative in modeling diverse patterns,
and flexible to RNN variants.
For the second challenge, we propose an attention mechanism among channels to select proper local structure or
dependency patterns at each step. In this way, the structures and connections in sentences can be parameterized,
and the discrete local structures and dependency patterns
can be mined and transformed into a regular learnable prob-

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been widely used
in processing natural language tasks and achieve huge success. Traditional RNNs usually treat each token in a sentence
uniformly and equally. However, this may miss the rich semantic structure information of a sentence, which is useful
for understanding natural languages. Since semantic structures such as word dependence patterns are not parameterized, it is a challenge to capture and leverage structure information. In this paper, we propose an improved variant of
RNN, Multi-Channel RNN (MC-RNN), to dynamically capture and leverage local semantic structure information. Concretely, MC-RNN contains multiple channels, each of which
represents a local dependence pattern at a time. An attention
mechanism is introduced to combine these patterns at each
step, according to the semantic information. Then we parameterize structure information by adaptively selecting the
most appropriate connection structures among channels. In
this way, diverse local structures and dependence patterns in
sentences can be well captured by MC-RNN. To verify the
effectiveness of MC-RNN, we conduct extensive experiments
on typical natural language processing tasks, including neural
machine translation, abstractive summarization, and language
modeling. Experimental results on these tasks all show significant improvements of MC-RNN over current top systems.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), designed with recurrent
units and parameter sharing, have demonstrated outstanding
ability in modeling sequential data and achieved success in
various Nature Language Processing (NLP) tasks, such as
language modeling (Merity, Keskar, and Socher 2018), machine translation (Bahdanau et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2018),
abstractive summarization (Suzuki and Nagata 2017), and
dialog systems (Asri, He, and Suleman 2016). Traditional
RNNs produce hidden state vectors one by one through recurrent computations, treating all tokens in the sequence uniformly and equally. This would limit the applicability of the
model.
Notice that the meaning of a sentence is determined by
two main factors: the meaning of each word and the rule of
combining them. Thus, the semantic structure information is
essential for understanding texts. In fact, natural languages
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5525

