The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Video-Based Sentiment Analysis
with hvnLBP-TOP Feature and bi-LSTM
Haoran Li,1,2,3 Hua Xu1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems, Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology(BNRist), Beijing 100084, China
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
lihr15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuhua@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

exist significant opportunities for accuracy improvements
in applying video-based features.
This paper proposes a novel feature for video-based sentiment analysis. We combine the hand-crafted feature
hvnLBP and the approach of concatenating features on
three orthogonal planes (TOP) to create hvnLBP-TOP feature. By using principal components analysis (PCA), we
reduce the length of our feature to 512. Finally, we select
bidirectional LSTM architecture for sentiment classifying
and regression. We verify our feature on MOUD dataset
(Pérez-Rosas, Mihalcea, and Morency 2013) and CMUMOSI dataset (Zadeh et al. 2016), and the results reveal
that our model achieves better accuracy and efficiency than
other approaches.

In this paper, we propose a new feature extraction method
called hvnLBP-TOP for video-based sentiment analysis.
Furthermore, we use principal component analysis (PCA)
and bidirectional long short term memory (bi-LSTM) for
dimensionality reduction and classification. We achieved an
average recognition accuracy of 71.1% on the MOUD dataset and 63.9% on the CMU-MOSI dataset.

Introduction
With the prosperity of video sharing websites and social
network applications, multimodal sentiment analysis is
becoming increasingly popular among researchers. Beyond
information from natural language, visual information contains important sentiment features in the speakers’ gestures
and facial expressions. Therefore, video-based sentimental
analysis and facial expression recognition (FER) on video
are of great importance in analyzing multimodal sentiment.
Many previous works are associated with facial expression recognition on images. In the early stage, facial landmarks (Hong, Neven, and von der Malsburg 1998) have
been used to describe the geometric feature of faces. Later,
texture features including LBP (Ahonen, Hadid, and Pietikainen 2006) have been used for expression recognition.
LBP has many more advanced derivatives, and horizontal
and vertical neighborhood comparison LBP (hvnLBP)
(Mistry et al. 2017) is the most advanced among them.
These features compare each pixel with its border pixels
and generate histograms of patterns of such comparison
results. In recent years, machine learning techniques such
as shallow convolutional neural network (CNN) (Burkert
et al. 2015) have also been used to extract sentiment features. Besides image-based features, video-based sentiment
analysis utilizes video features including LBP-TOP (Zhao
and Pietikainen 2007). Unlike image-based features, there

Proposed Method
The architecture contains 2 main modules: Feature Extraction Module and Sequential Learning Module, plus an additional preprocessing module. The details of each module
are explained as follows.

Preprocessing
First, the video is cut into frames and stored as jpeg pictures. Second, we detect the biggest human face using the
face detection API. Third, all frames in the video are
cropped by the same face location, so that we get the human face video. Lastly we resize them into 98*98 png picture sequences.

Feature Extraction
As a texture descriptor, hvnLBP involves static facial
states, but not movements of facial muscles. As temporal
change is similar to spatial texture, we compute hvnLBP
on three orthogonal planes, i.e. XY, XT and YT planes, in
order to represent both facial state and movements.
To optimize this feature, we adjusted the computation of
hvnLBP. For all hvnLBP results, there exist only 65 possible digits ranging from 0 to 255. Given this, we create a
map between such digits in range 0-64. We then concate-

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9963

