The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On-Line Adaptative Curriculum Learning for GANs
Thang Doan,1,8 João Monteiro,2 Isabela Albuquerque,2 Bogdan Mazoure,3
Audrey Durand,4,5 Joelle Pineau,4,5,6 R Devon Hjelm5,7
1

Desautels Faculty of Management, McGill University
2
INRS-EMT, Université du Québec
3
Department of Mathematics & Statistics, McGill University
4
School of Computer Science, McGill University
5
Mila – Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute
6
Facebook AI Research,7 Microsoft Research Montreal

Abstract

an empirical target dataset (such as a collection of images).
The discriminator, which acts as an adversary to the generator, needs to discriminate between (or classify) samples as
coming from the real data or the generator.

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) can successfully
approximate a probability distribution and produce realistic
samples. However, open questions such as sufficient convergence conditions and mode collapse still persist. In this paper, we build on existing work in the area by proposing a
novel framework for training the generator against an ensemble of discriminator networks, which can be seen as a
one-student/multiple-teachers setting. We formalize this problem within the full-information adversarial bandit framework,
where we evaluate the capability of an algorithm to select
mixtures of discriminators for providing the generator with
feedback during learning. To this end, we propose a reward
function which reflects the progress made by the generator
and dynamically update the mixture weights allocated to each
discriminator. We also draw connections between our algorithm and stochastic optimization methods and then show that
existing approaches using multiple discriminators in literature
can be recovered from our framework. We argue that less expressive discriminators are smoother and have a general coarse
grained view of the modes map, which enforces the generator
to cover a wide portion of the data distribution support. On the
other hand, highly expressive discriminators ensure samples
quality. Finally, experimental results show that our approach
improves samples quality and diversity over existing baselines
by effectively learning a curriculum. These results also support the claim that weaker discriminators have higher entropy
improving modes coverage.

1

While GANs can achieve impressive qualitative performance (most notably with image data, e.g., see (Roth et
al. 2017; Miyato et al. 2018; Karras et al. 2017)), the most
successful methods depart from the original formulation to
address various instabilities and other optimization difficulties (Arjovsky and Bottou 2017; Arjovsky, Chintala, and
Bottou 2017). One such difficulty in training GANs occurs
when the generator produces samples only from a small
subset of the target distribution, a phenomenon known as
missing modes (a.k.a., mode-dropping, e.g. see (Che et al.
2016)). Numerous works try to address the problem by modifying the original objective, such as unrolling (Metz et al.
2016), aggregating samples (Lin et al. 2017), stacked architectures (Huang et al. 2016; Karras et al. 2017), mutual information / entopy maximization (Belghazi et al. 2018), multiple
discriminators (Neyshabur, Bhojanapalli, and Chakrabarti
2017; Juefei-Xu, Boddeti, and Savvides 2017), or multiple generators (Tolstikhin et al. 2017; Hoang et al. 2017;
Kwak and Zhang 2016).
In our work, we follow the intuition that missing modes in
GANs are due in part to mode-specific vanishing gradients.
As a simple illustrative example which we explore in detail in
our experiments below (Fig. 1), consider a discriminator that
is well representing the target distribution and a generator
that is only generating a subset of the modes in the data. If
any of the missing modes are disjoint from those represented
in the generator (i.e., are composed of sets of features with
low intersection), there is no way for the generator to receive
gradient signal on missing modes from the discriminator.
However, if the discriminator only represents the data approximately (in the sense that it also cannot fully distinguish
between these modes), it may be possible to recover the missing mode gradient signal. If this can be achieved by using

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et
al. 2014) have reshaped the state of machine learning in
tasks that involve generating data. A GAN is an unsupervised
method that consists of two neural networks, a generator
and a discriminator, with opposing (or adversarial) objectives. The typical goal of the generator is to transform noise
(e.g., drawn from a normal distribution) into samples whose
statistical and structural characteristics match well those of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3470

