The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dynamic Compositionality in Recursive Neural
Networks with Structure-Aware Tag Representations
Taeuk Kim,1 Jihun Choi,1 Daniel Edmiston,2 Sanghwan Bae,1 Sang-goo Lee1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
Department of Linguistics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
taeuk@europa.snu.ac.kr, jhchoi@europa.snu.ac.kr, danedmiston@uchicago.edu,
sanghwan@europa.snu.ac.kr, sglee@europa.snu.ac.kr
Abstract

models are designed to reflect the syntactic tree structure,
achieving impressive results on several sentence-level tasks
such as sentiment analysis (Socher et al. 2012; 2013), machine translation (Yang et al. 2017), natural language inference (Bowman et al. 2016), and discourse relation classification (Wang et al. 2017).
However, some recent works have (Yogatama et al. 2017;
Choi, Yoo, and Lee 2018) proposed latent tree models,
which learn to construct task-specific tree structures without explicit supervision, bringing into question the value of
linguistically-motivated recursive neural models. Witnessing the surprising performance of the latent tree models on
some sentence-level tasks, there arises a natural question:
Are linguistic tree structures the optimal way of composing
sentence representations for NLP tasks?
In this paper, we demonstrate that linguistic priors are in
fact useful for devising effective neural models for sentence
representations, showing that our novel architecture based
on constituency trees and their tag2 information obtains superior performance on several sentence-level tasks, including sentiment analysis and natural language inference.
A chief novelty of our approach is that we introduce a
small separate tag-level tree-LSTM to control the composition function of the existing word-level tree-LSTM, which
is in charge of extracting helpful syntactic signals for meaningful semantic composition of constituents by considering
both the structures and linguistic tags of constituency trees
simultaneously. In addition, we demonstrate that applying a
typical LSTM to preprocess the leaf nodes of a tree-LSTM
greatly improves the performance of the tree models. Moreover, we propose a clustered tag set to replace the existing
tags on the assumption that the original syntactic tags are too
fined-grained to be useful in neural models.
In short, our contributions in this work are as follows:

Most existing recursive neural network (RvNN) architectures
utilize only the structure of parse trees, ignoring syntactic tags
which are provided as by-products of parsing. We present a
novel RvNN architecture that can provide dynamic compositionality by considering comprehensive syntactic information
derived from both the structure and linguistic tags. Specifically, we introduce a structure-aware tag representation constructed by a separate tag-level tree-LSTM. With this, we
can control the composition function of the existing wordlevel tree-LSTM by augmenting the representation as a supplementary input to the gate functions of the tree-LSTM. In
extensive experiments, we show that models built upon the
proposed architecture obtain superior or competitive performance on several sentence-level tasks such as sentiment analysis and natural language inference when compared against
previous tree-structured models and other sophisticated neural models.

1

Introduction

One of the most fundamental topics in natural language processing is how best to derive high-level representations from
constituent parts, as natural language meanings are a function of their constituent parts. How best to construct a sentence representation from distributed word embeddings is an
example domain of this larger issue. Even though sequential neural models such as recurrent neural networks (RNN)
(Elman 1990) and their variants including Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Cho et al. 2014) have become
the de-facto standard for condensing sentence-level information from a sequence of words into a fixed vector, there have
been many lines of research towards better sentence representation using other neural architectures, e.g. convolutional
neural networks (CNN) (Kim 2014) or self-attention based
models (Shen et al. 2018).
From a linguistic point of view, the underlying tree
structure—as expressed by its constituency and dependency
trees—of a sentence is an integral part of its meaning. Inspired by this fact, some recursive neural network (RvNN1 )

• We propose a new linguistically-motivated neural model
which generates high-quality sentence representations
by considering all the information extracted from constituency parse trees.
• In addition, we demonstrate the superiority of the pronetworks RNNs, following the convention of some previous works.
2
In this work, we refer to both part-of-speech (POS) tags (e.g.
DT-determiner, JJ-adjective) for words and phrase-level tags (e.g.
NP-noun phrase, VP-verb phrase) simply as ‘tags’.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
To avoid confusion, we call recursive neural networks (or treestructured NNs) RvNNs to distinguish them from recurrent neural

6594

