The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Red-Black Heuristics for Planning Tasks with Conditional Effects
Michael Katz

IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
michael.katz1@ibm.com

Abstract

Giménez 2010) plays a major role in making red-black plan
generation tractable. Following up and exploiting the notion of invertibility, Katz, Hoffmann, and Domshlak (2013a)
devised practical red-black plan heuristics, non-admissible
heuristics generated by repairing fully delete-relaxed plans
into red-black plans. Observing that this technique often
suffers from dramatic over-estimation incurred by following arbitrary decisions taken in delete-relaxed plans, Katz
and Hoffmann (2013) refined the approach to rely less on
such decisions, yielding a more flexible algorithm that delivers better search guidance. Finally, Katz and Hoffmann
(2014b) presented red-black DAG heuristics for a tractable
fragment characterized by DAG black causal graphs and
devised some enhancements targeted at making the resulting red-black plans executable in the real task, stopping the
search if they succeed in reaching the goal. Red-black DAG
heuristics are at the heart of the Mercury planner (Katz and
Hoffmann 2014a), the runner-up of the sequential satisficing
track in the International Planning Competition (IPC 2014).
The most recent IPC 2018 had seen four additional participants (not counting variants) that employ red-black planning heuristics, namely Saarplan (Fickert et al. 2018), the
runner-up of the agile track; IBaCoP-2018 (Cenamor, de la
Rosa, and Fernández 2018), a portfolio-based planner that
has Mercury2014 as one of its components; and MERWIN
(Katz et al. 2018) and Cerberus (Katz 2018), both empowering red-black planning heuristics with the novelty of the
heuristic in state (Katz et al. 2017).
All red-black heuristics to this day, however, are defined
in a classical planning formalism that does not include conditional effects. Because support of conditional effects is
mandatory since IPC 2014, Mercury planner did handle conditional effects, but in a naive way. This was done by simply
compiling them away in a straightforward fashion, multiplying out the actions (Nebel 2000). Obviously, the number
of actions grows exponentially, and thus the straightforward
compiling away does not scale well. Nebel (2000) presents
an alternative compilation that does not lead to an exponential blow-up in the task size. This compilation, however,
does not preserve the delete relaxation. Thus, several delete
relaxation-based heuristics were adapted to natively support conditional effects (Haslum 2013; Röger, Pommerening, and Helmert 2014).
Our main goal in this work is to extend the red-black

Red-black planning is a state-of-the-art approach to satisficing classical planning. Red-black planning heuristics are at
the heart of the planner Mercury, the runner-up of a satisficing
track in the International Planning Competition (IPC) 2014
and a major component of four additional planners in IPC
2018, including Saarplan, the runner-up in the agile track.
Mercury’s exceptional performance is amplified by the fact
that conditional effects were handled by the planner in a trivial way, simply by compiling them away. Conditional effects,
however, are important for classical planning, and many domains require them for efficient modeling.
Consequently, we investigate the possibility of handling conditional effects directly in the red-black planning heuristic
function, extending the algorithm for computing red-black
plans to the conditional effects setting. We show empirically
that red-black planning heuristics that handle conditional effects natively outperform the variants that compile this feature away, improving coverage on tasks where black variables
exist by 19%.

Introduction
Delete relaxation heuristics have played a key role in the
success of satisficing planning systems (Bonet and Geffner
2001; Hoffmann and Nebel 2001; Richter and Westphal
2010). A well-known pitfall of delete relaxation is its inability to account for repetitive achievements of facts. It has thus
been an actively researched question from the outset how to
take some deletes into account, e. g. (Fox and Long 2001;
Gerevini, Saetti, and Serina 2003; Helmert 2004; Helmert
and Geffner 2008; Baier and Botea 2009; Cai, Hoffmann,
and Helmert 2009; Haslum 2012; Keyder, Hoffmann, and
Haslum 2012). The red-black planning framework (Domshlak, Hoffmann, and Katz 2015), where a subset of red state
variables takes on the relaxed value-accumulating semantics, while the other black variables retain the regular semantics, introduced a convenient way of interpolating between
fully relaxed and regular planning.
Katz, Hoffmann, and Domshlak (2013b) introduced the
red-black framework and conducted a theoretical investigation of tractability of both plan existence and plan generation. In particular, they found that reversibility (Chen and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7619

