The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Meta Learning for Image Captioning
Nannan Li,1 Zhenzhong Chen,1∗ Shan Liu2
1

School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
Tencent Media Lab, Palo Alto, CA, USA
{live, zzchen}@whu.edu.cn, shanl@tencent.com

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown its advantages in
image captioning by optimizing the non-differentiable metric directly in the reward learning process. However, due to
the reward hacking problem in RL, maximizing reward may
not lead to better quality of the caption, especially from the
aspects of propositional content and distinctiveness. In this
work, we propose to use a new learning method, meta learning, to utilize supervision from the ground truth whilst optimizing the reward function in RL. To improve the propositional content and the distinctiveness of the generated captions, the proposed model provides the global optimal solution by taking different gradient steps towards the supervision
task and the reinforcement task, simultaneously. Experimental results on MS COCO validate the effectiveness of our approach when compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

RL: a little girl holding a cat in
a of a. (1.48)
GT: girl with a yellow shirt
holding a small cat. (1.39)
occupy

RL: a red fire hydrant in the
snow with a. (2.57)
GT: a fire hydrant and sign
covered in snow. (2.10)
occupy

RL: a street sign on a pole with
a in the. (1.21)
GT: a no bicycles, skates or
skateboards sign on a pole.
(0.94)

RL: a bathroom with a toilet
and a sink and a. (1.80)
GT: a modern looking bathroom has a toilet and a sink.
(1.05)

Introduction
Image captioning, which aims to automatically generate descriptions of a given image, is a prominent research problem
in computer vision (Farhadi et al. 2010; Fang et al. 2015;
Vinyals et al. 2015). It’s a challenging task because it requires advanced techniques of object recognition and natural language processing, in order to translate an image into
human-like description accurately.
Based on a CNN-LSTM structure (Vinyals et al. 2015;
Mao et al. 2015; Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015), significant
progress has been made in recent years, especially by using
reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998). Reinforcement learning has been exploited as a training method
to deal with the out-of-context problem (Choi, Torralba, and
Willsky 2008). For implicit optimization towards the evaluaition metric, (Rennie et al. 2017) train the model directly on
non-differentiable metrics by using test-time reward as the
baseline in the target function. For better estimation of the
reward function, (Liu et al. 2017) use a linear combination of
different evaluation metrics and expoit Monte Carlo rollouts
instead of mixing Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE)
training with policy gradient (Ranzato et al. 2016). (Ren et
al. 2017) present a policy network and a value network using an actor-critic reinforcement learning model, where the

Figure 1: Comparison of some ground truth captions (i.e.,
GT) and the RL generated captions using CIDEr optimization (i.e., RL). Digit next to the caption is its corresponding
CIDEr score, where RL generated captions achieve significantly high CIDEr score but not necessarily better quality.
reward is learned instead of pre-defined using the evaluation
metrics .
Although RL has been proven to achieve significant performance improvements on the evaluation metrics (Rennie
et al. 2017; Anderson et al. 2018; Yao et al. 2017), the
model may overfit to the reward function,which causes reward hacking (Irpan 2018). Specifically, given a reward as
the objective function, RL can maximize the reward but the
increasing reward may not come from the intended solution. Since the reward function may not accurately represent

∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8626

