The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Basis Representation to Refine 3D Human Pose Estimations
Chunyu Wang,∗ Haibo Qiu,∗ Alan L. Yuille,† Wenjun Zeng∗
∗

†

Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA

Abstract
Estimating 3D human poses from 2D joint positions is an illposed problem, and is further complicated by the fact that
the estimated 2D joints usually have errors to which most of
the 3D pose estimators are sensitive. In this work, we present
an approach to refine inaccurate 3D pose estimations. The
core idea of the approach is to learn a number of bases to obtain tight approximations of the low-dimensional pose manifold where a 3D pose is represented by a convex combination of the bases. The representation requires that globally
the refined poses are close to the pose manifold thus avoiding
generating illegitimate poses. Second, the designed bases also
have the property to guarantee that the distances among the
body joints of a pose are within reasonable ranges. Experiments on benchmark datasets show that our approach obtains
more legitimate poses over the baselines. In particular, the
limb lengths are closer to the ground truth.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) shows the 2D pose estimated by (Cao et al.
2017). The joints highlighted by the yellow dots are those
that were not successfully detected. (b) shows the estimated
3D pose (two views) by the baseline method (MorenoNoguer 2017). (c) shows our refined 3D poses.

Estimating 3D human poses from monocular images (Nie,
Wei, and Zhu 2017; Tekin et al. 2017; Martinez et al. 2017;
Sun et al. 2017; Pavlakos et al. 2017) is useful for many
applications such as action recognition and human computer
interaction. Compared to 2D poses, 3D poses are viewpoint
invariant thus are more intrinsic representations of human
motion. On the other hand, compared to raw RGB images,
3D poses have lower dimensions and suffer less from the
risk of over-fitting to small datasets.
The task however is very challenging due to several reasons. First, multiple 3D poses may correspond to the same
2D pose and several candidates are even illegitimate. For example, the poses may have invalid anthropometric measurements, e.g. limb lengths or bending angles. Second, the input
2D poses are usually automatically estimated from images
and may have large errors in some challenging cases (e.g.
severe occlusions). The errors in 2D poses usually degrade
the estimation accuracy of 3D poses severely. Figure 1 (b)
shows a sample (inaccurate) 3D pose estimated by a strong
baseline (Moreno-Noguer 2017).
In this work, we present an approach to refine inaccurate
3D poses by learning manifold priors from 3D pose datasets.
There are two motivations behind our approach. First, we
know that although 3D poses lie in a high dimensional ambient space (e.g. 3×m, m is the number of joints), legitimate

3D poses only lie in a small bounded region of that space.
See the cyan region in Figure 2 for illustration. The core of
our approach is to learn a bounded and low-dimensional representation for that region utilizing a dictionary of bases. See
the red circles in Figure 2. A pose is represented by a convex
combination of the neighboring bases. The neighborhood
requirement enables a local and tight approximation of the
pose manifold. For refinement purpose, a 3D pose will be
projected to generate a valid 3D pose on the manifold. This
basis representation captures the global configuration of all
the body joints.
The second motivation is that, due to the skeletal structure
of a pose, the distances among the body joints of a scalenormalized pose are bounded by the minimum and maximum distances. In particular, if a pair of joints form a rigid
limb, then their distance is almost constant for all the normalized poses. This is a local prior for poses which we can
use to locally refine illegitimate poses. We embed this information into bases and guarantee that locally a pose has
legitimate distances among all joints.
We evaluate our 3D pose refinement approach on two
benchmark datasets: H36M (Ionescu et al. 2014) and MPIINF-3DHP (Mehta et al. 2017). We use two strong baselines
(Moreno-Noguer 2017; Martinez et al. 2017) to obtain ini-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8925

