The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Robust Multi-Object Detection Based on Data
Augmentation with Realistic Image Synthesis for Point-of-Sale Automation
Saiprasad Koturwar, Soma Shiraishi, Kota Iwamoto
Data Science Research Laboratories, NEC Corporation
1753, Shimonumabe, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 211-8666, Japan

Abstract
As an alternative to bar-code scanning, we are developing
a real-time retail product detector for point-of-sale automation. The major challenge associated with image based object
detection arise from occlusion and the presence of other objects in close proximity. For robust product detection under
such conditions, it is crucial to train the detector on a rich
set of images with varying degrees of occlusion and proximity between the products, which fairly represents a wide
range of customer tendencies of placing products together.
However, generating a fairly large database of such images
traditionally requires a large amount of human effort. On the
other hand, acquiring individual object images with their corresponding masks is a relatively easy task. We propose an
realistic image synthesis approach which uses individual object images and their corresponding masks to create training images with desired properties (occlusion and congestion among the products). We train our product detector over
images thus generated and achieve a consistent performance
improvement across different types of test data. With the proposed approach, detector achieves an improvement of 46.2%
(from 0.67 to 0.98) and 40% (from 0.60 to 0.84) over precision and recall respectively, compared to using a basic training dataset containing one product per image.

1

Figure 1: The developed POS system.

Figure 2: Examples of difficult instances for detection.

an image of the products placed on the platform. Finally, the
system analyzes the captured image to recognize individual
products, which then outputs the total price on the screen.
To enable efficient and user friendly operation, with minimal constraints on the user, we allow the users to place products freely and randomly as long as they do not occlude each
other heavily. This freedom of product placement results
in congested conditions as shown in Fig. 2. In most cases,
the products are placed in close proximity where sometimes
they are touching each other or even have partial occlusion.
Hence, it is vital to have a robust identification of products
under such congested conditions in order to have flawless
operation of the proposed system.
In order to achieve a reliable product recognition under
such congested conditions, our system divides the recognition task into two stages: detection and classification. The
detector focuses on robustly localizing and extracting the regions of each individual product from the image. The detector then passes each extracted product region to the classifier, which focuses on the classification of the product (out
of hundreds of possible product classes) one-by-one. This

Introduction

Over past few years, retail industry has been seeking solutions for facilitating unmanned store operations, owing to
labor shortages and longer queue times. In particular, executing an automated checkout process is crucial, since it
has been the bottleneck for smooth operation of stores. Here
we instantiate the automated checkout system by replacing
conventional bar-code scanning with an image recognition
based product detector system. Image recognition enables
scanning of multiple products at once, making the checkout
faster. This system leverages state-of-the-art deep learning to
enable reliable recognition of various types of products including packaged products (e.g. pre-processed foods, softdrinks etc.). The developed POS system is shown in Fig.
1. The process for checkout is as follows. First, the customer puts the products he/she wishes to buy on the product
placement platform. Next, a camera placed above captures
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9492

