The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Explicit Interaction Model towards Text Classification
Cunxiao Du,1 Zhaozheng Chen,1∗ Fuli Feng,2∗ Lei Zhu,3 Tian Gan,1† Liqiang Nie1
1

Shandong University, No.72 Binhai Road, Jimo,Qingdao, Shandong, China 266237
2
National University of Singapore, 13 Computing Drive, Singapore 117417
3
Shandong Normal University, No.1 University Road, Changqing Dist., Ji’nan, Shandong, China 250358
{cnsdunm,zhaozhengcc,fulifeng93,leizhu0608}@gmail.com, {gantian, nieliqiang}@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract

models such as Linear Regression (Zhu and Hastie 2001) and
Support Vector Machine (Cortes and Vapnik 1995) to make
the judgment. Traditional solutions suffer from two defects:
1) High labor intensity for the manually crafted features, and
2) data sparsity (a N-grams could occur only several times in
a given dataset).
Recently, owing to the ability of tackling the aforementioned problems, deep neural networks (Kim 2014; Iyyer et
al. 2015; Schwenk et al. 2017; Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2016;
Grave et al. 2017) have become the promising solutions
for the text classification. Deep neural networks typically
learn a word-level representation for the input text, which
is usually a matrix with each row/column as an embedding
of a word in the text. They then compress the word-level
representation into a text-level representation (vector) with
aggregation operations (e.g., pooling). Thereafter, a fullyconnected (FC) layer at the topmost of the network is
appended to make the final decision. Note that these solutions
are also called encoding-based methods (Munkhdalai and Yu
2017), since they encode the textual content into a latent
vector representation.
Although great success has been achieved, these deep
neural network based solutions naturally ignore the finegrained classification clues (i.e., matching signals between
words and classes), since their classifications are based
on text-level representations. As shown in Figure 1, the
classification (i.e., FC) layer of these solutions matches the
text-level representation with class representations via a dotproduct operation. Mathematically, it interprets the parameter
matrix of the FC layer as a set of class representations (each
column is associated with a class) (Press and Wolf 2017).
As such, the probability of the text belonging to a class is
largely determined by their overall matching score regardless
of word-level matching signals, which would provide explicit
signals for classification (e.g., missile strongly indicates the
topic of military).
To address the aforementioned problems, we introduce the
interaction mechanism (Wang and Jiang 2016b), which is
capable of incorporating the word-level matching signals for
text classification. The key idea behind the interaction mechanism is to explicitly calculate the matching scores between
the words and classes. From the word-level representation,
it computes an interaction matrix, in which each entry is
the matching score between a word and a class (dot-product

Text classification is one of the fundamental tasks in natural
language processing. Recently, deep neural networks have
achieved promising performance in the text classification task
compared to shallow models. Despite of the significance of
deep models, they ignore the fine-grained (matching signals
between words and classes) classification clues since their
classifications mainly rely on the text-level representations. To
address this problem, we introduce the interaction mechanism
to incorporate word-level matching signals into the text
classification task. In particular, we design a novel framework,
EXplicit interAction Model (dubbed as EXAM), equipped
with the interaction mechanism. We justified the proposed
approach on several benchmark datasets including both multilabel and multi-class text classification tasks. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
method. As a byproduct, we have released the codes and
parameter settings to facilitate other researches.

Introduction
Text classification is one of the fundamental tasks in natural
language processing, targeting at classifying a piece of
text content into one or multiple categories. According to
the number of desired categories, text classification can
be divided into two groups, namely, multi-label (multiple
categories) and multi-class (unique category). For instance,
classifying an article into different topics (e.g., machine
learning or data mining) falls into the former one since
an article could be under several topics simultaneously.
By contrast, classifying a comment of a movie into its
corresponding rating level lies into the multi-class group.
Both multi-label and multi-class text classifications have
been widely applied in many fields like sentimental analysis
(Cambria, Olsher, and Rajagopal 2014), topic tagging (Grave
et al. 2017), and document classification (Yang et al. 2016).
Feature engineering dominates the performance of traditional shallow text classification methods for a very long time.
Various rule-based and statistical features like bag-of-words
(Wallach 2006) and N-grams (Brown et al. 1992) are designed
to describe the text, and fed into the shallow machine learning
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6359

