The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficiently Reasoning with Interval Constraints in Forward Search Planning
Amanda Coles,∗ Andrew Coles,∗ Moises Martinez,∗ Emre Savas,∗
Juan Manuel Delfa,∗∗ Tomás de la Rosa,† Yolanda E-Martı́n,† Angel Garcı́a-Olaya†
∗

Department of Informatics, King’s College London firstname.lastname@kcl.ac.uk
∗∗
European Space Agency, Oxford, UK Juan.Delfa@esa.int
†
Department of Computer Science, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid {trosa,yescuder,agolaya}@inf.uc3m.es

Abstract

approach for reasoning with these problems; and paves the
way for the use of decades of research on P DDL planning in
space applications typically dominated by timeline planners.
The lack of attention to explicitly reasoning with interval
constraints in P DDL has been, in part, due to the fact that
previous work noted they can be represented in P DDL 2.1
by adding additional actions to the domain (Fox, Long, and
Halsey 2004; Smith, Frank, and Cushing 2008). Early critics argued that this type of approach is cumbersome, forcing
a planner to do additional work (Smith 2003); and indeed,
as the first to fully define, and empirically evaluate the performance of, such a compilation in this paper, we find its
scalability is very poor.
Our main contribution is a novel approach for reasoning
directly with interval constraints in state-based P DDL planning. We extend P DDL to provide new mechanisms for representing interval constraints explicitly, and then go on to
show how an expressive P DDL planner, O PTIC, can be extended to reason directly with these constraints. We evaluate the performance of our new approach against that of a
compilation on a range of benchmark domains with interval constraints, showing empirically that it outperforms this
compilation by an order of magnitude (sometimes several).
Finally, to illustrate the potential of our work to in space
applications, typically dominated by timeline planners, we
provide an initial comparison to an A PSI timeline planning
system (Cesta et al. 2012), on an existing ESA Mars rover
domain, originally written in D DL: the representation language for A PSI. We observe that our planner performs better
than A PSI on many of the problem instances.

In this paper we present techniques for reasoning natively
with quantitative/qualitative interval constraints in statebased P DDL planners. While these are considered important
in modeling and solving problems in timeline based planners; reasoning with these in P DDL planners has seen relatively little attention, yet is a crucial step towards making
P DDL planners applicable in real-world scenarios, such as
space missions. Our main contribution is to extend the planner O PTIC to reason natively with Allen interval constraints.
We show that our approach outperforms both MTP, the only
P DDL planner capable of handling similar constraints and a
compilation to P DDL 2.1, by an order of magnitude. We go on
to present initial results indicating that our approach is competitive with a timeline based planner on a Mars rover domain, showing the potential of P DDL planners in this setting.

1

Introduction

Interval constraints are fundamental to modeling real-world
planning problems, allowing specification of constraints on
the temporal relationships between the execution of actions
and the achievement of facts. For example, a Mars Rover
must take a picture during a period in which the rover is stationary at the location, and remains so for some specified
time before and after the image is taken. Such constraints
appear frequently in applications, not only in space-based
domains, but also in terrestrial scenarios from scheduling activities of nursing home assistance robots (Tran et al. 2017)
to planning ocean liner repositioning (Tierney et al. 2012).
Due to their ubiquity in applications, reasoning with interval constraints has been a major focus of research in
timeline-based planning systems (Cesta et al. 2012; Frank
and Jonsson 2003; Chien et al. 2000). The need for expressive languages has been noted (Cushing et al. 2007), but
handling such constraints in P DDL planners has seen relatively little attention. This paper is the first to bridge the
gap between the two major paradigms in temporal planning,
combining their strengths: the expressive temporal reasoning of timeline planners and the powerful heuristics of P DDL
state-based planners, that are not readily accessible to timeline planners, which typically use less-scalable partial-order
planning approaches. This provides a new, more efficient

2
2.1

Background

PDDL Temporal Planning Problems

The basis for P DDL 2.1 (Fox and Long 2003) temporal planning is a collection of propositions P , and a vector of numeric variables v. These are manipulated by actions whose
executability is determined a precondition: a conjunction
of zero or more conditions. A condition is either a single
proposition p ∈ P , ¬p, or a numeric constraint over v. We
assume numeric constraints are linear, i.e. can be written
w.v{>, ≥, <, ≤, =}c (elements of w, and c, are constants).
Each durative action A has three sets of preconditions:
pre` A, pre↔ A, prea A. These represent the conditions that

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7562

