The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Examining Political Trustworthiness through Text-Based Measures of Ideology
Eitan Sapiro-Gheiler
Department of Economics, Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building, Princeton, NJ 08544
Phone: 612-321-1849, Email: eitans@princeton.edu

Abstract

While party-blind elections are uncommon, they do exist—as described by e.g., (Bonneau and Cann 2013)—so this
machine-learning-inspired simulation of social behavior is
more realistic than it seems on face. Furthermore, party affiliation is an objective ground-truth label, while voting-based
measures of ideology, which this work uses to discuss trustworthiness, are constructed from data and thus a step away
from the reality of political behavior. Second, this work develops “scores” that embed ideology in a one-dimensional
space, similar to those based on voting behavior.1 We use
these scores to examine the gap between text-based and
voting-based measures of political position, thus providing
quantitative analysis of both the magnitude and causes of
political untrustworthiness.

This work shows the value of word-level statistical data from
the US Congressional Record for studying the ideological positions and dynamic behavior of senators. Using classification
techniques from machine learning, we predict senators’ party
with near-perfect accuracy. We also develop text-based ideology scores to embed a politician’s ideological position in
a one-dimensional policy space. Using these scores, we find
that speech that diverges from voting positions may result
in higher vote totals. To explain this behavior, we show that
politicians use speech to move closer to their party’s average
position. These results not only provide empirical support for
political economy models of commitment, but also add to the
growing literature of machine-learning-based text analysis in
social science contexts.

Methods and Data

Introduction and Motivation

Using word-count approaches (bag-of-words), we employ four classical classification methods: decision tree
(DT), naı̈ve Bayes (NB), support vector machine (SVM),
and lasso-penalty regression (LR). This paper studies approximately 1000 senators—all those serving between
1995-2015.2 All classification methods use 10-fold crossvalidation. We train each method using all ten sessions of
Congress and test its performance on each individual session
of Congress. We also train classifiers for each method using
only the data from each individual session of Congress, each
of which is then tested not only on its own session, but also
on true “out-of-sample” data by applying it to the other sessions of Congress and the combined 10-session sample.
Because of LR’s excellent performance across the full
sample and because it provides a wide range of probabilities of party membership, we use it to construct onedimensional ideology scores that are directly comparable to
DW-NOMINATE scores, the standard such measure based
on voting records. In other words, we provide a novel textbased embedding of political ideology. These scores allow
more fine-grained and quantitative approaches to measuring ideology than existing political-text-analysis literature,

It is commonly believed that politicians lie, and do it often. After all, speeches and votes represent two different
levels of commitment. While speeches are public, they are
nonbinding; on the other hand, votes represent recorded positions that influence on whether policy proposals are approved or not. However, existing political science literature
on promise-keeping is more mixed than that adage would
suggest. Political parties are surprisingly trustworthy, as discussed for example by (Pétry and Collette 2009). Early work
in this area used party platforms to manually derive a list
of promises and examined policy implementations to see
whether they line up, as in (Budge and Hofferbert 1990).
The development of automatic text analysis and classification techniques from machine learning provides a new set
of tools with which to address these questions. Recently,
(Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Taddy 2016) and (Laurendale and
Herzog 2016) have used these modern methods to quantify
political polarization by extracting features from speeches in
the US Congress, a much larger and more personalized body
of text than party platforms.
The work presented here builds on these contributions
in two ways. First, using methods from data classification
on political texts to predict political party simulates a simplified version of voting—the determination of a political
candidate’s ideological position from available information.

1
The most well-known example of this are Poole-Rosenthal
DW-NOMINATE scores, described in (Poole and Rosenthal 1985).
2
Data is drawn from a preprocessed version of the US Congressional Record used in (Laurendale and Herzog 2016). We perform
further text preprocessing using standard tools in Matlab.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10029

