The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Inter-Class Angular Loss for Convolutional Neural Networks
Le Hui,† Xiang Li,† Chen Gong,† Meng Fang,‡ Joey Tianyi Zhou,§ Jian Yang†∗
†

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
†
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
‡
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China § Institute of High Performance Computing , Singapore
{le.hui, xiang.li.implus, chen.gong, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, mfang@tencent.com, joey.tianyi.zhou@gmail.com
Abstract

et al. 2016a) introduced the deep residual network with
more than 1000 layers, which is a huge breakthrough in
training extreme deep neural networks. Other typical CNNs
including (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; Szegedy et al.
2015; Srivastava, Greff, and Schmidhuber 2015; Szegedy
et al. 2016; He et al. 2016a; Xie et al. 2017; Huang et al.
2017; Szegedy et al. 2017) have exhibited strong learning
ability and obtained superior performance to traditional
learning approaches on a variety of tasks. In summary, the
classical CNNs’ structure can be viewed as a convolutional
feature learning machine supervised by the softmax loss.
The convolutional layers extract the discriminative features
of an input image, and send the features into the softmax
layer for classification.
However, in classical CNNs’ structure, the softmax function ignores the distinct difficulties for discriminating the
examples in different categories. In fact, the inter-class
similarities between different categories are very different.
For instance, in CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2009)
dataset, distinguishing cats and dogs is usually harder than
distinguishing horses and ships for CNNs, as the cats often
share many similar local patterns with dogs. Unfortunately,
the softmax operation fails to explicitly consider the different distinguishability of inter-class pairs, which is an
important issue that has been largely neglected.
By a series of exploratory experiments, it is observed that
there exists a correlation between the angle of two classes
and the difficulty in correctly distinguishing them. As shown
in Fig. 1, the smaller the angle of a pair of classes is, the
harder will be for a network to distinguish them. From the
angular matrix shown in Fig. 1(a), we see that the angle
θcat,dog is smaller than angle θdog,plane , which is consistent
with our general understanding that separating cats and dogs
is actually more difficult than distinguishing between dogs
from planes.
To reduce the discriminative difficulty between the two
categories, especially the two similar ones, our method tries
to explicitly enlarge the angle of two classes as shown in
Fig. 1(d). To this end, Inter-Class Angular Loss (ICAL)
is proposed in this paper to enhance the discriminative
ability between hard category pairs in order to improve
the classification performance of CNNs. Specifically, ICAL
uses cosine distance on the class angle θ to measure the
similarity of two classes. The value of cosine distance

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have shown great
power in various classification tasks and have achieved remarkable results in practical applications. However, the distinct learning difficulties in discriminating different pairs of
classes are largely ignored by the existing networks. For
instance, in CIFAR-10 dataset, distinguishing cats from dogs
is usually harder than distinguishing horses from ships. By
carefully studying the behavior of CNN models in the training
process, we observe that the confusion level of two classes
is strongly correlated with their angular separability in the
feature space. That is, the larger the inter-class angle is, the
lower the confusion will be. Based on this observation, we
propose a novel loss function dubbed “Inter-Class Angular
Loss” (ICAL), which explicitly models the class correlation
and can be directly applied to many existing deep networks.
By minimizing the proposed ICAL, the networks can effectively discriminate the examples in similar classes by enlarging the angle between their corresponding class vectors.
Thorough experimental results on a series of vision and nonvision datasets confirm that ICAL critically improves the
discriminative ability of various representative deep neural
networks and generates superior performance to the original
networks with conventional softmax loss.

Introduction
Over the past few years, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have been successfully applied to various image
analysis tasks and gradually become one of the most powerful machine learning approaches nowadays. In particular,
CNNs have achieved state-of-the-art results for a wide range
of challenging tasks such as object recognition (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Li et al. 2016), hand-written
digit recognition (LeCun et al. 1989), image classification
(Deng et al. 2009; Gong et al. 2016; 2017), natural language
processing (Kim 2014; Lai et al. 2015; Liu, Qiu, and Huang
2016; Wang et al. 2017), etc.
Generally, the key components of a CNN for visual classification tasks includes stacked convolutional layers, pooling
layers, and a linear matrix with the softmax function. The
earliest CNN can be dated back to LeNet5 (LeCun et al.
1998), which has only five layers. Recently, He et al. (He
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3894

