The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multilevel Language and Vision Integration for Text-to-Clip Retrieval
Huijuan Xu,1 Kun He,1 Bryan A. Plummer,1 Leonid Sigal,2 Stan Sclaroff,1 Kate Saenko1
1

Boston University, 2 University of British Columbia
hxu@bu.edu, hekun@bu.edu, bplum@bu.edu, lsigal@cs.ubc.ca, sclaroff@bu.edu, saenko@bu.edu

Abstract
Video

We address the problem of text-based activity retrieval in
video. Given a sentence describing an activity, our task is to
retrieve matching clips from an untrimmed video. To capture
the inherent structures present in both text and video, we introduce a multilevel model that integrates vision and language
features earlier and more tightly than prior work. First, we inject text features early on when generating clip proposals, to
help eliminate unlikely clips and thus speed up processing
and boost performance. Second, to learn a fine-grained similarity metric for retrieval, we use visual features to modulate
the processing of query sentences at the word level in a recurrent neural network. A multi-task loss is also employed
by adding query re-generation as an auxiliary task. Our approach significantly outperforms prior work on two challenging benchmarks: Charades-STA and ActivityNet Captions.

Text queries

Person holding the door
to the refrigerator open

Person closing the
refrigerator door

Query-guided
proposals
Learned
similarity

LSTM
0.1

0.8 0.6

0.3

0.9

0.2

Retrieved
clips

Figure 1: Text-to-clip is a complicated task that can involve
objects, their interactions, and activities. In this example,
the model needs to understand the objects being referred to
(person and refrigerator), disambiguate between the verbs
(holding open vs. closing), and perform temporal localization based on the movement of the refrigerator door. For this
task, we propose a multilevel model to tightly integrate language and vision features in its retrieval pipeline: 1) queryguided video clip proposals, 2) learned similarity measure
with a recurrent LSTM.

Introduction
Temporal localization of events or activities of interest is a
key problem in computer vision. Recently there has been increased interest in specifying the queries using natural language rather than only supporting a predefined set of actions
or events (Gao et al. 2017; Hendricks et al. 2017). In this paper, we focus on the task of retrieving temporal segments in
untrimmed video through natural language queries, or simply, text-to-clip. Solving this task requires understanding the
nuances of natural language and video contents. For example, in Figure 1, although the two queries talk about the same
objects, their verbs make the key difference, and the temporal ordering of video frames can give an important cue.
Existing methods for solving cross-modal retrieval tasks
typically learn embedding functions to project data from different modalities into a common vector embedding space.
In this common space retrieval is performed using standard
similarity metrics, such as Euclidean distance. However, for
text-to-clip, such wholistic representations of sentences and
video clips make it difficult to leverage fine-grained structures, such as the ordering of words and frames. Also, the
embeddings are usually independent of each other, making
it impossible to use input from one modality to modulate the
processing of another.

To better model the structured information present in both
modalities, we propose a novel multilevel approach for integrating vision and language features for the text-to-clip task.
In the first level, we inject language features at the temporal
segment proposal stage. Inspired by attention mechanisms
in Visual Question Answering (VQA) (Anderson et al. 2018;
Lu et al. 2016; Shih, Singh, and Hoiem 2016; Xu and Saenko
2016), we re-weight the video features used to propose temporal segments by their similarity to the encoding of the input query. This enables our model to select clips that are
more relevant to queries as candidates for further processing. The video feature weights can be pooled over a set of
queries which helps to reduce computational costs when performing multiple queries on a single video.
The second level of integration happens when computing
the similarity between the text query and video clips. We
learn a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model that pro-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9062

