The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SpHMC: Spectral Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
Haoyi Xiong,1* Kafeng Wang,2* Jiang Bian,3* Zhanxing Zhu,4
Cheng-Zhong Xu,2 Zhishan Guo,3 Jun Huan1
1

Big Data Lab, Baidu Inc. & National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Applications, China
2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
& University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Central Florida, United States
4
Deep Learning Laboratory, Peking University & Beijing Institute of Big Data Research, China
*Equal Contribution
{xionghaoyi, v wangkafeng, v bianjiang, huanjun}@baidu.com
Abstract

known. For example, for some data augmentation applications, a training dataset is given without knowing the probability distributions. One has to generate new samples from
the unknown distributions using the dataset and further boost
the performance of learning. In such a scenario, existing solutions often use Kernel Density Estimators, such as Gaussian Kernels, to first learn the distribution from the given
datasets, then leverage SGHMC to draw new samples from
the distributions modeled by kernels. Such solutions, namely
Kernel Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (Strathmann et al. 2015;
Strathmann 2018), have been used to handle the cases that
likelihood or density of data is intractable.
Although the Kernel density estimator provides the sampler an evaluator of probability density, the performance
of kernel-based solutions is usually limited mainly due to
the following three factors: 1) Dimensionality Curse. it is
difficult to scale-up the density estimation on dimensionality, while kernel density estimation over high-dimensional
data is frequently inaccurate (Bengio, Delalleau, and Roux
2006); 2) Bandwidth Selection. When using Gaussian kernels, it consumes time significantly to select an optimal
bandwidth for Kernel due to the dimensionality and size of
dataset (Raykar and Duraiswami 2006); and 3) Computational Complexity. It is quite time consuming to compute
the derivatives of Kernel density model (Sasaki, Noh, and
Sugiyama 2015; Sasaki et al. 2016), i.e., gradients of LogSumExp functions.
Thus, there needs a method to replace kernel density estimation, while providing accurate derivative evaluation of
probability density. To lower the computational complexity
to compute the derivative of kernel density functions, Sasaki
et al. (Sasaki, Noh, and Sugiyama 2015; Sasaki et al. 2016)
proposed the direct density derivative estimator that learns a
regression model through sampling from fitted kernels, then
predicts the derivatives using the regression model. With
such methods, one can draw samples from the distribution
with low computational complexity. However, such methods still cannot handle the dimensionality curse of kernel
methods, which may cause significant performance degradation (Strathmann 2018) due to the divergence between fitted
and groundtruth distributions.
Our Contributions. From the previous discussions, it is

Stochastic Gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC)
methods have been widely used to sample from certain probability distributions, incorporating (kernel) density derivatives and/or given datasets. Instead of exploring new samples from kernel spaces, this piece of work proposed a novel
SGHMC sampler, namely Spectral Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
(SpHMC), that produces the high dimensional sparse representations of given datasets through sparse sensing and
SGHMC. Inspired by compressed sensing, we assume all
given samples are low-dimensional measurements of certain
high-dimensional sparse vectors, while a continuous probability distribution exists in such high-dimensional space.
Specifically, given a dictionary for sparse coding, SpHMC first
derives a novel likelihood evaluator of the probability distribution from the loss function of LASSO, then samples from
the high-dimensional distribution using stochastic Langevin
dynamics with derivatives of the logarithm likelihood and
Metropolis–Hastings sampling. In addition, new samples in
low-dimensional measuring spaces can be regenerated using
the sampled high-dimensional vectors and the dictionary. Extensive experiments have been conducted to evaluate the proposed algorithm using real-world datasets. The performance
comparisons on three real-world applications demonstrate the
superior performance of SpHMC beyond baseline methods.

Introduction
Stochastic Gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC) algorithms (Chen, Fox, and Guestrin 2014; Ma, Chen, and Fox
2015) have been widely used to support a wide spectrum
of applications, such as Bayesian learning (Andrieu et al.
2003), generative sampling, and data augmentation (Antoniou, Storkey, and Edwards 2017). All these tasks require efficient samplers, such as SGHMC, that are capable of drawing samples/parameters from certain prior/posterior distributions. Generally, given the derivative evaluation of the probability density function, SGHMC methods can sample from
the distribution through a number of iterations, incorporating a discrete-time second-order Langevin dynamics.
While the evaluation of density derivative is indispensable
for SGHMC, the density or its derivative is frequently not
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5516

