The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Scalable Recollections for Continual Lifelong Learning
Matthew Riemer, Tim Klinger, Djallel Bouneffouf, Michele Franceschini
IBM Research
T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY
{mdriemer, tklinger, djallel.bouneffouf, franceschini}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

Continual learning (Thrun 1994; Ring 1994; Thrun 1996)
has three main requirements: (1) continually adapt in a nonstationary environment, (2) retain memories which are useful,
(3) manage compute and memory resources over a long period of time. Most neural network research has focused on
methods to improve (1) and (2). In this paper we consider (3)
as well and further investigate the role of efficient experience
storage in avoiding the catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey
and Cohen 1989) problem that makes (2) so challenging.
Experience memory has been influential in many recent
approaches. For example, experience replay (Lin 1992)
was integral in helping to stabilize the training of Deep Q
Learning on Atari games (Mnih et al. 2015). Episodic storage mechanisms (Schaul et al. 2015; Blundell et al. 2016;
Pritzel et al. 2017; Rebuffi, Kolesnikov, and Lampert 2017;
Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017) were also some of the earliest
solutions to the catastrophic forgetting problem in the supervised learning setting (Murre 1992; Robins 1995). Unlike
approaches which simply focus on remembering representations of old tasks (Li and Hoiem 2016; Riemer, Khabiri,
and Goodwin 2016; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017), episodic storage techniques achieve superior performance because of their
ability to continually improve on old tasks over time as useful
information is learned later (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017).
All of these techniques try to use stored experiences to stabilize learning. However, they do not consider agents which
must operate independently in the world for a long time. In
this scenario, assuming the kind of high-dimensional data
which make up human experiences, the efficient storage of
experiences becomes an important factor. Storing full experiences in memory, as these methods do, causes storage costs to
scale linearly with the number of experiences. To truly learn
over a massive number of experiences in a non-stationary
environment, the incremental cost of adding experiences to
memory must be sub-linear in the number experiences.
In this paper we propose a scalable experience memory
module which learns to adapt to a non-stationary 2 environment and improve itself over time. The memory module is
implemented using a variational autoencoder which learns to
compress high-dimensional experiences to a compact latent
code for storage. This code can then be used to reconstruct

Given the recent success of Deep Learning applied to a variety
of single tasks, it is natural to consider more human-realistic
settings. Perhaps the most difficult of these settings is that of
continual lifelong learning, where the model must learn online
over a continuous stream of non-stationary data. A successful
continual lifelong learning system must have three key capabilities: it must learn and adapt over time, it must not forget
what it has learned, and it must be efficient in both training
time and memory. Recent techniques have focused their efforts
primarily on the first two capabilities while questions of efficiency remain largely unexplored. In this paper, we consider
the problem of efficient and effective storage of experiences
over very large time-frames. In particular we consider the case
where typical experiences are O(n) bits and memories are
limited to O(k) bits for k << n. We present a novel scalable
architecture and training algorithm in this challenging domain
and provide an extensive evaluation of its performance. Our
results show that we can achieve considerable gains on top of
state-of-the-art methods such as GEM. 1

Introduction
A long-held dream of the AI community is to build a machine capable of operating autonomously for long periods
or even indefinitely. Such a machine must necessarily learn
and adapt to a changing environment and, crucially, manage memories of what it has learned for the future tasks it
will encounter. A spectrum of learning scenarios are available depending on problem requirements. In lifelong learning
(Thrun 1996) the machine is presented a sequence of tasks
and must use knowledge learned from the previous tasks to
perform better on the next. In the resource-constrained lifelong learning setting the machine is constrained to a small
buffer of previous experiences. Some approaches to lifelong
learning assume that a task is a set of examples chosen from
the same distribution (Rusu et al. 2016; Fernando et al. 2017;
Shin et al. 2017; Ramapuram, Gregorova, and Kalousis 2017;
Al-Shedivat et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2018). If instead the machine is given a sequence of examples without any batching,
then this is called continual learning. In this paper we focus
on this more challenging continual learning scenario.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See an extended version of this paper including the appendix at
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1711.06761.pdf.

2
We assume the environment is non-stationary, but not adversarial. So past experiences can be helpful for learning future tasks.

1352

