The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Novelty Detection for Multispectral
Images with Application to Planetary Exploration
Hannah R Kerner,1 Danika F Wellington,1 Kiri L Wagstaff,2
James F Bell,1 Chiman Kwan,3 Heni Ben Amor4
1

School or Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA
3
Applied Research LLC, Rockville, MD 20850, USA
4
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
{hkerner, dfwellin, jim.bell, hbenamor}@asu.edu, kiri.l.wagstaff@jpl.caltech.edu, chiman.kwan@arllc.net
2

Abstract

quiring human labels for scientific data can be high due to
limited access to domain experts.
One project that may greatly benefit from novelty detection is the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover. Curiosity explores new regions on Mars every day as it is
commanded to drive and make scientific observations in
Gale crater. One instrument the rover uses to make geologic
observations is the mast camera, or “Mastcam,” a pair of
multispectral, color CCD imagers mounted on the rover’s
mast about 2 meters above the surface (Bell et al. 2017;
Malin et al. 2017; Grotzinger et al. 2012). Scientists only
have a short time period after the data is received from
the rover for planning follow-up observations (typically less
than 12 hours), and this planning timeline will be even further reduced for future missions (for example, the goal is
≤5 hours for NASA’s Mars 2020 rover mission). For these
reasons, there is a need for systems that can rapidly and intelligently extract information of interest from Mastcam and
other science instrument data to focus on potential discoveries and avoid missed opportunities. Science planning and
data analysis teams can benefit by spending their limited
available time on the most promising, novel, or anomalous
observations (e.g., Figure 1). Such a system must also provide explanatory visualizations that allow scientists to trust
and understand how the system came to its conclusion – a
need that is not supported by existing methods.

In this work, we present a system based on convolutional autoencoders for detecting novel features in multispectral images. We introduce SAMMIE: Selections based on Autoencoder Modeling of Multispectral Image Expectations. Previous work using autoencoders employed the scalar reconstruction error to classify new images as novel or typical. We
show that a spatial-spectral error map can enable both accurate classification of novelty in multispectral images as well
as human-comprehensible explanations of the detection. We
apply our methodology to the detection of novel geologic features in multispectral images of the Martian surface collected
by the Mastcam imaging system on the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover.

Introduction
The goal of novelty detection techniques is to identify
new patterns in data that have not previously been observed (Markou and Singh 2003a; 2003b). Prior work has
shown promising results in using autoencoder (Hinton and
Salakhutdinov 2006) networks to detect novel observations and sensor readings. Autoencoders create mappings
from high-dimensional input data, e.g., images, to a lowerdimensional manifold, along with a corresponding reverse
mapping. Autoencoders thereby identify a compact representation that consists of the most salient features of the
dataset.
An autoencoder can be trained in a purely unsupervised
fashion to recognize novel input data that substantially deviate from previously seen data. The network is trained to
reconstruct all training inputs with minimal loss. A new input sample can be fed into the trained network to yield a new
reconstruction. The scalar reconstruction error can be used
as a measure of the (un)familiarity of the autoencoder with
this input. The assumption is that high reconstruction errors
indicate novel, previously unseen input data. Such unsupervised training is particularly useful in applications like planetary exploration where the nature of novel features may not
be well defined or known at all. Additionally, the cost of ac-

Example Mars
scenes with
typical geologic
features

Sol: 1462

Sol: 66

Sol: 468

Sol: 1273

Sol: 1092

Sol: 1344

Sol: 1552

Sol: 1505

Example Mars
scenes with
novel geologic
features

Figure 1: Example Mastcam images with typical (top) and
novel (bottom) geologic features on Mars. Image credit:
NASA/JPL/MSSS/ASU
In this work, we propose a neural network architecture called Selections based on Autoencoder Modeling of

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9484

