The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Perceptual Pyramid Adversarial Networks for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Lianli Gao,1 Daiyuan Chen,1 Jingkuan Song,1∗ Xing Xu,1 Dongxiang Zhang,1 Heng Tao Shen1
1

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu 611731, China.
{lianli.gao,xing.xu,zhangdo}@uestc.edu.cn, {yayeochen95,jingkuan.song}@gmail.com, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

Text

Abstract

GT

AttnGAN

Ours

Very short black bill
with a soft grey
body and very faint
brown flank
coloring, black feet
and tarsus.

Generating photo-realistic images conditioned on semantic
text descriptions is a challenging task in computer vision
field. Due to the nature of hierarchical representations learned
in CNN, it is intuitive to utilize richer convolutional features to improve text-to-image synthesis. In this paper, we
propose Perceptual Pyramid Adversarial Network (PPAN) to
directly synthesize multi-scale images conditioned on texts
in an adversarial way. Specifically, we design one pyramid
generator and three independent discriminators to synthesize and regularize multi-scale photo-realistic images in one
feed-forward process. At each pyramid level, our method
takes coarse-resolution features as input, synthesizes highresolution images, and uses convolutions for up-sampling to
finer level. Furthermore, the generator adopts the perceptual
loss to enforce semantic similarity between the synthesized
image and the ground truth, while a multi-purpose discriminator encourages semantic consistency, image fidelity and
class invariance. Experimental results show that our PPAN
sets new records for text-to-image synthesis on two benchmark datasets: CUB (i.e., 4.38 Inception Score and .290
Visual-semantic Similarity) and Oxford-102 (i.e., 3.52 Inception Score and .297 Visual-semantic Similarity).

A small bird with
yellow and gray
throat and belly
and darker crown,
wings and tail
feathers.

A small bird with
brown wings,
vanilla break and
a small black beak.

Figure 1: Some experimental results of our method (column
3) for text-to-image synthesis on CUB dataset, and the comparison with current state-of-the-art method AttnGAN (column 2). Each sample shows the input text description and
generated 256×256 images. Our generated images are more
realistic and clear. Zoom-in for better observation.

Introduction
Recently, we have witnessed a breakthrough in the application of deep learning to generate textual descriptions conditioned on images/videos (Song et al. 2017; Gao et al.
2017). On the other hand, text-to-image synthesis is the reverse problem: generating photo-realistic images that match
the given text descriptions. However, there are very few researches on this task. From a high-level perspective, both
tasks are similar. Nevertheless, these problems are entirely
different because text-to-image and image-to-text conversions are highly different cross-modal problems (Bodnar
2018). Particularly, text-to-image synthesis requires the synthesized images to be not only photo-realistic but also semantically consistent, and this task has many practical applications such as photo editing or multimedia data creation.
The task of text-to-image synthesis is exactly what generative models attempt to solve, and most of the recent progresses are obtained by Generative Adversarial Networks

(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). GANs consist of one generator and one discriminator. The generator is designed to
generate as realistic images as possible to fool the discriminator, and the discriminator is optimized to distinguish between fake generated images and real ground-truth images.
Recently, GANs have been applied to various applications,
especially in simulating complicated data distributions, like
images (Song et al. 2018a; 2018b), music, texts (Gupta et
al. 2018) and video (Li et al. 2018). More recently, GANs
have been used to generate photo-realistic fine-grained images conditioned on semantic texts. This task demands the
network to learn a precise mapping from semantic text distribution to visual image distribution. Meanwhile, the network,
as a generative model, is requested to synthesize various and
natural images that match text descriptions, not just like the
ground-truth images in pixel space.
As a pioneering work on text-to-image synthesis, GANINT-CLS (Reed et al. 2016b), firstly introduces a vanilla

∗

Jingkuan Song is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8312

