The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Updates in Human-AI Teams:
Understanding and Addressing the Performance/Compatibility Tradeoff
Gagan Bansal,1 Besmira Nushi,2 Ece Kamar,2 Daniel S. Weld,1 Walter S. Lasecki,3 Eric Horvitz2
1

University of Washington, 2 Microsoft Research, 3 University of Michigan

Abstract
AI systems are being deployed to support human decision
making in high-stakes domains such as healthcare and criminal justice. In many cases, the human and AI form a team,
in which the human makes decisions after reviewing the AI’s
inferences. A successful partnership requires that the human
develops insights into the performance of the AI system, including its failures. We study the influence of updates to an
AI system in this setting. While updates can increase the
AI’s predictive performance, they may also lead to behavioral changes that are at odds with the user’s prior experiences
and confidence in the AI’s inferences. We show that updates
that increase AI performance may actually hurt team performance. We introduce the notion of the compatibility of an
AI update with prior user experience and present methods for
studying the role of compatibility in human-AI teams. Empirical results on three high-stakes classification tasks show that
current machine learning algorithms do not produce compatible updates. We propose a re-training objective to improve the
compatibility of an update by penalizing new errors. The objective offers full leverage of the performance/compatibility
tradeoff across different datasets, enabling more compatible
yet accurate updates.

Figure 1: Schematized view of human-AI teams in the presence of AI updates. Human-AI teams perform better than
either alone, but when the AI is updated its behavior may violate human expectations. Even if updates increase the AI’s
individual performance, they may reduce team performance
by making mistakes in regions where humans have learned
to trust the AI.

Introduction
A promising opportunity in AI is developing systems that
can partner with people to accomplish tasks in ways that exceed the capabilities of either individually (Wang et al. 2016;
Kamar 2016; Gaur et al. 2016). We see many motivating examples: a doctor using a medical expert system (Wang et al.
2016), a judge advised by a recidivism predictor, or a driver
supervising a semi-autonomous vehicle. Indeed, economists
expect human-AI teams to handle many such tasks (Gownder et al. 2017). Despite rising interest, there is much to learn
about creating effective human-AI teams and what capabilities AI systems should employ to be competent partners.
We study human-AI teams in decision-making settings
where a user takes action recommendations from an AI partner for solving a complex task. The user considers the recommendation and, based on previous experience with the
system, decides to accept the suggested action or take a different action. We call this type of interaction AI-advised

human decision making. While there exist other important
forms of human-AI collaboration (including human-advised
AI decision making and more general collaborative decision
making involving a mix of initiatives and emergent team behaviors), we focus on a specific interplay where the goal is to
create AI systems that recommend actions to assist humans
with decisions in high-stakes domains (Angwin et al. 2016;
Bayati et al. 2014). The motivation for AI-advised human
decision making comes from the fact that humans and machines have complementary strengths and abilities. While
both human experts and machine-learned models are not
perfect on a task like medical diagnosis or object classification, researchers have shown that their ideal combination
could significantly improve performance (Wang et al. 2016;
Kamar, Hacker, and Horvitz 2012). AI systems offer added
benefits by speeding up decision making when humans can
identify tasks where the AI can be trusted and no more human effort is needed (Lasecki et al. 2012a; 2012b).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2429

