The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Distribution Consistency Based
Covariance Metric Networks for Few-Shot Learning
Wenbin Li,1∗ Jinglin Xu,2∗ Jing Huo,1 Lei Wang,3 Yang Gao,1 Jiebo Luo4
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
3
University of Wollongong, Australia
4
University of Rochester, USA
Abstract

introducing any learning mechanism. Nevertheless, it is almost impossible to learn a real concept containing diverse
and complex appearances merely by a few examples in this
way. Therefore it is necessary to exploit more prior knowledge to precisely represent and learn.
Another commonly used approach is to resort to an additional auxiliary dataset via a transfer learning mechanism. More concretely, one emerging direction is to exploit meta-learning or learning-to-learn paradigm on the
few-shot learning problem, such as (Santoro et al. 2016;
Ravi and Larochelle 2017; Mishra et al. 2018). This kind of
methods attempts to learn an across-task meta-learner which
is trained on a distribution of similar tasks, aiming to generalize to unseen new tasks. Generally, a Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) or Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network is employed to learn the meta-learner to capture the
significant short- and long-term memory (knowledge) further. Furthermore, in order to tackle the problem of limiteddata, another emerging research direction on metric-learning
based methods tries to learn a deep embedding space by introducing metric-learning mechanism, e.g., (Koch, Zemel,
and Salakhutdinov 2015; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017;
Yang et al. 2018). Such methods usually utilize the idea of
episodic training on the auxiliary dataset to learn transferable representations (knowledge).
Based on the above analysis, the key issue of few-shot
learning is that the data of each category is too limited to
express a concept adequately. Only using very few examples, either for training a learner or for fine-tuning a pretrained model, can easily result in over-fitting. How to learn
and store the transferable knowledge by fully utilizing the
auxiliary data? How to represent a concept precisely in the
few-shot setting? And how to measure the relation between
a concept and a query sample reasonably? We will consider
these three aspects to solve the problems occurred in the previous work, which are transferable knowledge, concept representation, and relation metric.
For the first aspect, meta-learning based methods employ
meta-learner and the metric-learning based methods rely
on the episodic training to capture the transferable knowledge, respectively. As for the proposed method, we adopt
the episodic training mechanism because it is simpler than a
meta-learner but efficient. For the second aspect, Prototypical Nets (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017) take the means of

Few-shot learning aims to recognize new concepts from very
few examples. However, most of the existing few-shot learning methods mainly concentrate on the first-order statistic of
concept representation or a fixed metric on the relation between a sample and a concept. In this work, we propose a
novel end-to-end deep architecture, named Covariance Metric Networks (CovaMNet). The CovaMNet is designed to exploit both the covariance representation and covariance metric based on the distribution consistency for the few-shot classification tasks. Specifically, we construct an embedded local
covariance representation to extract the second-order statistic
information of each concept and describe the underlying distribution of this concept. Upon the covariance representation,
we further define a new deep covariance metric to measure
the consistency of distributions between query samples and
new concepts. Furthermore, we employ the episodic training mechanism to train the entire network in an end-to-end
manner from scratch. Extensive experiments in two tasks,
generic few-shot image classification and fine-grained fewshot image classification, demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed CovaMNet. The source code can be available from
https://github.com/WenbinLee/CovaMNet.git.

1

Introduction

Few-shot learning is a learning mechanism that tries to learn
and understand new concepts (or categories) from only one
or few examples. Humans can learn new concepts with very
few instances, and have a strong generalization capability for
their variants. Unfortunately, many current machine learning
algorithms do not have such a strong generalization ability
to identify a new category. Moreover, in real applications,
new samples from new categories are usually difficult to obtain. It is even more difficult to make annotations in many
applications. Therefore, learning new categories with very
few samples becomes an urgent and important problem.
In recent years, a variety of methods have been proposed
to handle this problem. One basic and straightforward way is
to only utilize the information of a few examples. For example, the k-Nearest Neighbor classifier can be used to predict
the label of the query image depending solely on the similarities between the query image and the few samples, without
∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8642

