The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Interactive Attention Transfer Network
for Cross-Domain Sentiment Classification
Kai Zhang,† Hefu Zhang,† Qi Liu,†§∗ Hongke Zhao,† Hengshu Zhu,‡ Enhong Chen†§
†

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China
§
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
‡
Baidu Talent Intelligence Center, Baidu Inc
{sa517494, zhf2011, zhhk}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {qiliuql, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn, zhuhengshu@gmail.com
Abstract

Cross-domain sentiment classification refers to utilizing useful knowledge in the source domain to help sentiment classification in the target domain which has few or no labeled
data. Most existing methods mainly concentrate on extracting common features between domains. Unfortunately, they
cannot fully consider the effects of the aspect (e.g., the battery life in reviewing an electronic product) information of the
sentences. In order to better solve this problem, we propose
an Interactive Attention Transfer Network (IATN) for crossdomain sentiment classification. IATN provides an interactive
attention transfer mechanism, which can better transfer sentiment across domains by incorporating information of both
sentences and aspects. Specifically, IATN comprises two attention networks, one of them is to identify the common features between domains through domain classification, and the
other aims to extract information from the aspects by using
the common features as a bridge. Then, we conduct interactive attention learning for those two networks so that both
the sentences and the aspects can influence the final sentiment representation. Extensive experiments on the Amazon
reviews dataset and crowdfunding reviews dataset not only
demonstrate the effectiveness and universality of our method,
but also give an interpretable way to track the attention information for sentiment.

RAM
CPU
Price
…

The appearance of the
PC looks good, but the
battery life is too short.

The appearance of this
dress looks nice, and
the fabric is not bad.

Figure 1: Aspects in different domains. For computer, there
are “appearance” and “battery life” aspects; for cloth, there
are “appearance” and “fabric” aspects.

To learn the emotion of the sentences from unlabeled
data, cross-domain sentiment classification has been proposed as a promising direction. It uses effectual information in the source domain (with sufficient labeled data) to
help sentiment classification in the target domain (with few
or no labeled data). As it is crucial for reducing the reliance on the massive amount of labeled data and significant for domains which are lack of labels, much research
attention has been attracted from both academia and industry. In the literature, many methods have been proposed
to solve the cross-domain sentiment classification problem (Blitzer, McDonald, and Pereira 2006; Pan et al. 2010;
Chen et al. 2012), especially various solutions for learning shared features have been designed. The shared features
were usually assumed as words with high co-occurrence in
both domains which are regarded as the good predictors of
source domain labels.
Recently, with the rapid development of deep learning techniques, researchers proposed many neural network
based methods to automatically capture the shared sentiment
features across domains (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011;
Chen et al. 2012; Li et al. 2017; 2018b). However, most of
the previous efforts ignore the characteristics which do not
express the sentiment directly, such as the individual modeling of the aspect. As Figure 1 shows, there are two reviews
“The appearance of the PC looks good, but the battery life
is too short” and “The appearance of this dress looks nice,

Introduction
Sentiment analysis, which aims to identify the overall emotional label (i.e., positive or negative) of the sentences, has
attracted more and more research attention in recent years.
Traditional sentiment classification methods usually perform well on label-rich data (Wang et al. 2014; Tripathy,
Agrawal, and Rath 2016). However, in practice, there still
exists a huge amount of insufficiently labeled data, where the
traditional methods are hard to be utilized. For example, the
reviews on the prevalent e-commerce platforms (e.g., Amazon) often contain score option, which can reflect the sentiment labels of the reviews. But in some specialized applications such as crowdfunding platforms (Zhao et al. 2017a),
(e.g., Indiegogo.com), nearly all the project reviews do not
have sentiment labels.
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5773

