The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

From Lab to Internship and Back Again: Learning Autonomous
Systems through Creating a Research and Development Ecosystem
Trevor Bihl,† Todd Jenkins,† Chadwick Cox,‡ Ashley DeMange,† Kerry Hill,† Edmund Zelnio†
†

Sensors Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), Wright Patterson AFB, OH 45433
‡
KeyW Corporation, Dayton, OH
{Trevor.Bihl.2, Todd.Jenkins, Chadwick.Cox.ctr, Ashley.Demange, Kerry.Hill, Edmund.Zelnio}@us.af.mil

Abstract

be explored to enable autonomy (Floreano and Wood
2015).
Recent work has explored interactive robot laboratories
for teaching various artificial intelligence (AI) skills, c.f.
(Ruvolo 2017) (Hettlinger and Boutell 2010); but frequently, these courses are highly structured and not directly research related. Summer internships and laboratories in robotics are well documented, c.f. (Grimm et al. 2017)
(Burgsteiner et al. 2016) (Guzzi et al. 2018); however, these are highly structured towards specific learning objectives. While open-ended robotics projects have been developed for independent research development, see (Musicant
et al. 2017), what is missing is a research-based internship
in robotics which aims to both educate the interns and the
workforce as well as making Research and Development
(R&D) progress in autonomous systems.
Appropriately developed, internships are used as a
method of workforce education wherein interns are free to
focus entirely on one endeavor and then relay their
knowledge back to their mentors. Internships provide various benefits to all parties involved (Coco 2000) (Weible
2009), including evaluating potential employees before a
hiring decision and providing experiences to interns while
in school. Schools gain further validation of their curriculum and potential employment of their students.
Additionally, workforce development is possible wherein interns and mentors learn side-by-side through collaboration in R&D (Arnold et al. 2008). In such approaches,
intern projects provide a useful way to quickly evaluate
technologies for further development by the mentoring
organization. R&D progress may continue their education
in those areas that are determined to be fruitful. Interns,
mentors, and their organizations all gain from the experience.
This internship employs a multidisciplinary undergraduate research team to answer various R&D questions in AI,

As research and development (R&D) in autonomous systems progresses further, more interdisciplinary knowledge is
needed from domains as diverse as artificial intelligence
(AI), bi-ology, psychology, modeling and simulation
(M&S), and robotics. Such R&D efforts are necessarily interdisciplinary in nature and require technical as well as further soft skills of teamwork, communication and integration.
In this paper, we introduce a 14 week, summer long internship for developing these skills in undergraduate science
and engineering interns through R&D. The internship was
designed to be modular and divided into three parts: training, innovation, and application/integration. The end result
of the internship was 1) the development of an M&S ecosystem for autonomy concepts, 2) development and robotics
testing of reasoning methods through both Bayesian methods and cognitive models of the basal ganglia, and 3) a process for future internships within the modular construct.
Through collaboration with full-time professional staff, who
actively learned with the interns, this internship incorporates
a feedback loop to educate and per-form fundamental R&D.
Future iterations of this internship can leverage the M&S
ecosystem and adapt the modular internship framework to
focus on different innovations, learning paradigms, and/or
applications.

Introduction
Autonomous systems promise to reduce workloads and to
improve performance by replacing the cognitive functions
of people with intelligent software. Robotics are a key
technology in many proposed future autonomous systems,
from autonomous vehicles to industrial automation and
service. Current research involves improving robotic systems to minimize the inputs of human operators by automating tasking. Various perspectives exist in what is/is not
autonomy (Bihl et al. 2018) and what technology needs to
Official works of the US Government are not subject to copyright ©
2019.

9635

