The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Document Embeddings with Crossword Prediction∗
Junyu Luo,1,2 Min Yang,1 Ying Shen,3 Qiang Qu,1 Haixia Chai4
1

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Department of Computer Science, Sichuan University
3
School of Electronics and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
4
Data Center of SNG, Tencent
asbljy@outlook.com, {min.yang, qiang}@siat.ac.cn, shenying@pkusz.edu.cn, haixiachai@tencent.com
Abstract

information from both past and future contexts. Unlike the
standard decoder for text reconstruction, we take the idea
from crossword game to consider both the partial and global
contexts, and keep the balance between the known and unknown information. We randomly block some words in the
input document, and use the incomplete context information
and the encoded document embedding to predict the blocked
words in the document.
The experiments on the document classification and document retrieval tasks demonstrate that our model outperforms
the compared methods and achieves the state-of-the-art results.

In this paper, we propose a Document Embedding Network
(DEN) to learn document embeddings in an unsupervised
manner. Our model uses the encoder-decoder architecture as
its backbone, which tries to reconstruct the input document
from an encoded document embedding. Unlike the standard
decoder for text reconstruction, we randomly block some
words in the input document, and use the incomplete context
information and the encoded document embedding to predict
the blocked words in the document, inspired by the crossword
game. Thus, our decoder can keep the balance between the
known and unknown information, and consider both global
and partial information when decoding the missing words.
We evaluate the learned document embeddings on two tasks:
document classification and document retrieval. The experimental results show that our model substantially outperforms
the compared methods.1 .

Document Embedding Network
Encoding Network We assume that the input document d
consists of n words d = [w1 , w2 , . . . , wn ], where wi denotes
the i-th word in document. Each word wi in the document is
mapped to a low-dimensional embedding xi ∈ Rd through
a word embedding layer, where d denotes the dimension of
the embedding. We then employ a LSTM network to obtain
the hidden state zi of each word xi in the document. Finally,
we feed the last hidden state hn to a non-linear activation
function to get final document embedding e.

Introduction
Inspired by the recent success of word embedding methods (Bengio et al. 2003; Mikolov et al. 2013), several approaches have been proposed to learn document representations by taking the semantics of text data into consideration Sentences that share semantic and syntactic properties
are thus mapped to similar vector representations. Despite
significant improvements have been achieved by the recent
neural network based methods such as the paragraph vector
(Le and Mikolov 2014) and skip-thought (Kiros et al. 2015),
they are essentially designed for processing sentences rather
than long documents.
To learn high-quality representations for long documents,
we propose a Document Embedding Network (DEN). DEN
is an unsupervised model that uses autoencoder as its backbone to learn the distributed document embeddings directly
for documents instead of using a sliding window to catch local context information. Concretely, DEN first encodes the
input document with the LSTM network. Then, a bidirectional decoding network is designed to reconstruct the input sequence from the encoded embedding, leveraging the

Crossword Model in Semantic Level Most previous
studies (e.g., skip-gram) only leverage local context information and are defective to learn document embeddings. To
overcome this limitation, we design a crossword model to
capture both the partial and global context, inspired by the
crossword game. The crossword game is a word puzzle that
usually takes the form of a square or a rectangular grid of
white-and black-shaded squares. The goal of the crossword
game is to fill the white squares with letters, forming words
or phrases, which lead to the answers. In (Crossman and
Crossman 1983), crossword was proved to be a useful tool
in teaching the children to learn the key concepts.
Like the crossword game, our crossword model tries to
keep the balance between the known information and unknown information. We use the incomplete global contextual information and the corresponding document embedding to predict the missing words in the document. Concretely, we randomly block the original input document x
(set the embedding to the zero vector) with a probability of
0.5 and get the representations of the new input sequence as

∗
Min Yang is corresponding author (min.yang@siat.ac.cn).
This work is supported by CAS Pioneer Hundred Talents Program.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code is available at https://github.com/doucmentnet/
doument-network.

9993

