The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Translating with Bilingual Topic Knowledge for Neural Machine Translation
Xiangpeng Wei,1,2 Yue Hu,1,2 Luxi Xing,1,2 Yipeng Wang,1,2 Li Gao3
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Platform & Content Group, Tencent, Beijing, China
{weixiangpeng, huyue, xingluxi, wangyipeng}@iie.ac.cn, leolgao@tencent.com

Abstract

et al. 2016), posterior regularization (Zhang et al. 2017a)
and linguistic knowledge based methods (Sennrich and
Haddow 2016; Eriguchi, Hashimoto, and Tsuruoka 2016;
Chen et al. 2017a; 2017b; Wu, Zhou, and Zhang 2017;
Wu et al. 2017). Although (Zhang et al. 2016) had proposed a topic-informed NMT model that can increase the
likelihood of selecting words from the same topic or domain
by conveying topic knowledge during translation, the topicinformed NMT suffers from the gap between the two topic
distributions of source and target languages that are respectively constructed by two independent LDA models.
In this paper, we take bilingual topic information as prior
knowledge and incorporate it into NMT for further improving translation performance. More concretely, (1) we use
bilingual LDA to jointly learn the topic distribution of each
source and target word by taking comparable documents
from Wikipedia in two languages and mapping them into
a shared topic space which represented by a group of universal topics. (2) We consider the topic distribution learned
by bilingual LDA of each word as its topic embedding,
and propose a novel bilingual topic enhanced NMT (BLTNMT) model that takes topic embeddings of source and target words as additional inputs.
For encoding, we generate representations containing information both from literal words and from latent topics
for each source sentence by introducing a joint-encoder network. During decoding, we convey target-side topic knowledge by developing a joint-decoder, and augment the existing attention mechanism with topic-level attentions by developing a joint-attention network. Through this way, each
target word is generated according to both the literal relevance and the topical relevance with source words. Furthermore, we modify the softmax layer by adding a separate generation probability at each prediction timestep, which can
bias the probability distribution over target vocabulary and
contributes to generating quality translations.
We evaluate the proposed model on Chinese-English
and English-German translation tasks. Experimental results
show that the proposed model consistently outperforms
the traditional RNNsearch and the previous topic-informed
NMT. In addition, we also introduce the bilingual topic
knowledge into the newly emerged Transformer on EnglishGerman translation and achieve a notable improvement.
Compared with the previous topic-informed NMT, the

The dominant neural machine translation (NMT) models
that based on the encoder-decoder architecture have recently
achieved the state-of-the-art performance. Traditionally, the
NMT models only depend on the representations learned during training for mapping a source sentence into the target domain. However, the learned representations often suffer from
implicit and inadequately informed properties. In this paper,
we propose a novel bilingual topic enhanced NMT (BLTNMT) model to improve translation performance by incorporating bilingual topic knowledge into NMT. Specifically,
the bilingual topic knowledge is included into the hidden
states of both encoder and decoder, as well as the attention
mechanism. With this new setting, the proposed BLT-NMT
has access to the background knowledge implied in bilingual topics which is beyond the sequential context, and enables the attention mechanism to attend to topic-level attentions for generating accurate target words during translation.
Experimental results show that the proposed model consistently outperforms the traditional RNNsearch and the previous topic-informed NMT on Chinese-English and EnglishGerman translation tasks. We also introduce the bilingual
topic knowledge into the newly emerged Transformer base
model on English-German translation and achieve a notable
improvement.

Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Sutskever, Vinyals, and
V. Le 2014; Cho et al. 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015) is a novel approach to machine translation that
has shown remarkable superiority over conventional statistical machine translation (SMT) across a variety of language
pairs (Junczys-Dowmunt, Dwojak, and Hoang 2016), which
directly models the entire translation process through training an encoder-decoder network in end-to-end style. The
success of NMT depends on its capacity of using representation to bridge the source and target languages. However,
this representation, a sequence of fixed-dimensional vectors
learned from sequential context, suffers from implicit and
inadequately informed properties.
Currently, many methods have been proposed to enrich
the representations produced by NMT model, such as coverage mechanism (Tu et al. 2016), fertility constraint (Cohn
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7257

