The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Automatic Code Review by Learning the Revision of Source Code
Shu-Ting Shi,1 Ming Li,1,2 David Lo,3 Ferdian Thung,3 Xuan Huo1
1

2

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing University, China
3
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
{shist, lim, huox}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, davidlo@smu.edu.sg, ferdiant.2013@phdis.smu.edu.sg

Approve,
integration

Examine the revision

Revise code

Abstract

Original.java Revised.java

Code review is the process of manual inspection on the revision of the source code in order to find out whether the
revised source code eventually meets the revision requirements. However, manual code review is time-consuming, and
automating such the code review process will alleviate the
burden of code reviewers and speed up the software maintenance process. To construct the model for automatic code review, the characteristics of the revisions of source code (i.e.,
the difference between the two pieces of source code) should
be properly captured and modeled. Unfortunately, most of
the existing techniques can easily model the overall correlation between two pieces of source code, but not for the “difference” between two pieces of source code. In this paper,
we propose a novel deep model named DACE for automatic
code review. Such a model is able to learn revision features
by contrasting the revised hunks from the original and revised source code with respect to the code context containing
the hunks. Experimental results on six open source software
projects indicate by learning the revision features, DACE can
outperform the competing approaches in automatic code review.

Review
request

Developer

Reject,
no integration

Reviewer

Binary result

Figure 1: The process of code review.
code) as input and output a recommendation on whether the
revision should be rejected. To construct a well-performing
model, the revision of source code, i.e., the “difference” between the original and revised source code, should be properly modeled. Unfortunately, most of the existing software
mining approaches are equipped for modeling the “correlation” rather than the “difference” between software artifacts.
For example, in software clone detection (Wei and Li 2017),
models are constructed to identify source code fragments
that may have same functionality; in bug localization (Huo,
Li, and Zhou 2016; Huo and Li 2017), models are constructing to model the correlation between the bug report and the
source code that is potentially responsible for the reported
bug. All these approaches tend to focus on and emphasize the
“similar” aspects of the two software artifacts. However, in
the automatic code review, most of the revised source code
is almost the same as the original source code, and only a
tiny little portion is different. If adapting these approaches
to automatic code review, the “difference”, which is the key
for determining the review result, would be ignored by these
approaches. Thus, how to model the revision of source code
is the key challenge for automatic code review.
To model the revision of source code and avoid being misled by the overwhelming among of unchanged code in the
revision, a straight-forward solution is only to consider the
hunks, i.e., the block of changed lines of code, and discard
all the unchanged code. However, such a solution may perform poorly due to the following two reasons. First, the hunk
is usually small and only contains a few consecutive lines. It
is usually insufficient to modeling the correct functionality
of the revised code. Second, the unchanged lines provide a
context in which the revision is taken place. Such contextual
information is sometimes crucial to determining the review
result. Figure 2 provides a concrete example the same re-

Introduction
Code review is important for software maintenance and evolution. A general process of code review is shown in Figure 1. Whenever a revision of the source code is triggered,
a manual review or inspection the revision would be conducted, upon request, to check whether the revised source
code eventually meets the revision requirements. The revisions that fail to fulfill the requirements would be rejected to
be incorporated into the software system. In order to make a
correct judgment, the code reviewer needs to carefully read
the source code, analyzing the functionality and contrasting
the revised source code and the original source code, which
cost a huge amount of human efforts. To alleviate the burden
of code reviewers and speed up the software maintenance
process, techniques to automate the code review process are
required.
Automatic code review can be formalized as a machine
learning task where a model is constructed to take the revision on the source code (i.e., the original and revised source
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4910

