The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Using Automated Agents to Teach Negotiation
Emmanuel Johnson
Institute for Creative Technologies
University of Southern California
12015 E Waterfront Dr, Los Angeles, CA 90094

Abstract

Experiential Learning Theory states that learning is best
viewed as a process rather than an outcome. This process
is enhanced when learners are able to engage their cognitive abilities, emotion, perception, and behavior (Kolb and
Kolb 2012) and can reflect upon their subsequent actions.
Thus, feedback plays a valuable role in the learning process.
It informs students of their performance, and deficiencies.
Thus for multi-agent systems to be effective teaching system, these systems must provide an opportunity for students
to practice, review their performance and receive actionable
feedback based on similar metrics those used in the class
room.In the next section, I highlight my current work in this
page followed by future work.

Negotiation is an integral part of our daily lives regardless
of occupation. Although ubiquitous to our experience, we are
never taught to negotiate. This lack of training presents many
consequences from unfair salary negotiation to geopolitical
ramification. The ability to resolve conflicts and negotiate is
becoming more critical due to the rise of automated systems
which look to replace various repetitive task jobs. In hopes
of improving human negotiation skills, my work seeks to develop automated negotiation agents capable of providing personalized feedback. In this paper, I provide an overview of
my past , current, and future work.

Background

Current Work

Negotiation is an integral part of our daily lives regardless of occupation. Although ubiquitous to our experience,
we are never thought to negotiate. This lack of training
presents both many challenges from unfair salary negotiation to geopolitical ramification. The ability to resolve conflicts and negotiate is becoming more critical due to the rise
of automated systems which look to replace various repetitive task jobs. In a recent study, researchers projected a increase in need for jobs that require collaborative and negotiation skills. This would increase the need for individuals
with softer skills and the ability to work collaboratively. To
improve one’s negotiation ability, a number of courses are
offered through universities business, and law school. The
issue with these courses is that they can be quite expensive.Automated agents provide a low cost alternative. Research has shown the benefits of using automated agents
to teach negotiation (Gratch et al. 2015). Research shows
that even by just allowing users to practice with an automated agents, people are able to improve their negotiation
ability(Lin, Oshrat, and Kraus 2009). A number of systems
have been proposed and develop to study how humans negotiate as well as help individuals improve their negotiation
skills. Systems such as the conflict resolution agents(Gratch,
DeVault, and Lucas 2016), pocket negotiators(Hindriks and
Jonker 2008), IAGO (Mell and Gratch 2016) and Bilat (Kim
et al. 2009) have all been shown as effective tools to allow
humans to negotiate with human-like automated agents.

In building a negotiation training system, we must first consider what aspect of negotiation we want to teach. Once we
know what we want to teach, the next step is understanding
the student. With a subject and understanding of our pupil,
the goal is to provide actionable feedback that would help
them improve. We began by first identifying a set of principles followed by good negotiators. These principles were
proposed by Harold Kelley and has been subsequently validated by research (Kelley 1996). Kelley found that good
negotiators avoided early concession, made efficient concessions and encouraged their opponent to concede. In a
previously published paper(Johnson, Gratch, and DeVault
2017), I showed how Kelley’s principles of a good negotiators could be translated into quantifiable metrics that are
easily extracted via automated methods. This paper utilized
a corpus of human-agent negotiation with the CRA agent.
I also showed that these metrics were indeed predictive of
negotiation outcome and could be used to provide feedback.
My next set of studies were geared towards finding ways to
teach individuals best practices by providing feedback based
on these automated metrics. To better understand how these
metrics help people improve their negotiation abilities, we
conducted a study which looked at the effects of personalized feedback in helping to improve negotiation skills (Monahan et al. 2018). Participants negotiated with two agents
and were either provided feedback after the first negotiation, or not. In this paper, we showed that individuals who
were provided with personalized feedback did do better in a
subsequent negotiation than those who did not receive feed-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9888

