The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Semi-Supervised Feature Selection with Adaptive Discriminant Analysis
Weichan Zhong,1 Xiaojun Chen,1∗ Guowen Yuan,1 Yiqin Li,1 Feiping Nie2
1

2

College of Computer Science and Software, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P.R. China
School of Computer Science and OPTIMAL, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi0 an 710072, P. R. China
969566450@qq.com, xjchen@szu.edu.cn, gwyuan93@qq.com, 1550047250@qq.com, feipingnie@gmail.com

Abstract

The Proposed Method

In this paper, we propose a novel Adaptive Discriminant Analysis for semi-supervised feature selection, namely
SADA. Instead of computing fixed similarities before performing feature selection, SADA simultaneously learns an
adaptive similarity matrix S and a projection matrix W with
an iterative method. In each iteration, S is computed from the
projected distance with the learned W and W is computed
with the learned S. Therefore, SADA can learn better projection matrix W by weakening the effect of noise features
with the adaptive similarity matrix. Experimental results on 4
data sets show the superiority of SADA compared to 5 semisupervised feature selection methods.

In semi-supervised learning, a data set X ∈ Rd×n with c
classes consists of two subsets: a set of l labeled objects
XL = (x1 , ..., xl ) which are associated with class labels
YL = {y1 , ..., yl }T ∈ Rl×c , and a set of u = n − l unlabeled objects XU = (xl+1 , ..., xl+u )T whose labels YU =
{yl+1 , ..., yl+u }T ∈ Ru×c are unknown. Let W ∈ Rd×m
be a projection matrix where m is the projection dimension.
Inspired by the paper (Xiaojun Chen and Huang 2018), we
can learn W by solving the following objective function
n
 p2

X
X
2
min
WT (xi − xj ) 2 + 
WT W=I

Introduction

i=1 j∈M1i

S

M2i

(1)

d q
X
+γ
wl (wl )T + 

Since it is often costly to obtain labeled data, the study
of ‘semi-supervised feature selection” has gained more and
more attention. Recently, Chen proposed a semi-supervised
feature selection method RLSR (Chen et al. 2017), in which
a rescaled linear square regression is proposed to extend the
least square regression for feature selection. Yuan et al. improved RLSR by introducing a -dragging technique in order to enlarge the distances between different classes (Yuan
et al. 2018). In real applications, multimodality phenomena that samples in some classes form several separate clusters is often observed (Fukunaga 1990). However, existing
semi-supervised feature selection methods cannot solve this
problem.
To address the “multimodality” problem, we propose
a new semi-supervised feature selection method, namely
Semi-supervised Adaptive Discriminant Analysis (SADA).
Instead of computing a fixed similarity matrix before performing feature selection, SADA learns an adaptive similarity matrix S and a projection matrix W simultaneously
with an iterative method. In each iteration, S is computed
from the projected distance with the learned W and W is
computed with the learned S. Therefore, SADA can better
rank the features by weakening the affection of noise features with the adaptive similarity matrix. Experimental results on 4 data sets show the superiority of SADA in comparison to 5 semi-supervised feature selection methods.

l=1

where M1i consists of k nearest neighbors of xi in XL and
M2i consists of k nearest neighbors of xi in XU . Specifically, if xi is labeled, M1i consists of min{k, nci } nearest neighbors which are in the same class as xi and nci is
the number of objects in the class to which xi belongs. The
`2,p norm is used to obtain more sparser solution if we set a
smaller p where p ∈ (0, 2).  is a sufficiently small constant,
e.g. 10−10 , which is used to avoid zero denominators.
It is difficult to directly solve problem (1). In this paper,
we propose to obtain W by solving the following problem


min T r(WT XLS XT W) + γT r(WT QW) (2)
WT W=I
where Q ∈ Rd×d is a diagonal matrix in which
1
qll = p
l
2 w (wl )T + 
and S ∈ Rn×n is defined as
(
p
sij =

2(

0

p
1−
2
kWT (xi −xj )k22 +

)

if j ∈ M1i

(3)

S

M2i

otherwise
(4)

With fixed Q and S, problem (2) can be solved directly to
obtain the optimal solution to W as the m eigenvectors of
XLS XT + γQ corresponding to the m smallest eigenvalues, where LS = Ds − S is the Laplacian matrix of S and

∗

Xiaojun Chen is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10083

