The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Talking Face Generation by Adversarially
Disentangled Audio-Visual Representation
Hang Zhou, Yu Liu, Ziwei Liu,∗ Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
{zhouhang@link, yuliu@ee, zwliu@ie, xgwang@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk, pluo.lhi@gmail.com

Abstract

Input video

Talking face generation aims to synthesize a sequence of face
images that correspond to a clip of speech. This is a challenging task because face appearance variation and semantics of speech are coupled together in the subtle movements
of the talking face regions. Existing works either construct
specific face appearance model on specific subjects or model
the transformation between lip motion and speech. In this
work, we integrate both aspects and enable arbitrary-subject
talking face generation by learning disentangled audio-visual
representation. We find that the talking face sequence is actually a composition of both subject-related information and
speech-related information. These two spaces are then explicitly disentangled through a novel associative-and-adversarial
training process. This disentangled representation has an advantage where both audio and video can serve as inputs for
generation. Extensive experiments show that the proposed approach generates realistic talking face sequences on arbitrary
subjects with much clearer lip motion patterns than previous
work. We also demonstrate the learned audio-visual representation is extremely useful for the tasks of automatic lip
reading and audio-video retrieval.

1

Generation
from video

Identity
guidance

Generation
from audio

Input audio

Figure 1: Problem description. Given a single face image of
a target person, this work aims to generate the talking video
based on the given speech information that is represented by
either a clip of video or an audio.

Wang et al. 2010; Fan et al. 2015; Suwajanakorn, Seitz,
and Kemelmacher-Shlizerman 2017; Thies et al. 2016). Researchers construct specific 3D face model for a chosen
subject and the talking faces are animated by manipulating
3D meshes of the face model. However, these approaches
strongly rely on the 3D face model and are hard to scale
up to arbitrary identities. More recent attempts (Chung, Jamaludin, and Zisserman 2017) leverage the power of deep
generative model and learn to generate talking faces from
scratch. Though the resulting models can be applied to an arbitrary subject, the generated face sequences are sometimes
blurry and not temporally meaningful. One important reason
is that the subject-related and speech-related information are
coupled together such that the talking faces are difficult to
learn in a purely data-driven manner.
To address the aforementioned problems, we integrate
the identity-related and speech-related information by learning disentangled audio-visual representation, as illustrated
in Fig. 2. We aim to disentangle a talking face sequence into
two complementary representations, one containing identity
information while the other containing speech information.
However, directly separating these two parts is not a trivial
task because the variations of face deformation can be extremely large considering the diversity of potential subjects
and speeches.
The key idea here is using audio-visual speech recognition (Chung and Zisserman 2016b; 2017) (i.e. recognizing
words from talking face sequence and audios, aka lip read-

Introduction

Understanding talking faces visually is of great importance
to machine perception and communication. Humans can not
only guess the semantic meaning of words by observing lip
movement but also imagine the scenario when a specific
subject talks (i.e. face generation). Recent advances have
focused on automatic lip reading, which surpasses humanlevel performance in certain domains. Here, we explore generating a video of arbitrary-subject speaking, which perfectly syncs with a specific speech where the speech information can be represented by either a clip of audio or video.
We refer this problem as arbitrary-subject talking face generation, as shown in Fig. 1.
However, generating identity-preserving talking faces that
clearly conveys certain speech information is a challenging
task, since the continuous deformation of the face region
relates to both intrinsic subject traits (Liu et al. 2015) and
extrinsic speech vibrations. Previous efforts in this direction are mainly from computer graphics (Xie and Liu 2007;
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9299

