The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

A Monte Carlo Tree Search Player for Birds of a Feather Solitaire
Christian Roberson, Katarina Sperduto
Florida Southern College
croberson@flsouthern.edu, ksperduto@mocs.flsouthern.edu

Abstract

oped tools. Finally, we provide some conclusions and possible avenues for future work.

Artificial intelligence in games serves as an excellent platform for facilitating collaborative research with undergraduates. This paper explores several aspects of a research challenge proposed for a newly-developed variant of a solitaire
game. We present multiple classes of game states that can
be identified as solvable or unsolvable. We present a heuristic for quickly finding goal states in a game state search tree.
Finally, we introduce a Monte Carlo Tree Search-based
player for the solitaire variant that can win almost any solvable starting deal efficiently.

Background
Birds of a Feather Solitaire
Birds of a Feather is a variant of a classic solitaire game
proposed as a research challenge for facilitating research
experiences for undergraduates (Neller 2018). It is played
with a standard 52-card deck, however out of the 52 cards
only 16 will be used. Once shuffled, the player deals 16
cards out face-up in a 4-by-4 grid as shown in Figure 1.
Each card (or bird) can be moved onto other cards in the
grid to form a stack of cards (a flock).

Introduction
Games are a good way for students to get involved in the
intricacies of scholarly research. Games with perfect information are especially nice because they allow students
to focus on the rules and strategy of the game without having to worry about the inherent uncertainty that comes with
imperfect information (Rosenthal 1981). One such game
that has been developed for research is Birds of a Feather
Solitaire. Much like other variants, this version of solitaire
requires making a series of moves to combine various piles
of cards into a single stack. This game is particularly interesting because while most initial configurations of the
game state are solvable, there are many ways to end up in
an unsolvable state and lose the game. There are also several distinct characteristics of game states that could potentially be used to determine if a state is solvable.
This paper is organized as follows. In the Background
section, we provide an overview of the Birds of a Feather
game and highlight relevant search algorithms including
heuristic search and Monte Carlo Tree Search. In the Game
State Solvability Section, we outline three different characteristics of game states that can be used to identify unsolvable states. In the Player section, we describe the structure
of our AI player for Birds of a Feather. The Results section
contains experimental tests and validation for our devel-

Figure 1: Example initial game state

In this game each position in the grid is considered a stack
of cards, so in the initial layout each stack or flock has a
size of one. In order to move one stack on top of another,
the following conditions must be met: (1) The two stacks
must be located in the same row or column. (2) The top
card of each stack must either have the same suit, same
rank, or adjacent ranks. For this version, aces are considered to be low and are only adjacent in rank to twos. The
score for a game state is determined by taking the square of
the stack size of each remaining column and adding them
together. For example, if there were a total of three stacks
remaining: one of size 9, one of size 4, and one of size 3,
the final score would be 106 (81 + 16 + 9). The ultimate
goal is to move all 16 cards into a single stack, yielding a

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9700

