The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Mining Entity Synonyms with Efficient Neural Set Generation
Jiaming Shen♮ , Ruiliang Lyu† , Xiang Ren‡ , Michelle Vanni , Brian Sadler , Jiawei Han♮
†

♮
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China  U.S. Army Research Laboratory, MD, USA
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, CA, USA
♮
{js2, hanj}@illinois.edu † lvruiliang-ele@sjtu.edu.cn ‡ xiangren@usc.edu

{michelle.t.vanni.civ, brian.m.sadler6.civ}@mail.mil

Abstract

2001), textual patterns (Nakashole, Weikum, and Suchanek
2012), or query contexts (Chakrabarti et al. 2012), from different data sources (e.g., query log (Chaudhuri, Ganti, and
Xin 2009), web table (He et al. 2016), and raw text corpus
(Qu, Ren, and Han 2017)) to calculate the above probabilities.
However, this approach treats each candidate term separately
and computes its probability of referring to the query entity
independently. As a result, it ignores relations among candidate terms which could have helped to improve the quality
of discovered synonym sets. Furthermore, as shown in (Ren
and Cheng 2015), the number of true synonyms varies a lot
across different entities and thus converting a rank list into a
set itself is a non-trivial problem and can be error-prone.
Another line of work divides the synonym set discovery
problem into two sequential subtasks: (1) synonymy detection
(i.e., finding term pairs of synonymy relation), and (2) synonymy organization (i.e., aggregating synonymous term pairs
into synonym sets). Methods developed for synonymy detection leverage textual patterns (Wang and Hirst 2012) and distributional word representations (Shwartz and Dagan 2016) to
train a classifier that predicts whether two terms hold the synonymy relation. Then, those predicted term pairs form a synonymy graph on which different graph clustering algorithms
are applied (Hope and Keller 2013; Oliveira and Gomes 2014;
Ustalov, Panchenko, and Biemann 2017). This approach is
able to capture relations among candidate terms and returns
all entity synonym sets in the vocabulary. However, these
two-phase methods only use training data in their first phase
and cannot leverage training signals in the second phase. Furthermore, the detected synonymous term pairs are usually
fixed during synonymy organization and there is no feedback
from the second phase to the first, which causes the error
accumulation problem.
In this work, we propose a new framework, SynSetMine,
which leverages existing synonym sets from a knowledge
base as distant supervision and extracts more synonym sets
not in knowledge bases from massive raw text corpus. Specifically, SynSetMine first applies an entity linker to map incorpus text (i.e. entity mentions) to entities in the knowledge
base. Then, it groups all mentions mapped to the same entity
(with the same unique id) into an entity synonym set, which
provides supervision signals. As these “training” synonym
sets are created automatically and without any human effort,
we refer to them as distant supervision.

Mining entity synonym sets (i.e., sets of terms referring to the
same entity) is an important task for many entity-leveraging
applications. Previous work either rank terms based on their
similarity to a given query term, or treats the problem as a
two-phase task (i.e., detecting synonymy pairs, followed by
organizing these pairs into synonym sets). However, these
approaches fail to model the holistic semantics of a set and
suffer from the error propagation issue. Here we propose a new
framework, named SynSetMine, that efficiently generates
entity synonym sets from a given vocabulary, using example
sets from external knowledge bases as distant supervision.
SynSetMine consists of two novel modules: (1) a set-instance
classifier that jointly learns how to represent a permutation
invariant synonym set and whether to include a new instance
(i.e., a term) into the set, and (2) a set generation algorithm that
enumerates the vocabulary only once and applies the learned
set-instance classifier to detect all entity synonym sets in it.
Experiments on three real datasets from different domains
demonstrate both effectiveness and efficiency of SynSetMine
for mining entity synonym sets.

Introduction
An entity synonym set is a set of terms (i.e., words or phrases)
that refer to the same real-world entity. For instance, {“USA”,
“United States”, “U.S.”} is an entity synonym set as all terms
in it refer to the same country. Entity synonym set discovery can benefit a wide range of applications such as web
search (Cheng, Lauw, and Paparizos 2012), question answering (Zhou et al. 2013), and taxonomy construction (Anh, Kim,
and Ng 2015). Take the query “Emirates Airline U.S. to UAE”
as an example, understanding “U.S.” refers to “United States”
and “UAE” stands for “United Arab Emirates” is crucial for
an intelligent system to satisfy the user information need.
One line of work for entity synonym sets discovery takes a
ranking plus pruning approach. Given a query term referring
to one entity, it first ranks all candidate terms based on their
probabilities of referring to the same entity and then prunes
the rank list into an output set. By treating each term in a
vocabulary as a query, this approach can finally output all
the entity synonym sets in the vocabulary. A variety of features are extracted, including corpus-level statistics (Turney
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

249

