The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Random Dictators with a Random Referee:
Constant Sample Complexity Mechanisms for Social Choice
Brandon Fain

Ashish Goel

Kamesh Munagala

Nina Prabhu

Duke University

Stanford University

Duke University

Stanford University

Abstract

simple queries, regardless of the number of voters and alternatives. We call this property constant sample complexity,
and we explore mechanisms of this sort in this paper.
We define our model more formally in Section 4, but at
a high level, we have a set N of agents (or voters) and a
set of alternatives S, from which we must choose a single
outcome. We assume that N and S are both large, and that
eliciting the full ordinal rankings may be prohibitively difficult. Instead, we work with an ordinal query model, and a
constant sample complexity mechanism uses only a constant
number of these queries.

We study social choice mechanisms in an implicit utilitarian framework with a metric constraint, where the goal is to
minimize Distortion, the worst case social cost of an ordinal
mechanism relative to underlying cardinal utilities. We consider two additional desiderata: Constant sample complexity
and Squared Distortion. Constant sample complexity means
that the mechanism (potentially randomized) only uses a constant number of ordinal queries regardless of the number of
voters and alternatives. Squared Distortion is a measure of
variance of the Distortion of a randomized mechanism.
Our primary contribution is the first social choice mechanism
with constant sample complexity and constant Squared Distortion (which also implies constant Distortion). We call the
mechanism Random Referee, because it uses a random agent
to compare two alternatives that are the favorites of two other
random agents. We prove that the use of a comparison query
is necessary: no mechanism that only elicits the top-k preferred alternatives of voters (for constant k) can have Squared
Distortion that is sublinear in the number of alternatives. We
also prove that unlike any top-k only mechanism, the Distortion of Random Referee meaningfully improves on benign
metric spaces, using the Euclidean plane as a canonical example. Finally, among top-1 only mechanisms, we introduce
Random Oligarchy. The mechanism asks just 3 queries and is
essentially optimal among the class of such mechanisms with
respect to Distortion.
In summary, we demonstrate the surprising power of constant
sample complexity mechanisms generally, and just three random voters in particular, to provide some of the best known
results in the implicit utilitarian framework.

1

Top-k Query. “What are your k favorite alternatives, in order?” (We call a top-1 query a favorite query); and
Comparison Query. “Which of two given alternatives do
you prefer?”
Query models are not just of theoretical interest. They can
be used to reduce cognitive overload in voting. For example,
in the context of Participatory Budgeting (Goel et al. 2015),
the space of possible budget allocations is large, and one
mechanism is to ask voters to compare two proposed budgets. Similarly, in a context like transportation policy for a
city, a single alternative can be an entire transportation plan.
In such examples, not only are there many alternatives, but it
may be infeasible to expect voters to compare more than two
alternatives at the same time. We stress that constant sample
complexity is particularly important in settings where there
may be a large number of possibly complex alternatives.
To evaluate the quality of our mechanisms, we adopt
the implicit utilitarian perspective with metric constraints (Boutilier et al. 2015; Cheng, Dughmi, and Kempe
2017; Anshelevich and Postl 2017; Goel, Krishnaswamy,
and Munagala 2017; Anshelevich et al. 2018; Feldman, Fiat,
and Golomb 2016). That is, we assume that agents have cardinal costs over alternatives, and these costs are constrained
to be metric, but asking agents to work with or report cardinal costs is impractical or impossible. We want to design social choice mechanisms to minimize the total social cost, but
our mechanism is constrained only to use ordinal queries,
that is, those that can be answered given a total order over
alternatives. We therefore measure the efficiency of a mechanism as its Distortion (see Section 4), the worst case approximation to the total social cost.

Introduction

Consider the social choice problem of deciding on an allocation of public tax dollars to public projects. This is a
voting problem over budgets. Clearly, the number of voters
in such situations can be large. More interestingly, unlike in
traditional social choice theory, there is no reason to believe
that the number of alternatives (budgets) is small. It is therefore unreasonable to assume that we can elicit full ordinal
preferences over alternatives from every agent. For a voting
mechanism to be practical in such a setting, one would ideally like it to require only an absolute constant number of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1893

