The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Probabilistic Alternating-Time µ-Calculus∗
Fu Song,1 Yedi Zhang,1

Taolue Chen,2,5 Yu Tang,3 Zhiwu Xu4

1

3

ShanghaiTech University, 2 University of London
East China Normal University, 4 Shenzhen University
5
Nanjing University

Abstract

have been proposed, for which the model checking problem was also studied. In contrast, the satisfiability problem
for these logics turns out to be much more difficult. Indeed,
the satisfiability problem for PCTL, a (proper) fragment of
these logics, is a long-standing open problem in the formal
verification community (Chakraborty and Katoen 2016).
This paper aims to propose a temporal logic with decidable
satisfiability checking for reasoning about stochastic MAS.
Apart from being theoretical appealing, admitting decidability for satisfiability is useful in practice. Examples include
debugging specifications (as writing formal specifications
is often error-prone (Rozier and Vardi 2010)), social procedure or mechanism design (Pauly 2011), and assertion-based
design (i.e., verifying consistency of all requirements by formalizing designer’s intention by assertions, and checking
the full set of assertions to be satisfied before the model is
ready for examination (Foster, Krolnik, and Lacey 2004)). To
this end, we propose a probabilistic variant of AMC, probabilistic alternating-time µ-calculus (PAMC), which is acquired by equipping the coalition modalities with (qualitative) probability quantifiers hhAii./k in AMC. For instance,
νZ(a ∧ hh{1, 2}ii≥0.9 Z) states that the agent group {1, 2} has a
coalition strategy at each step such that the opponent coalition can escape the a-region in one step with probability less
than 0.1. PAMC subsumes both AMC and PµTL (Liu et al.
2015), but is incomparable with PATL and PATL∗ mentioned
before. Remark that we do not extend AMC in a quantitative
way such as (Mio 2012), in order to retain decidability.
We investigate the model checking and the satisfiability checking problems of PAMC. The former can be done
by an adaptation of the algorithm for AMC. As a result, the model checking problem of PAMC is shown in
UP∩co-UP. In a sharp contrast, for satisfiability checking the presence of coalition modalities and probabilistic quantifiers pose new challenges. In particular, the decision procedures for (non-probabilistic) alternating-time
logics (Schewe and Finkbeiner 2006; Walther et al. 2006;
Schewe 2008) and PµTL (Chakraborty and Katoen 2016)
cannot be directly adapted. To solve this problem, we propose a novel reduction from the satisfiability problem to
solving (turn-based two-player) parity games, resulting in an
EXPTIME decision procedure and a small model property
in the sense that every satisfiable formula φ has a model of
size exponential in |φ| (cf. Theorem 3). Remarkably, the com-

Reasoning about strategic abilities is key to an AI system consisting of multiple agents with random behaviors. We propose
a probabilistic extension of Alternating µ-Calculus (AMC),
named PAMC, for reasoning about strategic abilities of agents
in stochastic multi-agent systems. PAMC subsumes existing
logics AMC and PµTL. The usefulness of PAMC is exemplified by applications in genetic regulatory networks. We show
that, for PAMC, the model checking problem is in UP∩co-UP,
and the satisfiability problem is EXPTIME-complete, both of
which are the same as those for AMC. Moreover, PAMC admits the small model property. We implement the satisfiability
checking procedure in a tool PAMCSolver.

Introduction
Temporal logics play a key role in specification and verification of ICT systems. There are two fundamental decision problems of temporal logics: satisfiability checking and
model checking. Given a temporal logic formula, the former
asks whether a system satisfying the formula exists, while
the latter asks whether a further given system satisfies the
formula. Temporal logics for reasoning about strategic abilities in Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) have been proposed,
typically in the form of alternating-time temporal logics
(e.g., ATL, ATL∗ and AMC) (Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002), and strategic logics (Chatterjee, Henzinger, and
Piterman 2010; Mogavero et al. 2014; 2017). Both model
checking and satisfiability checking for these logics have
been extensively investigated (Schewe and Finkbeiner 2006;
Walther et al. 2006; Schewe 2008).
In practice, agents or the environment may exhibit random behaviors because of unpredictable physical conditions.
Hence, it is vital to reason about strategic abilities of agents in
a stochastic setting. From the modeling perspective, this gives
rise to stochastic MAS, which consist of a set of agents operating concurrently in a stochastic environment. Probabilistic
variants of ATL and ATL∗ , for instance PATL, PATL∗ (Chen
and Lu 2007; Chen et al. 2013) and SGL (Baier et al. 2007),
∗

This work is partially supported by NSFC (No. 61532019,
61761136011, and 61502308), EPSRC (EP/P00430X/1) and ARC
(DP160101652, DP180100691).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6179

