The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Distributed Community Detection via Metastability of the 2-Choices Dynamics
Emilio Cruciani,? Emanuele Natale,† Giacomo Scornavacca
?

†

Gran Sasso Science Institute – emilio.cruciani@gssi.it
Max Planck Institute für Informatik & Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, I3S, Inria – natale@i3s.unice.fr

Università degli Studi dell’Aquila – giacomo.scornavacca@graduate.univaq.it

Abstract

In this work we consider the 2-C HOICES dynamics (Definition 2), in which at each discrete-time step each agent
samples two random neighbors with replacement and, if the
two have the same state, the agent adopts that state. The
process rapidly converges to consensus, i.e., a configuration where all agents have the same state, if the proportion of agents supporting one state exceeds a given function
of the second eigenvalue of the graph (Cooper et al. 2015;
2017). Their proofs leverage an interesting property of the
2-C HOICES dynamics, i.e., that the expected number of
agents supporting one state can be expressed as a quadratic
form of the transition matrix of a simple random walk on the
underlying graph. This fact allows to relate the behavior of
the process to the eigenspaces of the graph.
Motivated by questions arising in graph clustering and
evolutionary biology, we exploit the aforementioned relation
to show a more fine-grained understanding of the consensus behavior of the 2-C HOICES dynamics. Our new analysis combines symmetry-breaking techniques (Becchetti et
al. 2016; Clementi et al. 2018) and concentration of probability arguments with a linear algebraic approach (Cooper et
al. 2015; 2017) to obtain the first symmetry-breaking analysis for dynamics on non-complete topologies.
Informal description of Theorem 1. Let the agents
of a network initially pick a random binary state and
then run the 2-C HOICES dynamics. If the network has
a community structure there is a significant probability that it will rapidly converge to an almost-clustered
configuration, where almost all nodes within each
community share the same state, but the predominant
states in the communities are different. In other words,
with constant probability, after a short time the states
of the nodes constitute a labeling which reveals the
clustered structure of the network.
The aforementioned probability for the labeling to reveal
the community structure can be amplified via CommunitySensitive Labeling (Becchetti et al. 2017a), transforming the
2-C HOICES dynamics into a distributed label propagation
algorithm with quasi-linear message complexity.
We remark that, because of the stochastic and timeindependent behavior of the 2-C HOICES dynamics, the process eventually leaves almost-clustered configurations and
reaches a monochromatic configuration in which all agents
have the same state. However, before that happens, we

We investigate the behavior of a simple majority dynamics
on networks of agents whose interaction topology exhibits
a community structure. By leveraging recent advancements
in the analysis of dynamics, we prove that, when the states
of the nodes are randomly initialized, the system rapidly and
stably converges to a configuration in which the communities
maintain internal consensus on different states. This is the
first analytical result on the behavior of dynamics for nonconsensus problems on non-complete topologies, based on
the first symmetry-breaking analysis in such setting.
Our result has several implications in different contexts in
which dynamics are adopted for computational and biological
modeling purposes. In the context of Label Propagation Algorithms, a class of widely used heuristics for community detection, it represents the first theoretical result on the behavior
of a distributed label propagation algorithm with quasi-linear
message complexity. In the context of evolutionary biology,
dynamics such as the Moran process have been used to model
the spread of mutations in genetic populations (Lieberman,
Hauert, and Nowak 2005); our result shows that, when the
probability of adoption of a given mutation by a node of the
evolutionary graph depends super-linearly on the frequency
of the mutation in the neighborhood of the node and the underlying evolutionary graph exhibits a community structure,
there is a non-negligible probability for species differentiation to occur.

Introduction
Dynamics are simple stochastic processes on networks, in
which agents update their own state according to a symmetric function of the state of their neighbors and of their current state, with no dependency on time or on the topology
of the network (Mossel and Tamuz 2017; Natale 2017). In
previous decades, in the context of automata networks, this
kind of systems has been investigated from a computability
point of view, attracting the interest of mathematicians and
physicists. Recently it has been subject to a renewed interest
from computer scientists, as new techniques for analyzing
this class of processes have made possible to answer questions regarding their efficiency and capability as distributed
algorithms (Doerr et al. 2011; Becchetti et al. 2015; 2016;
2017a; Cooper et al. 2015; 2017).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6046

