The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

G2C: A Generator-to-Classifier Framework
Integrating Multi-Stained Visual Cues for Pathological Glomerulus Classification
Bingzhe Wu,1∗ Xiaolu Zhang,2 Shiwan Zhao,3 Lingxi Xie,4
Caihong Zeng,5 Zhihong Liu,5 Guangyu Sun1
1

Peking University, 2 Ant Financial Services Group, 3 IBM Research, 4 Johns Hopkins University
5
National Clinical Research Center of Kidney Disease, Jinling Hospital
wubingzhe@pku.edu.cn, yueyin.zxl@antfin.com, zhaosw@cn.ibm.com, 198808xc@gmail.com
zengch nj@hotmail.com, liuzhihong@nju.edu.cn, gsun@pku.edu.cn
PAS

Abstract

MASSON

PASM

Patches

Slides

Pathological glomerulus classification plays a key role in the
diagnosis of nephropathy. As the difference between different subcategories is subtle, doctors often refer to slides from
different staining methods to make decisions. However, creating correspondence across various stains is labor-intensive,
bringing major difficulties in collecting data and training a
vision-based algorithm to assist nephropathy diagnosis.
This paper provides an alternative solution for integrating
multi-stained visual cues for glomerulus classification. Our
approach, named generator-to-classifier (G2C), is a twostage framework. Given an input image from a specified stain,
several generators are first applied to estimate its appearances
in other staining methods, and a classifier follows to combine
visual cues from different stains for prediction (whether it is
pathological, or which type of pathology it has). We optimize
these two stages in a joint manner. To provide a reasonable
initialization, we pre-train the generators in an unlabeled reference set under an unpaired image-to-image translation task,
and then fine-tune them together with the classifier.
We conduct experiments on a glomerulus type classification
dataset collected by ourselves (there are no publicly available datasets for this purpose). Although joint optimization
slightly harms the authenticity of the generated patches, it
boosts classification performance, suggesting more effective
visual cues are extracted in an automatic way. We also transfer our model to a public dataset for breast cancer classification, and outperform the state-of-the-arts significantly.

H&E

Figure 1: Top: slides from four different staining methods
(PAS, H&E, MASSON and PASM, respectively). Bottom: four
real patches, containing the same glomerulus and sampled
from the same position of these slides.

namely PAS, H&E, MASSON and PASM. As shown in Figure 1, these staining methods produce quite different appearances even for the same glomerulus.
We aim at integrating multi-stained visual cues for
glomerulus classification. The main difficulty lies in the lack
of annotation, i.e., in both training and testing, labeling every
glomerulus across different stains is both labor-intensive and
error-prone. In our case, we are provided a partially labeled
dataset on one stain (PAS), and unlabeled data on other three
stains. For most glomeruli, it is difficult to find their perfect
occurrences in all four stains, thus we cannot expect a simple algorithm to learn from correspondence across different
stains. This partly limits previous work (Gallego et al. 2018)
from training classification models on multiple stains.
To this end, we propose an approach named generatorto-classifier (G2C), with the core idea being to generate
fake images in other stains to assist classification in the target stain. G2C has two stages. The first stage contains a
few generators, each of which takes an input patch from
one stain (e.g., PAS) and estimates its appearance in another

Introduction
More than 10% people all over the world suffer nephropathy (Levin et al. 2017). An important way of diagnosis lies in
a quantitative analysis of glomeruli, e.g., discriminating between normal and abnormal samples, and further diagnosing
the abnormality if necessary. In clinics, pathologists generally refer to multiple slides of the same glomerulus, generated by different staining methods, in order to collect cues
from particular glomerular structures, elements, or even microorganisms to detect subtle differences among these subcategories. In this work, we consider four staining methods,
∗
This work was done when Bingzhe Wu was a research intern
at IBM Research - China.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1214

