The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Jointly Extracting Multiple Triplets with Multilayer Translation Constraints
Zhen Tan,1 Xiang Zhao,1,3,* Wei Wang,2,4 Weidong Xiao1,3
1

Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Information System Engineering,
National University of Defense Technology, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, UNSW, Australia
3
Collaborative Innovation Center of Geospatial Technology, China
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, DGUT, China
Abstract

lations (Zheng et al. 2017a). Miwa and Bansal used an endto-end model to extract entities, and dependency tree was
harnessed to determine relations (Miwa and Bansal 2016).
These two models first recognize entities, and then choose
a semantic relation for every possible pair of extracted entities; in this case, the RC classifier has a comparatively low
precision but high recall, since it is misled by many of the
pairs that fall into the other category 1 .
Meanwhile, there are models that extract confined appearances of target relations. In particular, Zheng et al. transformed joint extraction into a tagging problem to tag entities
and relations in a unified tagging scheme, and utilized an
end-to-end model to solve the problem (Zheng et al. 2017b).
Nevertheless, in this model each entity is constrained to
be involved in only one relation in every sentence. Katiyar and Cardie also used Bi-LSTM to extract entities, and
a self-attention mechanism was incorporated to extract relations (Katiyar and Cardie 2017). The model assumes that an
entity could relate to only one of its preceding entities in the
sentence.These two models still have not fully recognized
and attached importance to the fact that there could be multiple relations associated with an entity; in this case, the RC
task performs at comparatively high precision but low recall,
since the scope of candidates for RC is confined.

Triplets extraction is an essential and pivotal step in automatic knowledge base construction, which captures structural
information from unstructured text corpus. Conventional extraction models use a pipeline of named entity recognition
and relation classification to extract entities and relations,
respectively, which ignore the connection between the two
tasks. Recently, several neural network-based models were
proposed to tackle the problem, and achieved state-of-the-art
performance. However, most of them are unable to extract
multiple triplets from a single sentence, which are yet commonly seen in real-life scenarios. To close the gap, we propose in this paper a joint neural extraction model for multitriplets, namely, TME, which is capable of adaptively discovering multiple triplets simultaneously in a sentence via ranking with translation mechanism. In experiment, TME exhibits
superior performance and achieves an improvement of 37.6%
on F1 score over state-of-the-art competitors.

1

Introduction

Triplets extraction captures structural information, i.e.,
triples of two entities with one relation, from unstructured text corpus, which is an essential and pivotal step
in automatic knowledge base construction (Bollacker et al.
2008). Conventional models use a pipeline of named entity recognition (NER) (Shaalan 2014) and relation classification (RC) (Rink and Harabagiu 2010) to extract entities
and relations, respectively, to produce the final triplets. Such
pipelined methods may not fully capture and exploit correlations between the NER and RC tasks, being susceptible to
cascading errors (Li and Ji 2014).
To overcome the shortcoming, recent research resorted
to joint models, most of which are features-based structured models (Kate and Mooney 2010; Yu and Lam 2010;
Chan and Roth 2011; Miwa and Sasaki 2014), which require
excessive manual intervention and supervised natural language processing toolkits to construct multiplex and complicated features. Lately, several neural models have been presented to jointly extract entities and relations. Specifically,
Zheng et al. utilized Bi-LSTM to learn shared hidden features, then used LSTM to extract entities, and CNN for re-

Arrive in
Located in

Donald Trump arrives in France , Pairs . Elysee Palace Ċ
O

B-PER-R

I-PER-R

O

O

O
B-LOC-R

B-LOC-R

O
B-ORG-N I-ORG-N

Figure 1: Sample Sentence with Tri-part Tagging

To sum up, existing joint models either extract limited relations with unpragmatic constraints (one relation for one
sentence, or relating to only one preceding entity), or simply produce too many candidates for RC (relations for all
possible entity pairs). Thorough investigation suggests that
the main reason lies in that they overlooked the impact of
1

In RC, class other means that there is no semantic relation
between entities, or it is out of the given set of target relations (Rink
and Harabagiu 2010).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Corresponding Author: Xiang Zhao (xiangzhao@nudt.edu.cn)

7080

