The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Learning with Contrastive Latent Variable Models
Kristen A. Severson, Soumya Ghosh, Kenney Ng
Center for Computational Health and MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab,
IBM Research, 75 Binney St. Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02142

Abstract

and is uninteresting for the problem while highlighting variation unique to the disease population enabling downstream
applications such as subgroup discovery.
Despite this natural setting for unsupervised learning,
most techniques address individual data points, sequences,
or paired data points. Few techniques generalize to the contrastive scenario where we have sets of data but no obvious
correspondence between their members. Yet, there are many
cases where datasets that can be used in a comparative setting arise naturally: control vs. study populations, pre- and
post-intervention groups, and signal vs. signal free groups
(Abid et al. 2018). Each of these settings has possible nuisance variation, for example, population level variation, effects unrelated to intervention, and sensor noise variation.
The recently published contrastive principal component
approach (cPCA) (Abid et al. 2018) is one example of a
technique that can be used for sets of data. cPCA builds on
principal component analysis (PCA) (Hotelling 1933), a dimensionality reduction technique which projects data into a
lower dimensional space while minimizing the squared loss.
PCA and other dimensionality reduction techniques are popular because they allow high-dimensional data to be visualized while removing noise. cPCA seeks to find a projection
to a lower dimensional space that discovers variation that is
enriched in one dataset as compared to another by applying
PCA to the empirical covariance matrix

In unsupervised learning, dimensionality reduction is an important tool for data exploration and visualization. Because
these aims are typically open-ended, it can be useful to frame
the problem as looking for patterns that are enriched in one
dataset relative to another. These pairs of datasets occur commonly, for instance a population of interest vs. control or signal vs. signal free recordings. However, there are few methods that work on sets of data as opposed to data points or
sequences. Here, we present a probabilistic model for dimensionality reduction to discover signal that is enriched in the
target dataset relative to the background dataset. The data
in these sets do not need to be paired or grouped beyond
set membership. By using a probabilistic model where some
structure is shared amongst the two datasets and some is
unique to the target dataset, we are able to recover interesting
structure in the latent space of the target dataset. The method
also has the advantages of a probabilistic model, namely that
it allows for the incorporation of prior information, handles
missing data, and can be generalized to different distributional assumptions. We describe several possible variations
of the model and demonstrate the application of the technique
to de-noising, feature selection, and subgroup discovery settings.

Introduction
In unsupervised learning, the goal is often to learn what is
unique or interesting about a dataset. Given the subjective
nature of this question, it can be useful to frame the problem
in the context of what signal is enriched in one dataset, referred to as the target, relative to a second dataset, referred
to as the background. An example of this is an exploration
of a heterogeneous disease population, such as patients with
Parkinson’s disease. The interesting sources of variation are
those that are unique to the disease population. However, it
is likely that some sources of variation are unrelated to the
disease state, for instance variation due to aging. This is difficult to assess without a baseline population, therefore, it is
useful to contrast the disease population with a population of
healthy controls. Such contrastive analysis can discover nuisance variation that is common amongst the two populations

C=

n
m
1 X
1X T
xi xi − α
y yT
n i=1
m j=1 j j

(1)

where {xi } are the observations of interest, {yj } are the
comparison data, and α is a tuning parameter. The choice of
α is a trade-off between maximizing the retained variance
of the target set and minimizing the retained variance of the
background set.
In this work, we develop probabilistic latent variable models applicable to the setting where contrastive analysis is desired. These models are based on the insight that it is possible to emphasize latent structures of interest while suppressing spurious, uninteresting variance in the data through carefully designed statistical models. Such models have several
key advantages over deterministic approaches: it is straight
forward to incorporate prior domain knowledge, missing and
noisy data can naturally be modeled through appropriate

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Supplemental information is available at https://arxiv.org/

4862

