The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Acting and Planning Using Operational Models
Sunandita Patra,1 Malik Ghallab,2 Dana Nau,1 Paolo Traverso3
1

Department of Computer Science and Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
2
Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS), Toulouse, France
3
Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK), Povo - Trento, Italy
patras@cs.umd.edu, malik@laas.fr, nau@cs.umd.edu, traverso@fbk.eu

Abstract

for the development and consistency verification of the models. By ‘consistency verification of the models’, we mean a
growing body of work (eg, in the context of certifying selfdriving cars) for the formal verification of operational models, such as PRS-like procedures, using model checking and
theorem proving. (de Silva, Meneguzzi, and Logan 2018)
attempts to do this. It is highly desirable to have a single
representation for both acting and planning. But this representation cannot be solely descriptive, because that wouldn’t
provide sufficient functionality. The planner needs to be able
to reason directly with the actor’s operational models.
We present an integrated planning and acting system in
which both planning and acting use the actor’s operational
models. The acting component is inspired by the wellknown PRS system (Ingrand et al. 1996). It uses a hierarchical task-oriented operational representation with an expressive, general-purpose language offering rich control structures for closed-loop online decision-making. A collection
of refinement methods describes alternative ways to handle
tasks and react to events. Each method has a body that can
be any complex algorithm. In addition to the usual programming constructs, the body may contain subtasks, which need
to be refined recursively, and sensory-motor commands,
which query and change the world non-deterministically.
Commands are simulated when planning and performed by
an execution platform in the real world when acting.
Rather than behaving purely reactively like PRS, our actor interacts with a planner, RAEplan. To decide how to refine tasks or events, RAEplan does Monte Carlo rollouts with
applicable refinement methods. When a refinement method
contains a command, RAEplan takes samples of its possible outcomes, using either a domain-dependent generative
simulator, when available, or a probability distribution of its
possible outcomes. We have implemented and evaluated our
approach, and the results show significant benefits.
Next we discuss related work, followed by descriptions of
the operational models, the acting and planning algorithms,
our benchmark domains and experimental results, and a discussion of the results and concluding remarks.

The most common representation formalisms for planning
are descriptive models. They abstractly describe what the actions do and are tailored for efficiently computing the next
state(s) in a state transition system. But acting requires operational models that describe how to do things, with rich control structures for closed-loop online decision-making. Using
descriptive representations for planning and operational representations for acting can lead to problems with developing
and verifying consistency of the different models.
We define and implement an integrated acting-and-planning
system in which both planning and acting use the same operational models, which are written in a general-purpose hierarchical task-oriented language offering rich control structures.
The acting component is inspired by the well-known PRS
system, except that instead of being purely reactive, it can
get advice from the planner. Our planning algorithm, RAEplan, plans by doing Monte Carlo rollout simulations of the
actor’s operational models. Our experiments show significant
benefits in the efficiency of the acting and planning system.

1

Introduction

Numerous knowledge representations have been proposed
for describing and reasoning on actions. However, for the
purpose of planning, the dominant representation is the one
inherited from the early STRIPS system and formalized
in various versions of the PDDL description language, including representations for planning under uncertainty, like
PPDDL. This class of descriptive models of actions is tailored to efficiently compute the next states in a state transition system. It is quite limited. In particular it cannot reason about ongoing activities, react and adapt to an unfolding
context. As argued by many authors, e.g., (Pollack and Horty
1999), plans are needed for acting deliberately, but they are
not sufficient for realistic applications. Acting requires operational models that describe how to do things, with rich
control structures for closed-loop online decision-making.
Most approaches for the integration of planning and acting seek to combine descriptive representations for the former and operational representations for the latter (Ingrand
and Ghallab 2017). This has several drawbacks in particular

2

Related Work

To our knowledge, no previous approach has proposed the
integration of planning and acting directly within the language of an operational model. Our acting algorithm and

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7691

