The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

One for All: Neural Joint Modeling of Entities and Events
Trung Minh Nguyen∗

Thien Huu Nguyen∗

Alt Inc.
8F, Higashi-Kanda 3-1-2, Chiyoda-ku
Tokyo, 101-0031, Japan
nguyen.minh.trung@alt.ai

Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Oregon
Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA
thien@cs.uoregon.edu

Abstract

Another a-10 warthog was hit today.
In this sentence, an EMD system needs to recognize “a10 warthog” as an entity mention of type “VEHICLE” and
“today” as a time expression. For ED, the systems should
be able to realize that “hit” is a trigger word for an event of
type “Attack”. Finally, for ARP, the systems are supposed to
identify “a-10 warthog” as playing the “Target” role in the
“Attack” event and “today” as the event’s time.
A large portion of the prior work on EE has taken a simplified approach that only focuses on one or two specific subtasks, either assuming the manual/golden annotation for the
other subtasks or simply ignoring them (i.e, the pipelined
approach) (Li, Ji, and Huang 2013; Chen et al. 2015;
Nguyen, Cho, and Grishman 2016a). One of the major issues with this approach is the error propagation in which
the error from the earlier subtask is inherited and magnified in the later subtasks, causing the poor performance of
those later subtasks (Li, Ji, and Huang 2013). In addition,
the pipelined approach for EE does not have any mechanisms to capture the dependencies and interactions among
the three subtasks so the later subtasks in the pipeline can interfere with and improve the decision process for the earlier
subtasks. The earlier subtasks, on the other hand, can only
communicate with the later subtasks via the discrete outputs,
and fail to pass deeper information to the later stages to potentially improve the overall performance. Consider an EE
system where EMD is done separately from ED and ARP as
an example. In this system, the EMD module would work
on its own and the ED and ARP modules have no way to
correct the mistake made earlier by the EMD module. At
the same time, it is very usual that the EMD module can
only provide the ED and ARP modules with the boundary
and types of the detected entity mentions. Such deeper information as the hidden contextual representations or the more
fine-grained semantic classification of the entity mentions
cannot be passed to or affect the ED and ARP modules. This
would cause the inefficiency to use the information among
the subtasks and result in the poor performance for EE.
It is thus appealing to design a single system to simultaneously model the three EE subtasks to avoid the aforementioned issues of the pipelined approach. However, due to the
complexity in modeling, there has been only few works in
the literature to study this joint modeling approach for EE.
The major prior works in this direction for the ACE 2005

The previous work for event extraction has mainly focused on
the predictions for event triggers and argument roles, treating entity mentions as being provided by human annotators.
This is unrealistic as entity mentions are usually predicted by
some existing toolkits whose errors might be propagated to
the event trigger and argument role recognition. Few of the
recent work has addressed this problem by jointly predicting
entity mentions, event triggers and arguments. However, such
work is limited to using discrete engineering features to represent contextual information for the individual tasks and their
interactions. In this work, we propose a novel model to jointly
perform predictions for entity mentions, event triggers and
arguments based on the shared hidden representations from
deep learning. The experiments demonstrate the benefits of
the proposed method, leading to the state-of-the-art performance for event extraction.

Introduction
An important problem of information extraction in natural
language processing (NLP) is event extraction (EE): understanding how events are presented in text and developing
techniques to recognize such events. We follow the definition of events in the annotation guideline designed for the
ACE 2005 dataset1 : an event is triggered by some words
in the sentence with which several entities are associated to
play different roles in the event.
EE is a challenging problem as it is a composition of three
subtasks corresponding to different aspects of the event definition. In particular, the first subtask concerns the extraction of entity mentions appearing in the sentences (Entity
Mention Detection - EMD) while the second subtask needs
to identify the event trigger words (Event Detection - ED).
Finally, in the third subtask, the relationships between the
detected entity mentions and trigger words in the sentences
should be recognized to reflect the roles of the entity mentions in the events (Argument Role Prediction - ARP). We
call the three subtasks ordered by “EMD → ED → ARP”
the EE pipeline for convenience. For instance, consider the
following sentence taken from the ACE 2005 dataset:
∗
Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/collaborations/past-projects/ace

6851

