The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Disjoint Label Space Transfer Learning with Common Factorised Space
Xiaobin Chang,1 Yongxin Yang,2 Tao Xiang,1 Timothy M. Hospedales2
1

Queen Mary University of London, 2 The University of Edinburgh
x.chang@qmul.ac.uk, yongxin.yang@ed.ac.uk, t.xiang@qmul.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Source & Target Label Space

Aligned

In this paper, a unified approach is presented to transfer learning that addresses several source and target domain labelspace and annotation assumptions with a single model. It is
particularly effective in handling a challenging case, where
source and target label-spaces are disjoint, and outperforms
alternatives in both unsupervised and semi-supervised settings. The key ingredient is a common representation termed
Common Factorised Space. It is shared between source and
target domains, and trained with an unsupervised factorisation loss and a graph-based loss. With a wide range of experiments, we demonstrate the flexibility, relevance and efficacy
of our method, both in the challenging cases with disjoint label spaces, and in the more conventional cases such as unsupervised domain adaptation, where the source and target
domains share the same label-sets.

Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation

Fine-tuning

Unsupervised
DLSTL

Fine-tuning

Semi-supervised
DLSTL

Disjoint
Unsupervised

Semi-supervised
Target Supervision

Supervised

Figure 1: Schematic of various transfer learning problems
on two criteria: the relation between source and target label
space, and the amount of target problem supervision.

An important but less-studied transfer learning problem
setting is one where the source and target domains are with
disjoint label spaces, recently highlighted by (Luo et al.
2017). In these problems, which we term Disjoint Label
Space Transfer Learning (DLSTL), there are both a domain
shift between source and target, as well as a new set of target
classes to recognise with few (semi-supervised case) or no
labelled (unsupervised case) sample per category. Thus, two
main challenges exist simultaneously. On one hand, there is
few or no target label to drive the adaptation. On the other
hand, no clear path is provided to transfer source supervision
to target domain due to the disjoint label spaces. As an example, consider object recognition in two cameras (domains)
where the object categories (label-space) are different in
each camera, and one source camera has dense labels, while
the target camera has data but few or no labels. The traditional fine-tuning (Yosinski et al. 2014) and multi-domain
training (Rebuffi, Bilen, and Vedaldi 2017) can address the
supervised (few label) DLSTL variant, but break down if
the labels are very few, and cannot exploit unlabelled data
in the target camera, i.e., semi-supervised learning. Meanwhile UDA approaches (Ganin et al. 2016) based on distribution alignment are ineffective since the label-spaces are
disjoint and feature distributions thus should not be indistinguishable. One approach that has the potential to handle
DLSTL under both unsupervised and semi-supervised settings is based on modelling attributes, which can serve as a
bridge across domains for better transferring the discriminative power (Chen et al. 2015; Gebru, Hoffman, and Li 2017;

Introduction
Deep learning methods are now widely used in diverse applications. However, their efficacy is largely contingent on
a large amount of labelled data in the target task and domain of interest. This issue continues to motivate intense interest in cross-task and cross-domain knowledge transfer. A
wide range of transfer learning settings are considered which
differ in whether the label spaces of source and target domains are overlapped (i.e., aligned or disjoint), as well as
the amount of supervision/labelled training samples available in the target domain (see Figure 1). The standard practice of fine-tuning (Yosinski et al. 2014) treats a pre-trained
source model as a good initialisation for training a target
problem model. It is adopted when the label spaces of both
domains are either aligned or disjoint, but always requires
a significant amount of labelled data from the target, albeit
less than learning from scratch. Another popular problem is
the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), where knowledge is transferred from a labelled source domain to an unlabelled target domain (Tzeng et al. 2017; Ganin et al. 2016;
Cao, Long, and Wang 2018). UDA makes the simplifying
assumption that the label space of source and target domains are the same, and focuses on narrowing the distribution gap between source and target domains without any
labelled samples from the target.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3288

