The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Meta-Learning of
Figure-Ground Segmentation via Imitating Visual Effects
Ding-Jie Chen,† Jui-Ting Chien,‡ Hwann-Tzong Chen,‡ Tyng-Luh Liu†
†

Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
{djchen.tw, ydnaandy123}@gmail.com, htchen@cs.nthu.edu.tw, liutyng@iis.sinica.edu.tw
‡

Abstract
This paper presents a “learning to learn” approach to figureground image segmentation. By exploring webly-abundant
images of specific visual effects, our method can effectively
learn the visual-effect internal representations in an unsupervised manner and uses this knowledge to differentiate the figure from the ground in an image. Specifically, we formulate
the meta-learning process as a compositional image editing
task that learns to imitate a certain visual effect and derive
the corresponding internal representation. Such a generative
process can help instantiate the underlying figure-ground notion and enables the system to accomplish the intended image segmentation. Whereas existing generative methods are
mostly tailored to image synthesis or style transfer, our approach offers a flexible learning mechanism to model a general concept of figure-ground segmentation from unorganized
images that have no explicit pixel-level annotations. We validate our approach via extensive experiments on six datasets
to demonstrate that the proposed model can be end-to-end
trained without ground-truth pixel labeling yet outperforms
the existing methods of unsupervised segmentation tasks.

Figure 1: Given the same image (1st column), imitating different visual effects (2nd column) can yield distinct interpretations of figure-ground segmentation (3rd column), which
are derived by our method via referencing the following visual effects (from top to bottom): black background,
color selectivo, and defocus/Bokeh. The learned
VERs are shown in the last column, respectively.

Introduction

resulting VER is closely related to image segmentation. Another advantage of focusing on visual-effect images is that
such data are abundant from the Internet, while pixel-wise
annotating large datasets for image segmentation is timeconsuming. However, in practice, we only have access to the
visual-effect images, but not the VERs as well as the original
images. Taking all these factors into account, we reduce the
meta-problem of figure-ground segmentation to predicting
the proper VER of a given image for the underlying visual
effect. Owing to its data richness from the Internet, the latter
task is more suitable for our intention to cast the problem
within the unsupervised generative framework.
Many compositional image editing tasks have the aforementioned properties. For example, to create the color
selectivo effect on an image, as shown in Fig. 2, we can
i) identify the target and partition the image into foreground
and background layers, ii) convert the color of background
layer into grayscale, and iii) combine the converted background layer with the original foreground layer to get the
final result. The operation of color conversion is local—it
simply “equalizes” the RGB values of pixels in certain areas.
The quality of the result depends on how properly the layers

In figure-ground segmentation, the regions of interest are
conventionally defined by the provided ground truth, which
is usually in the form of pixel-level annotations. Without
such supervised information from intensive labeling efforts,
it is challenging to teach a system to learn what the figure
and the ground should be in each image. To address this
issue, we propose an unsupervised meta-learning approach
that can simultaneously learn both the figure-ground concept
and the corresponding image segmentation.
The proposed formulation explores the inherent but often unnoticeable relatedness between performing image segmentation and creating visual effects. In particular, to visually enrich a given image with a special effect often first
needs to specify the regions to be emphasized. The procedure corresponds to constructing an internal representation
that guides the image editing to operate on the target image regions. For this reason, we name such an internal guidance as the Visual-Effect Representation (VER) of the image. We observe that for a majority of visual effects, their
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8159

