The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Revisiting Spatial-Temporal Similarity:
A Deep Learning Framework for Traffic Prediction
Huaxiu Yao,* Xianfeng Tang,* Hua Wei, Guanjie Zheng, Zhenhui Li
Pennsylvania State University
{huaxiuyao, xianfeng, hzw77, gjz5038, jessieli}@ist.psu.edu

Abstract

predict the traffic for the next time slot. A number of studies have investigated traffic prediction for decades. In time
series community, autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) and Kalman filtering have been widely applied to traffic prediction problems (Li et al. 2012; MoreiraMatias et al. 2013; Shekhar and Williams 2008; Lippi,
Bertini, and Frasconi 2013). While these earlier methods
study traffic time series for each individual location, separately, recent studies started taking into account spatial information (e.g., adding regularizations on model similarity for
nearby locations) (Deng et al. 2016; Idé and Sugiyama 2011;
Zheng and Ni 2013) and external context information (e.g.,
adding features of venue information, weather condition,
and local events) (Wu, Wang, and Li 2016; Pan, Demiryurek,
and Shahabi 2012; Tong et al. 2017). However, these approaches are still based on traditional time series models or
machine learning models and do not well capture the complex non-linear spatial-temporal dependency.
Recently, deep learning has made achieved tremendous
success in many challenging learning tasks (LeCun, Bengio,
and Hinton 2015). The success has inspired several studies
to apply deep learning techniques to traffic prediction problem. For example, several studies (Zhang, Zheng, and Qi
2017; Zhang et al. 2016; Ma et al. 2017) have modeled citywide traffic as a heatmap image and use convolutional neural
network (CNN) to model the non-linear spatial dependency.
To model non-linear temporal dependency, researchers propose to use recurrent neural network (RNN)-based framework (Yu et al. 2017; Cui, Ke, and Wang 2016). Yao et al.
further propose a method to jointly model both spatial and
temporal dependencies by integrating CNN and long shortterm memory (LSTM) (Yao et al. 2018).
Although both spatial dependency and temporal dynamics have been considered in deep learning for traffic prediction, the existing method have two major limitations. First,
the spatial dependency between locations relies only on the
similarity of historical traffic (Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017;
Yao et al. 2018) and the model learns a static spatial dependency. However, the dependencies between locations could
change over time. For example, in the morning, the dependency between a residential area and a business center
could be strong; whereas in late evening, the relation between these two places might be very weak. However, such
dynamic dependencies have not been considered in previous

Traffic prediction has drawn increasing attention in AI research field due to the increasing availability of large-scale
traffic data and its importance in the real world. For example, an accurate taxi demand prediction can assist taxi companies in pre-allocating taxis. The key challenge of traffic
prediction lies in how to model the complex spatial dependencies and temporal dynamics. Although both factors have
been considered in modeling, existing works make strong assumptions about spatial dependence and temporal dynamics,
i.e., spatial dependence is stationary in time, and temporal
dynamics is strictly periodical. However, in practice the spatial dependence could be dynamic (i.e., changing from time
to time), and the temporal dynamics could have some perturbation from one period to another period. In this paper,
we make two important observations: (1) the spatial dependencies between locations are dynamic; and (2) the temporal dependency follows daily and weekly pattern but it is not
strictly periodic for its dynamic temporal shifting. To address
these two issues, we propose a novel Spatial-Temporal Dynamic Network (STDN), in which a flow gating mechanism
is introduced to learn the dynamic similarity between locations, and a periodically shifted attention mechanism is designed to handle long-term periodic temporal shifting. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work that tackle both
issues in a unified framework. Our experimental results on
real-world traffic datasets verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Traffic prediction - a spatial temporal prediction problem,
has drawn increasing attention due to the growing traffic
related datasets and for its impacts in real-world applications.. In the meantime, an accurate traffic prediction model
is essential to many real-world applications. For example,
taxi demand prediction can help taxi companies pre-allocate
taxis; traffic volume prediction can help transportation department better manage and control the traffic to ease traffic
congestion.
In a typical traffic prediction setting, given historical traffic data (e.g., traffic volume of a region or a road intersection for each hour during the previous month), one needs to
* Equal contribution
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5668

