The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

One-Network Adversarial Fairness
Zoubin Ghahramani

Isabel Valera

Tameem Adel

Adrian Weller

University of Cambridge, UK University of Cambridge, UK
MPI-IS, Germany
University of Cambridge, UK
The Alan Turing Institute, UK
Uber AI Labs, USA
isabel.valera@tuebingen.mpg.de
tah47@cam.ac.uk
aw665@cam.ac.uk
zoubin@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract

is general, in that it may be applied to any differentiable discriminative model. We establish a fairness paradigm where
the architecture of a deep discriminative model, optimized
for accuracy, is modified such that fairness is imposed (the
same paradigm could be applied to a deep generative model
in future work). Beginning with an ordinary neural network
optimized for prediction accuracy of the class labels in a
classification task, we propose an adversarial fairness framework performing a change to the network architecture, leading to a neural network that is maximally uninformative
about the sensitive attributes of the data as well as predictive of the class labels. In this adversarial learning framework, there is no need for a separate network architecture
representing the adversary, thus we avoid the well-known
difficulties which may arise from double-network adversarial learning (Goodfellow 2016; Goodfellow et al. 2014).
We make the following contributions: 1) We propose a
fairness algorithm by modifying the architecture of a potentially unfair model to simultaneously optimize for both accuracy and fairness with respect to sensitive attributes (Section 2); 2) We quantify the tradeoff between the accuracy
and fairness objectives (Section 2); 3) We propose a variation of the adversarial learning procedure to increase diversity among elements of each minibatch of the gradient
descent training, in order to achieve a representation with
higher fidelity. This variation may be of independent interest since it is applicable generally to adversarial frameworks
(Section 2.2); 4) We develop a novel generalization bound
for our framework illustrating the theoretical grounding behind the relationship between the label classifier and the adversary’s ability to predict the sensitive attribute value (Section 3); and 5) We experiment on two fairness datasets comparing against many earlier approaches to demonstrate stateof-the-art effectiveness of our methods (Section 4).

There is currently a great expansion of the impact of machine
learning algorithms on our lives, prompting the need for objectives other than pure performance, including fairness. Fairness here means that the outcome of an automated decisionmaking system should not discriminate between subgroups
characterized by sensitive attributes such as gender or race.
Given any existing differentiable classifier, we make only
slight adjustments to the architecture including adding a new
hidden layer, in order to enable the concurrent adversarial optimization for fairness and accuracy. Our framework provides
one way to quantify the tradeoff between fairness and accuracy, while also leading to strong empirical performance.

1

Introduction

Automated decision support has become widespread, raising
concerns about potential unfairness. Here, following earlier
work, unfairness means discriminating against a particular
group of people due to sensitive group characteristics such
as gender or race (Grgic-Hlaca et al. 2018b; Hardt, Price,
and Srebro 2016; Kusner et al. 2017; Louizos et al. 2016;
Zafar et al. 2017c; 2017a; Zemel et al. 2013). Fairness concerns have been considered in applications including predictive policing (Brennan, Dieterich, and Ehret 2009), recidivism prediction (Chouldechova 2017) and credit scoring (Khandani, Kim, and Lo 2010). The current trend in the
literature on fairness is to begin with a notion (definition)
of fairness, and then to construct a model which automates
the detection and/or eradication of unfairness accordingly.
Common definitions of fairness consider whether or not a
decision is related to sensitive attributes, such as gender.
Most state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms for fairness build from scratch a model’s architecture tailored for a
specific fairness notion. In contrast, we propose a method
that slightly modifies the architecture of the model which
was to be optimized solely for accuracy. We learn a fair representation together with a new performance function acting
on it, with the goal of concurrently optimizing for both fairness and performance (accuracy). Our method is based on an
adversarial framework, which allows explicitly measuring
the tradeoff between fairness and accuracy. Our approach

2

Fair Learning by Modifying
an Unfair Model

We aim to adapt a classifier that was to learn solely to predict the data labels into a fair classifier without reconstructing its architecture from scratch. Our strategy is to add a
term to the optimization objective to simultaneously maximize both fairness and accuracy. This term imposes fairness
by establishing a fair representation of the input data which

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2412

