The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Self-Supervised Video Representation
Learning with Space-Time Cubic Puzzles
Dahun Kim, Donghyeon Cho, In So Kweon
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea
mcahny@kaist.ac.kr, cdh12242@gmail.com, iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Self-supervised tasks such as colorization, inpainting and zigsaw puzzle have been utilized for visual representation learning for still images, when the number of labeled images is
limited or absent at all. Recently, this worthwhile stream of
study extends to video domain where the cost of human labeling is even more expensive. However, the most of existing methods are still based on 2D CNN architectures that can
not directly capture spatio-temporal information for video applications. In this paper, we introduce a new self-supervised
task called as Space-Time Cubic Puzzles to train 3D CNNs
using large scale video dataset. This task requires a network
to arrange permuted 3D spatio-temporal crops. By completing Space-Time Cubic Puzzles, the network learns both spatial appearance and temporal relation of video frames, which
is our final goal. In experiments, we demonstrate that our
learned 3D representation is well transferred to action recognition tasks, and outperforms state-of-the-art 2D CNN-based
competitors on UCF101 and HMDB51 datasets.

(a)

(a’)

(b)

(b’)

Figure 1: Ambiguity in time direction. Given a pair of images on the left, it is ambiguous to determine the time direction in between. One can finally identify the direction (b‘ →
a‘) and action (throwing) when given video sequences.

Introduction

for feature learning. For instance, a deep CNN is taught to
complete zigsaw puzzles (Noroozi and Favaro 2016) and fill
in missing pixels (Pathak et al. 2016). The rationale behind
such self-supervised tasks is that solving them will force the
CNN to learn semantic image features that can be useful for
other vision tasks. In image domain, self-supervised learning is performed using only images from ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015) without labels and is transferred to
downstream tasks such as Pascal (Everingham et al. 2007;
2012). Recent methods have shown promising results, and
significantly narrowed the gap with the fully supervised
learning using ImageNet labels.
More recently, this worthwhile stream of research has extended to video domain, where the burden of human annotation is even more severe. Compared to images, videos provide additional temporal information. To illustrate, we introduce a problem of guessing the direction of time in Fig. 1.
Given a pair of image on the left, one runs into a problem
of determining whether the action is catching (a → b) or
throwing (b → a). One can finally clarify when the neighboring frames are given together that it is throwing (b’ → a).
In the past few years, various self-supervision signals using
video frames have shown promising results that are better
than random initialization in action recognition tasks. How-

Recent progress in computer vision stems from a huge
amount of labeled images as well as deep convolutional
neural networks. Typically, a network trained with ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015) consisting of one million
images and label pairs learns the general features of the image and has been used to initialize the network for various
kinds of downstream tasks. In fact, there are much more than
one million images in the web, however, building large-scale
annotated datasets is extremely expensive and impractical.
Therefore, many researches have been attempted to minimize human supervision in computer vision. For example,
(Oquab et al. 2015) and (Kim et al. 2017) proposed to use
weak image tag information for object localization without
using bounding boxes or pixel-level masks. In the same vein,
unsupervised representation learning, which learns generalpurpose semantic features without human annotation, has
been regarded as a fundamental problem for years (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). Among them, a prominent paradigm is the so-called self-supervised representation
learning that defines an annotation-free pretext task from
the raw data in order to provide a free supervision signal
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8545

