The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

InfoVAE: Balancing Learning and
Inference in Variational Autoencoders
Shengjia Zhao, Jiaming Song, Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
sjzhao,tsong,ermon@stanford.edu

Abstract

limited capacity), the ELBO objective tends to sacrifice correct inference to better fit (or potentially overfit) the training
data.

A key advance in learning generative models is the use of
amortized inference distributions that are jointly trained with
the models. We find that existing training objectives for variational autoencoders can lead to inaccurate amortized inference distributions and, in some cases, improving the objective
provably degrades the inference quality. In addition, it has
been observed that variational autoencoders tend to ignore the
latent variables when combined with a decoding distribution
that is too flexible. We again identify the cause in existing
training criteria and propose a new class of objectives (InfoVAE) that mitigate these problems. We show that our model
can significantly improve the quality of the variational posterior and can make effective use of the latent features regardless of the flexibility of the decoding distribution. Through
extensive qualitative and quantitative analyses, we demonstrate that our models outperform competing approaches on
multiple performance metrics.

Another problem that has been observed is that when the
conditional distribution is sufficiently expressive, the latent
variables are often ignored (Chen et al. 2016). That is, the
model only uses a single conditional distribution component
to model the data, effectively ignoring the latent variables
and fails to take advantage of the mixture modeling capability of the VAE. In addition, one goal of unsupervised learning is to learn meaningful latent representations, but this obviously fails if the latent variables are ignored. Some solutions have been proposed in (Chen et al. 2016) by limiting the capacity of the conditional distribution, but this requires manual and problem-specific design of the features
we would like to extract.
In this paper we propose a novel solution by framing both
problems as explicit modeling choices: we introduce new
training objectives where it is possible to weight the preference between correct inference and fitting the data distribution, and specify a preference on how much the model
should rely on the latent variables. This choice is only implicitly made in the traditional ELBO objective. We make
this choice explicit and generalize the ELBO objective by
adding additional terms that allow users to select their preferences. Despite of the addition of seemingly intractable
terms, we find an equivalent form that can still be efficiently
optimized.

Introduction
Generative models have shown great promise in modeling
complex distributions such as natural images and text (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015; Zhu et al. 2017; Yang et al.
2017; Li, Song, and Ermon 2017). These are directed graphical models which represent the joint distribution between
the data and a set of hidden variables (features) capturing latent factors of variation. The joint is factored as the product
of a prior over the latent variables and a conditional distribution of the visible variables given the latent ones. Usually a
simple prior distribution is provided for the latent variables,
while the distribution of the input conditioned on latent variables is complex and modeled with a deep network.
However, variational autoencoders have several problems.
First, the approximate inference distribution is often significantly different from the true posterior. Previous methods
have resorted to using more flexible variational families to
better approximate the true posterior distribution (Kingma,
Salimans, and Welling 2016). However we find that the
problem is rooted in the ELBO training objective itself. In
fact, we show that the ELBO objective favors fitting the
data distribution over performing correct amortized inference. When the two goals are conflicting (e.g., because of

Our new family also generalizes known models including
the β-VAE (Higgins et al. 2017) and Adversarial Autoencoders (Makhzani et al. 2015). In addition to deriving these
models as special cases, we provide generic principles for
hyper-parameter selection that work well in all the experimental settings we considered. Finally we perform extensive
experiments to evaluate our newly introduced model family,
and compare with existing models on multiple metrics of
performance such as log-likelihood, sampling quality, and
semi-supervised performance. An instantiation of our general framework called MMD-VAE achieves better or on-par
performance on all metrics we considered. We further observe that our model can lead to better amortized inference,
and utilize the latent variables even in the presence of a very
flexible decoder.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5885

