The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Blameworthiness in Strategic Games
Pavel Naumov

Jia Tao

Department of Mathematical Sciences
Claremont McKenna College
Claremont, California 91711
pgn2@cornell.edu

Department of Computer Science
Lafayette College
Easton, Pennsylvania 18042
taoj@lafayette.edu

Abstract

that we call blameworthiness: a coalition is blamable for an
outcome ϕ if ϕ is true, but the coalition had a strategy to
prevent ϕ. In our example, Lopez had a strategy to prevent
the death by keeping the gun in a safe place.

There are multiple notions of coalitional responsibility. The
focus of this paper is on the blameworthiness defined through
the principle of alternative possibilities: a coalition is blamable for a statement if the statement is true, but the coalition had a strategy to prevent it. The main technical result is
a sound and complete bimodal logical system that describes
properties of blameworthiness in one-shot games.

Principle of Alternative Possibilities Throughout centuries, blameworthiness, especially in the context of free will
and moral responsibility, has been at the focus of philosophical discussions (Singer and Eddon 2013). Modern works on
this topic include (Fields 1994; Fischer and Ravizza 2000;
Nichols and Knobe 2007; Mason 2015; Widerker 2017).
Frankfurt (1969) acknowledges that a dominant role in these
discussions has been played by what he calls a principle of
alternate possibilities: “a person is morally responsible for
what he has done only if he could have done otherwise”.
As with many general principles, this one has many limitations that Frankfurt discusses; for example, when a person
is coerced into doing something. Following the established
tradition (Widerker 2017), we refer to this principle as the
principle of alternative possibilities. Cushman (2015) talks
about counterfactual possibility: “a person could have prevented their harmful conduct, even though they did not.”
Halpern and Pearl proposed several versions of a formal definition of causality as a relation between sets of
variables (Halpern 2016). This definition uses the counterfactual requirement which formalizes the principle of alternative possibilities. Halpern and Kleiman-Weiner (2018)
used a similar setting to define degrees of blameworthiness. Batusov and Soutchanski (2018) gave a counterfactualbased definition of causality in situation calculus. (Alechina,
Halpern, and Logan 2017) applied Halpern and Pearl definition of causality to team plans.

Introduction
It was a little after 9am on Friday, July 20th 2018, when a
four-year-old boy accidentally shot his two-year old cousin
in the town of Muscoy in Southern California. The victim was taken to a hospital, where she died an hour
later (Oreskes 2018). The police arrested Cesar Lopez, victim’s grandfather, as a felon in possession of a firearm and
for child endangerment (Juarez and Miracle 2018).
The first charge against Lopez, a previously convicted
felon, is based on California Penal Code §29800 (a) (1) that
prohibits firearm access to “any person who has been convicted of, or has an outstanding warrant for, a felony under the laws of the United States, the State of California, or
any other state, government, or country...”. We assume that
Lopez knew that California state law bans him from owning
a gun, but his actions guaranteed that he broke the law.
The second charge is different because Lopez clearly
never intended for his granddaughter to be killed. He never
took any actions that would force her death. Nevertheless,
he is blamed for not taking an action (locking the gun) to
prevent the tragedy. Blameworthiness is tightly connected to
the legal liability for negligence (Goudkamp 2004).
We are interested in logical systems for reasoning about
different forms of responsibility. Xu (1998) introduced a
complete axiomatization of a modal logical system for reasoning about responsibility defined as taking actions that
guarantee a certain outcome. In our example, by possessing
a gun Lopez guaranteed that he was responsible for breaking California law. Broersen, Herzig, and Troquard (2009)
extended Xu’s work from individual responsibility to group
responsibility. In this paper we propose a complete logical
system for reasoning about another form of responsibility

Coalitional Power in Strategic Games Pauly (2001;
2002) introduced logics of coalitional power that can be
used to describe group abilities to achieve a certain result. His approach has been widely studied in the literature (Goranko 2001; van der Hoek and Wooldridge 2005;
Borgo 2007; Sauro et al. 2006; Ågotnes et al. 2010; Ågotnes,
van der Hoek, and Wooldridge 2009; Belardinelli 2014;
Goranko, Jamroga, and Turrini 2013; Alechina et al. 2011;
Galimullin and Alechina 2017; Goranko and Enqvist 2018).
In this paper we use Marc Pauly’s framework to define
blameworthiness of coalitions of players in strategic (oneshot) games. We say that a coalition C could be blamed for

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3011

