The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Cross-Relation Cross-Bag Attention for Distantly-Supervised Relation Extraction
Yujin Yuan,1 Liyuan Liu,2 Siliang Tang,1∗ Zhongfei Zhang,1 Yueting Zhuang,1
Shiliang Pu,3 Fei Wu,1 Xiang Ren4
1

Zhejiang University 2 University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign 3 Hikvision Research Institute
4
University of Southern California
{yujin, siliang, zhongfei, yzhuang, wufei}@zju.edu.cn, llychinalz@gmail.com,
pushiliang@hikvision.com, xiangren@usc.edu
KB Fact

Abstract

Sentence Bag
with Distant
Supervision

Distant supervision leverages knowledge bases to automatically label instances, thus allowing us to train relation extractor without human annotations. However, the generated
training data typically contain massive noise, and may result
in poor performances with the vanilla supervised learning.
In this paper, we propose to conduct multi-instance learning with a novel Cross-relation Cross-bag Selective Attention (C2 SA), which leads to noise-robust training for distant supervised relation extractor. Specifically, we employ
the sentence-level selective attention to reduce the effect of
noisy or mismatched sentences, while the correlation among
relations were captured to improve the quality of attention
weights. Moreover, instead of treating all entity-pairs equally,
we try to pay more attention to entity-pairs with a higher quality. Similarly, we adopt the selective attention mechanism to
achieve this goal. Experiments with two types of relation extractor demonstrate the superiority of the proposed approach
over the state-of-the-art, while further ablation studies verify
our intuitions and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed two techniques.

<Jimi Hendrix, died in, London>
Jimi Hendrix died in 1970 in
S1
London at 27.
George Frideric Handel and Jimi
Hendrix lived at adjacent addresses
S2
in London
...
...

Table 1: Distant Supervision and Sentence Bag.
has been employed to reduce the noise and bring such robustness. As shown in Table 1, it treats sentence bag as the
basic training instance, instead of individual sentence. Each
bag would contain a group of sentences labeled by the same
KB fact. By selecting from such bags, it allows a model
to focus more on sentences of a higher quality and reduces
the effect of noisy ones. Specifically, some methods (Riedel,
Yao, and McCallum 2010; Hoffmann et al. 2011; Surdeanu
et al. 2012) try to pick only one sentence from one bag,
while more improvements (Lin et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2017b)
have been observed by replacing the hard selection with
Sentence-level Selective attention (ATT). ATT tries to assign
attention weights to sentences and combines all sentences in
the bag for the training.
However, ATT generates the attention weight for each relation type independently and overlooked their correlation.
For example, in Table 1, by identifying S2 as a high-quality
sentence for live in, we are also able to recognize it as
a low-quality sentence for die in. Based on this intuition,
we propose a novel attention mechanism, Cross-relation Attention, which generates the attention weight after examining their relatednesses to all relation types.
Moreover, we go beyond ATT and construct training instances at a higher level. We relax the constraint that one
training instance only contains one entity pair. Specifically,
we propose the Cross-bag Attention to combine different
sentence bags, refer the combined structure as superbag, and
set superbag as the training instance instead of sentence bag.
This allows us to focus more on sentence bags of a higher
quality, and reduce the noise brought by KB Facts which are
outdated or unexpressed in the corpus.
Combining these two mechanisms, we refer our method
as Cross-relation Cross-bag Selective Attention (C2 SA).
Applying such attention to two types of relation extractor,

Introduction
Aiming to detect and classify the relation between an entity pair in the given sentences, Relation Extraction (RE)
plays a vital role in natural language understanding (Etzioni
et al. 2004; Mintz et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2017a). The typical methods follow the supervised learning paradigm and
require extensive human annotations, which are costly and
time-consuming. To alleviate such reliance, attempts have
been made to build relation extractor with distant supervision, i.e., automatically generating training data by knowledge base (KB). For example, with the KB fact <Jimi Hendrix, died in, London> in Table 1, distant supervision
would annotate all sentences containing Jimi Hendrix and
London as the relation type died in.
Despite its efficiency in cost and time, distant supervision is context-agnostic thus containing massive noise for
sentence-level RE. Accordingly, it may lead to an unsatisfying performance before noise-robust training paradigms are
developed (Lin et al. 2016). Multi-instance learning (MIL)
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

419

