The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bayesian Functional Optimisation with Shape Prior
Pratibha Vellanki,1 Santu Rana,1 Sunil Gupta,1 David Rubin de Celis Leal,2
Alessandra Sutti,2 Murray Height,2 Svetha Venkatesh1
1

Centre for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics
Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
pratibha.vellanki, santu.rana, sunil.gupta, svetha.venkatesh@deakin.edu.au
2
Institute for Frontier Materials, GTP Research, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
d.rubindecelisleal, alessandra.sutti, murray.height@deakin.edu.au
Abstract

allow incorporating prior information or for adjustment of
function complexity mid-optimisation. When Bayesian optimisation is used for optimisation of physical experiments
loose prior knowledge may be available. But, only recently,
the value of using such information in Baysian optimisation
is being looked at (Li et al. 2018).
Our solution is primarily based on representing the control function on Bernstein polynomial basis (Bernstein
1912) and then optimising in the coefficient space. Bernstein polynomials basis follow the Stone-Weierstrass approximation theorem i.e. any function on a bounded subspace when represented on this basis system can be pointwise approximated to an arbitrary precision. Whilst the theorem is true for any polynomial basis system, Bernstein basis offers many unique properties, some of which are critical
for achieving our goals. They are presented in more detail
in proposed framework. Once the control functions are represented on a Bernstein basis with a suitable order, we can
directly use the coefficient vector as the input subspace for
the global optimisation of a function, which maps the coefficient vector to the outcome of the system.
Bernstein polynomials have been a popular choice in the
field of aerospace for the optimisation of aerofoil geometry. For example, it has been used in (Kulfan and Bussoletti 2006) to convert a shape optimisation problem into a
function optimisation problem. Often Computational Fluid
Dynamic (CFD) tools are used to optimise such geometries
(Samareh 2001). However, these methods are not designed
to be sample-efficient, and hence, not feasible for expensive optimisation tasks. The proposed Bayesian functional
optimisation algorithm addresses the optimisation of expensive experimental processes, two of which we present in this
paper (physical recirculation systems, and optimisation of
learning rate schedule for a large neural network model being trained on a large dataset).
Mathematically, if g(t) is the control function that drives
the system output (y) by a functional h : g(t) → y where
g ∈ B(R), the space of all bounded real-valued functions,
then the original functional optimisation problem can be
written as:

Real world experiments are expensive, and thus it is important
to reach a target in a minimum number of experiments. Experimental processes often involve control variables that change
over time. Such problems can be formulated as functional
optimisation problem. We develop a novel Bayesian optimisation framework for such functional optimisation of expensive black-box processes. We represent the control function
using Bernstein polynomial basis and optimise in the coefficient space. We derive the theory and practice required to
dynamically adjust the order of the polynomial degree, and
show how prior information about shape can be integrated.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for short
polymer fibre design and optimising learning rate schedules
for deep networks.

Introduction
Functional optimisation arises when a time-varying system
requires optimal control variable values to change with time.
As an example consider optimising the learning rate schedule while training a neural network. The learning rate schedule can be expressed as a function of time and often there
is knowledge about the shape of this function; traditionally,
it is a decreasing function. Consider also recirculation processes, common in industries like drug production or plastic
recycling. Recirculation involves the reintroduction of partially formed output product into the input of the system
until target output is reached. Recirculation might require
adjusting of input parameters as a function of time to keep
the system optimal throughout. Often, industrial knowledge
exists about the trend of this adjustment.
We propose a Bayesian functional optimisation algorithm
for expensive processes that offers two main capabilities:
a) allows detection of underspecification of complexity of
the functional search space and adjusting for it in a dynamic
fashion, and b) admits loose prior information on the shape
of the function.
The closest work is that of (Vien, Zimmermann, and Toussaint 2018), where functions are represented in a functional
RKHS, captured through functional kernels. Based on that a
Gaussian process is constructed and subsequently, Bayesian
optimisation is performed. However, their method does not

g ∗ (t) = argmaxg(t)∈B(R) h(g(t))
When we convertPg(t) onto the nth order Bernstein polynon
n
mial as g(t) =
v=0 αv bv,n (t), where α = {αv }v=1 are

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1617

