The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Direct Training for Spiking Neural Networks:
Faster, Larger, Better
Yujie Wu,1 Lei Deng,2 Guoqi Li,1 Jun Zhu,3† Yuan Xie,2 Luping Shi1†
1

Center for Brain-Inspired Computing Research, Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for AI, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University
†
Corresponding: lpshi@tsinghua.edu.cn; dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

of effective learning algorithms and efficient programming
frameworks, which greatly limit the network scale and application spectrum (Tavanaei et al. 2018).
In terms of learning algorithms, three challenges exist for
training large-scale SNNs. First, the complex neural dynamics in both spatial and temporal domains make BP obscure.
Specifically, the neural activities not only propagate layer by
layer in spatial domain, but also affect the states along the
temporal direction, which is more complicated than typical
ANNs. Second, the event-driven spiking activity is discrete
and non-differentiable, which impedes the BP implementation based on gradient descent. Third, SNNs are more sensitive to parameter configuration because of binary spike representation. Especially in the training phase, we should simultaneously ensure timely response for presynaptic stimulus and avoid too many spikes that will probably degrade the
neuronal selectivity. Although previous work has proposed
many techniques to adjust firing rate, such as model-based
normalization (Diehl et al. 2015) and spike-based normalization (Sengupta et al. 2018), all of them are specialized for
ANNs-to-SNNs conversion learning, not for the direct training of SNNs as considered in this paper.
In terms of programming frameworks, we lack suitable
platforms to support the training of deep SNNs. Although
there exist several platforms serving for simulating biological features of SNNs with varied abstraction levels (Brette
et al. 2007; Carnevale and Hines 2006; Hazan et al. 2018),
little work is designed for training deep SNNs. Researchers
have to build application-oriented models from scratch and
the training speed is usually slow. On the other hand, emerging ANN-oriented frameworks can provide much better efficiency, especially for large models, hence a natural idea is
to map the SNN training onto these frameworks. However,
these frameworks are designed for aforementioned ANN algorithms so that they cannot be directly applied to SNNs
because of the neural dynamic of spiking neurons.
In this paper, we propose a full-stack solution towards
faster, larger, and better SNNs from both algorithm and programming aspects. We draw inspirations from the recent
work (Wu et al. 2018), which proposes the spatio-temporal
back propagation (STBP) method for the direct training of
SNNs, and significantly extend it to much deeper structure,
larger dataset, and better performance. We first propose the
NeuNorm method to balance neural selectivity and increase

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) that enables energy efficient implementation on emerging neuromorphic hardware
are gaining more attention. Yet now, SNNs have not shown
competitive performance compared with artificial neural networks (ANNs), due to the lack of effective learning algorithms and efficient programming frameworks. We address
this issue from two aspects: (1) We propose a neuron normalization technique to adjust the neural selectivity and develop a direct learning algorithm for deep SNNs. (2) Via
narrowing the rate coding window and converting the leaky
integrate-and-fire (LIF) model into an explicitly iterative version, we present a Pytorch-based implementation method towards the training of large-scale SNNs. In this way, we are
able to train deep SNNs with tens of times speedup. As a
result, we achieve significantly better accuracy than the reported works on neuromorphic datasets (N-MNIST and DVSCIFAR10), and comparable accuracy as existing ANNs and
pre-trained SNNs on non-spiking datasets (CIFAR10). To our
best knowledge, this is the first work that demonstrates direct
training of deep SNNs with high performance on CIFAR10,
and the efficient implementation provides a new way to explore the potential of SNNs.

Introduction
Spiking neural networks, a sub-category of brain-inspired
computing models, use spatio-temporal dynamics to mimic
neural behaviors and binary spike signals to communicate between units. Benefit from the event-driven processing paradigm (computation occurs only when the unit receives spike event), SNNs can be efficiently implemented on
specialized neuromorphic hardware for power-efficient processing, such as SpiNNaker (Khan et al. 2008), TrueNorth
(Merolla et al. 2014), and Loihi (Davies et al. 2018).
As well known, the powerful error backpropagation (BP)
algorithm and larger and larger model size enabled by
ANN-oriented programming frameworks (e.g. Tensorflow,
Pytorch) has boosted the wide applications of ANNs in
recent years. However, the rich spatio-temporal dynamics
and event-driven paradigm make SNNs much different from
conventional ANNs. Till now SNNs have not yet demonstrated comparable performance to ANNs due to the lack
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1311

