The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Geometry-Aware Face Completion and Editing
Linsen Song, Jie Cao, Lingxiao Song, Yibo Hu, Ran He∗
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
songlinsen2018@ia.ac.cn, {jie.cao,yibo.hu}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {lingxiao.song,rhe}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Face completion is a challenging generation task because it
requires generating visually pleasing new pixels that are semantically consistent with the unmasked face region. This
paper proposes a geometry-aware Face Completion and Editing NETwork (FCENet) by systematically studying facial geometry from the unmasked region. Firstly, a facial geometry estimator is learned to estimate facial landmark heatmaps
and parsing maps from the unmasked face image. Then, an
encoder-decoder structure generator serves to complete a face
image and disentangle its mask areas conditioned on both
the masked face image and the estimated facial geometry images. Besides, since low-rank property exists in manually labeled masks, a low-rank regularization term is imposed on
the disentangled masks, enforcing our completion network to
manage occlusion area with various shape and size. Furthermore, our network can generate diverse results from the same
masked input by modifying estimated facial geometry, which
provides a flexible mean to edit the completed face appearance. Extensive experimental results qualitatively and quantitatively demonstrate that our network is able to generate visually pleasing face completion results and edit face attributes
as well.

Figure 1: Face completion and attributes editing results. The
first and third row show the visual quality results of face
completion under the guidance of inferred facial geometry. In the second row, the girl’s eyes become smaller after changing its facial geometry. In the fourth row, the boy’s
mouth becomes much bigger by replacing the mouth patch
in the facial geometry images with a bigger mouth patch.

Introduction
Face completion, also known as face inpainting, aims to
complete a face image with a masked region or missing content. As a common face image editing technique, it can also
be used to edit face attributes. The generated face image can
either be as accurate as the original face image, or content
coherent to the context so that the completed image looks
visually realistic. Most traditional methods (Barnes et al.
2009; Huang et al. 2014; Darabi et al. 2012) rely on lowlevel cues to search for patches to synthesize missing content. These image completion algorithms are skilled in filling backgrounds which contain similar textures but not excel
at specific image object like face since prior domain knowledge isn’t well incorporated.
Recently, CNN based image completion methods with adversarial training strategy have already significantly boosted
the image completion performance (Pathak et al. 2016;

Yeh et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017). These methods set a masked
image as the network input to learn context features, then
restore the missing content from the learned features. Some
challenges still exist in these methods when they are applied
to real-world face completion problems. First of all, different from general objects, human faces have distinct geometry distribution, and hence face geometry prior is more likely
to facilitate face completion (Yeh et al. 2017). Few existing
methods utilize the facial prior knowledge and well incorporate it into an end-to-end network. Second, these algorithms
are incapable of modifying the face attributes of the filled
region (Li et al. 2017), e.g., editing the eye shape or mouth
size in figure 1.
To address these two problems, this paper studies
a geometry-aware face completion and editing network
(FCENet) by exploring facial geometry priors including
facial landmark heatmaps and parsing maps. Landmark
heatmap is an image composed of 68 points labeled by dif-

∗

Ran He is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2506

