The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exploiting the Ground-Truth: An Adversarial Imitation
Based Knowledge Distillation Approach for Event Detection
Jian Liu,1,2 Yubo Chen,1 Kang Liu1,2
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jian.liu, yubo.chen, kliu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

expression might refer to entirely different events. To illustrate, consider the following two sentences (adapted from
the corpus of ACE 20051 ):
S1: The European Unit is set to release 20 million euros to
Iraq.
S2: The government reports that Anwar ’s earliest release
date is April 14.
It is note that each of the sentences contains a token release, however, according to the ACE Annotation Guidelines2 , release expresses completely different events in the
two sentences — in S1, release evokes a Transfer-Money
event; while in S2, release expresses a Release-Parole event.
According to (Liu et al. 2018), 57% of the event triggers
are ambiguous and trigger different events (in the ACE 2005
corpus). This ambiguity might confuse many event detection
systems and lead to a considerable amount of errors.
Previous studies have shown that the chunk knowledge
corresponding to the sentences can provide evidence for
event type disambiguation (Hong et al. 2011; Li, Ji, and
Huang 2013; Feng et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2017). Taking the
above two examples again, if an event detector is aware that
in S1: 1) The European Unit is an ORGANIZATION entity,
and 2) 20 million designates a NUMBER value, then the
detector can guess that S1 might express a financial event
which is related to an organization. These clues help to recognize the Transfer-money event without ambiguity. As for
S2, if an event detector knows that: 1) Anwar means a PERSON entity, and 2) April 14 indicates a DATE value, then
the detector can correctly identify the Release-Parole event
by considering the prior knowledge that — if a sentence
matches the pattern “[PERSON] release [DATE]”, then the
token release is highly probable to express a Release-Parole
event in the sentence.
Unfortunately, how to acquire this chunk knowledge from
the raw-sentences for ED remains a challenge, especially
in the real test scenario where the ground-truth annotations
are missing. Current works usually first use external NLP
toolkits (e.g., a named entity recognizer) to predict chunk
labels and then transform the predicted labels into vectorized knowledge representations. These methods operate in

The ambiguity in language expressions poses a great challenge for event detection. To disambiguate event types, current approaches rely on external NLP toolkits to build knowledge representations. Unfortunately, these approaches work
in a pipeline paradigm and suffer from error propagation
problem. In this paper, we propose an adversarial imitation based knowledge distillation approach, for the first time,
to tackle the challenge of acquiring knowledge from rawsentences for event detection. In our approach, a teacher module is first devised to learn the knowledge representations
from the ground-truth annotations. Then, we set up a student module that only takes the raw-sentences as the input.
The student module is taught to imitate the behavior of the
teacher under the guidance of an adversarial discriminator.
By this way, the process of knowledge distillation from rawsentence has been implicitly integrated into the feature encoding stage of the student module. To the end, the enhanced
student is used for event detection, which processes raw texts
and requires no extra toolkits, naturally eliminating the error
propagation problem faced by pipeline approaches. We conduct extensive experiments on the ACE 2005 datasets, and the
experimental results justify the effectiveness of our approach.

Introduction
With the rapid development in the fields of Text Mining
(TM) and Natural Language Processing (NLP), the study on
Event Detection (ED) has gained great popularity (Aggarwal and Zhai 2012; Hirschberg and Manning 2015). Concretely, ED is a specialized Information Extraction (IE) technology which aims to identify event instances of specified types in unstructured texts, and it has shown to be
beneficial for a big variety of real-world applications including Information Retrieval (IR) (Allan 2002; Campos
et al. 2014), Question Answering (QA) (Saurı́ et al. 2005;
Kuchmann-Beauger, Aufaure, and Thollot 2015), Automatic
Text Summarization (Ge et al. 2016; Marujo et al. 2017) and
others.
Amongst, a major challenge faced by ED is the ambiguity in natural language expressions (Poon and Vanderwende
2010; Ritter et al. 2012; Li, Ji, and Huang 2013). On the
one hand, the same event can be expressed in a wide variation; on the other hand, depending on the context, the same

1

https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2006T06
https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/sites/www.ldc.upenn.edu/
files/english-events-guidelines-v5.4.3.pdf
2

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6754

