The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CompareLDA: A Topic Model for Document Comparison
Maksim Tkachenko, Hady W. Lauw
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
maksim.tkatchenko@gmail.com, hadywlauw@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

towards capturing topics that could reflect the word cooccurrences in the corpus well. In doing so, its topics tend
to capture general semantics. For instance, a topic model
based on country reports may well discover topics aligned
to geographical or linguistic commonalities, which however
may or may not bear direct relevance to the question at hand
(e.g., healthcare outcomes). Topics based on grant proposals may describe various scientific foci, though such topics
may group competing proposals but may not be indicative of
their likelihood of acceptance. In turn, product reviews may
yield topics focused on brands or features, but such topics
may coalesce opposing sentiment polarities as words with
positive (e.g., “good”) or negative (e.g., “bad”) connotations
tend to co-occur with similar words, e.g., “battery life”.
Problem We postulate that introducing supervision that
signals how one entity (document) compares to another into
topic modeling would better align the topics discovered from
a corpus to the comparison dimension of interest. Suppose
that in addition to a corpus of documents, we are also given
some pairwise comparisons among the documents. Each
pairwise comparison indicates which of two documents is
considered “higher” or “better” according to some desired
dimension (e.g., a country healthier than another, a pair of
accepted and rejected proposals, a product preferred to another). Constraining the topic model to “comply” with the
pairwise comparison observations may yield topics that differentiate entities along the dimension of interest (e.g., why
one product is preferred), rather than simply discovering
commonality in words (e.g., products with similar features).
Such topic modeling supervised with pairwise comparisons between documents as we are proposing is indeed
novel. Previous work on supervised topic modeling would
expect a different supervision in the form of pointwise response variables, e.g., a numerical rating. A case in point
is sLDA (Mcauliffe and Blei 2008). However, there are inherent advantages to modeling pairwise comparisons as opposed to pointwise ratings. The latter may not even be available in some scenarios. In the implicit feedback settings,
comparisons are naturally relative, when it may be known
that one entity is better, but not necessarily clear by how
much in absolute terms. For instance, when a consumer
browses but skips a product, and purchases another, the latter is probably preferred to the former. Even when pointwise
ratings are available, fitting the absolute ratings may not al-

A number of real-world applications require comparison of
entities based on their textual representations. In this work,
we develop a topic model supervised by pairwise comparisons of documents. Such a model seeks to yield topics that
help to differentiate entities along some dimension of interest, which may vary from one application to another. While
previous supervised topic models consider document labels in
an independent and pointwise manner, our proposed Comparative Latent Dirichlet Allocation (CompareLDA) learns predictive topic distributions that comply with the pairwise comparison observations. To fit the model, we derive a maximum
likelihood estimation method via augmented variational approximation algorithm. Evaluation on several public datasets
underscores the strengths of CompareLDA in modelling document comparisons.

Introduction
Due to the abundance of text data, there is a need for exploratory analysis of a text corpus. Topic model is a class
of probabilistic models that “reduce” an input corpus into a
manageable number of “topics”, where each topic congeals
words that tend to co-occur with one another in documents,
thus signifying some hidden semantics in the corpus. By
identifying the topics that essentialize the corpus, and discerning which ones predominate in a specific document, a
topic model is a crucial tool for sensemaking.
Increasingly, there are real-world scenarios where the purpose of analyzing a corpus is to compare entities based on
their textual representations (documents). For example, analysts may seek to explore why one country could achieve a
better healthcare (alternatively economic, educational, etc.)
outcome than another based on certain documents such as
country reports. Funding agencies or scientists may seek
a better understanding of what may get a grant proposal
funded over another based on proposal contents. Among the
products browsed by consumers, some are purchased while
others are not. Among the purchases, some satisfy customers
more than others. Thus, delving into product descriptions or
reviews could reveal insights on consumer preferences.
An unsupervised topic model, such as Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003), is oriented
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7112

