The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dimension-Free Error
Bounds from Random Projections
Ata Kabán
School of Computer Science
The University of Birmingham
Edgbaston, B15 2TT
Birmingham, UK
A.Kaban@cs.bham.ac.uk
Abstract

example illustrating that analysis in small and large sample regimes may bring different insights is found in (Kontorovich and Weiss 2014).
We approach this problem from first principles. Although
it is common practice, as well as technically convenient,
to prime the analysis with a margin or some regularisation scheme in order to obtain dimension-free guarantees –
where these geometric structures come from some form of
prior knowledge, or experience – instead here we are interested in a generic principle that brings these in automatically
when necessary.
To this end, we introduce a notion of compressibility that
quantifies the distortion suffered by the loss when the inputs
are subjected to a universal compression – that is a random
projection. Random projection is often used for dimensionality reduction in algorithms, however in this context, the
role of this compression will be purely analytic. In this role,
it is somewhat analogous to the one-dimensional random
projection of function outputs in Rademacher and Gaussian
complexities, but here instead a random matrix acts on the
inputs to the functions.
Based on these ideas we derive new generalisation
bounds, which will depend on the complexity of an auxiliary
low-dimensional hypothesis class instead the original one,
plus a new complexity term that we call the data-complexity
of the original function class. The latter captures and identifies benign geometric structures for the problem (of which
‘margin’ is a special case). We give the generic formalism
first, which we then instantiate in concrete models.

Learning from high dimensional data is challenging in general – however, often the data is not truly high dimensional
in the sense that it may have some hidden low complexity geometry. We give new, user-friendly PAC-bounds that
are able to take advantage of such benign geometry to reduce dimensional-dependence of error-guarantees in settings
where such dependence is known to be essential in general.
This is achieved by employing random projection as an analytic tool, and exploiting its structure-preserving compression ability. We introduce an auxiliary function class that operates on reduced dimensional inputs, and a new complexity
term, as the distortion of the loss under random projections.
The latter is a hypothesis-dependent data-complexity, whose
analytic estimates turn out to recover various regularisation
schemes in parametric models, and a notion of intrinsic dimension, as quantified by the Gaussian width of the input
support in the case of the nearest neighbour rule. If there is benign geometry present, then the bounds become tighter, otherwise they recover the original dimension-dependent bounds.

Introduction
We consider learning settings where the generalisation error has a known essential dependence on the dimension of
the input representation – examples include learning on unbounded input domains, learning with scale-insensitive loss
functions, metric learning, and non-parametric methods.
Much of the statistical analysis of learning concerns how
fast the empirical error converges to the true error as the
sample size increases, and how large the sample must be
to match the complexity of the model or hypothesis class
of choice. However, in practice, especially in the above settings, the answers to these questions are often not sufficiently informative – for one cannot have access to unlimited
sample sizes.
Instead, here we are mainly interested in the questions of
what error-guarantee can be given for the available sample
size in problems where the input dimension can be arbitrarily high, and what characteristics of the problem ensure
good generalisation despite the sample size is small? A nice

Framework
Notations and Problem Setup
Let Xd ⊆ Rd be an input domain, and Y the set of target values. In binary classification Y = {−1, 1} is the set
of class labels, in regression Y ⊆ R. Let Hd be a function class (hypothesis class) with elements h ∈ Hd of
the form h : Xd → Y. Let ` : Y × Y → [0, ¯
`] be a
bounded loss function. We are given a set of labelled examples TN = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xN , yN )} drawn i.i.d. from
some unknown distribution Dd over Xd × Y. The learning
problem is to use these to select a function from Hd with
smallest generalisation error E(x,y)∼Dd [`(h(x), y)].

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4049

