The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bootstrap Estimated Uncertainty of the
Environment Model for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Wenzhen Huang,1,2 Junge Zhang,1,2 Kaiqi Huang1,2,3
1

CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
{wenzhen.huang, jgzhang, kqhuang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

core idea is as follows. The method builds up multiple environment models with the identical network architectures and
randomly samples different experience replays to train these
models. Each learned model can be seen as a sample from
the environment model’s approximate posterior. Then the
agent randomly samples an environment model and utilizes
it to predict and plan in T steps. For the state-action pairs
with high uncertainty, the rewards or Q-values estimated by
different environment models would fluctuate more greatly.
As a result, they would be more likely to be predicted as
large values by some models, and the pairs would be more
likely to be visited. Thus, this bootstrap method can guide
the agent to explore the state-action pairs which are ‘unfamiliar’ for environment model and reduce the potential
model errors.
We apply this idea to TreeQN (Farquhar et al. 2017),
a model-based RL method which learn a value-prediction
model and utilizes the model to build a look-ahead tree to
plan. The transition, reward and value functions of TreeQN
form the environment model, thus we would quantify the uncertainty of these functions through the bootstrap method.
Considering that the model errors generally increase with
the planning depth, we establish multiple environment module sets to quantify the uncertainty in different depth. Furthermore, we construct the look-ahead trees through sampling modules from each set and using them to generate
the terms in different depth of the tree. Randomly generated trees are utilized to select the appropriate actions, calculate the target values and optimize the environment model
in the same way of TreeQN. As each module is trained by
the re-sampled transitions, the models assembled by them
can be considered as the bootstrap estimates of the environment model. Thus, the target Q-values estimated based on
these models reflect the uncertainties of Q-value estimation
at subsequent time-steps. The uncertainties on current and
subsequent time-steps can be connected when the Q-value
is updated using the target Q-values at subsequent states,
which can help our method to learn the uncertainty of Qestimator faster.
In addition, we introduce prior mechanism (Osband and
Van Roy 2017; Osband, Aslanides, and Cassirer 2018) by
adding a frozen random prior network, to our bootstrapped
model-based RL method. We add each module in total modules sets with a prior network which has the same architec-

Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) methods attempt
to learn a dynamics model to simulate the real environment
and utilize the model to make better decisions. However, the
learned environment simulator often has more or less model
error which would disturb making decision and reduce performance. We propose a bootstrapped model-based RL method
which bootstraps the modules in each depth of the planning
tree. This method can quantify the uncertainty of environment model on different state-action pairs and lead the agent
to explore the pairs with higher uncertainty to reduce the
potential model errors. Moreover, we sample target values
from their bootstrap distribution to connect the uncertainties at current and subsequent time-steps and introduce the
prior mechanism to improve the exploration efficiency. Experiment results demonstrate that our method efficiently decreases model error and outperforms TreeQN and other stateof-the-art methods on multiple Atari games.

Introduction
Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) methods learn a
model of the environment from its experience. Using the
internal model to simulate the environment, the agent can
plan and avoid making poor decisions. However, building
a perfect environment model without errors in complex domains is hard, and it would be harder when the transition
and reward functions of the environment are stochastic. The
model errors would mislead the agent and degrade its performances during the process of planning and deciding (Talvitie
2014). Some methods (Tamar et al. 2016; Silver et al. 2017;
Oh, Singh, and Lee 2017; Farquhar et al. 2017) attempt to
replace observation-prediction model with value-prediction
model to decrease prediction error. There are also several
methods trying to quantify the errors (Asadi, Misra, and
Littman 2018) or make robust decisions based on the imprecise model (Racanière et al. 2017).
Different from above model-based methods, we attempt
to actively find and reduce the potential model errors. We
proposed a bootstrapped model-based RL method which can
utilize bootstrap to quantify the uncertainty of predicted rewards and Q-values on the different state-action pairs and
lead the agent to explore the pairs with high uncertainty. The
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3870

