The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Transferable Curriculum for Weakly-Supervised Domain Adaptation
Yang Shu, Zhangjie Cao, Mingsheng Long,B Jianmin Wang
School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
KLiss, MOE; BNRist; Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
{shuyang5656,caozhangjie14}@gmail.com {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

behind data which can reduce the domain discrepancy (Donahue et al. 2014; Yosinski et al. 2014). In light of this, recent
deep domain adaptation approaches embed domain adaptation modules into deep architectures to match feature distributions across domains, yielding evident performance improvement (Tzeng et al. 2014; Long et al. 2015; Ganin and
Lempitsky 2015; Tzeng et al. 2015; Long et al. 2016; 2017;
Tzeng et al. 2017).
Existing domain adaptation works assume that the source
domains are clean datasets with accurate annotations, free
of noises. However, this is an ideal scenario. In real domain
adaptation problems, we usually have no access to clean and
high-quality datasets, which are time consuming and expensive to collect. It is even rarer that such high-quality datasets
can be relevant enough to serve as the source domain from
which we can leverage useful knowledge to our target task
of interest. In contract, we have to collect data from crowdsourcing platform or crawl from Internet or social media.
Such datasets are large-scale and to which we have easier
access, but are inevitably corrupted with noises.

Domain adaptation improves a target task by knowledge
transfer from a source domain with rich annotations. It is
not uncommon that “source-domain engineering” becomes a
cumbersome process in domain adaptation: the high-quality
source domains highly related to the target domain are hardly
available. Thus, weakly-supervised domain adaptation has
been introduced to address this difficulty, where we can tolerate the source domain with noises in labels, features, or both.
As such, for a particular target task, we simply collect the
source domain with coarse labeling or corrupted data. In this
paper, we try to address two entangled challenges of weaklysupervised domain adaptation: sample noises of the source
domain and distribution shift across domains. To disentangle
these challenges, a Transferable Curriculum Learning (TCL)
approach is proposed to train the deep networks, guided by
a transferable curriculum informing which of the source examples are noiseless and transferable. The approach enhances
positive transfer from clean source examples to the target and
mitigates negative transfer of noisy source examples. A thorough evaluation shows that our approach significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art on weakly-supervised domain adaptation tasks.

Standard DA Method

Proposed DA Method

Introduction
Modern deep networks have pushed forward the boundary of
various machine perception tasks, at the expenses of largescale annotated training samples. The high cost of human
labeling effectively limits these approaches to many target
tasks with insufficient annotations. Thus, there is strong need
to leverage or reuse rich labeled data from a different but related source domain. Such a learning paradigm to establish
a discriminative model that reduces the underlying distribution shift between domains is known as domain adaptation
(Pan and Yang 2010).
Domain adaptation is an important research problem that
finds a wide range of application in machine learning (Pan
et al. 2011; Duan, Tsang, and Xu 2012; Zhang et al. 2013;
Wang and Schneider 2014), computer vision (Saenko et al.
2010; Gong et al. 2012; Hoffman et al. 2014) and natural
language processing (Collobert et al. 2011). A rich literature
has revealed that deep networks learn distributed representations that disentangle the explanatory factors of variations

clean source

clean target

classifier

feature noise

label noise

Figure 1: The technical challenge of weakly-supervised domain adaptation. The main idea of the proposed approach is
to undo the negative effect of both label and feature noises in
the process of distribution matching for domain adaptation.
Thus, it is meaningful to establish methods that can adapt
both the representation and classification models from noisy
source datasets to our target datasets. This more practical
scenario (Figure 1) is known as weakly-supervised domain
adaptation, which is under-explored compared to standard
domain adaptation. In practice, noises mainly present in the
two forms of label noise and feature noise. Label noise refers

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4951

