The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Hierarchical Graph Convolution for
Election Prediction from Geospatial Census Data
Mike Li,1 Elija Perrier,2 Chang Xu3
1

Centre for Complex Systems, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
Centre for Quantum Software and Information, The University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
3
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
mili7522@uni.sydney.edu.au, elija.t.perrier@student.uts.edu.au, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
2

Abstract

the intrinsic graphs constructible from GIS data render traditional neural-network and convolutional neural network
(CNN) approaches problematic. Recent developments in
spectral and spatial filtering graph CNN (GCNN) methodologies (Such et al. 2017) together with novel adaptive graph
representation learning, provide a potential means of overcoming these limitations by opening up heterogeneous datastructures to CNN-driven analysis.
In this paper, we build upon state-of-the art GCNN approaches to develop a hierarchical spatial-filtering GCNN
(Hierarchical GCNN) model (equipped with an adaptive
distance learning metric) that significantly enhances the predictive power of socio-economic Census data (from the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS)) in the prediction of Australian election results (from the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC)). By connecting the neighbouring statistical regions into a planar graph and performing graph convolutions along these edges, our experiments demonstrate
a root mean-squared error (RMSE) measures of 2.20%
compared with optimal standard generalised linear model
(GLM) benchmark RMSEs of 7.75%, a decrease of nearly
70%. We additionally demonstrate that defining auxiliary
networks and embedding operations based upon a Hierarchical GCNN model to feed in residual information from
higher levels of statistical agglomeration outperforms standard GCNN approaches by up to an additional 14% in
semi-supervised tasks. Code for the models is provided at
https://github.com/mili7522/Hierarchical-GCNN.

Geographic information systems’ (GIS) research is widely
used within the social and physical sciences and plays a crucial role in the development and implementation by governments of economic, education, environment and transportation policy. While machine learning methods have been applied to GIS datasets, the uptake of powerful deep learning
CNN methodologies has been limited in part due to challenges posed by the complex and often poorly structured nature of the data. In this paper, we demonstrate the utility
of GCNNs for GIS analysis via a multi-graph hierarchical
spatial-filter GCNN network model in the context of GIS systems to predict election outcomes using socio-economic features drawn from the 2016 Australian Census. We report a
marked improvement in performance accuracy of Hierarchical GCNNs over benchmark generalised linear models and
standard GCNNs, especially in semi-supervised tasks. These
results indicate the widespread potential for GIS-GCNN research methods to enrich socio-economic GIS analysis, aiding the social sciences and policy development.

Introduction
Geographical information systems (GIS) are frameworks
for the storage, ordering and representation of geospatial
data. They are integral to many social and physical sciences
and to the functioning of modern economies and governments, playing an important role in infrastructure, agriculture, transport, logistics, urban management and economic
management policy design and implementation (Management Association 2013). Complementary GIS data, such as
Census and other demographic surveys in particular, constitute important datasets upon which researchers and policymakers rely. Despite their ubiquity and utility, the size
and complexity of many GIS datasets can present tractability challenges that limit the capacity of traditional models
to fully leverage the relationships between geospatial features. Many current techniques ignore the geography inherent in GIS data (including spatial boundaries, clustering effects and distance measures), opting to treat the separate regions as independent and identically distributed. In
the context of deep learning, the heterogeneous nature of

Related Work
Machine Learning with GIS
GIS data is analysed in a rich variety of ways, incorporating tools from topology, graph theory and linear algebra. It
is characterised by process modelling (Heywood, Cornelius,
and Carver 2011) which seeks to model complex behaviour
of spatial systems (Jakeman, Beck, and McAleer 1995) via
a priori models (that seek explanatory theories) and a posteriori models to test and explore the domain of theories
(Heywood, Cornelius, and Carver 2011). GIS approaches
utilise diverse mathematical models depending upon the research questions (usually classification or regression-based)
of interest: GLMs, such as linear or logistic regression, are
common where the input features are known. This is espe-

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

647

