The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Almost Unsupervised Learning for Dense Crowd Counting
Deepak Babu Sam, Neeraj N Sajjan, Himanshu Maurya, R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560012, India
deepaksam@iisc.ac.in, nnsajjan@gmail.com, himanshu.mib@gmail.com, venky@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We present an unsupervised learning method for dense crowd
count estimation. Marred by large variability in appearance
of people and extreme overlap in crowds, enumerating people proves to be a difficult task even for humans. This implies creating large-scale annotated crowd data is expensive
and directly takes a toll on the performance of existing CNN
based counting models on account of small datasets. Motivated by these challenges, we develop Grid Winner-Take-All
(GWTA) autoencoder to learn several layers of useful filters
from unlabeled crowd images. Our GWTA approach divides
a convolution layer spatially into a grid of cells. Within each
cell, only the maximally activated neuron is allowed to update the filter. Almost 99.9% of the parameters of the proposed model are trained without any labeled data while the
rest 0.1% are tuned with supervision. The model achieves superior results compared to other unsupervised methods and
stays reasonably close to the accuracy of supervised baseline.
Furthermore, we present comparisons and analyses regarding
the quality of learned features across various models.

Figure 1: Typical dense crowd images with human annotations (from Part A of Shanghaitech dataset (Zhang et al.
2016)). Sheer density of the crowd compounded with severe
occlusions render crowd annotation challenging.

counting. Hence we formulate the objective of this work as
to train crowd counting models to the maximum extent with
unlabeled data. To the best of our knowledge, there are no
other works in this direction for dense crowd counting and
is expected to fuel more research in the area.
Existing unsupervised methodologies are mostly based on
autoencoders. They learn features by training to predict its
own input (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006; Vincent et al.
2008) or some function of the input (Larsson, Maire, and
Shakhnarovich 2017; Agrawal, Carreira, and Malik 2015;
Wang and Gupta 2015; Pathak et al. 2016; Doersch, Gupta,
and Efros 2015; Noroozi and Favaro 2016). It has been
shown that many autoencoder based approaches fail to learn
useful features (Makhzani and Frey 2015). When applied
on highly diverse dense crowd images, we show that current unsupervised methods do not learn enough useful features for density regression as evidenced from their performance scores. In order to improve feature learning from unlabeled crowd images, we consider winner-take-all (WTA)
regularization for autoencoders. WTA autoencoder proposed
by (Makhzani and Frey 2015), is inspired from the behavior
of actual neuron adaptation in human brain. The basic idea
of WTA approach is to selectively perform learning for neurons in the autoencoder. This means not all neurons are allowed to update their weights at a particular iteration, creating a race among neurons to learn a feature and get specialized. The “winner” neuron is the one which has the highest activation value. This loosely tries to model the inhibition mechanism seen in brain neurons. It has been shown

Introduction
Counting people in crowds, though a necessity in many practical scenarios, is very challenging. Typical dense crowds
with thousands of people lend any naive person detector
fruitless. This is because of the absence of consistent observable features like face, body parts etc. owing to extreme
occlusion, pose variations and background clutter. In acute
crowding, detecting people appearing as just blobs is laborious and difficult even for humans (see Figure 1). The visual
patterns that need to be learned for detecting people, vary
drastically from sparse to extreme dense crowds. As a result, any crowd counting system has to model such a huge
diversity of appearance of people, requiring large annotated
datasets for training. The performance of models based on
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), in general, is directly related to the availability of large datasets encompassing the entire diversity. However, due to annotation difficulty, the datasets available for dense crowd counting are
small, with the current largest one having only 482 images
with 0.2 million person annotations. This seriously limits the
advances in annotation intensive problems like dense crowd
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8868

