The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Safe Partial Diagnosis from Normal Observations
Roni Stern

Brendan Juba

Software and Information Systems Engineering
Ben Gurion University
Be’er Sheba, Israel
sternron@post.bgu.ac.il

Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
1 Brookings Dr., St. Louis, MO, 63130 USA
bjuba@wustl.edu

Abstract

Learning approaches for diagnosis (Qin 2012; Keren,
Kalech, and Rokach 2011; Hafez, Ross, and Gadd 1997)
learn from observations of past failures how to map various observed features to the correct diagnosis. These methods usually rely on having a set of abnormal observations,
each associated with its correct diagnosis. Since most systems function properly most of the time, obtaining a large set
of abnormal observations and their diagnosis is often very
difficult. Moreover, given that such observations are inherently abnormal, the kinds of assumptions underlying datadriven techniques, such as stationarity of the data, are questionable for diagnosis. By contrast, normal observations, i.e.,
observations in which the system is behaving as planned, are
easily obtained in practice. Indeed, systems often collect an
abundance of data while operating, to be used for monitoring and optimization purposes. Such data contains valuable
information about the (mostly) normal behavior of the monitored system. In this work we explore theoretically how such
data can be used for diagnostic purposes.

Model-based diagnosis (MBD) is difficult to use in practice
because it requires a model of the diagnosed system, which
is often very hard to obtain. We explore theoretically how
observing the system when it is in a normal state can provide information about the system that is sufficient to learn
a partial system model that allows automated diagnosis. We
analyze the number of observations needed to learn a model
capable of finding faulty components in most cases. Then,
we explore how knowing the system topology can help us to
learn a useful model from the normal observations for settings
in which many of the internal system variables cannot be observed. Unlike other data-driven methods, our learned model
is safe, in the sense that subsystems identified as faulty are
guaranteed to truly be faulty.

Introduction
Model-based diagnosis (MBD) is an approach for automated
diagnosis in which a model that describes the diagnosed system’s expected behavior is assumed to be given as input.
This model is used to infer possible explanations – diagnoses – for an observed abnormal system behavior. MBD is
a well-established, principled, approach for automated diagnosis that has been studied in the Artificial Intelligence literature for decades, and has been applied in practice (Williams
and Nayak 1996; Struss and Price 2003; Feldman et al.
2013). However, a key inhibitor to its widespread use is that
obtaining a model of the diagnosed system is often impossible or prohibitively expensive.
Spectrum-based fault localization (SFL) provides an alternative approach for diagnosis that does not require modeling
the system behavior (Abreu, Zoeteweij, and Van Gemund
2009; Gupta et al. 2014). SFL considers the observations
collected at the time when the system has failed, and finds
diagnoses by “discovering statistical coincidences between
system failures and the activity of the different parts of a system” (Abreu et al. 2009). While SFL is lightweight, its diagnostic accuracy is inherently limited compared to modelbased approaches. Moreover, SFL approaches do not improve over time, and the number of observations required to
obtain accurate diagnoses is currently not fully understood.

Our first contribution is a method for learning a partial model from normal observations that can be used for
diagnosis. In particular, this partial model enables identifying some components as surely faulty and other components as probably normal, where surely faulty components
must be faulty and probably normal components cannot be
in any (minimal) diagnosis. Our learning method is safe, in
the sense that “surely faulty” components are indeed faulty,
in contrast to standard data-driven methods that cannot provide such a guarantee. As can be expected, the effectiveness
of this learned model strongly depends on how visible the
internal variables of the systems are, and on the number of
available normal observations. Our second contribution is
a statistical analysis of the number of normal observations
needed to learn an effective model. This novel form of statistical analysis draws from the well-known probably approximately correct (PAC) framework for analyzing learning
algorithms (Vapnik and Chervonenkis 1971; Valiant 1984;
Haussler 1992). Our main theoretical result is that under
several assumptions, the number of observations needed to
learn, with high probability, a model that will identify faults
in most cases is only linear in the number of components.
Our third contribution is a method for using knowledge
about the system topology, in addition to the set of normal observations, to learn a useful and more informed par-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3084

