The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Non-Saturating Recurrent
Units for Modelling Long-Term Dependencies
Sarath Chandar,1,2∗† Chinnadhurai Sankar,1∗ Eugene Vorontsov,1‡
Samira Ebrahimi Kahou,3 Yoshua Bengio§ 1
1

Mila, Université de Montréal
2
Google Brain
3
Microsoft Research

Abstract

ways: they are contractive and they saturate at the bounds.
Activation functions whose gradients contract as they saturate
are typically referred to as saturating nonlinearities; in that
sense, rectified linear units (ReLU) Nair and Hinton (2010)
are non-saturating and thus help reduce vanishing gradients
in deep feed-forward networks Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton (2012); Xu et al. (2015).
Saturating activation functions still dominate in the literature for recurrent neural networks, in part because of the
success of LSTM on sequential problems (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le, 2014; Vinyals and Le, 2015; Merity, Keskar, and
Socher, 2017; Mnih et al., 2016). As these functions saturate,
gradients contract. In addition, while saturated gates may
push more information through memory, improving gradient flow across a long sequence, the gradient to the gating
units themselves vanishes. We expect that non-saturating activation functions and gates could improve the modelling of
long-term dependencies by avoiding these issues. We propose
a non-saturating recurrent unit (NRU) that forgoes both saturating activation functions and saturating gates. We present
a new architecture with the rectified linear unit (ReLU) and
demonstrate that it is well equipped to process data with long
distance dependencies, without sacrificing performance on
other tasks.

Modelling long-term dependencies is a challenge for recurrent
neural networks. This is primarily due to the fact that gradients vanish during training, as the sequence length increases.
Gradients can be attenuated by transition operators and are
attenuated or dropped by activation functions. Canonical architectures like LSTM alleviate this issue by skipping information
through a memory mechanism. We propose a new recurrent
architecture (Non-saturating Recurrent Unit; NRU) that relies
on a memory mechanism but forgoes both saturating activation functions and saturating gates, in order to further alleviate
vanishing gradients. In a series of synthetic and real world
tasks, we demonstrate that the proposed model is the only
model that performs among the top 2 models across all tasks
with and without long-term dependencies, when compared
against a range of other architectures.

Introduction
Vanishing and exploding gradients remain a core challenge
in the training of recurrent neural networks. While exploding gradients can be alleviated by gradient clipping or norm
penalties (Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio, 2013), vanishing
gradients are difficult to tackle. Vanishing gradients prevent
the network from learning long-term dependencies Hochreiter (1991); Bengio, Simard, and Frasconi (1994) and arise
when the network dynamics have attractors necessary to store
bits of information over the long term (Bengio, Simard, and
Frasconi, 1994). At each step of backpropagation, gradients
in a recurrent neural network can grow or shrink across linear
transition operators and shrink across nonlinear activation
functions.
Successful architectures, like the LSTM Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber (1997) and GRU Cho et al. (2014), alleviate
vanishing gradients by allowing information to skip transition
operators (and their activation functions) via an additive path
that serves as memory. Both gates and transition operators
use bounded activation functions (sigmoid, tanh). These help
keep representations stable but attenuate gradients in two

Background
Vanishing Gradient Problem in RNNs
Recurrent Neural Networks are the most successful class of
architectures for solving sequential problems. A vanilla RNN,
at any time step t, takes xt as input and updates its hidden
state as follows:
zt = Wht−1 + Uxt
ht = f (zt ),

(1)
(2)
(3)

∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding author: apsarathchandar@gmail.com.
‡
Work done while at Microsoft Research.
§
CIFAR Fellow.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

where W and U are the recurrent and the input weights of the
RNN respectively and f (.) is any non-linear activation function like a sigmoid or tanh. Consider a sequence of length T
with loss L computed at the end of the sequence. To compute
∂L
∂L
∂Wij at time step t, we should first compute ∂ht using the

†

3280

