The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Scale Invariant Fully Convolutional Network: Detecting Hands Efficiently
Dan Liu,1 Dawei Du,2 Libo Zhang,3∗
Tiejian Luo,1 Yanjun Wu,3 Feiyue Huang,4 Siwei Lyu2
1

University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 2 University at Albany, SUNY, USA
3
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 4 Tencent Youtu Lab, China
liudan171@mails.ucas.ac.cn, ddu@albany.edu, libo@iscas.ac.cn,
tjluo@ucas.ac.cn, yanjun@iscas.ac.cn, huangfeiyue@gmail.com, slyu@albany.edu
Abstract

Existing hand detection methods usually follow the pipeline
of multiple stages with high computation cost, i.e., feature
extraction, region proposal, bounding box regression, and additional layers for rotated region detection. In this paper, we
propose a new Scale Invariant Fully Convolutional Network
(SIFCN) trained in an end-to-end fashion to detect hands efficiently. Specifically, we merge the feature maps from high to
low layers in an iterative way, which handles different scales
of hands better with less time overhead comparing to concatenating them simply. Moreover, we develop the Complementary Weighted Fusion (CWF) block to make full use of the
distinctive features among multiple layers to achieve scale
invariance. To deal with rotated hand detection, we present
the rotation map to get rid of complex rotation and derotation layers. Besides, we design the multi-scale loss scheme to
accelerate the training process significantly by adding supervision to the intermediate layers of the network. Compared
with the state-of-the-art methods, our algorithm shows comparable accuracy and runs a 4.23 times faster speed on the
VIVA dataset and achieves better average precision on Oxford hand detection dataset at a speed of 62.5 fps.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Performance comparison between our SIFCN with
ResNet50 backbone (cyan) and Multi-scale fast RCNN (Yan
et al. 2017) (red). (a) Examples from the VIVA dataset. (b)
Examples from the Oxford dataset.

Introduction
Hand detection is applied in many tasks such as virtual reality, human-computer interaction, and driving monitoring, to
name a few. However, it is still challenging due to many difficulties such as the low-resolution, clutter background, occlusions, the varying sizes and shapes of hands due to different view angle, and inconsistent appearances due to changing illuminations.
Several methods have been developed for the hand detection in the literature. Traditional methods first employ
human-crafted features such as Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOG) (Betancourt et al. 2015) and skin color (Kakumanu, Makrogiannis, and Bourbakis 2007), and then distinguish hand regions by classifiers such as SVM (Mittal, Zisserman, and Torr 2011) and Latent SVM (Felzenszwalb et
al. 2010). However, most of these methods are not robust to

background clutters, which give rise to high false positive
rates.
In recent years, more effective hand detection methods
are obtained based on the deep learning based object detection methods, for instance, Region-Based Convolutional
Networks (R-CNNs) (Girshick et al. 2016), Faster Regionbased Convolutional Network (Faster R-CNN) (Ren et al.
2015), and Single Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD) (Liu et
al. 2016). Multi-scale features (Le et al. 2017; Yan et al.
2017) extracted by Convolutional Neural Networks are explored to detect different scales of hands. In the very recent
work (Deng et al. 2018), rotation and derotation layers are
added to the network to handle rotated hands. One problem with the existing deep learning based hand detection
methods is that merging all the multi-scale features rudely
and the complex network structure to handle rotation usually
lead to high computational cost, which limits the practicality
of these methods in applications that require fast processing
time.
To address these issues, in this paper, we propose a

∗
Corresponding author: Libo Zhang (libo@iscas.ac.cn). This
work was partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61807033 and Grant 61771341,
partially supported by US NSF IIS-1816227.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4344

