The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Heterogeneous Transfer Learning via Deep
Matrix Completion with Adversarial Kernel Embedding
Haoliang Li,1 Sinno Jialin Pan,2 Renjie Wan,1 Alex C. Kot1
1

2

Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{lihaoliang,sinnopan,rjwan,eackot}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

an image, is represented by heterogeneous features across
different domain, HTL techniques are crucial.
Recently, matrix completion based methods have been
proposed for HTL problems (Xiao and Guo 2013; Zhou et
al. 2016). The key idea is that instead of learning an (or a pair
of) explicit feature mapping(s) between feature spaces of the
source domain and the target domain, one can directly reconstruct cross-domain heterogeneous features for each instance through matrix completion techniques. For instance,
recently, Zhou et al. (2016) proposed a method named Distribution Matching based Matrix Completion (DMMC) to
encode the distance in distributions between domains into
feature reconstruction in order to reduce the distance between domains. However, existing matrix-completion-based
methods have several major problems. First, they directly
reduce the distance between domains and learn a classifier
based on the recovered feature, which may fail to capture
the intrinsic underlying low-dimensional structure, which
indeed may benefit knowledge transfer and classifier training. In addition, to make the optimization problem tractable,
DMMC adopts the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD)
metric (Gretton et al. 2006; 2012) with a linear kernel to
measure the distance between distributions, rather than a
characteristic kernel (Sriperumbudur et al. 2009). As a result, the distance between distributions may not be measured
precisely. Moreover, they require plenty of corresponding
instances between the source domain and the target domain
when performing matrix completion, which limits their applications in real-world problems as the corresponding data
instances may be difficult to collect in some scenarios.
To address the aforementioned issues, in this paper, we
propose a novel algorithm named Deep Matrix Completion
with Adversarial Kernel Embedding (Deep-MCA) to jointly
perform matrix completion with distribution matching in
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) and learn a classifier for the target domain. To be specific, we propose an
auto-encoder style architecture for matrix completion and
latent feature representation learning. Subsequently, data instances from both the source domain and the target domain
are mapped to a RKHS induced by an adversarially trained
kernel. As all instances are in the RKHS, using MMD under
a proper bounded function can provide more accurate distance measure between distributions, which makes knowledge transfer more effective. Moreover, a classifier is trained

Heterogeneous Transfer Learning (HTL) aims to solve transfer learning problems where a source domain and a target
domain are of heterogeneous types of features. Most existing HTL approaches either explicitly learn feature mappings
between the heterogeneous domains or implicitly reconstruct
heterogeneous cross-domain features based on matrix completion techniques. In this paper, we propose a new HTL
method based on a deep matrix completion framework, where
kernel embedding of distributions is trained in an adversarial manner for learning heterogeneous features across domains. We conduct extensive experiments on two different
vision tasks to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method compared with a number of baseline methods.

Introduction
Transfer learning aims to transfer knowledge from one domain with sufficient labeled data to another domain where
labeled data is sparse or no labeled data is available. In the
literature, many existing transfer learning approaches focus
on cross-domain learning problems of homogeneous features, which are referred to as homogeneous transfer learning problems (Pan and Yang 2010). However, there exist
many other applications where data from the source domain and the target domain is characterized by different sets
of features, which are referred to as heterogeneous transfer
learning (HTL) problems. For example, in some computer
vision problems, one may extract powerful deep features
with a well-trained deep learning network in a domain where
sufficient labeled data is available for training. However, in
some other domains, training data may be protected by a
privacy policy (e.g. EU data protection rule (Carey 2018)).
In this case, one cannot employ deep learning but use handcrafted features to represent the data. In some other applications, one domain can be text (e.g. food recipe) and the other
can be images (e.g. photos of food) which also leads to heterogeneous feature presentation. Thus, it is highly desired if
knowledge extracted from the learning tasks with the public
available data can be transferred to help the learning tasks
where the corresponding training data is regularized by the
privacy policy. In this context, as each data instance, e.g.,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8602

