The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Video Frame Interpolation Using Cyclic Frame Generation
Yu-Lun Liu,1,2,3 Yi-Tung Liao,1,2 Yen-Yu Lin,1 Yung-Yu Chuang1,2
1

Academia Sinica, 2 National Taiwan University, 3 MediaTek
{yulunliu, queenieliaw}@cmlab.csie.ntu.edu.tw, yylin@citi.sinica.edu.tw, cyy@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

′
𝐼0.5

𝐼0

Video frame interpolation algorithms predict intermediate
frames to produce videos with higher frame rates and smooth
view transitions given two consecutive frames as inputs. We
propose that: synthesized frames are more reliable if they
can be used to reconstruct the input frames with high quality. Based on this idea, we introduce a new loss term, the
cycle consistency loss. The cycle consistency loss can better utilize the training data to not only enhance the interpolation results, but also maintain the performance better with
less training data. It can be integrated into any frame interpolation network and trained in an end-to-end manner. In addition to the cycle consistency loss, we propose two extensions: motion linearity loss and edge-guided training. The
motion linearity loss approximates the motion between two
input frames to be linear and regularizes the training. By applying edge-guided training, we further improve results by integrating edge information into training. Both qualitative and
quantitative experiments demonstrate that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. The source codes of the
proposed method and more experimental results will be available at https://github.com/alex04072000/CyclicGen.

CNN
𝐼1

CNN

𝐼1′′

CNN
𝐼2

′
𝐼1.5

Figure 1: Given three consecutive frames, I0 , I1 , and I2 , the
proposed CNN-based model aims to produce high-quality
0
0
interpolated frames, I0.5
and I1.5
. To this end, the model
maps the given frames to the interpolated frames and then
map them back by constructing I100 through interpolating be0
0
tween I0.5
and I1.5
. The proposed cycle consistency loss facilitates model learning by enforcing the similarity between
I1 and I100 .

to learn the mapping between two consecutive frames and
the intermediate frame, and alleviate the problems caused by
occlusions and varying lighting conditions. Despite the encouraging progress, video frame interpolation still remains
quite challenging: The interpolated frames are usually oversmoothed/blurred and have artifacts (Liang et al. 2017). This
situation becomes even worse in image regions with large
motions or rich textures.
This paper addresses the aforementioned issues. Our idea
is built on the reverse mapping from the interpolated frames
to the given frames. Consider a model that is derived to
generate the interpolated frame by taking two consecutive frames as inputs. If the interpolated frames are oversmoothed or have artifacts, the reverse mapping is unlikely
to be well performed by the same model. Inspired by this
observation, we implement forward-backward consistency
by introducing the cycle consistency loss for video interpolation. Specifically, the model maps the input frames to the
interpolated frames, and then maps them back. The cycle
consistency loss enforces the similarity between the input
frames and the mapped-back frames. Using the cycle consistency loss, the learned model can implicitly address the

Introduction
High-frame-rate videos with temporally coherent content
are preferable, but acquiring such videos often requires
higher power consumption and more storage. To compromise between the user experience and the acquiring cost,
video frame interpolation, e.g., (Liu et al. 2017; Niklaus,
Mai, and Liu 2017b), has drawn increasing attention in the
field of computer vision and video processing. It aims at
upscaling video frame rates by synthesizing spatially and
temporally consistent intermediate frames, and can produce
high-quality videos with smooth view transition.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) have been employed in many
modern methods for video frame interpolation (Niklaus,
Mai, and Liu 2017a; 2017b; Liu et al. 2017; Long et al.
2016). These CNN-based methods often integrate motion
prediction into video pixel generation, and can work without using hard-to-get dense flow fields as training data. Empowered by CNNs, these methods show excellent abilities
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8794

