The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Context-Tree Recommendation vs
Matrix-Factorization: Algorithm Selection and Live Users Evaluation
Stéphane Martin,1 Boi Faltings,2 Vincent Schickel3
1

EPFL, LIA, Switzerland, 2 EPFL, LIA, Switzerland, 3 Prediggo SA, Switzerland
stephane.martin@epfl.ch, boi.faltings@epfl.ch, schickel@prediggo.com

Abstract

The first one is a novel approach based on a Markovian algorithm, the Bayesian Variable-order Markov Model
(BVMM). The second one, SSAGD, is a variant of MatrixFactorization (MF). The family of MF algorithms is considered the state of the art in the field of recommendation; they
thus offer a solid baseline.
We will start with a description of the three types of algorithms. We then describe the offline tests we performed,
given the many variants based on MF, to develop the best
one for our purpose, resulting in SSAGD. Finally, we discuss
the live evaluations we carried in production conditions on
the websites of two of Prediggo’s customers. These experiments highlight the excellent performance of the BVMM.
By contrast, we found MF to obtain smaller CTRs and to be
considerably slower as well as memory-greedy.

We describe the selection, implementation and online evaluation of two e-commerce recommender systems developed
with our partner company, Prediggo. The first one is based on
the novel method of Bayesian Variable-order Markov Modeling (BVMM). The second, SSAGD, is a novel variant of
the Matrix-Factorization technique (MF), which is considered
state-of-the-art in the recommender literature.
We discuss the offline tests we carried out to select the best
MF variant, and present the results of two A/B tests performed on live ecommerce websites after the deployment of
the new algorithms. Comparing the new recommenders and
Prediggo’s proprietary algorithm of Ontology Filtering, we
show that the BVMM significantly outperforms the two others in terms of CTR and prediction speed, and leads to a
strong increase in recommendation-mediated sales. Although
MF exhibits reasonably good accuracy, the BVMM is still
significantly more accurate and avoids the high memory requirements of MF. This scalability is essential for its application in online businesses.

1

2
2.1

Related Work

Matrix-Factorization

Matrix-factorization is one of the most widely studied approaches to recommendation and is known to provide a very
good accuracy. Many variants of its basic method have been
developed since Sarwar et al.’s original proposal (Sarwar et
al. 2000), which relied on Singular Value Decomposition to
extract vectors of user- and item-latent preferences.
Funk (Funk 2006) pushed the idea further and avoided
the roundabout computation of a SVD by directly computing the latent coefficients through regularized gradient descent. Paterek (Paterek 2007) examines a number of improvements over Funk’s regularized factorization. Among
them, the asymmetric SVDs, NSVD1 and NSVD2, which
appear to work quite well in practice (Pu and Faltings 2013).
We discuss the second in Section 3. Paterek also introduced
the idea of adding item- and user-biases to the latent vectors (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009).
Koren (Koren 2008), together with Bell (Koren and Bell
2011) developed SVD++, to incorporate several improvements over the basic SVD method. Although they work with
the Netflix dataset — with implicit ratings —, they notably
observe that taking into account the implicit feedback offered by the users improves the accuracy (Koren and Bell
2011). They do so by introducing variables expressing the
mere presence or absence of ratings, in a way reminiscent of
Paterek’s approach.

Introduction

Today, recommender systems are essential components of
commercial websites. They contribute to the sales effort by
guiding the customers to interesting products and by personalizing the shopping experience. At the same time, the nature
of online traffic imposes stringent time limits on the computation of recommendations. Online businesses also expect
the systems to serve a large number of customers on affordable infrastructures. It is thus crucial to develop algorithms
that attract the attention of the customers while remaining
efficient in computation and memory consumption.
We carried out this work in cooperation with Prediggo
SA, a start-up specializing in recommendation- and searchsolutions for e-commerce (https://www.prediggo.com/). Its
main recommendation algorithm is a particularly efficient
and scalable content-based method, the Ontology Filtering
(OF). The purpose of this research was to extend Prediggo’s
portfolio of solutions with two additional algorithms, implemented in Java within its already existing framework, in order to benefit from recent advances in recommender system
technology.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9534

