The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Theory of Minds: Understanding Behavior in Groups through Inverse Planning
Michael Shum∗

Max Kleiman-Weiner∗

Michael L. Littman

Joshua B. Tenenbaum

Brain and Cognitive Sciences
MIT
mshum@mit.edu

Brain and Cognitive Sciences
MIT
maxkw@mit.edu

Computer Science
Brown University
mlittman@cs.brown.edu

Brain and Cognitive Sciences
MIT
jbt@mit.edu

Abstract

tribes, and alliances? Typically when we observe behavior we only get information about these latent relationships
sparsely and indirectly through the actions chosen by agents.
Furthermore, these inferences are fundamentally challenging because of their inherent ambiguity; we are friend to
some and foe to others (Galinsky and Schweitzer 2015).
They are also compositional and dynamic; we may cooperate with some agents in order to better compete against
another. In order for socially aware AI systems to be capable of acting as our cooperative partners they must learn the
latent structure that governs social interaction.
In some domains like sports and formal games, this social
structure is known in advance and is essentially written into
the environment itself e.g., “the rules of the game” (Kitano et
al. 1997; Jaderberg et al. 2018). In contrast we focus on cases
where cooperation is more ambiguous or could even be adhoc. In real life, people rarely play the same game twice and
have to figure out the rules as they go along whether it’s the
“rules of war” or navigating office politics.
Even young children navigate this uncertainty frequently
and display spontaneous cooperation in novel situations
from an early age (Warneken and Tomasello 2006; Hamlin, Wynn, and Bloom 2007; Hamann et al. 2011). There
is increasing evidence that this early arising ability to do
social evaluation and inference relies on “Theory-of-Mind”
(ToM) i.e., a generative model of other agents with mental
states of their own (Spelke and Kinzler 2007; Kiley Hamlin
et al. 2013). People use these models to simulate what another agent might do next or consider what they themselves
would do hypothetically in a new situation. From the perspective of building more socially sophisticated machines,
ToM acts as a strong inductive bias for predicting actions.
Rather than learning statistical patterns of low-level behavior which are often particular to a specific context (e.g., Bob
often goes left, then up), an approach based on human ToM
constrains inference to behaviors that are consistent with a
higher-level mental state such as a goal, a belief or even a
false-belief (e.g., Bob likes ice cream). When inference is
carried out over these higher-level mental states, the inferences made are more likely to generalize to new contexts
in a human-like way (Baker, Saxe, and Tenenbaum 2009;
Baker et al. 2017).
Inspired by this ability, we aim to develop a new algorithm that applies these human-like inductive biases towards

Human social behavior is structured by relationships. We
form teams, groups, tribes, and alliances at all scales of human life. These structures guide multi-agent cooperation and
competition, but when we observe others these underlying relationships are typically unobservable and hence must be inferred. Humans make these inferences intuitively and flexibly,
often making rapid generalizations about the latent relationships that underlie behavior from just sparse and noisy observations. Rapid and accurate inferences are important for
determining who to cooperate with, who to compete with,
and how to cooperate in order to compete. Towards the goal
of building machine-learning algorithms with human-like social intelligence, we develop a generative model of multiagent action understanding based on a novel representation
for these latent relationships called Composable Team Hierarchies (CTH). This representation is grounded in the formalism of stochastic games and multi-agent reinforcement learning. We use CTH as a target for Bayesian inference yielding a
new algorithm for understanding behavior in groups that can
both infer hidden relationships as well as predict future actions for multiple agents interacting together. Our algorithm
rapidly recovers an underlying causal model of how agents relate in spatial stochastic games from just a few observations.
The patterns of inference made by this algorithm closely correspond with human judgments and the algorithm makes the
same rapid generalizations that people do.

Introduction
Cooperation enables people to achieve together what no individual would be capable of on her own. From a group
of hunters coordinating their movements to an ad-hoc team
of programmers working on an open source project, the
scale and scope of human cooperation behavior is unique
in the natural world (Tomasello 2014; Henrich 2015). However, cooperation exists in a competitive world and finding
the right balance between cooperation and competition is a
fundamental challenge for anyone in a diverse multi-agent
world. At the core of this challenge is figuring out who to
cooperate with. How do we distinguish between friend and
foe? How can we parse a multi-agent world into groups,
∗

equal contribution
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6163

