The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Human-Like Semantic Cognition
Network for Aspect-Level Sentiment Classification
Zeyang Lei,1 Yujiu Yang,∗,1 Min Yang,2 Wei Zhao,3 Jun Guo,4 Yi Liu5
1

Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, 2 Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS,
Technische Universitt Darmstadt, 4 TBSI† , Tsinghua Universitys, 5 Peking University Shenzhen Institute,
leizy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yangyj@gmail.com, min.yang1129@gmail.com
eeguojun@outlook.com, eeyliu@gmail.com

3

Abstract

proposed to learn an embedding vector for each aspect, and
these aspect embeddings were used to calculate the attention weights to capture important information with regard
to a given aspect. As far as our knowledge, human-beings’
reading cognitive process has rarely been explored in aspectlevel sentiment classification.
When human-beings read and comprehend text, their exploration of the reading process organizes itself most naturally into an examination of three phrases: pre-reading, active reading (i.e., during-reading), and post-reading (Pressley M 1995; Avery and Graves 1997; Toprak and Almacıoğlu 2009). In the pre-reading stage, humans set the
purpose of reading and preview the text with prior knowledge to form the initial reading cognition. Active reading is
a complex cognitive process by which the reader constructs
meaning from text. During the active reading stage, good
readers use skimming ability to find relevant information to
specific target by locating distinguishable target-related context, instead of thorough reading. It is beneficial to eliminate
the distraction of irrelevant information so as to focus on the
target-specific information.
As more information becomes available, the readers will
evaluate their understanding of the text and revise their
hypothesis when necessary. This post-reading stage (rereading) creates opportunities for deeper understanding and
error correction. If one desires to create a machine intelligence imitating such a reading comprehensive skill of
humans, studying these three-stage human-beings’ reading
cognitive process is quite necessary.
In this paper, we propose a novel Human-like Semantic Cognition Network (HSCN) to simulate human-beings’
reading cognitive process. HSCN consists of three components corresponding to the three stages in the human-beings’
reading cognitive process (pre-reading, active reading, and
post-reading). Concretely, we first design a word-level interactive perception module to capture the correlation between
words in the context and the given target words, which can
be regarded as pre-reading. Second, to mimic the process
of active reading, we propose a target-aware semantic distillation module to produce the target-specific context representation for aspect-level sentiment prediction. Specifically,
we devise a target-aware skip-reading mechanism to select
target-related words from the context, acting as skimming.
Then these target-related words are fed into the semantic

In this paper, we propose a novel Human-like Semantic Cognition Network (HSCN) for aspect-level sentiment classification, motivated by the principles of human beings’ reading
cognitive process (pre-reading, active reading, post-reading).
We first design a word-level interactive perception module to
capture the correlation between context words and the given
target words, which can be regarded as pre-reading. Second,
to mimic the process of active reading, we propose a targetaware semantic distillation module to produce the targetspecific context representation for aspect-level sentiment prediction. Third, we further devise a semantic deviation metric
module to measure the semantic deviation between the targetspecific context representation and the given target, which
evaluates the degree we understand the target-specific context
semantics. The measured semantic deviation is then used to
fine-tune the above active reading process in a feedback regulation way. To verify the effectiveness of our approach, we
conduct extensive experiments on three widely used datasets.
The experiments demonstrate that HSCN achieves impressive
results compared to other strong competitors.

Introduction
Sentiment analysis has attracted increasing attention recently due to its broad applications. The majority of literature addressed the sentiment for a whole piece of text, such
as a document, a sentence etc. (Liu 2012). However, in real
world, people may mention several target entities in one document/sentence. For example, the sentence “although the
service is not that great, I still like the food” is positive regarding the food of the restaurant, but negative with regard to
its service. Considering merely the overall sentiment of the
sentence fails to capture the aspect-level sentiments. When
inferring the sentiment in response to a given aspect, it is
essential to effectively capture the relatedness of the aspect
with its context words. Several recent studies have been proposed to build aspect-level sentiment classifiers with attention mechanisms and explicit memory. For example, Tang,
Qin, and Liu (2016) developed deep memory networks to
capture importance of context words. Wang et al. (2016)
∗

Corresponding author
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6650

