The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Building Ethically Bounded AI
Francesca Rossi

Nicholas Mattei

IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
francesca.rossi2@ibm.com

Tulane University
New Orleans, LA, USA
nsmattei@tulane.edu

Abstract

when making our decisions. In many domains preferences
are combined with moral values, ethical principles, or behavioral constraints that are applicable to the decision scenario and are prioritized over the preferences (Rossi 2016;
Greene 2014). We have have our own preferences over food,
but maybe the doctor recommended that we follow a diet to
avoid some health issues, so we need to combine the doctor’s guidelines with our taste preferences (Balakrishnan et
al. 2018; 2019). This is especially true in decision that may
have an impact on others. In this context, social norms, regulations and laws could provide guidelines to follow when
making a decision (Sen 1974; Thomson 1985). While driving our car, we may want to drive as fast as possible to get
home sooner, but social norms and laws provide limits to
speed and dangerous deriving behavior.
AI systems are increasingly supporting human decision
making, or they make decisions autonomously. So it is natural to ask ourselves how to code both subjective preferences and ethical principles in these systems. This is especially necessary when AI systems tackle ill-defined problems whose solution procedure cannot be accurately defined
by a rule-based approach but require data-driven and/or
learning approaches, which are increasingly used in AI.
Data-driven AI systems are indeed very successful in terms
of accuracy and flexibility, and they can be very “creative”
in achieving a goal, finding paths to the goal that could positively surprise humans and teach them innovative ways to
solve a problem, such as the move that the AlphaGo system used against Lee Sedol in the 2017 match (Silver et al.
2017) and a similar system that used uncommon methods to
set records in Atari games (Mnih et al. 2013). However, creativity and freedom without boundaries can sometimes lead
to undesired actions: the system could achieve its goal in
ways that are not considered acceptable according to values
and norms of the impacted community.
Recently researchers at DeepMind collected a list of examples of “specification gaming” behaviors1 and released
AI Safety Block Worlds to examine these behaviors (Leike
et al. 2017). Examples of specification gaming includes:

The more AI agents are deployed in scenarios with possibly unexpected situations, the more they need to be flexible,
adaptive, and creative in achieving the goal we have given
them. Thus, a certain level of freedom to choose the best
path to the goal is inherent in making AI robust and flexible
enough. At the same time, however, the pervasive deployment
of AI in our life, whether AI is autonomous or collaborating with humans, raises several ethical challenges. AI agents
should be aware and follow appropriate ethical principles
and should thus exhibit properties such as fairness or other
virtues. These ethical principles should define the boundaries
of AI’s freedom and creativity. However, it is still a challenge to understand how to specify and reason with ethical
boundaries in AI agents and how to combine them appropriately with subjective preferences and goal specifications.
Some initial attempts employ either a data-driven examplebased approach for both, or a symbolic rule-based approach
for both. We envision a modular approach where any AI technique can be used for any of these essential ingredients in
decision making or decision support systems, paired with a
contextual approach to define their combination and relative
weight. In a world where neither humans nor AI systems
work in isolation, but are tightly interconnected, e.g., the Internet of Things, we also envision a compositional approach
to building ethically bounded AI, where the ethical properties
of each component can be fruitfully exploited to derive those
of the overall system. In this paper we define and motivate
the notion of ethically-bounded AI, we describe two concrete
examples, and we outline some outstanding challenges.

Motivation and Overall Vision
Whatever we do in our everyday life, be it at work or in our
personal activities, we need to make decisions: what to eat,
where to go on vacation, what car to buy, which route to
take to go to work, what job to choose, and many more. To
make these decisions, we usually rely on our subjective preferences over the possible options. If we need to buy a car, we
may have preferences over its color, its maker, its engine,
and many other features. If we need to decide which restaurant to go for dinner, we may have preferences over location,
facilities, food, drinks, and many other features. However,
subjective preferences are not the only source of guidance

• an RL agent in a boat racing game going in circles and
repeatedly hitting the same reward targets in order to in1

More examples are available at: https://vkrakovna.wordpress.
com/2018/04/02/specification-gaming-examples-in-ai/

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9785

