The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Switch-Based Active Deep Dyna-Q: Efficient Adaptive
Planning for Task-Completion Dialogue Policy Learning
Yuexin Wu,? Xiujun Li,†‡ Jingjing Liu,† Jianfeng Gao,† Yiming Yang?
Carnegie Mellon University, † Microsoft Research
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
?
{yuexinw,yiming}@cs.cmu.edu, † {xiul,jingjl,jfgao}@microsoft.com
?

‡

Abstract

incur any real-world cost, and can in theory generate unlimited amount of simulated experiences for policy training. The learned policy can then be further fine-tuned using
small amount of real user experiences (Dhingra et al. 2016;
Su et al. 2016; Lipton et al. 2016; Li et al. 2017).
Although simulated users provide an affordable alternative, they may not be a sufficiently truthful approximation to
human users. The discrepancy between simulated and real
experiences inevitably leads to strong bias. In addition, it
is very challenging to develop a high-quality user simulator, because there is no widely accepted metric to assess the
quality of user simulators (Pietquin and Hastie 2013). It remains a controversial research topic whether training agents
through user simulators is an effective solution to building
dialogue systems.
Recently, Peng et al. (2018) proposed Deep Dyna-Q
(DDQ), an extension of the Dyna-Q framework (Sutton 1990), which integrates planning into RL for taskcompletion dialogue policy learning. As illustrated in Figure 1a, DDQ incorporates a trainable user simulator, referred
to as the world model, which can mimic real user behaviors and generate simulated experience. The policy of the
dialogue agent can be improved through either (1) real user
experiences via direct RL; or (2) simulated experiences via
indirect RL or planning.
DDQ is proved to be sample-efficient in that a reasonable
policy can be obtained using a small number of real experiences, an affordable training process thanks to the integration of planning into RL. However, the effectiveness of DDQ
depends, to a large degree, upon the way we control the ratio of real vs. simulated experiences used in different stages
of training. For example, Peng et al. (2018) pointed out that
although aggressive planning (i.e., policy learning using a
large number of simulated experiences) often helps improve
the performance in the beginning stage of training when the
agent is not sensitive to the low-quality experiences, such
aggressive planning might hurt the performance in the later
stage when the agent is more susceptible to noise, as illustrated in Figure 2. Carefully designed heuristics are essential to set the ratio properly. For example, we might decrease
the number of simulated experiences during the course of
training. However, such heuristics can vary with different
settings, and thus significantly limits the wide application of
DDQ in developing real-world dialogue agents.

Training task-completion dialogue agents with reinforcement
learning usually requires a large number of real user experiences. The Dyna-Q algorithm extends Q-learning by integrating a world model, and thus can effectively boost training efficiency using simulated experiences generated by the world
model. The effectiveness of Dyna-Q, however, depends on the
quality of the world model - or implicitly, the pre-specified
ratio of real vs. simulated experiences used for Q-learning.
To this end, we extend the recently proposed Deep Dyna-Q
(DDQ) framework by integrating a switcher that automatically determines whether to use a real or simulated experience
for Q-learning. Furthermore, we explore the use of active
learning for improving sample efficiency, by encouraging the
world model to generate simulated experiences in the stateaction space where the agent has not (fully) explored. Our results show that by combining switcher and active learning, the
new framework named as Switch-based Active Deep Dyna-Q
(Switch-DDQ), leads to significant improvement over DDQ
and Q-learning baselines in both simulation and human evaluations.1

Introduction
Thanks to the increasing popularity of virtual assistants such
as Apple’s Siri and Microsoft’s Cortana, there has been a
growing interest in both industry and research community
in developing task-completion dialogue systems (Gao, Galley, and Li 2018). Dialogue policies in task-completion dialogue agents, which control how agents respond to user input, are typically trained in a reinforcement learning (RL)
setting (Young et al. 2013; Levin, Pieraccini, and Eckert
1997). RL, however, usually requires collecting experiences
via direct interaction with real users, which is a costly data
acquisition procedure, as real user experiences are much
more expensive to obtain in the dialogue setting than that
in simulation-based game settings (such as Go or Atari
games) (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016).
One common strategy is to train policies with user simulators that are developed from pre-collected human-human
conversational data (Schatzmann et al. 2007; Li et al. 2016).
Dialogue agents interacting with such user simulators do not
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Source code is at https://github.com/CrickWu/Switch-DDQ.

7289

