The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Large Scale Personalized Categorization of Financial Transactions
Christopher Lesner, Alexander Ran, Marko Rukonic, Wei Wang
Intuit Inc., Mountain View, CA

Abstract

In this paper we present a large-scale recommendation
system that successfully recommends company specific
categories for several million small businesses in US, UK,
Australia, Canada, India and France and handles billions of
financial transactions each year. Our system uses machine
learning to combine fragments of information from millions of users in a manner that allows us to accurately recommend user-specific Chart of Accounts categories. Accounts are handled even if named using abbreviations or in
a foreign language. Transactions are handled even if a given user has never categorized a transaction like that before.
The development of such a system and testing it at scale
over billions of transactions is a first in the financial industry.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: First we
classify the problem and identify a candidate solution from
related prior research. Next, we discuss what was necessary to adopt this solution to our specific problem in order
to build the working system that has been serving millions
of Intuit QuickBooks customers for well over a year. We
then share results of experiments and our experience with
large scale model training and deployment. Here we emphasize the importance of different data representations:
one suitable for model training and another for model deployment. Finally, we cover some practical aspects of
building a large-scale production system such as dealing
with firm real-time latency deadlines, and selecting and
optimizing servers for model builds vs. model deployment.
Last, we conclude with a discussion of user impact, benefits and what we learned.

A major part of financial accounting involves tracking and
organizing business transactions over and over each month
and hence automation of this task is of significant value to
the users of accounting software. In this paper we present a
large-scale recommendation system that successfully recommends company specific categories for several million
small businesses in US, UK, Australia, Canada, India and
France and handles billions of financial transactions each
year. Our system uses machine learning to combine fragments of information from millions of users in a manner that
allows us to accurately recommend user-specific Chart of
Accounts categories. Accounts are handled even if named
using abbreviations or in a foreign language. Transactions
are handled even if a given user has never categorized a
transaction like that before. The development of such a system and testing it at scale over billions of transactions is a
first in the financial industry.

Introduction
A major part of financial accounting involves tracking and
organizing of business transactions using a customizable
filing system, which accountants call chart of accounts
(CoA). Every business transaction must be filed into some
suitable CoA account. This is a regular and tedious chore
for millions of accounting software users. Assuming it
takes a human about 3 seconds to pick the right CoA account for a typical financial transaction, last year the users
of Intuit's accounting software would have spent well over
a thousand man years on just this task if it were not automated by our systems.
Assigning correct categories to financial transactions is
important because errors on this task can lead to incorrect
financial statements, increased audit risk, tax and other
regulatory penalties, misinformed financial decisions and
displeased business owners / creditors / investors. For these
reasons the reliable automation of this task is of significant
economic value for everyone involved: business owners,
their accountants, vendors of accounting software, etc.

Understanding the Problem
Financial accounts track how much money was transferred
on a given date with a certain counterparty but unlike an
invoice or a receipt, a transaction from a bank or credit
card account generally does not have information about
items purchased or the services involved.
Despite this, it is still often possible to tell what a financial account transaction is about just by the attributes that
are available: (1) the financial institution that recorded the

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9365

