The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Consensual Affine Transformations for Partial Valuation Aggregation
Hermann Schichl,1 Meinolf Sellmann2
1

University of Vienna, Austria, 2 General Electric
hermann.schichl@univie.ac.at, meinolf@gmail.com

Problem Definition

Abstract

Let us begin our work by introducing some terminology.

We consider the task of aggregating scores provided by experts that each have scored only a subset of all objects to be
rated. Since experts only see a subset of all objects, they lack
global information on the overall quality of all objects, as well
as the global range in quality. Inherently, the only reliable information we get from experts is therefore the relative scores
over the objects that they have scored each.
We propose several variants of a new aggregation framework that takes this into account by computing consensual
affine transformations of each expert’s scores to reach a globally balanced view. Numerical comparisons with other aggregation methods, such as rank-based methods, KemenyYoung scoring, and a maximum likelihood estimator, show
that the new method gives significantly better results in practice. Moreover, the computation is practically affordable and
scales well even to larger numbers of experts and objects.

Definition 1 Let O be a finite set of N ∈ N objects, and
assume that there exists a function f : O → R assigning a
“ground truth” value to each object. Furthermore, let E be
a finite set of experts. For each o ∈ O, we assume there is a
set Eo ⊆ E of experts each estimating f (o). For each o ∈ O
and e ∈ Eo , denote with foe ∈ R the valuation of expert e of
object o.
The objective of the Score Aggregation Problem (SAP) is
to estimate the ground truth valuations for each object as
good as possible using only the expert valuations.
Definition 2 Let A be a finite set of alternatives and E a
finite set of voters or experts. Assume that each voter has
a strict preference order for [a subset of] the alternatives,
i.e., the preference order is transitive and anti-symmetric.
Such a ranking can be described by a ranking map B 7→
{0, . . . , |B| − 1}, where B ⊆ A. If the maps do not just
provide a ranking but a score for each alternative, we speak
of a cardinal voting system.
A collection of alternatives together with the set V of
ranking maps re , for e ∈ E, of expert preferences is called
a preference profile (A, V). A social choice function (SCF)
f , also called a voting scheme, is a map that assigns to each
preference profile (A, V) a ranking map f (A, V), which represents the aggregate choice of the experts.

Score Aggregation for Partial Valuations
We consider the task of aggregating scores from experts
who have only had access to a part of all objects. We focus purely on empirical performance in this paper, for the
purpose of providing an effective tool that helps, for example, when aggregating reviewer scores in conference reviewing, the organization of large online learning courses
where students grade each others’ homework, or when multiple information-retrieval algorithms score webpages with
respect to different sources of information (text, images,
video, audio, etc). The recurring characteristic is that each
expert only considers a part of the universe of objects, for
example because the workload for each expert would be too
high to score all objects, or because not every expert has the
expertise to score every object. This can lead to very specific
kinds of biases that need to be actively taken into account in
the mechanism that is used to reach a decision on the ranking
of objects.
The main contributions of our work are the development
of a new, computationally efficient, practical approach to
reduce partial valuation bias. Moreover, to the best of our
knowledge we conduct the first comprehensive numerical
comparison of partial value aggregation methods.

A simple way is to consider the cumulative rank each object has for all rankings where it appears. This ordering is
commonly referred to as the Borda count (de Borda 1781;
Lippman 2013).
Caragiannis et al. (2015) study peer grading in massive
online open courses where students grade each other. They
prove that the Borda count can result in approximate groundtruth-revealing grading schemes provided that reviewers are
carefully assigned to objects. They use bundle graphs for
this purpose. Complete freedom when assigning experts to
objects is required for this method, which somewhat limits it
to settings like grading in massive online courses. In conference reviewing, experts typically have pockets of expertise,
and we cannot assign a knowledge representation paper to
an expert in combinatorial search.
Another rank-based aggregation method is unweighted
Kemeny–Young method. It is based on summing, for each

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2612

