The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DBA: Dynamic Multi-Armed Bandit Algorithm
Sadegh Nobari

Rakuten, Inc.
sadegh@sqnco.com

Abstract
We introduce Dynamic Bandit Algorithm (DBA), a practical
solution to improve the shortcoming of the pervasively employed reinforcement learning algorithm called Multi-Arm
Bandit, aka Bandit. Bandit makes real-time decisions based
on the prior observations. However, Bandit is heavily biased
to the priors that it cannot quickly adapt itself to a trend that
is interchanging. As a result, Bandit cannot, quickly enough,
make profitable decisions when the trend is changing. Unlike Bandit, DBA focuses on quickly adapting itself to detect
these trends early enough. Furthermore, DBA remains as almost as light as Bandit in terms of computations. Therefore,
DBA can be easily deployed in production as a light process
similar to The Bandit. We demonstrate how critical and beneficial is the main focus of DBA, i.e. the ability to quickly
finding the most profitable option in real-time, over its stateof-the-art competitors. Our experiments are augmented with a
visualization mechanism that explains the profitability of the
decisions made by each algorithm in each step by animations.
Finally we observe that DBA can substantially outperform the
original Bandit by close to 3 times for a set Key Performance
Indicator (KPI) in a case of having 3 arms.

24%

9%

AB Testing

Original Bandit

Figure 1: Overall performance of all the algorithms
α

!0

Xi-1

α

!

!0

Xi

!#%&
̅

!

$n(i-1)

$1 …

!0

Xi+1

!̅#'&

!#̅

$̅i+1

$ ̅i

$̅i-1
$1 …

α

$n(i)

$1 …

$n(i+1)

Figure 2: State diagram of DBA

Introduction

We propose Dynamic Bandit Algorithm (DBA) as a solution to the above generalization, i.e. Dynamic Arms. DBA
finds applications in every situation that we want to pick the
best candidate, given our set KPI, from multiple candidates.
Candidates can be Layouts of website, Coupons, Products,
Emails, Advertisements, Algorithms and etc.

The multi-armed bandit problem (aka K- or N-armed bandit problem) maximizes the expected gain of resource allocation (arms) between competing choices in a setting that a
fixed limited set of resources is available while the properties
of the choices are partially known at the time of allocation.
Since the introduction of this problem as multi-armed
bandit (Katehakis and Veinott Jr ), several attempts have
been done in expanding and improving solutions as well
as the problem definition. In this paper we further generalize the problem definition to target more applications and
amend the shortcomings of the original definition.
In practice choices that we are selecting can change their
performance by time, we call it Dynamic Arms. For instance, imagine we are selecting the most attractive item for
sale and our choices are pumpkin and moon cake. Given the
time we make this selection the attractiveness of the items
can drastically varies. In this example if we are close to Halloween or Chinese new year one item overcomes the other.

Related works
DBA is a novel generalization the original Bandit (Katehakis
and Veinott Jr ). Below are other state-of-the-art variations:
Cascading Bandits imitates the popular model of user
behaviour in web search (Craswell et al. ). Given a list of K
links, the user examines this list with an order and selects
one. Cascade Bandit redefines the reward function to take
into account this order (Kveton et al. ; Zong et al. ).
Contextual Bandits: The bandit algorithm selects a candidate without using any contextual information. For example, if we know that a user is a kid or adult we can select or
avoid selecting some candidates. The contextual bandit extends the original model by making the decision conditional
on the state of the environment (Joseph et al. ).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9869

