The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Predicting Unsolvable Deals in
the Birds of a Feather Solitaire Game
Richard Hoshino, Maximilian Kahn
Quest University Canada, Squamish, British Columbia, Canada

Rules of the Game

Abstract

BoaF is played with a standard 52-card deck, with 4 suits
(C, H, S, D) and 13 ranks of each suit (from A to K). Below
is an example of an initial configuration, where 4 rows of 4
cards are dealt face-up, representing 16 one-card “stacks”.

In this paper, we analyze Birds of a Feather (BoaF), a solitaire
game played with 16 cards. While the large majority of deals
are solvable, the set of unsolvable deals share certain characteristics that can be determined from the adjacency matrix of
the corresponding “compatibility graph”. We create a binary
decision tree based on just three variables to predict whether a
given deal is solvable. Our predictive model, tested on 30,000
random deals, correctly classifies over 99.9% of our data.

8C
6H
5C
2D

Introduction

8H
JH
7C
TS

8S
5H
KS
QS

7S
9H
4S
3D

Any stack of cards can be picked up and placed on top of
another stack in the same row or column, as long as the top
card of each stack is either the same suit or their ranks differ
by at most one. For example, 8C can be placed on top of 7S.
For any deal, a game is solvable if and only if there exists a
sequence of 15 moves that creates a single stack of 16 cards.
Our deal above is solvable, as one possible 15-move solution
is 3D-2D 4S-7S 5C-8C 4S-5C 4S-3D QS-KS 8S-QS 4S-TS
7C-8H 6H-JH 9H-5H 8S-9H 7C-6H 8S-7C 4S-8S. This results in a single stack with 4S as the top card.
Given a deal, define its compatibility graph G as follows:
each of the 16 cards is a vertex, and two vertices are adjacent
if and only if their suits match or their ranks differ by at most
one. By definition, the 15-move solution to any deal must be
a spanning tree of its compatibility graph G, as we see from
the dark edges of the compatibility graph below.

In the 2019 EAAI Undergraduate Research Challenge, participants were invited to analyze Birds of a Feather (BoaF),
a perfect-information one-player card game (Neller 2016).
Like other open solitaire games, the 16 cards in each BoaF
game are dealt face-up. Thus, each initial configuration can
be classified as either solvable or unsolvable.
The 15-puzzle is a famous open solitaire game, consisting of fifteen tiles numbered 1 to 15 randomly arranged in a
4 × 4 frame, with one tile missing. The object of the game is
to use the empty space to slide the tiles, and create a configuration where the fifteen tiles are placed in order. A simple
parity argument (Johnson and Story 1879) shows that half
of the starting positions are unsolvable. Knowing the set of
solvable starting positions allows game designers to avoid
presenting users with an impossible puzzle.
Conversely, FreeCell is an open solitaire card game where
52 cards are dealt randomly, without any consideration of
whether a given deal is solvable. Although nearly every
FreeCell deal is solvable, one out of every 78,000 deals is
not (Keller 2018). Despite much effort, no Microsoft FreeCell player could solve the complete set of 32,000 deals, and
it was only through an extensive crowdsourcing effort that it
was shown that one of the deals is indeed unsolvable.
In this paper, we analyze the recently invented BoaF game
and describe our efforts of creating a model to quickly and
accurately predict whether a deal is solvable. After presenting the rules of the game, we describe our three-variable binary decision tree model, show that our model makes the
correct classification in over 99.9% of random deals in our
testing set, and conclude with ideas for future research.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9748

