The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bringing Order to Chaos – A Compact
Representation of Partial Order in SAT-Based HTN Planning
Gregor Behnke, Daniel Höller, Susanne Biundo
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Ulm University, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
{gregor.behnke, daniel.hoeller, susanne.biundo}@uni-ulm.de

Abstract

the problem into account. Progress has been made using
heuristic search (Höller et al. 2018) and search space pruning (Dvorak et al. 2014). However, since heuristics need
to be informed about both, the hierarchy and the statetransition system, the design of HTN heuristics is difficult.
Empirically, translations of HTN planning problems into
propositional logic have proven successful (Behnke, Höller,
and Biundo 2018a; 2018b). They have a unified representation of state transition and hierarchy and benefit from ongoing research in SAT solving. Similarly, a translation into
propositional logic has been proposed for the HTN plan verification problem (Behnke, Höller, and Biundo 2017).

HTN planning provides an expressive formalism to model
complex application domains. It has been widely used in realworld applications. However, the development of domainindependent planning techniques for such models is still
lacking behind. The need to be informed about both statetransitions and the task hierarchy makes the realisation
of search-based approaches difficult, especially with unrestricted partial ordering of tasks in HTN domains. Recently,
a translation of HTN planning problems into propositional
logic has shown promising empirical results. Such planners
benefit from a unified representation of state and hierarchy,
but until now require very large formulae to represent partial
order. In this paper, we introduce a novel encoding of HTN
Planning as SAT. In contrast to related work, most of the reasoning on ordering relations is not left to the SAT solver, but
done beforehand. This results in much smaller formulae and,
as shown in our evaluation, in a planner that outperforms previous SAT-based approaches as well as the state-of-the-art in
search-based HTN planning.

The first encoding of hierarchical planning was proposed
by Mali and Kambhampati (1998). Their formalism does not
specify initial tasks to decompose, but freely inserts (abstract) tasks. Thus it does not comply with the established
HTN formalism and its definition of a solution, but is equivalent to classical planning. Further, the encoding cannot handle recursion, i.e., even with an initial task, it would allow
only for less expressive models. The second encoding has
been restricted to totally ordered HTNs, but allows for recursion (Behnke, Höller, and Biundo 2018a). This decreases
the expressivity severely (Höller et al. 2014). The encoding
of the hierarchy has been based on the Path Decomposition
Tree (PDT), which represents all possible decompositions
up to a certain depth. It has been combined with the Kautz
and Selman encoding (1996) to represent the state transition
system. Behnke, Höller, and Biundo (2018b) introduced a
canonical extension to partially ordered HTNs, representing
ordering relations on top of the PDT. Thus the SAT solver is
tasked with all reasoning about ordering relations.

Introduction
In many practical applications, Hierarchical Task Network
(HTN) planning (Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1996) has proven
to be a useful formalism for modelling planning problems (Nau et al. 2005; Straatman et al. 2013; Champandard, Verweij, and Straatman 2009; Dvorak et al. 2014;
Bercher et al. 2015; Behnke et al. 2018). It allows for specifying a primitive action theory in conjunction with a hierarchical refinement structure. As plans have to be obtained
using these refinement rules they form a second means to
restrict the set of solutions. In fact, these restrictions are
strictly more expressive than classical (even using ADL)
planning (Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1996; Höller et al. 2014;
Höller et al. 2016; Bercher et al. 2016).
The hierarchy can also be used to restrict the search space,
leading to very efficient domain-configurable planning systems (like, e.g., SHOP2 (Nau et al. 2003)). However, this
increases the modelling effort severely. Recent research has
focussed on domain-independent HTN planning, which provides more freedom and flexibility to the domain modeller,
as he does not have to take the way the planner will solve

In this paper we introduce a novel encoding of Partially
Ordered HTN Planning as SAT. Most ordering-related reasoning is done before creating the propositional formula
– alleviating it from the SAT solver. This leads to much
more succinct encodings – theoretically O(n3 ) instead of
Θ(n4 ) clauses, which practically often degenerates to a formula with O(n2 ) clauses. We further combine our hierarchy representation with the more recent ∃-step encoding for
classical planning (Rintanen, Heljanko, and Niemelä 2006).
The resulting planner outperforms existing SAT-based HTN
planners as well as the state-of-the-art in search-based
domain-independent HTN planning.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7520

