The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

K3S: Knowledge-Driven Solution Support System
Yu Zhang, Morteza Saberi, Min Wang, Elizabeth Chang
University of New South Wales, Canberra
Northcott Dr, Campbell, ACT 2612, Australia
{yu.zhang, min.wang}@student.adfa.edu.au, m.saberi@unsw.edu.au, e.chang@adfa.edu.au

Abstract

lution support knowledge maps demand three main components. Firstly, Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques are required for computers to understand texts and
extract requested information (Poon et al. 2010). Secondly,
predefined knowledge fusion rules are needed to support information integration, probabilistic reasoning and semantic
analysis (Sánchez, Moreno, and Del Vasto-Terrientes 2012).
Lastly, a good understanding of knowledge maps is of great
help for sorting the collected knowledge accordingly in the
maps (Dong et al. 2014). Many works have been done to explore the above topics individually, but little research has
combined them to process scholarly publications for providing scientific solutions. Therefore, to remedy this gap,
a knowledge-driven solution support system (K3S) is proposed in this paper.
The superiority of K3S is that it is able to not only extract research problems and solutions proposed in academic
papers, but also rank the solutions based on the bibliometric information of the papers. To achieve these advantages,
K3S introduces a new type of customized information network, named ‘solution-oriented information network (SIN)’.
As the knowledge base of K3S, the SIN contains nodes representing research problems (RP s) and proposed techniques
(P T s), and one relation ‘tackled’ for connecting RP s and
P T s. The RP s and P T s are obtained from solution-oriented
academic papers in which authors propose techniques or
solutions to address specific research issues. Additionally,
K3S includes an academic paper ranking module to sort the
knowledge contained in the SIN . In this manner, driven by
the developed knowledge base and ranking module, K3S is
able to provide recommended solutions to each extracted research problem in specific subjects.

As the volume of scientific papers grows rapidly in size,
knowledge management for scientific publications is greatly
needed. Information extraction and knowledge fusion techniques have been proposed to obtain information from scholarly publications and build knowledge repositories. However,
retrieving the knowledge of problem/solution from academic
papers to support users on solving specific research problems
is rarely seen in the state of the art. Therefore, to remedy
this gap, a knowledge-driven solution support system (K3S)
is proposed in this paper to extract the information of research problems and proposed solutions from academic papers, and integrate them into knowledge maps. With the bibliometric information of the papers, K3S is capable of providing recommended solutions for any extracted problems. The
subject of intrusion detection is chosen for demonstration in
which required information is extracted with high accuracy, a
knowledge map is constructed properly, and solutions to address intrusion problems are recommended.

Introduction
With the dramatic expansion of the volume of academic
publications, there is an urgent need for novel knowledge
management techniques that can retrieve, store and manage the massive amount of scientific information effectively
and efficiently. Current knowledge management applications have been used to collect desired information from various sources, such as academic articles, news papers, web
pages, advertisements and email correspondence. Once obtained, the data can be added to existing datasets or integrated to build knowledge repositories. The constructed
knowledge repositories are then used as the brain of various types of applications for sharing domain knowledge or
providing technical support (Mayfield et al. 2014).
Although developing applications to manipulate knowledge has been lasting for decades in both academia and industries, automatically extracting knowledge from scientific
papers and reconstructing knowledge maps to provide intelligent support are still at the beginning stage. Knowledge
maps are two-dimensional spatial arrays that represent information in the form of a node-link-node diagram (Wiegmann et al. 1992). Intelligent systems assisting to build so-

K3S Conceptual Framework
K3S relies on four main modules, namely, Document Filter
Module, Knowledge Fusion Module, Uncertainty Investigation Module and Knowledge Ranking Module. Fig. 1 shows
the conceptual framework of the K3S and illustrates how the
four modules are connected.
In Fig. 1, keywords of a desired subject are fed into the
system as input, and the Document Filter Module firstly deploys Scopus as a searching tool to access academic papers based on the keywords. The module assists in collecting solution-oriented academic papers of the desired subject

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9873

