The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CommNets: Communicating Neural Network
Architectures for Resource Constrained Systems
Prince M Abudu
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
15 Parks Rd, Oxford OX1 3QD, UK
prince.abudu@balliol.ox.ac.uk
Abstract
Applications that require heterogeneous sensor deployments
continue to face practical challenges owing to resource constraints within their operating environments (i.e. energy efficiency, computational power and reliability). This has motivated the need for effective ways of selecting a sensing strategy that maximizes detection accuracy for events of interest using available resources and data-driven approaches. Inspired by those limitations, we ask a fundamental question:
whether state-of-the-art Recurrent Neural Networks can observe different series of data and communicate their hidden
states to collectively solve an objective in a distributed fashion. We realize our answer by conducting a series of systematic analyses of a Communicating Recurrent Neural Network
architecture on varying time-steps, objective functions and
number of nodes. The experimental setup we employ models tasks synonymous with those in Wireless Sensor Networks. Our contributions show that Recurrent Neural Networks can communicate through their hidden states and we
achieve promising results.

Figure 1: An illustration of event detection. Two (2) sets of
sensor signals A and B, A’ and B’ depicting temporally varying phenomena are shown. An alert signal is generated for
each set based on the occurrence of an episode of interest. In
this work, we demonstrate that distributed nodes observing
different signals characterized by dynamic phenomena can
communicate - a capability which enables event detection
applications in Resource Constrained Systems.

Motivation

communicating neural network architecture that can collective solve tasks and objectives in distributed settings - a common characteristic of Resource Constrained Systems, with
an example shown in Figure 1.

Resource Constrained Systems i.e. Wireless Sensor Networks and Embedded Systems are an integral part of human life owing to their successes in patient, environmental
and wildlife monitoring (Bell et al. 2014; Lazarescu 2013;
Dyo et al. 2012), among other application domains. Despite
their demonstrated value, these systems are plagued with
constraints on computing speed, memory size, energy efficiency and communication bandwidth.
We consider Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) in solving the problem of distributed communication. Current research has shown that RNNs can effectively model sequential data using their predictive power (Graves 2013;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014).
Owing to the great success of RNNs in various applications, many works have been motivated to make RNN architectures better suited for their implementation, for instance;
Light RNN (Li et al. 2016) and Hierarchical Multiscale
RNN (Chung, Ahn, and Bengio 2016). Work by (Zhang
et al. 2016) introduces connecting architectures for RNNs.
We harness the power of state-of-the-art RNNs to provide a

Proposed Contribution
We propose a data-driven, decentralized approach to communication that employs nodes observing unique data over
defined periods of time, and at each processing step sharing
their hidden states with neighbouring nodes to ultimately
learn the dependencies in the data and the observed function. To achieve this, we alter the architecture of traditional
RNNs on the lowest level of implementation possible, to enable communication through time (t) and space (number of
nodes) and empirically assess our results.
Our proposed architecture implements homologous and
unidirectional RNNs with shared weights implemented in
PyTorch. All layers are ReLu activated and parameters are
optimized using SGD (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams
1986) with a learning rate of 0.0005. The model uses the
default Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014) optimizer in PyTorch.
Communicating nodes have 8 latent states and are fully connected.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9909

