The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Video Object Detection with Locally-Weighted Deformable Neighbors
Zhengkai Jiang,1,2 Peng Gao,3 Chaoxu Guo,1,2 Qian Zhang,4
Shiming Xiang,1,2 Chunhong Pan1,2
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Horizon Robotics
{zhengkai.jiang,chaoxu.guo,smxiang,chpan}@nlpr.ac.cn penggao@ee.cuhk.edu.hk qian01.zhang@hobot.ai
Abstract

these challenges, videos provide rich temporal and motion
information. Effective usage of temporal information is the
key component for video object detection.

Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved great success on various image recognition tasks. However, it is nontrivial to transfer the existing networks to video due to the fact
that most of them are developed for static image. Frame-byframe processing is suboptimal because temporal information
that is vital for video understanding is totally abandoned. Furthermore, frame-by-frame processing is slow and inefficient,
which can hinder the practical usage. In this paper, we propose LWDN (Locally-Weighted Deformable Neighbors) for
video object detection without utilizing time-consuming optical flow extraction networks. LWDN can latently align the
high-level features between keyframes and keyframes or nonkeyframes. Inspired by (Zhu et al. 2017a) and (Hetang et al.
2017) who propose to aggregate features between keyframes
and keyframes, we adopt brain-inspired memory mechanism
to propagate and update the memory feature from keyframes
to keyframes. We call this process Memory-Guided Propagation. With such a memory mechanism, the discriminative ability of features in keyframes and non-keyframes are
both enhanced, which helps to improve the detection accuracy. Extensive experiments on VID dataset demonstrate that
our method achieves superior performance in a speed and accuracy trade-off, i.e., 76.3% on the challenging VID dataset
while maintaining 20fps in speed on Titan X GPU.

part
occlusion

rare
poses

motion
blur

Figure 1: Typical deteriorated object appearance in videos
A few works have been proposed to exploit such temporal information in videos by means of various postprocessing steps (Kang et al. 2016) on top of frame-level
detectors, which aims at making object detections coherent across time. However, since temporal coherence is enforced in a second stage, typically these methods cannot
be trained end-to-end. To overcome this limitation, recent
work have introduced the flow-based aggregation networks
(Zhu et al. 2017b) that is trained end-to-end. It exploits optical flow (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015) to find correspondences
across time and aggregate features across temporal correspondences to smooth object detection over adjacent frames.
However, one of the shortcomings of this method is that in
addition to performing object detection, it also needs timeconsuming optical flow extraction. This is disadvantageous
due to the following reasons: (1) optical flow extraction is
time-consuming which may reduce the detection speed; (2)
training such a model requires large amounts of flow data to
get a pretrained flow extraction network, etc.
To address these shortcomings, inspired by the flow warp
operation and non-local networks (Wang et al. 2018), we use
spatially variant weights to combine corresponding neighbors. To use the temporal information, we use the difference
of the two frames as inputs to predict the weights. Furthermore, we also predict offsets to adaptivly combine the neighbors. Our methods don’t need the time-consuming flow ex-

Introduction
Recently, deep convolutional networks (Gao et al. 2018)
have achieved significant success in many computer vision
tasks, including image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012; Feng et al. 2018), image object detection
(He et al. 2017) and image semantic segmentation (Chen et
al. 2017; Hu et al. 2018). Unlike static image, video contains redundancy and temporal information cue which could
be utilized to boost detection accuracy and speed.
Extending object detection from the static image to video
(Gupta et al. 2014) is highly valuable in a vast number of
scenarios, such as video surveillance and autonomous driving. Static image detectors are unable to handle motion blur,
video defocus, unusual poses or object occasion as shown in
Figure 1. Furthermore, frame-by-frame deep feature extraction on a heavy feature network like ResNet-101 (He et al.
2016) is time-consuming even on high-speed GPUs. Despite
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8529

