The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Aligning Domain-Specific Distribution and Classifier
for Cross-Domain Classification from Multiple Sources
Yongchun Zhu,1,2 Fuzhen Zhuang,1,2,∗ Deqing Wang3
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
School of Computer Science, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{zhuyongchun18s, zhuangfuzhen}@ict.ac.cn, dqwang@buaa.edu.cn

Single-source domain
adaptation

Abstract
While Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) algorithms,
i.e., there are only labeled data from source domains, have
been actively studied in recent years, most algorithms and
theoretical results focus on Single-source Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (SUDA). However, in the practical scenario,
labeled data can be typically collected from multiple diverse
sources, and they might be different not only from the target
domain but also from each other. Thus, domain adapters from
multiple sources should not be modeled in the same way. Recent deep learning based Multi-source Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (MUDA) algorithms focus on extracting common
domain-invariant representations for all domains by aligning
distribution of all pairs of source and target domains in a common feature space. However, it is often very hard to extract
the same domain-invariant representations for all domains in
MUDA. In addition, these methods match distributions without considering domain-specific decision boundaries between
classes. To solve these problems, we propose a new framework with two alignment stages for MUDA which not only
respectively aligns the distributions of each pair of source
and target domains in multiple specific feature spaces, but
also aligns the outputs of classifiers by utilizing the domainspecific decision boundaries. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can achieve remarkable results on popular benchmark datasets for image classification.

target

source1

Multi-source domain
adaptation

source2

source3

Figure 1: In Single-source Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (SUDA), the distribution of source and target domains
cannot be matched very well. While in Multi-source Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (MUDA), due to the shift between multiple source domains, it is much harder to match
distributions of all source domains and target domains. (Best
viewed in color.)

as domain adaptation. In recent years, most domain adaptation algorithms focus on Single-source Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (SUDA) problem, where there are only labeled data from one single source domain. Previous SUDA
methods include re-weighting the training data (Jiang and
Zhai 2007; Huang et al. 2007), and finding a transformation in a lower-dimensional manifold that draws the source
and target subspaces closer (Gong et al. 2012; Fernando
et al. 2013). In recent years, most SUDA algorithms learn
to map the data from both domains into a common feature space to learn domain-invariant representations by minimizing domain distribution discrepancy (Long et al. 2015;
Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Sun and Saenko 2016; Long et
al. 2017), and the source classifier can then be directly applied to target instances.
However, in practice, it is very likely that we have multiple source domains. Consequently, Multi-source Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (MUDA) is both feasible in practice and more valuable in performance improvement and
has received considerable attention in real-world application fields (Yang, Yan, and Hauptmann 2007; Duan, Xu, and

Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have significantly improved the state-of-the-arts across a variety of visual learning tasks (Ren et al. 2015; He et al. 2016). These achievements mainly come from the availability of large-scale labeled data for supervised learning. For a target task with
the shortage of labeled data, there is a strong motivation
to build effective learners that can leverage rich labeled
data from a related source domain. However, due to the
presence of domain shift (Quionero-Candela et al. 2009;
Pan and Yang 2010), the performance of the learned model
might tend to degrade heavily in the target domain.
Learning a discriminative model in the presence of domain shift between training and test distributions is known
∗

Corresponding author: Fuzhen Zhuang
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5989

