The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SDRL: Interpretable and Data-Efficient Deep
Reinforcement Learning Leveraging Symbolic Planning
Daoming Lyu,1 Fangkai Yang,2 Bo Liu,1 Steven Gustafson2
1

Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA
2
Maana Inc., Bellevue, WA, USA
daoming.lyu@auburn.edu, fyang@maana.io, boliu@auburn.edu, sgustafson@maana.io

Abstract

the system behavior interpretable to gain the trust from the
user and provide insights for their decision-making process
(Gilpin et al. 2018). Studying on these two topics has received
increasing attention from the machine learning community.
Recent study in Neuroscience suggests human plays video
games by learning and planning from a high-level objectbased representation of a deterministic transition model of
the underlying problem (Tsividis et al. 2017). This observation sheds lights on improving data efficiency by introducing
a hierarchy over flat MDP problem using subtasks, i.e., a
temporal abstraction over a course of primitive actions, and
utilizing object representation for learning (Kulkarni et al.
2016) or strategic planning (Keramati et al. 2018). Although
these approaches achieved some success on data efficiency,
none of them reaches the same level of interpretability as
much as object-based subtask planning and learning that
human performs.

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has gained great success
by learning directly from high-dimensional sensory inputs, yet
is notorious for the lack of interpretability. Interpretability of
the subtasks is critical in hierarchical decision-making as it
increases the transparency of black-box-style DRL approach
and helps the RL practitioners to understand the high-level
behavior of the system better. In this paper, we introduce symbolic planning into DRL and propose a framework of Symbolic Deep Reinforcement Learning (SDRL) that can handle
both high-dimensional sensory inputs and symbolic planning.
The task-level interpretability is enabled by relating symbolic
actions to options.This framework features a planner – controller – meta-controller architecture, which takes charge of
subtask scheduling, data-driven subtask learning, and subtask
evaluation, respectively. The three components cross-fertilize
each other and eventually converge to an optimal symbolic
plan along with the learned subtasks, bringing together the
advantages of long-term planning capability with symbolic
knowledge and end-to-end reinforcement learning directly
from a high-dimensional sensory input. Experimental results
validate the interpretability of subtasks, along with improved
data efficiency compared with state-of-the-art approaches.

In this paper, we argue that performing reasoning and planning on explicitly represented knowledge is an effective way
to achieve the task-level interpretability and propose to use
Symbolic Planning (SP) (Cimatti, Pistore, and Traverso 2008)
as a descriptive and intuitive high-level technique to improve
the data-efficiency and interpretability of DRL. Symbolic
planning has been used to build mobile robots that co-inhabit
with human, perform tasks for human and communicate with
human for task-relevant information (Hanheide et al. 2015;
Chen, Yang, and Chen 2016; Khandelwal et al. 2017), all
requiring high-level interpretability of their behavior. Different from RL approaches, a planning agent carries prior
symbolic knowledge of objects, properties and how they are
changed by executing actions in the dynamic system, represented in a formal, logic-based language such as PDDL
(McDermott et al. 1998) or an action language (Gelfond
and Lifschitz 1998) that relates to logic programming under answer set semantics (answer set programming) (Lifschitz 2008). The agent utilizes a symbolic planner, such as
a PDDL planner FAST D OWNWARD (Helmert 2006) or an
answer set solver C LINGO (Gebser, Kaufmann, and Schaub
2012) to generate a sequence of actions based on its symbolic knowledge, executes the actions to achieve its goal, perform execution monitor and replan to handle execution failure and domain uncertainty. Compared with RL approaches,
an SP agent does not require a large number of trial-anderror to behave reasonably well, and the interpretability of

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms have
achieved tremendous success on sequential decision-making
problems involving high-dimensional sensory inputs such
as Atari games (Mnih et al. 2015). The input states of Atari
games are usually raw pixel images, and the deep neural network is used to approximate Q-value, i.e., “Deep Q-Network”
(DQN). This approach can learn fine granular policies that
surpass human experts but is criticized for the lack of data efficiency and interpretability. DRL algorithms usually require
several millions of samples but still cannot learn long-horizon
sequential actions for problems with sparse and delayed rewards, such as Montezuma’s Revenge (Mnih et al. 2015).
The learning behavior based on the black-box neural network is nontransparent and hard to explain and understand.
The goal of interpretability is to describe the internals of a
system in a way that is understandable to humans. In real
applications of decision-making, it is instrumental to make
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2970

