The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Incorporating Network Embedding into Markov Random Field for Better
Community Detection
Di Jin,1 Xinxin You,1 Weihao Li,2 Dongxiao He,1 Peng Cui,3,* Françoise Fogelman-Soulié,1
Tanmoy Chakraborty4
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China,
2
Visual Learning Lab, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg 69120, Germany,
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China,
4
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110020, India.
{jindi, xinxyou, hedongxiao}@tju.edu.cn , francoise.soulie@outlook.com
weihao.li@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, tanmoy@iiitd.ac.in
Abstract
Recent research on community detection focuses on learning representations of nodes using different network embedding methods, and then feeding them as normal features to
clustering algorithms. However, we find that though one may
have good results by direct clustering based on such network
embedding features, there is ample room for improvement.
More seriously, in many real networks, some statisticallysignificant nodes which play pivotal roles are often divided
into incorrect communities using network embedding methods. This is because while some distance measures are used to
capture the spatial relationship between nodes by embedding,
the nodes after mapping to feature vectors are essentially not
coupled any more, losing important structural information. To
address this problem, we propose a general Markov Random
Field (MRF) framework to incorporate coupling in network
embedding which allows better detecting network communities. By smartly utilizing properties of MRF, the new framework not only preserves the advantages of network embedding (e.g. low complexity, high parallelizability and applicability for traditional machine learning), but also alleviates its
core drawback of inadequate representations of dependencies
via making up the missing coupling relationships. Experiments on real networks show that our new approach improves
the accuracy of existing embedding methods (e.g. Node2Vec,
DeepWalk and MNMF), and corrects most wrongly-divided
statistically-significant nodes, which makes network embedding essentially suitable for real community detection applications. The new approach also outperforms other state-ofthe-art conventional community detection methods.

Figure 1: Comparison of (a) network embedding methods
and (b) our MRF approach for community detection. The
sizes of nodes are proportional to their degree centrality values. Each of the actual community structure (left) and the
community structures derived by algorithms (right) is separated by a dotted line in the graph. (a) For embedding methods, the new feature representation in the form of individual vectors is first extracted and then taken as input to a
data clustering algorithm. Nodes 3 and 6 both have high degree centralities and thus can be regarded as statisticallysignificant nodes. Here node 3 is wrongly divided. (b) For
our MRF approach, the feature vectors obtained by embedding methods are modelled as unary potentials. The topological structure, which reflects the nodes dependency relationship, is modelled as pairwise potentials. They work together
to form the final energy function, in which the statisticallysignificant node 3 is successfully assigned.
One of the most important properties of complex networks
is their community structure, in which nodes are connected
more densely within clusters than across clusters. Discovering communities is useful in many real applications such as
targeted advertising, protein network analysis, recommendation system, etc. (Newman 2010).
Recently, discovering community structure in complex
networks has attracted a great number of scholars from
various research fields. A series of methods based on different theories and techniques have been proposed, as reviewed e.g. in (Fortunato and Hric 2016). They include
spectral clustering (Newman 2010), modularity optimiza-

Introduction
Complex networks such as biological networks, communication networks and social networks, are abstract representations of biological systems, communication systems and interaction systems respectively. Networks model interaction
relationships between units of such various complex systems. They are powerful representations which can be used
for analyzing the nature and function of complex systems.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

160

