The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adversarial Unsupervised Representation Learning for Activity Time-Series
Karan Aggarwal,1 Shafiq Joty,2 Luis Fernandez-Luque,3 Jaideep Srivastava1
1

University of Minnesota, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 Qatar Computing Research Institute
aggar081@umn.edu, srjoty@ntu.edu.sg, lluque@hbku.edu.qa, srivasta@umn.edu

Abstract

Only a minuscule proportion of the population has both their
clinical data and wearables data available. Thus a purely supervised approach utilizing the wearables-clinical data corpus is sub-optimal since it renders the activity data from
a majority of subjects redundant. Hence, any approach towards using activity signals should utilize the unsupervised
learning. Second, an important aspect is that information in
actigraphy signals depends on the subjects and their environments, such as their routines and surroundings (Storm,
Heller, and Mazzà 2015) along with measurement errors owing to device design. We propose a two-pronged approach.
First, a mapping of the temporal relations of the activities
from the time-series to a feature space should be learned.
Second, this feature space should take into account the subject’s environment, and make the representations invariant
to the subject and their environment.
We propose a new method that addresses these challenges.
Our activity2vec method is an unsupervised representation
learning model that learns distributed representations for
activity signals spanning over a time segment (e.g., at a
day level) in a subject invariant manner. We use two public
data-sets to evaluate our approach against baselines on four
disorder prediction tasks. Using a linear classifier (logistic
regression), we show our proposed representation learning
method outperforms the baseline time-series methods, with
day-level representations performing the best. The linear
classifier with our learned features performs at par with the
convolution neural network baseline trained end-to-end on
the tasks. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of inducing
subject invariant features.
Unlike traditional time-series methods, our feature vectors can be used to boost the performance of the supervised
learning models. It has been shown that using pre-trained
vectors to initialize the supervised models produces better
performance (Hinton et al. 2012). Our method is general
enough to be applied to other domains with similar timeseries like activity tracking through smart-phones, traffic
monitoring, or other sensor data. Specifically, we make the
following contributions:

Sufficient physical activity and restful sleep play a major
role in the prevention and cure of many chronic conditions.
Being able to proactively screen and monitor such chronic
conditions would be a big step forward for overall health.
The rapid increase in the popularity of wearable devices provides a significant new source, making it possible to track the
user’s lifestyle real-time. In this paper, we propose a novel
unsupervised representation learning technique called activity2vec that learns and “summarizes” the discrete-valued activity time-series. It learns the representations with three components: (i) the co-occurrence and magnitude of the activity levels in a time-segment, (ii) neighboring context of the
time-segment, and (iii) promoting subject-invariance with adversarial training. We evaluate our method on four disorder
prediction tasks using linear classifiers. Empirical evaluation
demonstrates that our proposed method scales and performs
better than many strong baselines. The adversarial regime
helps improve the generalizability of our representations by
promoting subject invariant features. We also show that using
the representations at the level of a day works the best since
human activity is structured in terms of daily routines.

Introduction
Physical activity and sleep are crucial to health and wellbeing. Requisite activity and sufficient sleep prevent various illnesses such as diabetes (Warburton, Nicol, and Bredin
2006). Rise in chronic conditions, mainly due to aging and
unhealthy lifestyles, is putting our healthcare system under
stress. The current disorder screening approach requires subjects to undergo various diagnosis steps, involving questionnaires and polysomnography (PSG). With increasing popularity of wearable devices like Fitbit, which collect detailed
data about the body’s movements, there is an increased interest in using actigraphy for detecting sleep-related disorders and tracking longitudinal changes in the subject’s condition. Although much lower fidelity than clinical devices,
availability of wearables provides a novel opportunity, owing to its non-intrusive and real-time capabilities; specifically, if we can develop techniques to extract information
from the vast amounts of body-monitoring data. Such techniques could be useful to assist healthcare professionals as
well as help monitor behavioral therapy, e.g., exercise.

• Unsupervised scalable embeddings for activity timeseries: To utilize enormous unlabeled human activity data,
we propose a novel unsupervised representation learning
method activity2vec that uncovers activity patterns through
distributed representation in a scalable fashion, which can

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

834

