The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Graph CNNs with Motif and Variable
Temporal Block for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Yu-Hui Wen,1,2 Lin Gao,1∗ Hongbo Fu,3 Fang-Lue Zhang,4 Shihong Xia1,2∗
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Creative Media, City University of Hong Kong
4
School of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington
{wenyuhui,gaolin,xsh}@ict.ac.cn, hongbofu@cityu.edu.hk, fanglue.zhang@ecs.vuw.ac.nz
Abstract

and bones as edges. Thus, in recent works, graph convolutional networks (GCNs), which generalize CNN from images to graphs of arbitrary structures, have been successfully
adopted to model the skeleton data (Yan, Xiong, and Lin
2018; Tang et al. 2018). A spatial-temporal graph is firstly
constructed to model the physical connection of joints and
temporal edges between corresponding joints in consecutive frames (Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018). Recently, GCNs are
combined with progressive reinforcement learning to select
key frames of the whole video for extracting more representative graph sequences to feed GCNs (Tang et al. 2018).
Human body completes an action with the cooperation
of various parts. The cues for understanding human actions
not only lie in the relationship between spatially connected
joints, but also exist in the potential dependency of disconnected joints. For example, our hands and head are physically disconnected, but their relationship is useful for recognizing the action “touch head”. An extrinsic dependency has
been introduced (Tang et al. 2018) for disconnected joints,
but they take the relationship between all pair-wise disconnected joints with equal importance.
We propose a novel deep architecture for skeletal human action recognition by better modelling the spatial and
temporal features of human actions. The basic structure
is a spatial-temporal module (STM) which contains motifbased GCNs with variable temporal dense block (VTDB),
as shown in Fig. 1. The motif-based graph convolution can
model the dependency of physically connected and disconnected joints simultaneously, thus resulting in a more effective extraction of high-order spatial information. For the
temporal modeling, VTDB is used to encode short-, midand long-range local information. In addition, we employ
the recent non-local neural network module (Wang et al.
2018) to compute a representative sequence. This non-local
block in our network is able to capture whole-range dependencies in an attention mechanism to enhance the ability for
extracting global temporal features.
The major contributions of our deep learning architecture for skeleton-based human action recognition lie in the
following aspects: 1) We propose motif-based GCNs for
modelling spatial information by adopting a weight-sharing
scheme among joints of identical semantic roles, and constructing high-order locality by considering both physical

Hierarchical structure and different semantic roles of
joints in human skeleton convey important information
for action recognition. Conventional graph convolution
methods for modeling skeleton structure consider only
physically connected neighbors of each joint, and the
joints of the same type, thus failing to capture highorder information. In this work, we propose a novel
model with motif-based graph convolution to encode
hierarchical spatial structure, and a variable temporal
dense block to exploit local temporal information over
different ranges of human skeleton sequences. Moreover, we employ a non-local block to capture global dependencies of temporal domain in an attention mechanism. Our model achieves improvements over the stateof-the-art methods on two large-scale datasets.

1

Introduction

With the swell in popularity of real-time human motion estimation technologies, skeletal human motion data have become widely and cheaply available. Due to the demand of
semantic descriptions of human motion data for the applications like medical monitoring, robot/human interaction, and
action analysis for sports and security, researchers have paid
more attention to skeletal human action recognition. Skeleton sequences are a kind of compact representation for human motion data, which can significantly reduce computational redundancy on semantic analysis. Compared to human action analysis from raw RGB or RGB-D video sequences, recognition on skeleton has much better performance when the background of a scene is complex (Ke et
al. 2017; Kim and Reiter 2017; Zhang et al. 2017).
Conventional deep learning based methods usually structure a skeleton sequence by a time series of 2D or 3D joint
coordinates or pseudo-images, which are then sent into recurrent neural networks (RNNs) or convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to predict action labels (Kim and Reiter 2017;
Liu, Liu, and Chen 2017; Li et al. 2017; Song et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2017). In fact, it is more natural to describe
a skeleton as a graph with human body joints as nodes
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8989

