The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Plan-Length Bounds: Beyond 1-Way Dependency
Mohammad Abdulaziz
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany

Abstract

NP-Hard (Pardalos and Migdalas 2004). The impracticality of those explicit algorithms is exacerbated in settings
where systems are described using factored representations,
like planning and model-checking, since a system’s explicit
representation can be exponential in the size of the corresponding factored problem description.
However, compositional approaches to calculate bounds
for problems described using factored representations are
feasible. The concrete system’s (recurrence) diameter is
bounded by composing together bounds for abstract subsystems. The subsystems are projections of the concrete system. The motivation for compositional approaches is that
they provide useful approximations of plan bounds using
smaller computational effort, since only explicit representations of abstract subsystems have to be constructed. Baumgartner, Kuehlmann, and Abraham (2002) and Rintanen and
Gretton (2013) followed this projection-based approach to
develop procedures to compositionally bound the diameter.
This was later improved by Abdulaziz, Gretton, and Norrish (2015) and Abdulaziz, Gretton, and Norrish (2017) (we
refer to those two papers as AGN1 and AGN2 hereafter).
A common drawback with previous approaches, however, is that they are only usefully applicable if the projections are induced by acyclicity in the causal/dependency
graph (Williams and Nayak 1997; Knoblock 1994). Thus it
is an open question as to whether there are practically useful
ways to upper-bound plan lengths using projections not resulting from dependency graphs with acyclicity. We address
this question by developing a compositional bounding procedure which is applicable to arbitrary projections. We do
so by defining a new topological property for the state space
to which we refer as the traversal diameter. The distinctive
feature of the traversal diameter is that, for any given factored transition system, the traversal diameter of that system
is upper bounded by the product of the traversal diameters
of projections of that system. Those projections can be obtained using any partition of the system’s state variables, i.e.
the restriction of having acyclic dependencies is not required
for this compositional bound.
Using the traversal diameter based compositional method
to bound concrete problems is not very practically useful
since it uses the product of all the projections’ traversal diameters as the bound. However, the utility of this new procedure is most pronounced when combined with previous

We consider the problem of compositionally computing upper bounds on lengths of plans. Following existing work, our
approach is based on a decomposition of state-variable dependency graphs (a.k.a. causal graphs). Tight bounds have
been demonstrated previously for problems where key dependencies flow in a single direction—i.e. manipulating variable v1 can disturb the ability to manipulate v2 and not vice
versa. We develop a more general bounding approach which
allows us to compute useful bounds where dependency flows
in both directions. Our approach is practically most useful
when combined with earlier approaches, where the computed
bounds are substantially improved in a relatively broad variety of problems. When combined with an existing planning
procedure, the improved bounds yield coverage improvements for both solvable and unsolvable planning problems.

Introduction
Many techniques for solving reachability problems in transition systems, like SAT-based planning (Kautz and Selman
1992) and bounded model checking (Biere et al. 1999), benefit from knowledge of upper bounds on the lengths of transition sequences, aka completeness thresholds. If N is such a
bound, and if a transition sequence achieving the goal exists,
then that sequence need not comprise more than N actions.
Biere et al. (1999) identify the diameter and the recurrence diameter, which are topological properties of the
state space, as conceptually appealing upper bounds. The
diameter is the longest shortest path between any two
states. The recurrence diameter is the longest simple path
in the state space, i.e. the longest path that does not traverse any state more than once. Approximate and exact
algorithms have been developed to calculate both properties given an explicit (e.g. tabular) representation of the
transition system. Exact algorithms to compute the diameter have worse than quadratic runtimes in the number
of states (Fredman 1976; Alon, Galil, and Margalit 1997;
Chan 2010; Yuster 2010), and approximation approaches
have super-linear runtimes (Aingworth et al. 1999; Roditty
and Vassilevska Williams 2013; Chechik et al. 2014; Abboud, Williams, and Wang 2016). The situation is even
worse for the recurrence diameter, whose computation is
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7502

