The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Communication-Efficient Stochastic Gradient MCMC for Neural Networks
Chunyuan Li,1 Changyou Chen,2 Yunchen Pu,3 Ricardo Henao,4 Lawrence Carin4
1

Microsoft Research, Redmond 2 University at Buffalo, SUNY 3 Facebook 4 Duke University

Abstract

2014; Ding et al. 2014; Li et al. 2016a; Liu, Zhu, and Song
2016; Durmus et al. 2016; Fu and Zhang 2017; Cong et al.
2017; Li et al. 2016b; Gan et al. 2017) have been developed
to deal with the inherent scalability problems of MCMC
methods when applied to large data sets.
The standard formulation of SG-MCMC is sequential,
i.e., it alternates between two operations: gradient evaluation and parameter updates. To improve the speed of SGMCMC algorithms, we consider estimating weight uncertainty through parallelizing across multiple compute cores
(processing nodes or processors). A natural approach to parallel SG-MCMC consists of allowing each compute core
to access the full data set, run separate SG-MCMC chains
(without communication), and then combine their results
as independent samples. Though a larger number of samples can be obtained, each chain has in principle roughly
the same mixing speed w.r.t. serial SG-MCMC. However, it
is likely to be better at exploring parameter space, because
each chain can be initialized to a different starting point in
such a space.
An alternative approach to implementing parallel SGMCMC allows communication between compute cores:
some cores (workers) are tasked with improving the mixing
(via stochastic gradients) of sample paths (Markov chains)
maintained by a different core (master), which regularly
sends globally aggregated parameter summaries back to the
workers. The cross-talk between workers through the master allows the parameter space to be efficiently represented
with a smaller number of samples, collected by the master
core. Unfortunately, communication overhead prevents instantaneous communication between master and workers at
every step of the learning procedure. One compromise strategy consists of allowing the master to interact with workers periodically. This raises a different concern: to the best
of our knowledge, there are no effective protocols for SGMCMC to coordinate the exchange of information between
cores, under communication constraints.
In this paper, we propose leveraging parallelization to
accelerate SG-MCMC under a master-worker framework.
Multiple workers run individual SG-MCMC chains to explore the parameter space at the same time; they periodically
communicate with the master to share information about
model parameters. In the distributed optimization literature,
numerous approaches have been proposed for coordination

Learning probability distributions on the weights of neural
networks has recently proven beneficial in many applications.
Bayesian methods such as Stochastic Gradient Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) offer an elegant framework to reason about model uncertainty in neural networks. However,
these advantages usually come with a high computational
cost. We propose accelerating SG-MCMC under the masterworker framework: workers asynchronously and in parallel
share responsibility for gradient computations, while the master collects the final samples. To reduce communication overhead, two protocols (downpour and elastic) are developed to
allow periodic interaction between the master and workers.
We provide a theoretical analysis on the finite-time estimation consistency of posterior expectations, and establish connections to sample thinning. Our experiments on various neural networks demonstrate that the proposed algorithms can
greatly reduce training time while achieving comparable (or
better) test accuracy/log-likelihood levels, relative to traditional SG-MCMC. When applied to reinforcement learning,
it naturally provides exploration for asynchronous policy optimization, with encouraging performance improvement.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become widely used
in machine learning, often achieving state-of-the-art performance across a variety of applications. Recently, there
has been considerable interest in developing principled yet
scalable Bayesian learning methods (Blundell et al. 2015;
Hernández-Lobato and Adams 2015; Korattikara et al. 2015;
Kingma, Salimans, and Welling 2015; Gal and Ghahramani 2016; Bui et al. 2016; Liu and Wang 2016), to obtain good estimates of uncertainty for the DNN weights.
The learned uncertainty is then transferred to predictions
during testing, to help alleviate overfitting, and/or to quantify confidence about predictive estimates. Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) is perhaps the most well-known family of (sample-based) uncertainty-estimation methods for
DNNs. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Neal 1995) is a
popular member of this family. More recently, mini-batchbased methods, such as stochastic gradient MCMC (SGMCMC) (Welling and Teh 2011; Chen, Fox, and Guestrin
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4173

