The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exploiting Local Feature Patterns for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Jun Wen,1,2 Risheng Liu,3 Nenggan Zheng,1∗ Qian Zheng,2 Zhefeng Gong,4 Junsong Yuan5
1

Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
College of Computer Science and Techology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
3
International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Liaoning, China
4
Department of Neurobiology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
5
State University of New York at Buffalo
{junwen, qianzheng, zfgong}@zju.edu.cn, zng@cs.zju.edu.cn, rsliu@dlut.edu.cn, jsyuan@buffalo.edu
2

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation methods aim to alleviate
performance degradation caused by domain-shift by learning domain-invariant representations. Existing deep domain
adaptation methods focus on holistic feature alignment by
matching source and target holistic feature distributions,
without considering local features and their multi-mode
statistics. We show that the learned local feature patterns are
more generic and transferable and a further local feature distribution matching enables fine-grained feature alignment. In
this paper, we present a method for learning domain-invariant
local feature patterns and jointly aligning holistic and local
feature statistics. Comparisons to the state-of-the-art unsupervised domain adaptation methods on two popular benchmark
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our approach and its
effectiveness on alleviating negative transfer.

Figure 1: Comparisons of (a) holistic feature alignment and
(b) local feature alignment. The learned local feature pattern
“Chair” could not only be shared across domains but also
between the category “Chair” and category “Computer”, as
shown in (b).

Introduction
Many machine learning algorithms assume that the training and testing data are drawn from the same feature space
with the same distribution. However, this assumption rarely
holds in practice as the data distribution is likely to change
over time and space. Though the state-of-the-art deep convolutional features show invariant to low-level variations to
some degree, they are still susceptible to domain-shift, as we
can not manually label sufficient training data that cover diverse application domains (Csurka 2017; Zhou et al. 2018;
Hong et al. 2018). The typical solution is to further finetune the learned deep models on task-specific datasets. However, it is often prohibitively difficult and expensive to obtain
enough labeled data to properly finetune the large-scale parameters employed by deep networks. Instead of recollecting labeled data and retraining the model for every possible
new scenario, unsupervised domain adaptation methods attempt to alleviate the performance degradation by transferring discriminative features from neighboring labeled source
domains using only unlabeled target data (Ganin et al. 2016;
Tzeng et al. 2017).
Unsupervised domain adaptation methods assume shared
label space with different feature distributions across source

and target domains. These methods usually bridge different
domains by learning domain-invariant discriminative representations, and directly apply the classifier learned from only
source labels to target domain (Ben-David et al. 2010). To
reduce domain discrepancy, previous methods usually align
source and target in a shared subspace (Gong et al. 2012;
Fernando et al. 2013). Recently, deep neural networks have
been exploited to map both domains into a domain-invariant
feature space and learn more transferable representations
(Zhou et al. 2014; Tzeng et al. 2017; Pei et al. 2018). This is
generally achieved by optimizing the learned representations
to minimize some measures of domain discrepancy such as
maximum mean discrepancy (Long et al. 2015), reconstruction loss (Ghifary et al. 2016), correlation distance (Sun
and Saenko 2016), or adversarial loss (Tzeng et al. 2017).
Among them, the adversarial learning based deep domain
adaptation methods have become increasingly prevalent and
achieved the top performances.
Though existing deep domain adaptation methods have
achieved excellent performances (Csurka 2017), they mainly
focus on aligning source and target holistic representations
(Ganin et al. 2016; Tzeng et al. 2017), without exploiting the

∗

Coresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5401

