The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Probabilistic Model Checking of Robots Deployed in Extreme Environments
Xingyu Zhao,1 Valentin Robu,1,2 David Flynn,1 Fateme Dinmohammadi,1
Michael Fisher,3 Matt Webster3
2

1
School of Engineering & Physical Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, U.K.
Center for Collective Intelligence, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02139, U.S.
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, U.K.
Email:{xingyu.zhao, v.robu, d.flynn, f.dinmohammadi}@hw.ac.uk, {mfisher, matt}@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract

robotic systems, i.e. systems that continuously monitor their
current and predicted performance and assess it within a
predefined certification framework (Robu, Flynn, and Lane
2018; Fisher et al. 2018).
Probabilistic model checking (PMC) (Kwiatkowska, Norman, and Parker 2018) has been successfully used to analyse quantitative properties of systems across a variety of
application domains, including robotic systems (Luckcuck
et al. 2018). This involves the construction of a probabilistic model, commonly using Discrete Time Markov Chain
(DTMC), Continuous Time Markov Chain (CTMC) and
Markov Decision Process (MDP) when considering nondeterministic actions, that formally represents the behaviour
of a system over time. The properties of interest are normally specified in Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) or Probabilistic Computational Tree Logic (PCTL), then systematic
exploration and analysis is performed to check if a claimed
property holds.
One inherent problem for most (if not all) formal verification techniques is that the verification assumes the formal
model (e.g. DTMC) accurately reflects the actual behaviour
of the real-world system (Calinescu et al. 2016). Comparing to conventional systems - for which we might argue the
formal model is fairly accurate – it becomes a tougher issue for systems in changing, unexpected environments and
with autonomous features. To handle the issue, the runtime verification idea was proposed (Epifani et al. 2009;
Calinescu et al. 2012) by keeping the formal model alive
and continuously updated when seeing new data at runtime.
In this paper, we propose a tailored PMC framework for
verifying safety-critical robots working in extreme environments. Firstly, we formalise how the robot works as a layered and parametric DTMC (transition probabilities are unknown parameters), then feed two Bayesian estimators for
different types of parameters with operational data. For each
mission, safety and reliability properties are verified at both:
Pre-mission, based on the best knowledge from previous
similar missions, lab-simulations and experts, which provides assurance before the robot undertaking a mission.
Runtime (i.e. during a running mission), using a DTMC
updated in real time. This allows the robot to take protection
actions (e.g. restart with new control policies or abort the
current mission) whenever a property of interest is being violated, which offers an additional control layer, independent

Robots are increasingly used to carry out critical missions in
extreme environments that are hazardous for humans. This requires a high degree of operational autonomy under uncertain
conditions, and poses new challenges for assuring the robot’s
safety and reliability. In this paper, we develop a framework for probabilistic model checking on a layered Markov
model to verify the safety and reliability requirements of such
robots, both at pre-mission stage and during runtime. Two
novel estimators based on conservative Bayesian inference
and imprecise probability model with sets of priors are introduced to learn the unknown transition parameters from operational data. We demonstrate our approach using data from a
real-world deployment of unmanned underwater vehicles in
extreme environments.

1

Introduction

Extreme environments, as a term used by UK EPSRC1 to
denote environments that are remote and hazardous for humans, are one of the most promising application areas in
which robots can be deployed to carry out a task, such as inspecting oil and gas equipment, maintaining offshore wind
turbines or monitoring nuclear reactors. Interaction with human operators is often infeasible in such remote environments, so autonomy becomes a key requirement, meaning
robots have to learn to adapt when performing tasks in
changing and unexpected circumstances (Lane et al. 2016).
However, unforeseen behaviour of a robot could result either in failure of its own mission or even undermine the integrity of the asset being inspected or repaired – with potentially catastrophic consequences, e.g. accidental puncture of subsea pipelines. The robots themselves are highvalue assets, whose loss or damage may be very costly.
Moreover, there are increasing demands on regulating autonomous robots to build public trust in their use. Yet,
the analysis of safety and reliability for autonomous robots
poses a significant challenge due to the inevitable uncertainties in a mission. Potential sources of risk range from failures
of sensors or hardware, to built-in algorithms making poor
choices in a stochastic environment. Key industrial foresight
reviews (Lane et al. 2016) outline a vision of self-certifying
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://epsrc.ukri.org/files/funding/calls/2017/raihubs/

8066

