The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multiple Independent Subspace Clusterings
Xing Wang,1 Jun Wang,1∗ Carlotta Domeniconi,2 Guoxian Yu,1,3 Guoqiang Xiao,1 Maozu Guo4
1

College of Computer and Information Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, USA
3
Hubei Key Laboratory of Intelligent Geo-Information Processing, China University of Geosciences, Hubei, China
4
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Beijing University Of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Beijing, China
Email: {wx1993cs,kingjun,gxyu,gqxiao}@swu.edu.cn, carlotta@cs.gmu.edu, guomaozu@bucea.edu.cn
Abstract

ferent parameter values, or explore different clustering algorithms (Bailey 2013). These approaches may generate
multiple clusterings with high redundancy, since they do
not take into account the already explored clusterings. To
overcome this drawback, two general strategies have been
introduced. The first one simultaneously generates multiple clusterings, which are required to be different from
each other (Jain, Meka, and Dhillon 2008; Dang and Bailey
2010). The second one generates multiple clusterings in a
greedy manner, and forces the new clusterings to be different
from the already generated ones (Cui, Fern, and Dy 2007;
Hu et al. 2015; Yang and Zhang 2017).
Most of these multi-clustering methods consider multiple clusterings in the full feature space. However, as the dimensionality of the data increases, clustering methods encounter the challenge of the curse of dimensionality (Parsons, Haque, and Liu 2004). Furthermore, some features
may be relevant to some clusterings but not others. This phenomenon is also observed in data with moderate dimensionality. Subspace clustering aims at finding clusters in subspaces of the original feature space, but it faces an exponential (2d − 1) search space and focuses on exploring only
one clustering. Some approaches try to find alternative clusterings in a weighted feature space (Caruana et al. 2006;
Hu et al. 2015) or in a transformed feature space (Cui, Fern,
and Dy 2007; Davidson and Qi 2008); however, the former
methods cannot control well the redundancy between different clusterings, and the latter cannot find multiple orthogonal
subspaces at the same time.
To overcome these issues, we propose an approach called
Multiple Independent Subspace Clusterings (MISC) to explore diverse clusterings in multiple independent subspaces,
one clustering for each subspace. During the first stage,
MISC uses Independent Subspace Analysis (ISA) (Szabó,
Póczos, and Lőrincz 2012) to explore multiple pairwiseindependent (i.e., non-redundant) subspaces by minimizing
the mutual information among them, and seeks the number of independent subspaces via the minimum description
length principle (Rissanen 2007). MISC automatically determines the number of clusters in each subspace via Bayesian
k-means (Welling 2006), and groups the data embedded
in each subspace using graph regularized semi-nonnegative
matrix factorization (Ding, Li, and Jordan 2010). To group
non-linearly separable data in a subspace, it further maps the

Multiple clustering aims at discovering diverse ways of organizing data into clusters. Despite the progress made, it’s still
a challenge for users to analyze and understand the distinctive structure of each output clustering. To ease this process,
we consider diverse clusterings embedded in different subspaces, and analyze the embedding subspaces to shed light
into the structure of each clustering. To this end, we provide a
two-stage approach called MISC (Multiple Independent Subspace Clusterings). In the first stage, MISC uses independent
subspace analysis to seek multiple and statistical independent
(i.e. non-redundant) subspaces, and determines the number
of subspaces via the minimum description length principle.
In the second stage, to account for the intrinsic geometric
structure of samples embedded in each subspace, MISC performs graph regularized semi-nonnegative matrix factorization to explore clusters. It additionally integrates the kernel
trick into matrix factorization to handle non-linearly separable clusters. Experimental results on synthetic datasets show
that MISC can find different interesting clusterings from the
sought independent subspaces, and it also outperforms other
related and competitive approaches on real-world datasets.

Introduction
Clustering is an unsupervised learning technique that aims
at partitioning data into a number of homologous groups (or
clusters). However, traditional clustering methods typically
provide a single clustering, and fail to reveal the diverse patterns underlying the data. In fact, several different clustering
solutions may co-exist in a given problem, and each may
provide a reasonable organization of the data, e.g., people
can be assigned to different communities based on different
roles; proteins can be categorized differently based on their
amino acid sequences or their 3D structure. In these scenarios, it would be desirable to present multiple alternative
clusterings to the users, as these alternative clusterings can
explain the underlying structure of the data from different
viewpoints.
To address the aforementioned problem, the research field
of multi-clustering has emerged during the last decade.
Naive solutions run a single clustering algorithm with dif∗

Corresponding author, kingjun@swu.edu.cn (Jun Wang)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5353

