The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Tensorial Change Analysis Using Probabilistic Tensor Regression
Tsuyoshi Idé
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center
tide@us.ibm.com

Abstract

: performance metric

This paper proposes a new method for change detection and
analysis using tensor regression. Change detection in our setting is to detect changes in the relationship between the input
tensor and the output scalar while change analysis is to compute the responsibility score of individual tensor modes and
dimensions for the change detected. We develop a new probabilistic tensor regression method, which can be viewed as a
probabilistic generalization of the alternating least squares algorithm. Thanks to the probabilistic formulation, the derived
change scores have a clear information-theoretic interpretation. We apply our method to semiconductor manufacturing
to demonstrate the utility. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first work of change analysis based on probabilistic tensor
regression.

time

variable
time period A

Figure 1: Illustration of industrial change analysis using tensor regression in semiconductor etching. A scalar y representing the goodness of etching is predicted as a function of
etching trace data X in a tensor format. How can we quantitatively compare the time period A with a “golden period”?

Introduction
Change detection in temporal data has a variety of applications across many industries. Depending on the specific
type of data and changes expected, a number of different
machine learning tasks can be defined. Of particular importance is change detection in the supervised setting, whose
goal is to detect a change in the relationship between the
input and output variables. By analyzing the nature of the
detected change in terms of controllable input variables, we
can obtain actionable insights into the system.
In the supervised setting, change detection has been
treated typically as a regression problem. For a recent
comprehensive review from an application perspective,
see (Ge et al. 2017). As a natural extension of conventional
vector-based regression approaches, condition-based monitoring based on tensor regression has attracted recent attention (Zhu, He, and Lawrence 2012; Fanaee-T and Gama
2016). As a real-world example, Fig. 1 illustrates the etching process in semiconductor manufacturing. One etching
round consists of many, say 20, etching steps (chemical gas
introduction, plasma exposure, etc.) and each of the steps is
monitored with the same set of sensors (pressure, temperature, etc.), resulting in a two-way tensor X as the input.
Note that neither y nor X is constant even under the normal
condition due to different production recipes, random fluctuations, aging of the tool, etc. After etching, semiconductor

wafers are sent to an inspection tool, which gives each of the
wafers a scalar y representing the goodness of etching.
When monitoring the process, imagine that we observed
an unusual trend in y for a certain time period (“time period
A” in the figure). In order to get insights into how to finetune process parameters, we need to know how the current
situation is different from a “golden period”, in which everything looked in good shape, in terms of the relationship
between X and y. This is indeed a motivating example of
the regression-based tensorial change analysis.
For practical change analysis, three major requirements
should be met. First, obviously, a change analysis model
must be able to quantitatively explain which tensor modes
and dimensions contribute most to the changes detected.
Second, it must be built on a probabilistic model between
X and y. The input tensor generally includes different physical quantities. To make them comparable on the same
ground, change scores should be formalized informationtheoretically. Third, the change scores must be efficiently
computed in both the training and testing phases.
To meet these requirements, we propose a new change
analysis framework based on a probabilistic tensor regres-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3902

