The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Response Generation by Context-Aware Prototype Editing
Yu Wu,† Furu Wei,‡ Shaohan Huang,‡ Yunli Wang,† Zhoujun Li,†∗ Ming Zhou‡
†

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{wuyu,wangyunli,lizj}@buaa.edu.cn {fuwei, shaohanh, mingzhou}@microsoft.com

Abstract

Context (c)

Open domain response generation has achieved remarkable
progress in recent years, but sometimes yields short and uninformative responses. We propose a new paradigm, prototypethen-edit for response generation, that first retrieves a prototype response from a pre-defined index and then edits the
prototype response according to the differences between the
prototype context and current context. Our motivation is that
the retrieved prototype provides a good start-point for generation because it is grammatical and informative, and the
post-editing process further improves the relevance and coherence of the prototype. In practice, we design a contextaware editing model that is built upon an encoder-decoder
framework augmented with an editing vector. We first generate an edit vector by considering lexical differences between
a prototype context and current context. After that, the edit
vector and the prototype response representation are fed to a
decoder to generate a new response. Experiment results on
a large scale dataset demonstrate that our new paradigm significantly increases the relevance, diversity and originality of
generation results, compared to traditional generative models.
Furthermore, our model outperforms retrieval-based methods
in terms of relevance and originality.

Prototype
context (c0 )
Prototype response (r0 )
Revised
response (r)

My friends and I went to some vegan
place for dessert yesterday.
My friends and I had Tofu and
vegetables at a vegan place nearby
yesterday.
Raw green vegetables are very beneficial for your health.
Desserts are very bad for your health.

Table 1: An example of context-aware prototypes editing.
Underlined words mean they do not appear in the original
context, while words with strikethrough mean they are not
in the prototype context. Words in bold represent they are
modified in the revised response.
tions include: 1) human-written responses, termed as “prototypes response”, are informative, diverse and grammatical
which do not suffer from short and generic issues. Hence,
generating responses by editing such prototypes is able to
alleviate the “safe response” problem. 2) Some retrieved
prototypes are not relevant to the current context, or suffer
from a privacy issue. The post-editing process can partially
solve these two problems. 3) Lexical differences between
contexts provide an important signal for response editing. If
a word appears in the current context but not in the prototype
context, the word is likely to be inserted into the prototype
response in the editing process.
Inspired by this idea, we formulate the response generation process as follows. Given a conversational context c, we
first retrieve a similar context c0 and its associated response
r0 from a pre-defined index, which are called prototype context and prototype response respectively. Then, we calculate
an edit vector by concatenating the weighted average results
of insertion word embeddings (words in prototype context
but not in current context) and deletion word embeddings
(words in current context but not in prototype context). After that, we revise the prototype response conditioning on the
edit vector. We further illustrate how our idea works with an
example in Table 1. It is obvious that the major difference
between c and c0 is what the speaker eats, so the phrase “raw
green vegetables” in r0 should be replaced by “desserts” in
order to adapt to the current context c. We hope that the

Introduction
In recent years, non-task oriented chatbots focused on responding to humans intelligently on a variety of topics, have
drawn much attention from both academia and industry. Existing approaches can be categorized into generation-based
methods (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Vinyals and Le 2015;
Serban et al. 2016; Sordoni et al. 2015; Serban et al. 2017)
which generate a response from scratch, and retrieval-based
methods (Hu et al. 2014; Lowe et al. 2015; Yan, Song, and
Wu 2016; Zhou et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2017) which select
a response from an existing corpus. Since retrieval-based
approaches are severely constrained by a pre-defined index,
generative approaches become more and more popular in recent years. Traditional generation-based approaches, however, do not easily generate informative responses, which is
referred to as “safe response” problem (Li et al. 2016a).
To address this issue, we propose a new paradigm,
prototype-then-edit, for response generation. Our motiva∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7281

