The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Composable Modular Reinforcement Learning
Christopher Simpkins, Charles Isbell
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
801 Atlantic Drive
Atlanta, GA 30332-0280, USA
chris.simpkins@gatech.edu, isbell@cc.gatech.edu
Abstract
Modular reinforcement learning (MRL) decomposes a monolithic multiple-goal problem into modules that solve a portion of the original problem. The modules’ action preferences
are arbitrated to determine the action taken by the agent.
Truly modular reinforcement learning would support not
only decomposition into modules, but composability of separately written modules in new modular reinforcement learning agents. However, the performance of MRL agents that
arbitrate module preferences using additive reward schemes
degrades when the modules have incomparable reward scales.
This performance degradation means that separately written
modules cannot be composed in new modular reinforcement
learning agents as-is – they may need to be modified to align
their reward scales. We solve this problem with a Q-learningbased command arbitration algorithm and demonstrate that it
does not exhibit the same performance degradation as existing approaches to MRL, thereby supporting composability.

Introduction
Decomposition is an important tool in designing software
systems in general and, as we will see in the next section, an
important tool for dealing with the larger state spaces likely
to be encountered in real-world problems. Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL), discussed in the Related Work
section, decomposes reinforcement learning problems temporally, modeling intermediate tasks as higher-level actions.
HRL has also formed the basis of reinforcement learningbased programming systems.
MRL decomposes the original problem concurrently,
modeling an agent as a set of concurrently running reinforcement learning modules. MRL has been used primarily
to model multiple-goal problems and to deal with large state
spaces. We would like to use MRL as a basis for reinforcement learning-based programming systems but, as we discuss in the section on composability in modular reinforcement learning, current approaches to MRL have a serious
limitation – a requirement for module reward scale comparability – which limits their usefulness in programming systems. The work we present in this paper solves the reward
scale comparability problem.

Figure 1: In the grid world above, the bunny must pursue
two goals simultaneously: find food and avoid the wolf. The
bunny may move north, south, east, or west. When it finds
food it consumes the food and new food appears elsewhere
in the grid world, when it meets the wolf it is eaten and
“dies.”

The Curse of Dimensionality
As with other kinds of machine learning, reinforcement
learning must deal with the curse of dimensionality. In reinforcement learning the curse of dimensionality manifests
itself primarily in the size of the state space, namely, the state
space grows exponentially in the number of state features.
As an example, consider the 5 × 5 grid of the bunny world
in Figure 1. The bunny, food, and wolf can be in one of 25
possible locations. If the task of the bunny were only to reach
a particular location, then the number of states would be 25.
Add the task of avoiding a wolf and the state space grows
to 252 = 625. Add finding food and the state space grows
to 253 = 15625. If you model this problem as two separate modules, one in which the bunny avoids the wolf and

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4975

