The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Align Question and Answer Utterances in Customer Service
Conversation with Recurrent Pointer Networks
Shizhu He,1 Kang Liu,1,2 Weiting An3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{shizhu.he, kliu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn weiting.awt@alibaba-inc.com
Customer

Abstract
Customers ask questions, and customer service staffs answer
those questions. It is the basic service manner of customer
service (CS). The progress of CS is a typical multi-round conversation. However, there are no explicit corresponding relations among conversational utterances. This paper focuses on
obtaining explicit alignments of question and answer utterances in CS. It not only is an important task of dialogue analysis, but also able to obtain lots of valuable train data for learning dialogue systems. In this work, we propose end-to-end
models for aligning question (Q) and answer (A) utterances
in CS conversation with recurrent pointer networks (RPN).
On the one hand, RPN-based alignment models are able to
model the conversational contexts and the mutual influence of
different Q-A alignments. On the other hand, they are able to
address the issue of empty and multiple alignments for some
utterances in a unified manner. We construct a dataset from
an in-house online CS. The experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed models are effective to learn the alignments
of question and answer utterances.

Server

𝑢1

Hello?

𝑢3

http:xxx.com

𝑢4

Is this a quality product?

𝑢5

Is it the same as a real
product?

𝑢6

Is there a winter style?

𝑢8

Why hasn't been echoed
again?

Welcome, what can I do to
help you?

Alignment

𝑢2

None

Don't worry, our clothes are
all certified products.

𝑢7

One-to-Many

This is the latest style of
this year.

𝑢9

None

The dress is in autumn and
winter.

𝑢10

One-to-One

Alignment

Figure 1: Question and answer alignments of multi-round
conversation utterances in customer service.
from the server. It could benefit the server to analyze the
consulting hot issues and perform quality control (e.g.,
check whether the customer is competent or not). Moreover, most intelligent dialogue systems such as deep learning methods (Ji, Lu, and Li 2014; Vinyals and Le 2015;
He et al. 2017; Cui et al. 2017) are starving of the highquality “aligned” question-answer (Q-A) pairs. Obviously,
such Q-A pairs could be automatically acquired through UA.
In fact, there are already some related work on utterance
alignment in the multi-round conversation. Discourse parsing aims at finding the discourse structure in multi-party chat
dialogues (Elsner and Charniak 2011; Afantenos et al. 2015;
Jiang et al. 2018) or technical web forums (Wang et al.
2011). (Du, Poupart, and Xu 2017) devotes to discovering
the dependencies of conversational messages. And (Jiang
et al. 2018) learns to disentangle interleaved conversational
threads and clusters utterances with the same chatting topic.
Compared with previous works which concentrate more on
alignment chatty messages of multi-party conversation, we
focus on the alignments of question and answer utterances in
two-party CS which mainly communicate with objective information (e.g., the color and style of some specific clothes).
In fact, the most simple and direct way to obtain the QA alignments is learning a content matching function between question and answer utterances. And the alignment
question for each server’s answer is the most matching one

Introduction
Customer service (CS) provides an irreplaceable platform
for sellers to answer the questions and solve the problems
of customers. In general, in the practical CS (e.g., CS of
e-commerce website), Customers pose questions that will
be answered by customer service staffs (hereinafter called
Server), and the communication between a customer and
a server is a typical multi-round conversation. In fact, as
shown in Figure 1, there are certain corresponding relations
among conversation utterances raised by different participants (e.g., customer and server). It is because each server
utterance is replying to some of previously customer utterances with consulting intention. Actually, there are no explicit relations among those conversational utterances.
In this paper, we focus on the utterance alignment (UA),
which is to align the question (Q) and answer (A) utterances in the multi-round conversation between customer and
server. Finding the alignments among utterances with different participants is very important in conversation analysis. Based on the alignments, the questions posed by a
customer are connected with the corresponding responses
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

134

