The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Allocating Planning Effort When Actions Expire
Shahaf S. Shperberg,1 Andrew Coles,2 Bence Cserna,3
Erez Karpas,4 Wheeler Ruml,3 Solomon E. Shimony1,5
1

Ben-Gurion University, Israel; 2 King’s College London, UK;
University of New Hampshire, USA; 4 Technion, Israel; 5 UMass Lowell, USA
shperbsh@post.bgu.ac.il, andrew.coles@kcl.ac.uk, {bence,ruml}@cs.unh.edu,
karpase@technion.ac.il, shimony@cs.bgu.ac.il

3

Abstract

infeasible. Such a planner, while handling the first example given above, can fail in our second example. In this
paper, we investigate the problem more deeply, explicitly
using rational metareasoning (Russell and Wefald 1991) to
choose which node to expand. We formalize this metareasoning problem, which we call Allocating Effort when Actions Expire (AE2), as an MDP, allowing us to define the
optimal solution in a manner similar to Hansen and Zilberstein (2001). We establish close connections between AE2,
deliberation scheduling in time-dependent planning (Boddy
and Dean 1994), and a seemingly unrelated problem in job
scheduling with deadlines (Yedidsion 2012). We describe
several efficient ways of solving the metareasoning problem,
although not necessarily optimally, and evaluate them empirically over several types of distributions. The empirical
results suggest that taking estimated node expiration times
into account can lead to a better planning strategy.
In this paper, we examine only the one-shot version of the
metareasoning problem. Integrating the solutions we present
here into a temporal planner can involve solving this problem repeatedly, possibly after each node expansion, in addition to gathering the requisite statistics. These issues are
beyond the scope of the current paper. Nevertheless, we devote attention to developing effective metareasoning algorithms that can be useful in practice. When testing our algorithms, we use scenarios based on realistic search trees generated by OPTIC (Benton, Coles, and Coles 2012), the same
planner that was adapted in the experiments of Cashmore
et al. (2018). Our work provides a firm basis for further efforts to design planners for agents that interact with a wider
world containing exogenous processes and other agents, one
in which time passes and opportunities can be fleeting.

Making plans that depend on external events can be tricky.
For example, an agent considering a partial plan that involves
taking a bus must recognize that this partial plan is only viable if completed and selected for execution in time for the
agent to arrive at the bus stop. This setting raises the thorny
problem of allocating the agent’s planning effort across multiple open search nodes, each of which has an expiration time
and an expected completion effort in addition to the usual estimated plan cost. This paper formalizes this metareasoning
problem, studies its theoretical properties, and presents several algorithms for solving it. Our theoretical results include
a surprising connection to job scheduling, as well as to deliberation scheduling in time-dependent planning. Our empirical results indicate that our algorithms are effective in practice. This work advances our understanding of how heuristic
search planners might address realistic problem settings.

Introduction
Agents that plan and act in the real world must deal with
the fact that time passes as they are planning. For example,
an agent that needs to get to the airport may have two options: take a taxi, or take a bus. Each of these options can be
thought of as a partial plan to be elaborated into a complete
plan before execution can start. Clearly, the agent’s planner
should only elaborate the partial plan that involves taking the
bus if it can be elaborated into a complete plan before the
bus leaves. Furthermore, consider a second example. When
faced with two partial plans that are each estimated to require five minutes of computation to elaborate into complete
plans, if only six minutes remain until they both expire, then
we would want the planner to allocate all of its remaining
planning effort to one of them, rather than to fail on both.
Cashmore et al. (2018) recognized the problem of node
expiration in the context of temporal planning with timed
initial literals (TIL) (Cresswell and Coddington 2003;
Edelkamp and Hoffmann 2004), where the TILs occur at
times that are relative to when planning starts, rather than to
when execution starts. However, their approach to addressing it is relatively superficial in that, after estimating the
latest time when execution can start for each search node,
this information is used merely to prune nodes that become

Problem Statement
To formalize AE2, we abstract away from any particular
planning methodology and merely posit the existence of n
computational processes, all attempting to solve the same
problem. For example, these may represent promising partial plans for a certain goal, implemented as nodes on the
frontier of a search tree. There is a single computing thread
or processor to run all the processes, so it must be shared.
When process i terminates, it will, with probability Pi , deliver a solution or, otherwise, indicate its failure to find one.
For each process, there is a deadline, defined in absolute wall

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2371

