The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Geometric Hawkes Processes with Graph
Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks
Jin Shang, Mingxuan Sun
Division of Computer Science and Engineering
Louisiana State University
jshang2@lsu.edu, msun@csc.lsu.edu

Abstract

occurrence of new events in another. For example, in social event analysis, the events of an individual user can be
modeled as an one-dimensional Hawkes process and events
in a network can be modeled as a Multivariate Hawkes process (Farajtabar et al. 2014; Mei and Eisner 2017; Yang et al.
2018), which captures the correlations of both endogenous
and exogenous event intensities. Extensive studies (Lemonnier, Scaman, and Kalogeratos 2017; Etesami et al. 2016;
Eichler, Dahlhaus, and Dueck 2017; Xu, Farajtabar, and
Zha 2016) have focused on estimating the excitation matrix of multivariate processes for different inference tasks.
However, those approaches are either unable to accurately
capture the mutual influence between processes or become
computational inhibitive in most real-world events involving large dimensions (Eichler, Dahlhaus, and Dueck 2017;
Hall and Willett 2016).
Incorporating geometric structure in the form of graphs
into Hawkes processes is an effective and efficient way for
improving model prediction accuracy. In many real world
applications, correlations between different Hawkes processes can be encoded by a graph. For example, in modeling the sequences of user-item interactions, the similarity
of users and items can be represented by a user graph and
an item graph, respectively. Such additional graph information can be used to impose smoothness priors on the parameters such as the base intensities of each individual process. Recently, geometric deep learning (Bruna et al. 2014;
Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and
Welling 2017; Monti, Bronstein, and Bresson 2017) are
promising techniques that can learn meaningful representations for geometric structure data such as graphs and have
been successfully applied in various applications such as
matrix completion.
In this paper, we propose a novel Geometric Hawkes Process (GHP) model by integrating geometric deep learning
into Hawkes processes, which aims to efficiently capture
meaningful patterns in a large collection of correlated sequences of recurrent events. Specifically, each sequence is
modeled as a Hawkes process and the proximities between
different processes are encoded in a graph. A novel convolutional and recurrent neural network is adopted to extract
local meaningful patterns from the graph. The learned meaningful embeddings are then used to generate parameters such
as the base intensities that characterize Hawkes processes.

Hawkes processes are popular for modeling correlated temporal sequences that exhibit mutual-excitation properties. Existing approaches such as feature-enriched processes or variations of Multivariate Hawkes processes either fail to describe
the exact mutual influence between sequences or become
computational inhibitive in most real-world applications involving large dimensions. Incorporating additional geometric
structure in the form of graphs into Hawkes processes is an
effective and efficient way for improving model prediction
accuracy. In this paper, we propose the Geometric Hawkes
Process (GHP) model to better correlate individual processes,
by integrating Hawkes processes and a graph convolutional
recurrent neural network. The deep network structure is computational efficient since it requires constant parameters that
are independent of the graph size. The experiment results on
real-world data show that our framework outperforms recent
state-of-art methods.

Introduction
Hawkes processes, which are capable of modeling temporal events that exhibit self-exciting properties, have been
widely applied in various applications such as supporting
decision making in smart health (Xu et al. 2017), inferring
granger causality (Xu, Farajtabar, and Zha 2016), and predicting recurrent user behaviors (Zhou, Zha, and Song 2013;
Du et al. 2016; Shang and Sun 2018). Generally, Hawkes
processes are useful for modeling a collection of correlated
event sequences such as earthquakes at N locations or the
diffusion of M infectious diseases among a group of N people. For example, in analyzing on-line user behaviors such as
visiting websites, recent approaches such as (Du et al. 2015)
treat the recurrent events of each user-item pair as an onedimensional Hawkes process, and assume the parameters of
all processes have a low-rank structure. However, methods
that typically treat each process independently would fail to
achieve good performance when there are insufficient observations for each process.
Multivariate Hawkes processes (Liniger 2009) are suitable for modeling multiple correlated sequences, where the
occurrence of an event in one sequence may influence the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4878

