The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Balanced Sparsity for Efficient DNN Inference on GPU
Zhuliang Yao,1,4,∗ Shijie Cao,2,4,∗ Wencong Xiao,3,4 Chen Zhang,4 Lanshun Nie2
1

Tsinghua University 2 Harbin Institute of Technology 3 Beihang University 4 Microsoft Research Asia
{v-zhuyao, v-shicao, v-wencxi, zhac}@microsoft.com, nls@hit.edu.cn

Perplexity
(the lower the better)

Abstract
In trained deep neural networks, unstructured pruning can reduce redundant weights to lower storage cost. However, it requires the customization of hardwares to speed up practical
inference. Another trend accelerates sparse model inference
on general-purpose hardwares by adopting coarse-grained
sparsity to prune or regularize consecutive weights for efficient computation. But this method often sacrifices model accuracy. In this paper, we propose a novel fine-grained sparsity
approach, Balanced Sparsity, to achieve high model accuracy
with commercial hardwares efficiently. Our approach adapts
to high parallelism property of GPU, showing incredible potential for sparsity in the widely deployment of deep learning services. Experiment results show that Balanced Sparsity
achieves up to 3.1x practical speedup for model inference on
GPU, while retains the same high model accuracy as finegrained sparsity.

95

Vector Sparsity

90

Block Sparsity

85
80

Balanced Sparsity (Ours)
0

0.5

Random Sparsity
Dense Model

1
1.5
2
Inference Time / ms

2.5

3

Figure 1: Perplexity and Inference Time trade-off of different sparsity patterns on the PTB dataset (Marcus et al. 1999).
All the methods prune the same pre-trained LSTM model
with single 1500-hidden-units cell to reach 90% sparsity.

parallel computing characteristic. The speedup could be
negative when the sparsity ratio is quite low and only a
sparsity ratio higher than 95% can lead to speedup.(Wen
et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2018) Therefore, customized hardwares (Han et al. 2016; 2017; Parashar et al. 2017) are required for the widely deployment of model pruning.
Another research work chooses to maintain a dense structure during pruning. More specifically, pruning granularity
often incorporates with neural network semantics in convolution neural network (CNN) structures, e.g., filter and channel (Li et al. 2016; He, Zhang, and Sun 2017) and recurrent
neural network (RNN) states, e.g., cell and gate (Wen et al.
2018). With coarse-grained DNN component pruned, the remaining parameters are still in a compact structure which is
a quite hardware-friendly feature and make practical acceleration more possible. However, despite the notable speedup
observed, the pruned models usually compromise accuracy.
Figure 1 shows the model accuracy and inference time
trade-off for pruning a trained LSTM model with different
sparsity patterns. The random sparsity (Han et al. 2015) approach is poor in inference speed while almost achieving
the same accuracy as the original dense model. On the contrary, coarse-grained sparsity patterns, i.e both vector sparsity (Mao et al. 2017) and block sparsity (Narang, Undersander, and Diamos 2017) fit GPU architecture for matrix
operation acceleration, however, losing in model accuracy.
To leverage sparsity for inference acceleration on GPUs
while retaining model accuracy, we thereby propose a novel

Introduction
In the past few years, deep neural network (DNN) has
achieved remarkable state-of-the-art results with large-scale
network models for many challenging tasks, including computer vision (CV), natural language processing (NLP), and
speech recognition. However, recent researches show that
the significant redundancy exists in trained model weights,
reaching up to 98% for popular computer vision models
(Han et al. 2015; Han, Mao, and Dally 2015). Driven by
the great potentials to reduce the model sizes for accelerating DNNs, a series of work (Han et al. 2015; Guo, Yao,
and Chen 2016; Molchanov et al. 2016; LeCun, Denker,
and Solla 1990; Engelbrecht 2001) identify and zero out the
unimportant weights at a high compression ratio. Redundant
weight pruning methods keep model accuracy and often benefit DNN models in cost-effective service deployment with
much fewer resources.
Despite a significant reduction in operative weights, the
fine-grained sparsity can only save storage costs, but hardly
speed up inference due to the fragmented unstructured
weights in pruned models. The irregularity and random distribution in weight matrices poorly fit current general purpose accelerators (i.e. GPU), which often advocate highly
∗

Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5676

