The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Non-Asymptotic Uniform Rates of Consistency for k-NN Regression
Heinrich Jiang
Google Research
Mountain View, CA

Abstract

We then discuss the setting where the data lies on a lower
dimensional manifold. It is already known that k-NN regression is able to automatically adapt to the intrinsic dimension
under various risk measures: the rates depend only on the
intrinsic dimension and independent of ambient dimension.
We show that this is also the case in the sup-norm: we attain
finite-sample bounds as if we were operating in the lower
intrinsic dimension space without any modifications to the
procedure.
We then show the utility of our k-NN regression results in
recovering certain structures of an arbitrary function, namely
the level-sets and global maximas. The motivation can be
traced back to the rich theory of density-based clustering.
There, one is given a finite sample from a probability density
p. The clusters can then be modeled based on certain structures in the underlying density p. Such structures include the
level-sets {x : p(x) ≥ λ} for some density level λ or the local maximas of p. Then to estimate these, one typically uses
a plug-in approach using a density estimator pb (e.g. for levelsets, {x : pb(x) ≥ λ} and for modes, argmaxx pb(x)). It turns
out that given uniform bounds on pb, we can estimate these
structures with strong guarantees.
In this paper, instead of estimating these structures in a
density, we estimate these structures for a general function
f . This is possible because of our established finite-sample
sup-norm bounds for nonparametric regression. There are
however some key differences in our setting. In the density
setting, one has access to i.i.d. samples drawn from the density. Here, we have an i.i.d. sample x drawn from some density pX not necessarily related to f , and then we obtain a
noisy observation of the value f (x). This can be viewed as
a noisy observation of the feature of x. In other words, we
estimate the stuctures based on the features of data, while in
the density setting, there are no features and the structures
are instead based on the dense regions of the dataset.

We derive high-probability finite-sample uniform rates of
consistency for k-NN regression that are optimal up to logarithmic factors under mild assumptions. We moreover show
that k-NN regression adapts to an unknown lower intrinsic
dimension automatically in the sup-norm. We then apply the
k-NN regression rates to establish new results about estimating the level sets and global maxima of a function from noisy
observations.

Introduction
The k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) regression algorithm is a
classical approach to nonparametric regression. The value of
the functional is taken to be the unweighted average observation of the k closest samples. Although this procedure has
been known for a long time and has a deep practical significance, there is still surprisingly much about its convergence
properties yet to be understood.
We derive finite-sample high probability uniform bounds
for k-NN regression under a standard additive model y =
f (x) + ξ where f is an unknown function, ξ is sub-Gaussian
white noise and y is the noisy observation. The samples
{(xi , yi )}ni=1 are drawn i.i.d. as follows: xi is drawn according to an unknown density pX , which shares the same
support as f , and then observation yi is generated by the
additive model based on xi .
We then give simple procedures to estimate the level sets
and global maximas of a function given noisy observations
and apply the k-NN regression bounds to establish new
Hausdorff recovery guarantees for these structures. Each of
these results are interesting on their own.
The bulk of the work on k-NN regression convergence
theory is on its properties under various risk measures or
asymptotic convergence. Notions of consistency involving
risk measures such as mean squared error are considerably
weaker than the sup-norm as the latter imposes a uniform
guarantee on the error |fk (x) − f (x)| where fk is the k-NN
regression estimate of function f . Existing work on studying
fk under the sup-norm thus far are asymptotic. We give the
first sup-norm finite-sample result. This result matches the
minimax optimal rate up to logarithmic factors.

Related Works and Contributions
k-NN Regression Rates
The consistency properties of k-NN regression have been
studied for a long time and we highlight some of the work
here. Biau, Cérou, and Guyader (2010) give guarantees under L2 risk. Devroye et al. (1994) give consistency guarantees under the L1 risk. Stone (1977) provides results under

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3999

