The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Based on Source-Guided Discrepancy∗
Seiichi Kuroki,†‡ Nontawat Charoenphakdee,†‡ Han Bao,†‡
Junya Honda,†‡ Issei Sato,†‡ Masashi Sugiyama‡†
†

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
‡
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract

This problem setting is called unsupervised domain adaptation (Ben-David et al. 2007), which is our interest in this
paper.
Since domain adaptation cannot be performed effectively
if the source and target domains are too different, an important topic to be addressed is how to measure the difference, or discrepancy, between the two domains. Many
discrepancy measures have been used in previous studies
such as the maximum mean discrepancy (Huang et al. 2007),
Kullback-Leibler divergence (Sugiyama et al. 2008), Rényi
divergence (Mansour, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2009b),
and Wasserstein distance (Courty et al. 2017).
Apart from the discrepancy measures described above,
Ben-David et al. (2007) proposed a discrepancy measure for
binary classification that explicitly takes a hypothesis class
into account. They showed that their discrepancy measure
leads to a tighter generalization error bound than the L1
distance, which does not use information of the hypothesis
class. Following this line of research, Mansour, Mohri, and
Rostamizadeh (2009a) generalized the discrepancy measure of Ben-David et al. (2007) to arbitrary loss functions,
and Germain et al. (2013) provided a PAC-Bayesian analysis based on the average disagreement of a set of hypotheses. These results provided a theoretical foundation
for various applications of domain adaptation based on estimation of source-target discrepancy, including sentiment
analysis (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011), source selection (Bhatt, Rajkumar, and Roy 2016), and multi-source
domain adaptation (Zhao et al. 2017). However, their discrepancy measure considers the worst pair of hypotheses to
bound the maximum gap in the loss between the domains,
which may lead to a loose generalization error bound and
expensive computation costs. Zhang, Zhang, and Ye (2012)
and Mohri and Medina (2012) analyzed another discrepancy
measure with a generalization error bound. Nevertheless,
this discrepancy measure cannot be computed without labels in the target domain and therefore is not suitable for
unsupervised domain adaptation.
To alleviate the limitations of the existing discrepancy
measures for domain adaptation, we propose a novel discrepancy measure called source-guided discrepancy (Sdisc). By incorporating labels in the source domain, S-disc
provides a tighter generalization error bound than the previously proposed discrepancy measure by Mansour, Mohri,

Unsupervised domain adaptation is the problem setting
where data generating distributions in the source and target domains are different and labels in the target domain
are unavailable. An important question in unsupervised domain adaptation is how to measure the difference between the
source and target domains. Existing discrepancy measures for
unsupervised domain adaptation either require high computation costs or have no theoretical guarantee. To mitigate these
problems, this paper proposes a novel discrepancy measure
called source-guided discrepancy (S-disc), which exploits labels in the source domain unlike the existing ones. As a consequence, S-disc can be computed efficiently with a finitesample convergence guarantee. In addition, it is shown that
S-disc can provide a tighter generalization error bound than
the one based on an existing discrepancy measure. Finally, experimental results demonstrate the advantages of S-disc over
the existing discrepancy measures.

Introduction
In the conventional supervised learning framework, we often assume that the training and test distributions are the
same. However, this assumption may not hold in many practical applications such as natural language processing (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011), speech recognition (Sun et
al. 2017), and computer vision (Saito, Ushiku, and Harada
2017). For instance, a personalized spam filter can be trained
from the emails of all available users, but the training
data may not represent the emails of the target user. Such
scenarios can be formulated in the framework of domain
adaptation, which has been studied extensively (Ben-David
et al. 2007; Mansour, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2009a;
Zhang, Zhang, and Ye 2012; Pan and Yang 2010; Sugiyama
and Kawanabe 2012). An important challenge in domain
adaptation is to find a classifier for a label-scarce target domain by exploiting a label-rich source domain. In particular,
there are cases where we only have access to labeled data
from the source domain and unlabeled data from the target domain, because annotating labels in the target domain
is often time-consuming and expensive (Saito et al. 2018).
∗
A longer version of this paper is available in Kuroki et al.
(2018).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4122

