The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hashtag Recommendation for Photo Sharing Services
Suwei Zhang,1 Yuan Yao,1 Feng Xu,1 Hanghang Tong,2 Xiaohui Yan,3 Jian Lu1
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Arizona State University, USA 3 Poisson Lab, Huawei Technologies, China
zsw@smail.nju.edu.cn, {y.yao, xf, lj}@nju.edu.cn, hanghang.tong@asu.edu, yanxiaohui2@huawei.com

Abstract

pre-approved friends. Optionally, users can attach several
hashtags with their uploaded photos. The hastags allow users
to indicate the topics of their uploaded content (a.k.a. posts),
and they have been shown to be beneficial for many tasks including sentiment analysis (Hasan, Agu, and Rundensteiner
2014), information retrieval (Highfield and Leaver 2015),
and topic extraction (Lim and Buntine 2014). Hashtags can
also facilitate users to interact with others. For example, it
has been shown that posts with at least one hashtag receive
12.6% more user engagement than those without any hashtags on Instagram.3
To date, many hashtag recommendation methods have
been proposed for online posts (Krestel, Fankhauser, and
Nejdl 2009; Sedhai and Sun 2014; Wang et al. 2016). However, an effective hashtag recommendation method for photo
sharing services is still in need due to the following two
reasons. The first reason lies in the endogenous side: while
most of the existing efforts focus on recommending hashtags for either text (Wu et al. 2016; Krestel, Fankhauser, and
Nejdl 2009; Li et al. 2016) or images (Wang et al. 2016;
Gong et al. 2014; Wei et al. 2014), the post in photo sharing
services usually consists of both image and text, which are
likely to be correlated with each other. Therefore, a coherent
modeling of image and text as well as the interaction between the two is crucial to better understanding the semantics of the post, which in turn affects hashtag recommendation performance. The second reason is about the exogenous
side: different users may have different tagging habits by attaching different hashtags to similar posts, and such tagging
habits can be attributed to many aspects including personal
preference or community effect (Zhu, Aloufi, and El Saddik 2015). Although some personalized treatments exist for
the problem (e.g., tensor factorization (Fang et al. 2015;
Nguyen, Wistuba, and Schmidt-Thieme 2017) and graphbased methods (Feng and Wang 2012; Guan et al. 2009)),
they generate the hashtags mainly based on an implicit
collaborative modeling of the existing interactions among
users, posts, and hastags. An explicit modeling of user habits
in conjunction with content modeling has largely remained
absent, especially in the context of photo sharing services.
An illustrative example from Instagram is shown in Table 1, where two similar posts are retrieved from two

Hashtags can greatly facilitate content navigation and improve user engagement in social media. Meaningful as it
might be, recommending hashtags for photo sharing services
such as Instagram and Pinterest remains a daunting task due
to the following two reasons. On the endogenous side, posts
in photo sharing services often contain both images and text,
which are likely to be correlated with each other. Therefore, it
is crucial to coherently model both image and text as well as
the interaction between them. On the exogenous side, hashtags are generated by users and different users might come
up with different tags for similar posts, due to their different
preference and/or community effect. Therefore, it is highly
desirable to characterize the users’ tagging habits. In this paper, we propose an integral and effective hashtag recommendation approach for photo sharing services. In particular, the
proposed approach considers both the endogenous and exogenous effects by a content modeling module and a habit modeling module, respectively. For the content modeling module,
we adopt the parallel co-attention mechanism to coherently
model both image and text as well as the interaction between
them; for the habit modeling module, we introduce an external memory unit to characterize the historical tagging habit
of each user. The overall hashtag recommendations are generated on the basis of both the post features from the content modeling module and the habit influences from the habit
modeling module. We evaluate the proposed approach on real
Instagram data. The experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed approach significantly outperforms the state-of-theart methods in terms of recommendation accuracy, and that
both content modeling and habit modeling contribute significantly to the overall recommendation accuracy.

Introduction
Photo sharing services such as Instagram and Pinterest are
gaining increasing popularity in recent years. According to
the latest statistics in 2018, Pinterest has reached 175 million monthly active users,1 while the number for Instagram
is one billion.2 Typically, photo sharing services provide
users a platform where they can upload their photos with
textual descriptions and share them with the public or the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.socialpilot.co/blog/social-media-statistics/
2
https://techcrunch.com/2018/06/20/instagram-1-billion-users/

3

5805

https://sproutsocial.com/insights/social-media-statistics/

