The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning a Visual Tracker from a Single Movie without Annotation
Lingxiao Yang, David Zhang, Lei Zhang
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
{cslyang,csdzhang,cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

sion problem, whose solution can be efficiently obtained in
the Fourier domain with a few element-wise operations.
Early DCF trackers often use hand-crafted descriptors
to describe the tracked target. Inspired by the great success of deep neural networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; Chatfield et al. 2014; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) in many vision tasks, hand-crafted descriptors
have been replaced by pre-trained deep features to improve
the tracking performance of DCFs (Danelljan et al. 2017).
More recently, some works (Valmadre et al. 2017; Wang et
al. 2017) reformulated DCFs as a particular layer in deep
networks, resulting in an end-to-end learning framework.
Highly competitive tracking results have been reported on
tracking datasets such as OTB (Wu, Lim, and Yang 2013;
2015) and VOT (Kristan, Matas, and Leonardis 2015).
The pre-trained network plays the key role for achieving
robust and accurate tracking performance. A well trained
network is expected to mitigate the overfitting issue in visual
tracking, for which only a single labeled data is available.
However, this often requires a significant amount of human
labeled data for training, which are expensive to collect. For
example, the widely utilized networks, VGG-M (Chatfield
et al. 2014) and VGG-16 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014),
are both pre-trained on large scale static image database, i.e.,
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009), with human annotated object
labels, while the Siamese networks (Bertinetto et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2017; Valmadre et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018)
are pre-trained on ILSVRC2015 videos (Russakovsky et al.
2015) with given object bounding boxes.
It is interesting to investigate whether we can train a good
visual tracking network without using human annotations. In
recent years, some unsupervised learning approaches (Wang
and Yeung 2013; Ma et al. 2015b; Wang et al. 2012) have
been reported to achieve this goal. These trackers, however,
do not exhibit comparable performance with those trackers
trained by supervised methods. The main problem is that
these trackers are optimized from an auxiliary task, in which
the main objective is not the same as that in the online tracking process. More specifically, all these methods learn to reconstruct input signals, and then transfer the learned network
to visual tracking as either a binary classification (Wang and
Yeung 2013; Wang et al. 2012) task or a target localization
(Ma et al. 2015b) task. Clearly, those trackers trained from
different tasks are suboptimal for the visual tracking task.

The recent success of deep network in visual trackers learning largely relies on human labeled data, which are however
expensive to annotate. Recently, some unsupervised methods
have been proposed to explore the learning of visual trackers without labeled data, while their performance lags far
behind the supervised methods. We identify the main bottleneck of these methods as inconsistent objectives between
off-line training and online tracking stages. To address this
problem, we propose a novel unsupervised learning pipeline
which is based on the discriminative correlation filter network. Our method iteratively updates the tracker by alternating between target localization and network optimization.
In particular, we propose to learn the network from a single movie, which could be easily obtained other than collecting thousands of video clips or millions of images. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our approach is insensitive to
the employed movies, and the trained visual tracker achieves
leading performance among existing unsupervised learning
approaches. Even compared with the same network trained
with human labeled bounding boxes, our tracker achieves
similar results on many tracking benchmarks. Code is available at: https://github.com/ZjjConan/UL-Tracker-AAAI2019.

Introduction
Generic object tracking has attracted considerable attention
in computer vision since it has been successfully applied
into many domains, including human-computer interaction,
video surveillance, and unmanned aerial vehicle, to name
a few. This paper focuses on the problem of single object
tracking, whose goal is to automatically estimate a trajectory
of a single target over a video. The target is often annotated
as a rectangle in the first frame.
Recent advances in object tracking are driven by the
development of Discriminative Correlation Filters (DCFs)
(Bolme et al. 2010; Henriques et al. 2015; Danelljan et al.
2015; Fan and Xiang 2017). DCF based methods begin by
learning a template of target object and then apply the template to detect target location in subsequent frames. The template is usually updated over time to adapt the appearance
changes of the tracked object. DCFs are very suitable for
fast tracking because they only need to solve a ridge regresCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9095

