The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Tensor Ring Decomposition with Rank Minimization on
Latent Space: An Efficient Approach for Tensor Completion
Longhao Yuan,1,2 Chao Li,2 Danilo Mandic,5 Jianting Cao,1,2,4,† Qibin Zhao2,3,†
1

Graduate School of Engineering, Saitama Institute of Technology, Japan
Tensor Learning Unit, RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), Japan
3
School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
5
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
2

Abstract

(TKD) and the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition (Kolda and Bader 2009). More recently, the matrix
product state/tensor-train (MPS/TT) decomposition has become very attractive, owing to its super-compression and
computational efficiency properties (Oseledets 2011). Currently, a generalization of TT decomposition, termed the
tensor ring (TR) decomposition, has been studied across
scientific disciplines (Zhao et al. 2016a; 2018). These tensor decomposition models have found application in various fields such as machine learning (Wang et al. 2018;
Novikov et al. 2015; Anandkumar et al. 2014; Kanagawa et
al. 2016), signal processing (Cong et al. 2015), image/video
completion (Liu et al. 2013; Zhao et al. 2016b), compressed
sensing (Gandy, Recht, and Yamada 2011), to name but a
few. Tensor completion is one of the most important applications of tensor decompositions, with the goal to recover an
incomplete tensor from partially observed entries. The theoretical lynchpin in tensor completion problems is the tensor
low-rank assumption, and the methods can mainly be categorized into two types: (i) tensor-decomposition-based approach and (ii) rank-minimization-based approach.
Tensor decomposition based methods find latent factors
of tensor by the incomplete tensor, and then the latent factors are used to predict the missing entries. Many completion algorithms have been proposed based on alternating
least squares (ALS) method (Grasedyck, Kluge, and Kramer
2015; Wang, Aggarwal, and Aeron 2017), gradient-based
method (Yuan, Zhao, and Cao 2017; Acar et al. 2011), to
mention but a few. Though ALS and gradient-based algorithms are free from burdensome hyper-parameter tuning,
the performance of these algorithms is rather sensitive to
model selection, i.e., rank selection of the tensor decomposition. Moreover, since the optimal rank is generally datadependent, it is very challenging to specify the optimal rank
beforehand. This is especially the case for Tucker, TT, and
TR decompositions, for which the rank is defined as a vector; it is therefore impossible to find the optimal ranks by
cross-validation due to the immense possibilities.
Rank minimization based methods employ convex surrogates to minimize the tensor rank. One of the most
commonly-used surrogates is the nuclear norm (a.k.a. Schatten norm, or trace norm), which is defined as the sum
of singular values of a matrix and it is the most popular
convex surrogate for rank regularization. Based on differ-

In tensor completion tasks, the traditional low-rank tensor decomposition models suffer from the laborious model selection problem due to their high model sensitivity. In particular, for tensor ring (TR) decomposition, the number of model
possibilities grows exponentially with the tensor order, which
makes it rather challenging to find the optimal TR decomposition. In this paper, by exploiting the low-rank structure
of the TR latent space, we propose a novel tensor completion method which is robust to model selection. In contrast
to imposing the low-rank constraint on the data space, we introduce nuclear norm regularization on the latent TR factors,
resulting in the optimization step using singular value decomposition (SVD) being performed at a much smaller scale.
By leveraging the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) scheme, the latent TR factors with optimal rank
and the recovered tensor can be obtained simultaneously. Our
proposed algorithm is shown to effectively alleviate the burden of TR-rank selection, thereby greatly reducing the computational cost. The extensive experimental results on both
synthetic and real-world data demonstrate the superior performance and efficiency of the proposed approach against the
state-of-the-art algorithms.

Introduction
Tensor decompositions aim to find latent factors in tensorvalued data (i.e., the generalization of multi-dimensional
arrays), thereby casting large-scale and intractable tensor
problems into a multilinear tensor latent space of lowdimensionality (very few degrees of freedom designated by
the rank). The latent factors within tensor decomposition can
be considered as the latent features of data, which makes
them an ideal set of bases to predict missing entries when
the acquired data is incomplete. The specific forms and operations among latent factors determine the type of tensor decomposition. The most classical and successful tensor decomposition models are the Tucker decomposition
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant No.
17K00326, 15H04002, 18K04178), JST CREST (Grant No. JPMJCR1784), and the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant No. 61773129).
The code is available at: https://github.com/yuanlonghao/TRLRF
†
Corresponding authors: qibin.zhao@riken.jp, cao@sit.ac.jp

9151

