The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Transferable Self-Attentive Representations for
Action Recognition in Untrimmed Videos with Weak Supervision
Xiao-Yu Zhang,1∗ Haichao Shi,1,2,4∗ Changsheng Li,3,4† Kai Zheng,3,4 Xiaobin Zhu,5 Lixin Duan3,4†
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 4 Youedata Co., Ltd., Beijing
5
School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
{zhangxiaoyu, shihaichao}@iie.ac.cn, {lichangsheng, zhengkai}@uestc.edu.cn, {brucezhucas, lxduan}@gmail.com
2

Untrimmed Video

Abstract
Action recognition in videos has attracted a lot of attention
in the past decade. In order to learn robust models, previous methods usually assume videos are trimmed as short sequences and require ground-truth annotations of each video
frame/sequence, which is quite costly and time-consuming.
In this paper, given only video-level annotations, we propose
a novel weakly supervised framework to simultaneously locate action frames as well as recognize actions in untrimmed
videos. Our proposed framework consists of two major components. First, for action frame localization, we take advantage of the self-attention mechanism to weight each frame,
such that the influence of background frames can be effectively eliminated. Second, considering that there are trimmed
videos publicly available and also they contain useful information to leverage, we present an additional module to
transfer the knowledge from trimmed videos for improving
the classification performance in untrimmed ones. Extensive
experiments are conducted on two benchmark datasets (i.e.,
THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.3), and experimental results
clearly corroborate the efficacy of our method.

Action
Detection

RGB

key frames
CNN

Optical
Flow

Self-Attention
Module

Action
Classification
“BasketballDunk”
Knowledge
Transfer

Trimmed Video

RGB
CNN

Optical
Flow

Self-Attention
Module

Action
Classification
“BasketballDunk”

Figure 1: Workflow of our proposed method. Our method
utilizes the temporal-spatial information by extracting
frames and optical flows from both untrimmed and trimmed
training videos. Those frames and optical flows are passed
to two independent convolutional neural networks to obtain
high-level semantic features and then to another two separate self-attention modules for action frame localization. The
knowledge later extracted from the trimmed training videos
is then transferred to enhance the classification performance
of the overall model for the untrimmed videos.

Introduction
Having been extensively studied in the last decade, action
recognition is still a challenging problem due to large variations (e.g., in human appearance, postures, cluttered background, etc.) as well as the unregulated characteristics in
untrimmed videos. To address a less complicated problem,
many previous action recognition methods (Lindeberg and
Laptev 2005; Wang and Schmid 2013; Wang, Qiao, and
Tang 2016; Tran et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2016) work on
trimmed video sequences, where each sequence contains a
single activity label (in other words, each frame has the same
annotation) and usually lasts no more than tens of seconds.
However, since there are much more untrimmed videos than
trimmed ones in the real world, how to effectively recognize
actions in untrimmed videos is of high demands and, however, is less studied in the literature.

With the rapid progress in deep learning, convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have attracted more and more attention in the research community of action recognition, because of the superior performance over traditional methods
which extract hand-crafted features (Lindeberg and Laptev
2005; Wang and Schmid 2013; Wang, Qiao, and Tang 2016;
Wu et al. 2011). Till now, quite a number of CNN based
methods were proposed to learn feature representations for
different action patterns (Tran et al. 2015; Wang et al.
2016). For instance, Simonyan and Zisserman developed a
so-called two-stream network to learn appearance and motion features based on RGB frames and optical flow, respectively (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). And more recently, Monfort et al. proposed 3D convolutional neural networks (C3D) by employing 3D convolutional kernels to capture the spatial and temporal information from raw videos

∗
These authors contributed equally to this study and share the
first authorship.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9227

