The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MAi: An Intelligent Model Acquisition
Interface for Interactive Specification of Dialogue Agents
Tathagata Chakraborti, Christian Muise, Shubham Agarwal, Luis A. Lastras
IBM Research AI, USA
{tathagata.chakraborti1, christian.muise, shubham.agarwal}@ibm.com, lastrasl@us.ibm.com

Abstract

allows specification of the dialogue model directly in terms
of dialogue actions, their realizations in implementation (determiners), context variables they operate on and their relationships between themselves. The latter allows specification
of the domain at a higher level of abstraction – i.e. in terms
of the domain knowledge that the dialogue is supposed to
occur in. The key insight here is that procedural knowledge
of the dialogue process is largely (if not entirely) transferable
across domains, and thus a generic dialogue agent can be
bootstrapped on given domain knowledge. The designer can,
of course, interactively refine this model further based on
the needs of that particular domain. We anticipate that this
modeling paradigm will not only reduce the effort in building
robust chatbots for enterprise use but also make the design
process of chatbots more easily accessible to a wider range
of users (and thus to a wider range of uses).

The state of the art in automated conversational agents for
enterprise (e.g. for customer support) require a lengthy design
process with experts in the loop who have to figure out and
specify complex conversation patterns. This demonstration
looks at a prototype interface that aims to bring down the
expertise required to design such agents as well as the time
taken to do so. Specifically, we will focus on how a metawriter can assist the domain-writer during the design process
and how complex conversation patterns can be derived from
simplifying abstractions at the interface level.

Sign up! An overview of the project can be viewed at: ibm.
biz/mai-video. If you would like to take MAi for a ride, please
sign up here: ibm.biz/mai-signup.

Designing Dialogue Agents: State-of-the-Art

The attached video walkthrough of the interface touches upon
three use cases that build upon these concepts.

Current enterprise-level automated goal oriented dialogue
agents require significant expertise, time and effort to build
(Sreedhar 2018). The process usually requires domain experts
to sit down with engineers to construct complex interaction
patterns in the form of explicit dialogue trees. This process
quickly becomes intractable. Existing end-to-end solutions
to chatbots, on the other hand, require little expertise to build
(but a lot of data) and offer little to no control over the operational properties of the bot (Metz 2018). As a result, such
data driven end-to-end techniques have been predominantly
demonstrated in non-goal oriented settings.

Dialogue Model Abstraction The interface (middle panel)
requires the domain-writer to specify what information the
dialogue agent would need to gather, and how (e.g. by asking
versus hitting API endpoints on the cloud) and relationships
among these variables in terms of pre/post-conditions of the
actions. They can also specify if these actions need to have
follow-ups (such as changing of the information or confirmation of the same in course of the dialogue). The backend
compiles this specification into two forms – one to be consumed by the implementation of the bot in terms of what
endpoints to hit for executing an action, the other to be used
by a non-deterministic planner that can orchestrate the dialogue process. The domain-writer can also visually inspect
the generated dialogue tree at any point to better understand
the dependencies in the domain and identify unmodeled constraints or possible undesired dialogue patterns.

Interactions on MAi
MAi attempts to address this problem in two ways, by –
– Reducing the expertise and effort required to specify a dialogue agent by abstracting away key dialogue components
in the interface and providing iterative assistance during
the design of the bot.
– Allowing the designer to examine the agent created by
investigating the dialogue tree generated in the backend or
by directly chatting with it.

Bot in a Click The interface (left panel) also allows the
domain-writer to only specify the high-level features of the
domain (in terms of tasks in it and dependencies among them)
and generate a basic dialogue agent directly from this. This
mode of specification thus does not require any consideration
of the dialogue patterns but rather the domain in which the
agent is going to converse. The domain-writer has the option
of using this mode, or the previous one which required direct
specification of dialogue actions, or a mixture of both.

The key features of the interface are shown in Figure 1.
The domain writer can choose to design an agent either using
the panel in the middle or the one on the left. The former
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9849

