The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robust Deep Co-Saliency Detection with Group Semantic
Chong Wang,1,2 Zheng-Jun Zha,2∗ Dong Liu,2 Hongtao Xie2
1

Institute of Intelligent Machines, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Science and Technology of China
wchong@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhazj, dongeliu, htxie}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Effective visual representation characterizing salient and
common objects is crucial for co-saliency detection. Conventional approaches utilize handcrafted features, such as
color, texture and SIFT descriptors etc., and achieve encouraging performance (Fu, Cao, and Tu 2013; Liu et al. 2014;
Li et al. 2015; Li, Meng, and Ngan 2013). However, handcrafted features based approaches usually suffer from multiple challenges including appearance variance of co-object
across images, similar appearance between co-object and
non-common object, and background clutter etc.Encouraged
by the success of deep learning in many vision tasks
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Long, Shelhamer,
and Darrell 2015; Zhang, Yu, and He 2018; Liu et al. 2016;
Jiao et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2018), recent researches improve
co-saliency detection by using deep neural network to learn
visual representation in a data driven manner (Han et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2016b; Zhang, Meng, and Han 2017;
Zhang et al. 2016a; Jeong, Hwang, and Cho 2017). The
deep visual features are fed into a subsequent co-saliency
detection module. As the feature learning and co-saliency
detection are separated as two independent processes, the
learned features are not tailored for inferring co-salient regions, resulting in suboptimal performance. Recently, (Wei
et al. 2017) proposed an end-to-end deep learning method
for co-saliency detection, which integrates the process of
feature learning and saliency mask prediction. A group-wise
visual representation is designed to capture the interaction
among visual features of individual images. As the groupwise visual feature is based on the concatenation of individual image features, it varies with the order of images within
a group, limiting the robustness of the model.

High-level semantic knowledge in addition to low-level visual cues is essentially crucial for co-saliency detection. This
paper proposes a novel end-to-end deep learning approach for
robust co-saliency detection by simultaneously learning highlevel group-wise semantic representation as well as deep visual features of a given image group. The inter-image interaction at semantic-level as well as the complementarity between group semantics and visual features are exploited to
boost the inferring of co-salient regions. Specifically, the proposed approach consists of a co-category learning branch and
a co-saliency detection branch. While the former is proposed
to learn group-wise semantic vector using co-category association of an image group as supervision, the latter is to infer
precise co-salient maps based on the ensemble of group semantic knowledge and deep visual cues. The group semantic
vector is broadcasted to each spatial location of multi-scale
visual feature maps and is used as a top-down semantic guidance for boosting the bottom-up inferring of co-saliency. The
co-category learning and co-saliency detection branches are
jointly optimized in a multi-task learning manner, further improving the robustness of the approach. Moreover, we construct a new large-scale co-saliency dataset COCO-SEG to
facilitate research of co-saliency detection. Extensive experimental results on COCO-SEG and a widely used benchmark
Cosal2015 have demonstrated the superiority of the proposed
approach as compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Discovering common and salient objects from a group of
relevant images, termed as Co-saliency Detection, is beneficial for big image data management and various vision tasks,
such as object co-segmentation (Quan et al. 2016; Dong et
al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2016b), object co-localization(Tang
et al. 2014), visual tracking (Li et al. 2018) and image retrieval (Fu, Cao, and Tu 2013; Zhang et al. 2013; Hong et
al. 2017) etc.visual tracking (Li et al. 2018) and image retrieval (Fu, Cao, and Tu 2013; Zhang et al. 2013; Hong et
al. 2017) etc. Co-saliency detection has attracted increasing
interests from both academia and industry in recent years
(Jeong, Hwang, and Cho 2017; Zhang, Meng, and Han 2017;
Yao et al. 2017).

Despite the remarkable progress made by recent works,
they mainly focus on sophisticated inference of co-salient
regions from visual cues, however neglect to explore highlevel semantic supervision as well as inter-image interaction
at semantic level, which are crucial for co-saliency detection. In this work, we propose a novel deep learning based
approach for robust co-saliency detection. The proposed approach learns high-level group-wise semantic representation
using inter-image common category association as supervision. The group-wise semantic representation characterizes
the interaction among images at semantic level and is used as
high-level semantic guidance for co-saliency inference. The
group-wise semantic feature and co-salience map are jointly

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8917

