The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adapting Translation Models for Transcript Disfluency Detection
Qianqian Dong,1,2 Feng Wang,1 Zhen Yang,1,2 Wei Chen,1 Shuang Xu,1 Bo Xu1,2∗
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{dongqianqian2016, feng.wang, yangzhen2014, wei.chen.media, shuang.xu, xubo}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

IM

z}|{
A flight [ to
Boston
+{
uh } to
| {z }
{z } ]
| Denver

Transcript disfluency detection (TDD) is an important component of the real-time speech translation system, which
arouses more and more interests in recent years. This paper presents our study on adapting neural machine translation (NMT) models for TDD. We propose a general training
framework for adapting NMT models to TDD task rapidly.
In this framework, the main structure of the model is implemented similar to the NMT model. Additionally, several extended modules and training techniques which are independent of the NMT model are proposed to improve the performance, such as the constrained decoding, denoising autoencoder initialization and a TDD-specific training object. With
the proposed training framework, we achieve significant improvement. However, it is too slow in decoding to be practical. To build a feasible and production-ready solution for
TDD, we propose a fast non-autoregressive TDD model following the non-autoregressive NMT model emerged recently.
Even we do not assume the specific architecture of the NMT
model, we build our TDD model on the basis of Transformer,
which is the state-of-the-art NMT model. We conduct extensive experiments on the publicly available set, Switchboard,
and in-house Chinese set. Experimental results show that the
proposed model significantly outperforms previous state-ofthe-art models.

RM

RP

Figure 1: Sentence with disfluencies annotated in English
Switchboard corpus. RM=Reparandum, IM=Interregnum,
RP=Repair. The preceding RM is corrected by the following RP.
(words that are discarded, or corrected by the following
words), where the interruption point (+) marking the end of
the reparandum, and the begin of the associated repair, or
an optional interregnum (filled pauses, discourse cue words,
etc). Some disfluencies are complicated and may contain diverse reparandums with arbitrary forms, varying in length,
location, and structure. In our experiments, we find that the
longest reparandum in the publicly available set, Switchboard, has as long as 15 words. And there are large similarities in syntax between the reparandum chunk and the
following repair chunk. However, the mainstream method in
this area is to view detecting disfluencies as a sequence labeling task which is usually good at capturing local context
information and weak in modeling long-range dependencies
(Lou and Johnson 2017; Wang et al. 2017).
In this paper, we investigate the long-range dependencies
in TDD by referring to NMT model. In contrast to previous
neural approaches, our approach treats TDD as a translation
task from a source sentence (the disfluent sentence) into a
target sentence (a fluent version in the same language as the
source). We propose a general training framework for adapting the NMT model to TDD task. In the proposed framework, the main structure of our model is implemented similar to the NMT model. Note that we do not assume the specific architecture of the NMT model. Additionally, several
extended modules and training techniques are proposed to
improve the performance, including the constrained decoding, denoising autoencoder initialization and a TDD-specific
training object. While we achieve substantial improvements
by adapting NMT model to TDD naively, the model is too
slow in decoding to be practical. To tackle this problem,
we extend the TDD model with non-autogressive decoding
based on the idea of non-autogressive NMT model. With

Introduction
Disfluency is a characteristic of spontaneous speech which
makes it different from written text. Transcript disfluency
detection is a task of recognizing non-fluent word sequences
in spoken language transcripts or automatic speech recognition (ASR) results (Lou and Johnson 2017; Wang et al.
2017). Disfluencies are informally defined as interruptions
in the normal flow of speech that occur in different forms,
including false starts, repairs, repetitions and filled pauses.
Frequent disfluencies introduce obstacles to many natural
language processing (NLP) tasks, such as dialogue systems, machine translation, natural language understanding
and so on. Therefore, it’s necessary to pre-process disfluencies in source corpus before passed to downstream NLP
tasks. As shown in Figure 1, standard annotation of disfluency structure (Shriberg 1994) indicates the reparandum
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6351

