The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Look across Elapse: Disentangled Representation Learning and
Photorealistic Cross-Age Face Synthesis for Age-Invariant Face Recognition
Jian Zhao,1,2∗ Yu Cheng,1 Yi Cheng,3 Yang Yang,1
Fang Zhao,4 Jianshu Li,1 Hengzhu Liu,2 Shuicheng Yan,1,5 Jiashi Feng1
1

3

National University of Singapore, 2 National University of Defense Technology
Panasonic R&D Center Singapore, 4 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, 5 Qihoo 360 AI Institute
{zhaojian90, e0321276, yang yang, jianshu}@u.nus.edu, yi.cheng@sg.panasonic.com
zhaofang0627@gmail.com, hengzhuliu@nudt.edu.cn, {eleyans, elefjia}@nus.edu.sg
Abstract

Despite the remarkable progress in face recognition related
technologies, reliably recognizing faces across ages still remains a big challenge. The appearance of a human face
changes substantially over time, resulting in significant intraclass variations. As opposed to current techniques for ageinvariant face recognition, which either directly extract ageinvariant features for recognition, or first synthesize a face
that matches target age before feature extraction, we argue
that it is more desirable to perform both tasks jointly so
that they can leverage each other. To this end, we propose
a deep Age-Invariant Model (AIM) for face recognition in
the wild with three distinct novelties. First, AIM presents a
novel unified deep architecture jointly performing cross-age
face synthesis and recognition in a mutual boosting way. Second, AIM achieves continuous face rejuvenation/aging with
remarkable photorealistic and identity-preserving properties,
avoiding the requirement of paired data and the true age of
testing samples. Third, we develop effective and novel training strategies for end-to-end learning the whole deep architecture, which generates powerful age-invariant face representations explicitly disentangled from the age variation. Extensive experiments on several cross-age datasets (MORPH,
CACD and FG-NET) demonstrate the superiority of the proposed AIM model over the state-of-the-arts. Benchmarking
our model on one of the most popular unconstrained face
recognition datasets IJB-C additionally verifies the promising
generalizability of AIM in recognizing faces in the wild.

Figure 1: Disentangled Representation Learning and Photorealistic Cross-Age Face Synthesis for Age-Invariant Face
Recognition. Col. 1 & 8: Input faces of distinct identities
with various challenging factors (e.g., neutral, illumination,
expression, pose and occlusion). Col. 2 & 7: Synthesized
younger faces by our proposed AIM. Col. 3 & 6: Synthesized older faces by our proposed AIM. Col. 4 & 5: Learned
facial representations by our proposed AIM, which are explicitly disentangled from the age variation. AIM can learn
age-invariant representations and synthesize photorealistic
cross-age faces effectively. Best viewed in color.

shots and verifying passports usually involve recognizing
faces across ages and/or synthesizing photorealistic age regressed/progressed1 face images. These are extremely challenging due to several reasons: 1) Human face rejuvenation/aging is a complex process whose patterns differ from
one individual to another. Both intrinsic factors (like heredity, gender and ethnicity) and extrinsic factors (like environment and living styles) affect the aging process and lead to
significant intra-class variations. 2) Facial shapes and textures dramatically change over time, making learning ageinvariant patterns difficult. 3) Current learning based crossage face recognition models are limited by existing crossage databases (fgn 2007; Rothe, Timofte, and Gool 2015;
Chen, Chen, and Hsu 2015; Ricanek and Tesafaye 2006;

Introduction
Face recognition is one of the most widely studied topics in
computer vision and artificial intelligence fields. Recently,
some approaches claim to have achieved (Taigman et al.
2014; Chen et al. 2017; Li et al. 2016a; Zhao et al. 2017) or
even surpassed (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015;
Wang et al. 2018a; Zhao et al. 2018) human performance on
several benchmarks.
Despite the exciting progress, age variations still form a
major bottleneck for many practical applications. For example, in law enforcement scenarios, finding missing children after years, identifying wanted fugitives based on mug
∗
Jian Zhao is the corresponding author. Homepage:
https://zhaoj9014.github.io/.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

Face regression (a.k.a face rejuvenation) and face progression
(a.k.a face aging) refers to rendering the natural rejuvenation/aging
effect for a given face, respectively.

9251

