The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Mono3D++: Monocular 3D Vehicle Detection
with Two-Scale 3D Hypotheses and Task Priors
Tong He,1,2 Stefano Soatto1
1

University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Megvii (Face++)
{simpleig, soatto}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We present a method to infer 3D pose and shape of vehicles
from a single image. To tackle this ill-posed problem, we optimize two-scale projection consistency between the generated
3D hypotheses and their 2D pseudo-measurements. Specifically, we use a morphable wireframe model to generate a
fine-scaled representation of vehicle shape and pose. To reduce its sensitivity to 2D landmarks, we jointly model the 3D
bounding box as a coarse representation which improves robustness. We also integrate three task priors, including unsupervised monocular depth, a ground plane constraint as well
as vehicle shape priors, with forward projection errors into an
overall energy function.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Representative 3D detection results, shown as projections on the input images. 3D morphable shape models
of each vehicle are colored in green. Dashed green lines are
occluded edges. For the 14 vertices of each morphable shape
model, visible vertices are colored in red and occluded ones
in yellow. 2D bounding boxes are colored in blue.

Objects are regions of three-dimensional (3D) space that can
move independently as a whole and have both geometric and
semantic attributes (shapes, identities, affordances, etc.) in
the context of a task. In this paper, we focus on vehicle objects in driving scenarios. Given an image, we wish to produce a posterior probability of vehicle attributes in 3D, or at
least some point-estimates from it.
Inferring 3D vehicles from a single image is an ill-posed
problem since object attributes exist in 3D but single images
can only provide partial pseudo-measurements in 2D. Therefore, we propose to solve this task by tackling two issues:
(i) how to ensure 3D-2D consistency between the generated
3D vehicle hypotheses and their corresponding 2D pseudomeasurements, which requires strong 3D hypotheses generators as well as robust scoring mechanisms; (ii) how to refine
3D hypotheses with task priors that can be integrated into an
easy-to-optimize loss function.
For the first problem, we use a joint modeling method that
leverages two different 3D hypotheses generation schemes:
one serves as a coarse representation of vehicle shape and
pose while the other is fine-scaled. We design end-to-end
trained deep networks to generate 3D hypotheses for each
vehicle instance in the form of both 3D bounding box
and morphable wireframe model (a.k.a linear shape model).
Shape and pose parameters will be adjusted according to the
2D pseudo-measurements via an optimization approach. A

wireframe model can determine shape and pose more precisely than a 3D bounding box, but it is very sensitive to the
2D landmark measurements which can be easily affected by
issues like partial occlusions, shadow, low resolution, etc.
Therefore, we jointly model the 3D bounding box projection constraint to improve its robustness. We conduct ablation studies to demonstrate benefits brought by jointly modeling the coarse and the fine-scaled 3D object pose and shape
representations.
For the second problem, we consider three constraints on
vehicles. Cars should stay on the ground plane, should look
like a car, and should be at a reasonable distance from the
observation camera. The first argument serves as a supporting plane constraint for vehicles. The second argument is
a prior term for vehicle shapes. The last argument indicates
that vehicle translation in camera coordinates should be constrained by a monocular range map of the current driving
scene. These constraints are jointly modeled with 3D-2D
consistency terms in order to further improve vehicle shape
and pose estimation.
In summary, in this paper we propose an approach for vehicle 3D shape and pose estimation from a single image that

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8409

