The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Optimal Approximation of Discrete
Random Variables for Estimation of Probabilities of Missing Deadlines
Liat Cohen, Gera Weiss
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel
{liati,geraw}@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract

above a prescribed threshold, where the measures of the quality
of the approximation and of its size are as specified in the
following two paragraphs.
We measure the quality of an approximation scheme by
the distance between random variables and their approximations. Specifically, we use the Kolmogorov distance which is
commonly used for comparing random variables in statistical
practice and literature. Given two random variables X and X 0
whose cumulative distribution functions (cdf) are FX and FX 0 ,
respectively, the Kolmogorov distance between X and X 0 is
dK (X, X 0 ) = supt |FX (t)−FX 0 (t)| (see, e.g., (Gibbons and
Chakraborti 2011)). We say that X 0 is a good approximation
of X if dK (X, X 0 ) is small. This distance is the basis for the
often used Kolmogorov-Smirnoff test for comparing a sample
to a distribution or two samples to each other.
The size of a random variable is measured by
the size of its support, the set of possible outcomes,
|X|=|{x : P r(X=x) 6= 0}|. When probability mass functions are maintained as tables, as done in many implementations of statistical software, the support size is proportional to
the memory needed to store the variable and to the complexity
of the computations that manipulate it. The exact notion of
optimality of the approximation targeted in this paper is:

We present an efficient algorithm that, given a discrete random
variable X and a number m, computes a random variable whose
support is of size at most m and whose Kolmogorov distance
from X is minimal. We present some variants of the algorithm,
analyse their correctness and computational complexity, and
present a detailed empirical evaluation that shows how they
performs in practice. The main application that we examine,
which is our motivation for this work, is estimation of the
probability of missing deadlines in series-parallel schedules.
Since exact computation of these probabilities is NP-hard, we
propose to use the algorithms described in this paper to obtain
an approximation.

1

Introduction

Various approaches for approximation of probability distributions are studied in the literature (Pettitt and Stephens 1977;
Miller and Rice 1983; Vidyasagar 2012; Cohen, Shimony, and
Weiss 2015; Pavlikov and Uryasev 2016; Cohen, Grinshpoun,
and Weiss 2018). These approaches vary in the types random
variables considered, how they are represented, and in the criteria used for evaluation of the quality of the approximations.
In this paper we propose an approach for compressing the
probability mass function of a random variable X such that
the errors added to queries such as P r(X ≤ t), for any t > 0,
is minimal. In other words, we minimise the Kolmogorov
distance between the approximation and the original variable,
see alternative definition in Equation (1).
Our main motivation for this work is estimation of the probability for missing deadlines, as described, e.g., in Cohen et
al. (Cohen, Shimony, and Weiss 2015; Cohen, Grinshpoun, and
Weiss 2018) and in (Kashef and Moayeri 2018). Specifically,
when X represents the probability distribution of the time to
complete some complex schedule and we cannot afford to
maintain the full table of its probability mass function, we
propose an algorithm for producing a smaller table, whose size
can be specified, such that probabilities for missing deadlines
are preserved as much as possible.
The main contribution of this paper is an efficient algorithm
for computing the best possible approximation of a given
random variable with a random variable whose size is not

Definition 1. A random variable X 0 is an optimal mapproximation of a random variable X if |X 0 | ≤ m and
there is no random variable X 00 such that |X 00 | ≤ m and
dK (X, X 00 ) < dK (X, X 0 ).
In these terms, the main contribution of the paper is an
efficient (linear time and constant memory) algorithm that
takes X and m as parameters and constructs an optimal mapproximation of X.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2
we describe how our work relates to other algorithms and
problems studied in the literature. In Section 3 we detail the
proposed algorithm, analyse its properties, and prove the main
theorems. In Section 4 we demonstrate how the proposed
approach performs on the problem of estimating the probability of missing deadlines in series-parallel schedules on
randomly generated random variables and compare it to alternative approximation approaches from the literature. The
paper is concluded with a discussion and with ideas for future
work in Section 5.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7809

