The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Attention-Aware Sampling via Deep
Reinforcement Learning for Action Recognition
Wenkai Dong,1,3 Zhaoxiang Zhang,1,2,3∗ Tieniu Tan1,2,3
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
wenkai.dong@cripac.ia.ac.cn, zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn, tnt@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

RGB or
Flow

Conv + pooling

1

Deep learning based methods have achieved remarkable
progress in action recognition. Existing works mainly focus
on designing novel deep architectures to achieve video representations learning for action recognition. Most methods treat
sampled frames equally and average all the frame-level predictions at the testing stage. However, within a video, discriminative actions may occur sparsely in a few frames and
most other frames are irrelevant to the ground truth and may
even lead to a wrong prediction. As a result, we think that
the strategy of selecting relevant frames would be a further
important key to enhance the existing deep learning based
action recognition. In this paper, we propose an attentionaware sampling method for action recognition, which aims
to discard the irrelevant and misleading frames and preserve
the most discriminative frames. We formulate the process of
mining key frames from videos as a Markov decision process and train the attention agent through deep reinforcement
learning without extra labels. The agent takes features and
predictions from the baseline model as input and generates
importance scores for all frames. Moreover, our approach is
extensible, which can be applied to different existing deep
learning based action recognition models. We achieve very
competitive action recognition performance on two widely
used action recognition datasets.

Video-level
prediction

FC-layer Frame-level
predictions

2

Agent
Features

T

Figure 1: Flow-chart of our proposed method for action
recognition. Each stream takes a sequence of frames or optical flow stacks as input. Then, a agent trained by deep
reinforcement learning generates importance scores for all
frames, which finds the attentions of the video for recognition.
Networks based methods (Donahue et al. 2015), 3D ConvNets based methods (Tran et al. 2015) and their combinations (Yue-Hei Ng et al. 2015; Carreira and Zisserman
2017). Among these works, two-stream based methods play
the most important role because they can exploit information from video data efficiently. To test a video efficiently,
these methods first sample frames sparsely and uniformly
from the whole video. Then they perform recognition for
each frame and average all the frame-level predictions to obtain the video-level prediction.
However, discriminative actions may occur sparsely in
a few frames and most other frames are irrelevant, which
may lead to a wrong video-level prediction. Most existing
two-stream based works treat every sampled frame equally
and pay little attention to the different importance of frames
at the testing stage. We think that the irrelevant frames,
which will bring in large proportion of noise, should be discarded by hard attention. Motivated by this, we propose an
attention-aware sampling method (AS) to identify discriminative frames and discard the irrelevant frames simultaneously. The agent in our method takes a sequence of features and predictions from the baseline action recognition
model as input and outputs a sequence of probabilities for
each frame. Since hard attention model is non-differentiable,
which cannot be trained end-to-end with the whole network,
we apply deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to train the at-

Introduction
Action recognition has drawn a large amount of attention due to its potential in practical applications like video
surveillance and behavior analysis. Since deep learning
has achieved great success in the task of object recognition with competitive performance achieved on ImageNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), recent
works have focused on learning deep representations from
a large number of labeled video data. These works can be
mainly divided into the following categories: two-stream
based methods (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Wang et
al. 2016; Diba, Sharma, and Van Gool 2017; Feichtenhofer,
Pinz, and Wildes 2017; Du et al. 2018), Recurrent Neural
∗

Corresponding Author (zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8247

