The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Evolutionary Manytasking Optimization Based on Symbiosis in Biocoenosis
Rung-Tzuo Liaw, Chuan-Kang Ting
Department of Power Mechanical Engineering
National Tsing Hua University
Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan
rtliaw@mx.nthu.edu.tw, ckting@pme.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract

Evolutionary multitasking introduces the new concept of
simultaneously solving multiple problems through a single
run of EA (Gupta, Ong, and Feng 2016). The multi-factorial
evolutionary algorithm (MFEA) has proved effective at realizing evolutionary multitasking by leveraging the synergy of
fitness landscapes among different problems. By regarding
each problem as a task, MFEA seeks the optima for all tasks
in a unified decision space, where the search space of multiple problems are unified by a transformation function. The
solution information of different tasks is exchanged through
skill factor and mating. MFEA has achieved several promising results in dealing with two or three tasks. However, there
exists room for improving EAs in multitasking.
This paper aims to address three issues at evolutionary
multitasking. First, information transfer plays a crucial role
in solving multiple tasks concurrently. In MFEA, information is transferred through recombination of individuals that
are good at some specific tasks under the user-defined random mating probability (rmp). Nevertheless, MFEA does
not control the rmp during evolution; that is, it lacks a mechanism for controlling the quantity and frequency of information transfer. Second, MFEA is inapplicable to the modelbased EAs, such as estimation of distribution algorithm
(Hauschild and Pelikan 2011) and ant colony optimization
(Dorigo, Maniezzo, and Colorni 1996), in that these EAs
seldom adopt recombination of individuals. The information
transfer among tasks is therefore disabled. Third, evolutionary multitasking is focused on two or three tasks, whereas
concurrently solving more tasks is highly desirable but has
not been investigated yet. In particular, appropriate transfer
becomes even harder asthe number of tasks increases due to
the squared number m
2 of possible transfers. Therefore, the
increase of tasks intensifies the importance of balancing the
exploitation within a task and the exploration among multiple tasks.
This paper proposes a novel framework for evolutionary
multitasking, called the symbiosis in biocoenosis optimization (SBO), which manipulates multiple EAs and each one is
responsible for a task. In SBO, the collection of EA populations constitutes the biocoenosis, while the transfer of information between populations caters to the symbiosis. Specifically, the inter-task individual replacement is proposed for
information transfer; hence, SBO enables the use of EAs
without recombination for evolutionary multitasking. For

Evolutionary multitasking is a significant emerging search
paradigm that utilizes evolutionary algorithms to concurrently optimize multiple tasks. The multi-factorial evolutionary algorithm renders an effectual realization of evolutionary multitasking on two or three tasks. However, there remains room for improvement on the performance and capability of evolutionary multitasking. Beyond three tasks,
this paper proposes a novel framework, called the symbiosis in biocoenosis optimization (SBO), to address evolutionary many-tasking optimization. The SBO leverages the notion
of symbiosis in biocoenosis for transferring information and
knowledge among different tasks through three major components: 1) transferring information through inter-task individual replacement, 2) measuring symbiosis through intertask paired evaluations, and 3) coordinating the frequency
and quantity of transfer based on symbiosis in biocoenosis.
The inter-task individual replacement with paired evaluations
caters for estimation of symbiosis, while the symbiosis in biocoenosis provides a good estimator of transfer. This study examines the effectiveness and efficiency of the SBO on a suite
of many-tasking benchmark problems, designed to deal with
30 tasks simultaneously. The experimental results show that
SBO leads to better solutions and faster convergence than the
state-of-the-art evolutionary multitasking algorithms. Moreover, the results indicate that SBO is highly capable of identifying the similarity between problems and transferring information appropriately.

1

Introduction

Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) (Holland 1975; Goldberg
1989; Schwefel 1995) have shown their great capability of
tackling search and optimization problems. Inspired from
Darwinian evolution theory (Darwin 1859), EAs mimic natural evolution to search for the optimal solutions by manipulating a population of candidate solutions. There have
been various EAs proposed for different problems (Eiben
and Smith 2003; Gen and Cheng 1997). In EA, a population
of individuals evolves for searching the optimal solution,
where a solution is encoded as chromosome, and the fitness
implies the quality of a solution. The principle of “survival
of the fittest” drives the population towards better and optimal solutions.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4295

