The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Refining Abstraction Heuristics during Real-Time Planning
Rebecca Eifler, Maximilian Fickert, Jörg Hoffmann

Wheeler Ruml

Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
{eifler,fickert,hoffmann}@cs.uni-saarland.de

University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH USA
ruml at cs.unh.edu

Abstract

cluding the approximation of goal distance (e.g. Edelkamp
2001; Haslum et al. 2007; Seipp and Helmert 2013; Helmert
et al. 2014). In this paper, we explore abstract state spaces
that are quotient graphs of the state space, where abstract
states are blocks in a state partition, and the goal distance estimate for any state is the distance of its block to the nearest
goal block. Refinement operations split blocks into smaller
ones, converging at the latest when all blocks are singletons.
Compared to per-state updates, abstraction offers several
potential advantages: i) generalization, as a single refinement operation may improve the estimates of many states;
ii) compactness, as an abstraction may use exponentially less
space to store the same value approximation; and iii) flexibility, as the abstraction can be refined anywhere in the state
space, not just on the states explored by search. Of course,
it is a priori not clear how to realize this potential. Abstraction refinement i) is computationally more expensive than a
per-state update. Compactness ii) may be outweighed by the
overhead of maintaining a global heuristic function rather
than just a function on the state set seen thus far. Flexibility
iii) is a mixed blessing as it introduces the need to define
how and where to refine the abstraction.
Here we begin to explore these research questions. We design several strategies for refining abstractions given a realtime lookahead search space. These strategies are, per se,
agnostic of how the abstraction is represented and how refinement operations are realized. Where relevant, we discuss these questions for Cartesian abstraction, which assumes a representation of the state space in terms of state
variables, and restricts blocks to be cross-products of statevariable domain subsets (Ball, Podelski, and Rajamani 2001;
Seipp and Helmert 2013). Cartesian abstraction allows finegrained state partitions yet supports effective refinement operations, and it underlies the current state of the art in using
abstractions to design heuristic functions in planning (Seipp
and Helmert 2014; Seipp 2017; Seipp and Helmert 2018).
Based on the Fast Downward (FD) planning system
(Helmert 2006) and its implementation of Cartesian abstraction, we run experiments on standard planning benchmarks
from the International Planning Competition (IPC), as well
as on a planning encoding of the sliding tiles puzzle. Our
results exhibit complementary strengths and weaknesses, of
traditional Bellman updates vs. Cartesian abstraction refinement. On a variety of benchmarks our methods result in sig-

In real-time planning, the planner must select the next action within a fixed time bound. Because a complete plan may
not have been found, the selected action might not lead to
a goal and the agent may need to return to its current state.
To preserve completeness, real-time search methods incorporate learning, in which heuristic values are updated. Previous work in real-time search has used table-based heuristics, in which the values of states are updated individually.
In this paper, we explore the use of abstraction-based heuristics. By refining the abstraction on-line, we can update the
values of multiple states, including ones the agent has not
yet generated. We test this idea empirically using Cartesian
abstractions in the Fast Downward planner. Results on various benchmarks, including the sliding tile puzzle and several
IPC domains, indicate that the approach can improve performance compared to traditional heuristic updating. This work
brings abstraction refinement, a powerful technique from offline planning, into the real-time setting.

Introduction
In some AI applications, it is unacceptable for the system to
exhibit unbounded pauses while planning. In real-time planning, the planner must return the next action for the system
to take within a strict time limit. Real-time search is a wellestablished area addressing this through dedicated heuristic
search algorithms (e.g. Korf 1990; Bulitko and Lee 2006;
Koenig and Sun 2009; Bulitko et al. 2011; Hernández and
Baier 2012; Kiesel, Burns, and Ruml 2015). One important
issue in this context is completeness: guaranteeing that the
agent will eventually reach a goal state. In domains without
dead-ends (unsolvable states from which a goal is not reachable), this can be achieved through the refinement of statevalue estimates: optimistic estimates of the true goal distance of a state, continuously refined throughout the search,
possibly until convergence to optimal values. Traditionally,
real-time search algorithms do this by storing distance estimates for individual states, and refining these with Bellman
state-value updates (Bellman 1957).
However, more effective methods may exist. In particular,
abstraction is a well-explored means to approximate transition systems (e.g. Clarke, Grumberg, and Long 1994), inCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7578

