The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Graph Convolutional Networks Meet Markov Random Fields:
Semi-Supervised Community Detection in Attribute Networks
Di Jin,1 Ziyang Liu,1 Weihao Li,2 Dongxiao He,1 Weixiong Zhang3,4
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China, 2Visual Learning Lab, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg 69120, Germany, 3Institute for Systems Biology, Jianghan University, Wuhan 430056, China, 4Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
{jindi, liuziyang}@tju.edu.cn, weihao.li@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de, hedongxiao@tju.edu.cn, weixiong.zhang@wustl.edu

Abstract

In practice, except network topological properties, two
additional pieces of information can also be exploited in
community detection. The first is the prior community
membership that some of the nodes in a network may have,
e.g., students and faculty in a university. The second is the
semantic information on nodes, e.g., information of personal interests. Utilizing the prior membership of even a
small number of nodes can dramatically increase the fidelity of the final communities identified, which also turns the
problem into a problem of semi-supervised community
detection. Utilizing node semantics expands the envelope
of community detection to encompass attribute networks, a
problem that has drawn little attention.
Many community detection methods have been proposed including hierarchical clustering (Jia et al. 2015),
statistical modeling (Chen et al. 2018), network embedding
(Tu et al. 2018), etc.
We would like to highlight two most recent approaches
to community detection, one is based on Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) and the other on Markov Random
Fields (MRF). GCN is a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) extended to the problem of semi-supervised classification of nodes in a graph (Kipf and Welling 2016; Chen
et al. 2018) and thus can be adopted for community detection. GCN defines a spectral graph convolution by multiplying a graph signal with a spectral filter in the Fourier
domain. It uses two graph convolution layers to derive a
network embedding, and then applies the Softmax function
to classify nodes into different categories. In training, the
prior information of community memberships of a few
nodes, network topology and node attributes are used together to learn the weight parameters of the neural network.
Similar to CNN, GCN has an excellent global search capability, i.e., it is able to extract complex features or patterns
from a myriad of local features by a stack of convolution
operations. However, GCN has at least two drawbacks.
Firstly, GCN aims primarily at deriving a network embed-

Community detection is a fundamental problem in network
science with various applications. The problem has attracted
much attention and many approaches have been proposed.
Among the existing approaches are the latest methods based
on Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) and on statistical
modeling of Markov Random Fields (MRF). Here, we propose to integrate the techniques of GCN and MRF to solve
the problem of semi-supervised community detection in attributed networks with semantic information. Our new
method takes advantage of salient features of GNN and
MRF and exploits both network topology and node semantic
information in a complete end-to-end deep network architecture. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the superior
performance of the new method over state-of-the-art methods and its scalability on several large benchmark problems.

1. Introduction
Many complex systems can be abstracted in the form of
networks, which include, e.g., the Internet, the WorldWide Web and power grids. Networks are both a representation tool and an analytic vehicle for gaining deep insights
into complex systems. Modular or community structures of
networks are important properties of underlying systems. A
community in a network consists of nodes that are connected more tightly than nodes in different communities.
The objective of community detection is to assign every
node in a network to a community based on network topologies (Girvan and Newman 2002). Community detection
can help reveal and comprehend significant hidden properties of complex systems, e.g., the organizational principles
of an institution, the units and their functions of an organization, and structures and possibly vulnerable spots of a
power grid.

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

152

