The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Goal-Oriented Dialogue Policy Learning from Failures
Keting Lu,1 Shiqi Zhang,2 Xiaoping Chen1
1

School of Computer Science, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Department of Computer Science, SUNY Binghamton
ktlu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, szhang@cs.binghamton.edu, xpchen@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

challenge for many dialogue systems to learn much at the
beginning and producing poor user experiences. This paper
focuses on runtime dialogue data augmentation (DDA) for
speeding up the process of learning goal-oriented dialogue
policies.
The idea of data augmentation for RL tasks is not new.
Existing research on hindsight experience replay (HER) has
shown that, in robotic manipulation tasks, an RL agent’s
learning rate can be improved by changing goals to generate “successful” instances (Andrychowicz et al. 2017). However, their HER approach is not directly applicable to dialogue domains, because a dialogue agent has to interact
with people to identify the desired goal state (whereas the
goal state is explicit in manipulation tasks). We develop two
complex HER methods for runtime DDA problems. The first
method is called Trimming-based HER (T-HER), where
failed dialogues are trimmed to generate successful dialogue
instances. While T-HER enables the agent to significantly
augment the training data, the generated instances are relatively short. The other method is Stitching-based HER (SHER) that enables an agent to analyze the similarity between dialogue belief states, and stitch together dialogue
segments to form relatively long, successful dialogues.
Figure is an overview of our DDA framework, illustrating the role of our HER methods. Like standard experience
replay, we add user dialogues to the experience pool. Unlike
existing methods, when incoming dialogues are unsuccessful, we use our HER methods to generate new, successful
dialogues, enabling our agent to learn from failures.
We have applied our DDA framework, including T-HER
and S-HER, to Deep Q-Networks (DQNs) (Mnih et al. 2015)
for learning dialogue policies. Results collected using a realistic user simulator (Li et al. 2016) suggest that our methods
perform better than competitive experience replay baselines,
including prioritized experience replay (Schaul et al. 2015).
Finally, our two HER methods can be combined to further
improve the performance. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work on HER-based dialogue policy learning.

Reinforcement learning methods have been used for learning dialogue policies. However, learning an effective dialogue policy frequently requires prohibitively many conversations. This is partly because of the sparse rewards in dialogues, and the very few successful dialogues in early learning phase. Hindsight experience replay (HER) enables learning from failures, but the vanilla HER is inapplicable to dialogue learning due to the implicit goals. In this work, we develop two complex HER methods providing different tradeoffs between complexity and performance, and, for the first
time, enabled HER-based dialogue policy learning. Experiments using a realistic user simulator show that our HER
methods perform better than existing experience replay methods (as applied to deep Q-networks) in learning rate.

Introduction
Goal-oriented dialogue systems aim at assisting users to accomplish specific goals using natural language, and have
been used in a variety of applications (Zhang and Stone
2015; Su et al. 2016b; Li et al. 2017). Goal-oriented dialogue systems usually aim at concise conversations.1 Such
dialogue systems typically include a language understanding component for recognizing and parsing the language inputs into inner representations, a belief state tracking component for predicting user intent and updating the dialogue
history, and a dialogue management component that generates dialogue actions. The dialogue actions can be converted
into spoken or text-based language using a language generator. Goal-oriented dialogue managers are frequently modeled as a sequential decision-making problem (Young et al.
2013), where reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto
1998) can be used for learning an optimal dialogue policy
from user experiences. While a variety of RL methods have
been developed for learning dialogue policies (Williams and
Zweig 2016; Cuayáhuitl 2017), the methods typically require a large amount of dialogue experience until one can
learn a good-quality dialogue policy. In particular, successful dialogues are rare in early learning phase, making it a

Related Work

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In comparison, the Chatbots that want to maximize social engagement, such as Microsoft XiaoIce, frequently result in extended
conversations.

This work is closely related to research areas that aim at
efficient (deep) RL methods, including, experience replay,
reward shaping, exploration in RL, and supervised pretraining for RL.
2596

