The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Gene Function Prediction
via Multi-Networks Representation Learning
Hansheng Xue,1,2 Jiajie Peng,1∗ Xuequn Shang1
1 School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China

xhs1892@gmail.com, jiajiepeng@nwpu.edu.cn, shang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

Our Proposed Approach

Multi-networks integration methods have achieved prominent performance on many network-based tasks, but these
approaches often incur information loss problem. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-networks representation learning method based on semi-supervised autoencoder, termed
as DeepMNE, which captures complex topological structures of each network and takes the correlation among multinetworks into account. The experimental results on two realworld datasets indicate that DeepMNE outperforms the existing state-of-the-art algorithms.

Learning global structure information In order to learn
single network topological information, we run random
walk with restart on each network and capture feature representations for each node. The adjacency matrix cannot
describe the global structure of the whole network. RWR
can makeup this drawback, and represent nodes using these
high-dimensional network structural information.
Prior Constraints Extraction Given pairs of nodes, we
calculate pairwise pearson correlation coefficient of all pairs
of nodes based on their feature vectors. We then set two
thresholds for must-link and cannot-link to extract prior constraints. After extracting the constraints from the previous
layer (i layer), we can apply these constraints to the next
layer (i+1 layer) as the prior information.

Introduction
Annotating gene function is an important and challenging
problem in biological area, which aims to assign an unknown gene to the correct functional categories. Because of
the complementary nature of different data sources, multinetworks based function prediction always performs better
than other single-network based methods. Thus, many approaches have been proposed for gene function prediction
by integrating multiple biological networks (Cho, Berger,
and Jian 2016; Sara and Quaid 2010; Cao and et al. 2014).
Gene function prediction can be considered as a node
classcification problem. It has been proved that better feature representation of nodes can enhance the performance of
models for node classification (Cho, Berger, and Jian 2016).
However, current network representation learning methods
mainly focus on single-network embedding and represent
nodes with topological structure information (Grover and
Leskovec 2016; Perozzi and et al. 2014). Besides, existing
multi-networks integration methods are linear and shallow
approaches which cannot capture complex and highly nonlinear structure across all networks.
In this work, we propose a novel multi-networks based
feature learning algorithm, named DeepMNE. Considering
correlation between multiple networks, DeepMNE applies
stacked semi-supervised autoencoder to map input multinetworks into a low-dimension and non-linear space. We
evaluate DeepMNE for the task of gene function prediction.
The experimental results show that DeepMNE performs better than exisiting state-of-the-art algorithms.

Multi-networks representations Integration using
SemiAE The core of DeepMNE is to integrate prior
constraints into the network representation. Here we revise
the original autoencoder and propose a novel variant of
autoencoder, termed as Semi-Supervised AutoEncoder
(semiAE). Let xi be the i-th input vector or node representation of network, and f and g be the activations
of the hidden layer and the output layer respectively.
We have hi = f (W xi + b) and yi = g(Mhi + d), where
Θ = {θ1 , θ2 } = {W, b, M, d} are the parameters to be
learned, f and g are the non-linear operators such as the sigmoid function (sigmoid(z) = 1/(1 + exp(−z))). Assuming
M and C are must-link and cannot-link pairwise constraints
extracted at the previous step.
The hypothesis is that xi and x j should also close based
on the low-dimensional space if there is a must-link constraint between them in previous layer. Ideally, after encoding, two must-link nodes should be closer, and two cannotlink nodes may be more distant. Mathematically, if the pair
(xi , x j ) belongs to must-link constraints, we add a penalty
on the loss function. If the pair (xi , x j ) belongs to cannotlink constraints, we add a reward on the loss function. The
loss function of semiAE can be defined as follows:
n

loss = arg min ∑ k yi − xi k2 +λ Lmc
θ ∈Θ i=1

∗ Corresponding author

(1)

where the first part of Equation 1 measures the squared error between input and output feature vectors, and the second

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10069

