The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Combining Deep Learning and Qualitative Spatial Reasoning
to Learn Complex Structures from Sparse Examples with Noise
Nikhil Krishnaswamy,1 Scott Friedman,2 James Pustejovsky1
1

Brandeis University Dept. of Computer Science, Waltham, MA, USA
2
Smart Information Flow Technologies, Minneapolis, MN, USA
nkrishna@brandeis.edu, friedman@sift.net, jamesp@brandeis.edu

Abstract

that any rigid body can undertake in 3D space. Thus, move,
translate, and rotate can be composed into more complex
actions, which define a compostional higher-level concept,
such as building a structure, which can then be labeled (Langley and Choi 2006; Laird 2012; Ménager 2016).
However, multiple paths to the desired goal often exist.
Structural components may be interchangeable and the order
in which relations between component parts can be instantiated is often non-deterministic, especially in the early steps,
simply due to there being many ways of solving a given
problem, and many ways to generalize from an example.
Computational approaches may handle this class of problem
either heuristically (cf. classic A* pathfinding (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968)) or through reinforcement learning (Asada, Uchibe, and Hosoda 1999; Smart and Kaelbling 2002; Williams 1992) and policy gradients to shrink
the search space (Gullapalli 1990; Peters and Schaal 2008).
Here, we define a means to use deep learning in a larger
learning and inference framework over few samples, in a
search space where every combination of configurations
may be intractable. Three-dimensional environments provide a setting to examine these questions in real time, as they
can easily supply both information about relations between
objects and naturalistic simulated data. Fine-grained 3D coordinates can be translated into qualitative relations that allow inference over smaller datasets than those required by
continuous value sets. The aforementioned motion primitives can be composed with sets of spatial relations between
object pairs, and machine learning can attempt to abstract
the set of primitives that hold over most observed examples.

Many modern machine learning approaches require vast
amounts of training data to learn new concepts; conversely,
human learning often requires few examples—sometimes
only one—from which the learner can abstract structural concepts. We present a novel approach to introducing new spatial structures to an AI agent, combining deep learning over
qualitative spatial relations with various heuristic search algorithms. The agent extracts spatial relations from a sparse
set of noisy examples of block-based structures, and trains
convolutional and sequential models of those relation sets.
To create novel examples of similar structures, the agent begins placing blocks on a virtual table, uses a CNN to predict the most similar complete example structure after each
placement, an LSTM to predict the most likely set of remaining moves needed to complete it, and recommends one using
heuristic search. We verify that the agent learned the concept
by observing its virtual block-building activities, wherein it
ranks each potential subsequent action toward building its
learned concept. We empirically assess this approach with
human participants’ ratings of the block structures. Initial results and qualitative evaluations of structures generated by the
trained agent show where it has generalized concepts from the
training data, which heuristics perform best within the search
space, and how we might improve learning and execution.

Introduction
A distinguishing factor of general human intelligence is the
capacity to learn new concepts from abstractions and few
examples, either by composing a new concept from primitives, or relating it to an existing concept, its constituent
primitives, and the constraints involved (Gergely, Bekkering, and Király 2002). Recent research in artificial intelligence has pursued “one-shot learning,” but the prevailing
machine learning paradigm is to train a model over a number of samples and allow the AI to infer generalizations and
solutions from the model. This approach is often very successful, but often requires large amounts of data and fails to
transfer task knowledge between concepts or domains.
For a computational learner, a complex building action
might be composed of moving objects into a specific configuration. The class move is taken as primitive, being a superclass of translate and rotate, the two types of motions

Related Work
Learning definitions of primitives has long been an area
of study in machine learning (Quinlan 1990). Confronting
a new class of problem by drawing on similar examples
renders the task decidable, as does the ability to break
down a complex task into simpler ones (Veeraraghavan,
Papanikolopoulos, and Schrater 2007; Dubba et al. 2015;
Wu et al. 2015; Alayrac et al. 2016; Fernando, Shirazi, and
Gould 2017). Recommendation systems at large propose future choices based on previous ones, which can be considered special cases of “moves” from one situation to another
(Smyth 2007). Often an example must be adapted to a new
situation of identifiable but low similarity, and this knowl-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2911

