The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

PhoneMD:
Learning to Diagnose Parkinson’s Disease from Smartphone Data
Patrick Schwab

Walter Karlen

Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
patrick.schwab@hest.ethz.ch

Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
walter.karlen@ieee.org
! walking

Abstract

"
& %

$ memory

%# %$#

x

○

y
z

○ ○

1?
2?

)) )'

signals

%

# tapping

tests

!

Parkinson’s disease is a neurodegenerative disease that can
affect a person’s movement, speech, dexterity, and cognition.
Clinicians primarily diagnose Parkinson’s disease by performing a clinical assessment of symptoms. However, misdiagnoses are common. One factor that contributes to misdiagnoses is that the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease may not
be prominent at the time the clinical assessment is performed.
Here, we present a machine-learning approach towards distinguishing between people with and without Parkinson’s disease using long-term data from smartphone-based walking,
voice, tapping and memory tests. We demonstrate that our
attentive deep-learning models achieve significant improvements in predictive performance over strong baselines (area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve = 0.85) in
data from a cohort of 1853 participants. We also show that
our models identify meaningful features in the input data. Our
results confirm that smartphone data collected over extended
periods of time could in the future potentially be used as a
digital biomarker for the diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease.

" voice

○
○

'

Figure 1: Smartphones can be used to perform tests that
are designed to trigger symptoms of Parkinson’s disease
(top). During these tests, smartphone sensors record highresolution signals (bottom) that we can use to distinguish
between people with and without Parkinson’s disease.
may appear similar to PD, and because symptom severity in
PD may fluctuate over time (Pahwa and Lyons 2010).
Smartphone-based tests could potentially give clinicians
access to long-term measurements of symptom severity and
symptom fluctuation by enabling patients to record themselves outside the clinic (Figure 1). However, making sense
of observational smartphone data is extremely challenging
for both humans and machines due to the large number of
diverse data streams sampled at high resolution over long
periods of time. Major unsolved questions include how to simultaneously cover the wide range of symptoms associated
with PD, how to best aggregate the vast amounts of clinically
relevant data collected over time, and how to communicate
the decisions of predictive models to clinicians.
To address these issues, we present a novel approach towards distinguishing between people with and without PD
from smartphone data. Our method is built on the idea of first
training specialised models to assess symptom severity from
single test instances, and then using an evidence aggregation
model to aggregate an arbitrary number of assessments from
several types of tests into a final prediction. We extend our
method with hierarchical attention to visualise both the importance of tests as well as the importance of segments in
those tests towards a prediction. Our experiments demonstrate that this approach leads to significant improvements
in predictive performance over several strong baselines, and
highlight the potential of smartphones to become accessible
tools for gathering clinically relevant data in the wild.

Introduction
Parkinson’s disease (PD) affects more than 6 million people worldwide (Vos et al. 2016) and is the second most
common neurodegenerative disease after Alzheimer’s disease (De Lau and Breteler 2006). The symptoms of PD progressively worsen over time, leading to a stark loss in quality of life (Schrag, Jahanshahi, and Quinn 2000), and a significant reduction in life expectancy (De Lau and Breteler
2006). While there currently exists no cure for PD, available pharmacological and surgical treatment options are effective at managing the symptoms of PD (Goetz et al. 2005;
Connolly and Lang 2014). Receiving a timely and accurate
diagnosis is paramount for patients because access to treatments could improve their quality of life (Global Parkinson’s Disease Survey Steering Committee 2002). Currently,
clinicians diagnose PD primarily based on subjective clinical assessments of patients’ symptoms (Pahwa and Lyons
2010). However, research has shown that around 25% of PD
diagnoses are incorrect when compared to results of postmortem autopsy (Pahwa and Lyons 2010). Diagnosing PD
is difficult because there are other movement disorders that
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1118

