The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

StNet: Local and Global Spatial-Temporal Modeling for Action Recognition
Dongliang He,1 Zhichao Zhou,1 Chuang Gan,2 Fu Li1
Xiao Liu,1 Yandong Li,3 Limin Wang,4 Shilei Wen1
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.1
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab2 , University of Central Florida3
State Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 4
{hedongliang01, zhouzhichao01, lifu, liuxiao12, wenshilei}@baidu.com
ganchuang1990@gmail.com, lyndon.leeseu@outlook.com, lmwang.nju@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite the success of deep learning for static image understanding, it remains unclear what are the most effective network architectures for spatial-temporal modeling in videos.
In this paper, in contrast to the existing CNN+RNN or pure
3D convolution based approaches, we explore a novel spatialtemporal network (StNet) architecture for both local and
global modeling in videos. Particularly, StNet stacks N successive video frames into a super-image which has 3N channels and applies 2D convolution on super-images to capture
local spatial-temporal relationship. To model global spatialtemporal structure, we apply temporal convolution on the local spatial-temporal feature maps. Specifically, a novel temporal Xception block is proposed in StNet, which employs
a separate channel-wise and temporal-wise convolution over
the feature sequence of a video. Extensive experiments on the
Kinetics dataset demonstrate that our framework outperforms
several state-of-the-art approaches in action recognition and
can strike a satisfying trade-off between recognition accuracy
and model complexity. We further demonstrate the generalization performance of the leaned video representations on
the UCF101 dataset.

1

(a) “Laying Bricks” (Top) v.s. “Laying Stone” (Bottom)

(b) “Cards Stacking” (Top) v.s. “Cards Flying” (Bottom)

Figure 1: Local information is sufficient to distinguish
“Laying Bricks” and “Laying Stones” while global spatialtemporal clue is necessary to tell “Cards Stacking” and
“Cards Flying”.

Introduction

Action recognition in videos has received significant research attention in the computer vision and machine learning
community (Karpathy et al. 2014; Wang and Schmid 2013;
Wang, Qiao, and Tang 2016; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Fernando et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2016; Qiu, Yao, and
Mei 2017; Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Shi et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2016). The increasing ubiquity of recording devices has created videos far surpassing what we can manually handle. It is therefore desirable to develop automatic
video understanding algorithms for various applications,
such as video recommendation, human behavior analysis,
video surveillance and so on. Both local and global information is important for this task, as shown in Fig.1. For example, to recognize “Laying Bricks” and “Laying Stones”,
local spatial information is critical to distinguish bricks and
stones; and to classify “Cards Stacking” and “Cards Flying”,
global spatial-temporal clues are the key evidence.

Motivated by the promising results of deep networks
(Ioffe and Szegedy 2015; He et al. 2016; Szegedy et al.
2017) on image understanding tasks, deep learning is applied to the problem of video understanding. Two major research directions are explored specifically for action recognition, i.e., employing CNN+RNN architectures for video
sequence modeling (Donahue et al. 2015; Yue-Hei Ng et al.
2015) and purely deploying ConvNet-based architectures for
video recognition (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Feichtenhofer, Pinz, and Wildes 2016; 2017; Wang et al. 2016;
Tran et al. 2015; Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Qiu, Yao,
and Mei 2017).
Although considerable progress has been made, current
action recognition approaches still fall behind human performance in terms of action recognition accuracy. The main
challenge lies in extracting discriminative spatial-temporal
representations from videos. For the CNN+RNN solution,

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8401

