The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Algorithms for Average Regret Minimization
Sabine Storandt,1 Stefan Funke2
1

University of Konstanz, Germany, 2 University of Stuttgart, Germany
sabine.storandt@uni-konstanz.de, funke@fmi.uni-stuttgart.de

So in case the best option in S according to the user preference is also contained in S ′ the regret is 0. In general, the
regret value can assume any value in [0, 1].
In previous work, the goal usually was to identify a concise subset S ′ of S which exhibits a small maximum regret,
that is, a subset that makes the unhappiest user sufficiently
happy. In this paper, we propose the usage of the average regret as a viable alternative. We focus on the scenario where
user preference functions are (all possible) convex linear
combinations of up to d criteria, and provide novel theoretical and practical results for computing subsets with small
average regret in this setting.

Abstract
In this paper, we study a problem from the realm of multicriteria decision making in which the goal is to select from a
given set S of d-dimensional objects a minimum sized subset
S ′ with bounded regret. Thereby, regret measures the unhappiness of users which would like to select their favorite object from set S but now can only select their favorite object
from the subset S ′ . Previous work focused on bounding the
maximum regret which is determined by the most unhappy
user. We propose to consider the average regret instead which
is determined by the sum of (un)happiness of all possible
users. We show that this regret measure comes with desirable properties as supermodularity which allows to construct
approximation algorithms. Furthermore, we introduce the regret minimizing permutation problem and discuss extensions
of our algorithms to the recently proposed k-regret measure.
Our theoretical results are accompanied with experiments on
a variety of inputs with d up to 7.

Related Work
The notion of maximum regret as a measure for subset quality was introduced in (Nanongkai et al. 2010) in the context
of databases. The idea was generalized to the k–maximum
regret measure in (Chester et al. 2014), which does not measure the quality of a subset in relation to the users’ top-1
choice in the whole set S but to the top-k choice.
It was proven in (Chester et al. 2014) that the problem of
computing a subset of given size that minimizes the maximum regret is NP-hard for sufficiently large d. For d = 2,
an exact algorithm based on dynamic programming was proposed in (Chester et al. 2014). For larger d, a simple greedy
algorithm was discussed in (Nanongkai et al. 2010) and
a randomized greedy linear programming algorithm for kregret in (Chester et al. 2014). Note that both of these greedy
algorithms do not come with an approximation guarantee.
Known algorithms with an approximation guarantee are either based on the notion of coresets (Agarwal et al. 2017;
Cao et al. 2017; Kumar and Sintos 2018) or by reformulating
the problem as a set cover or hitting set problem (Agarwal
et al. 2017; Asudeh et al. 2017; Kumar and Sintos 2018).
In (Soma and Yoshida 2017), the relation between regret
minimization and multi-objective submodular function maximization was investigated and two algorithms with provable
guarantees were proposed.
Although the findings above are all concerned with maximum regret, we are not the first to consider a measure related to average regret. In the 2-page paper by (Zeighami
and Wong 2016), it was suggested to minimize the average
regret ratio, that is, the expected maximum regret ratio of a
user. Their model is based on the explicit availability of a

Introduction
There are numerous (web) services in which it is impossible
to present all available options to the user at once; for example, the list of matching pages in a web search, or the list
of products of a certain type in an online warehouse. Hence
there needs to be a preselection of a concise subset of the options to be shown to the user first (e.g., on page 1). A typical
approach to make this selection is to rank all options using
a multivariate function (e.g., for products weighting price,
quality, date of appearance, and sales volume) and then presenting the top q options according to this function to the
user. The hope is that the function captures the preference
of a typical user or the majority of users. But in case user
preferences are diverse, considering only a single function
might be insufficient. As a remedy, an alternative selection
approach based on regret takes the preferences of all (possible) users into account. The regret induced by a user preference expressed as a multivariate function f (to be maximized) with respect to the full set of options S and a subset
S ′ thereof is
maxs∈S ′ f (s)
.
1−
maxs∈S f (s)
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1600

