The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hierarchical Context Enabled Recurrent Neural Network for Recommendation
Kyungwoo Song,1∗ Mingi Ji,1∗ Sungrae Park,2 Il-Chul Moon1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea
2
Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp., Korea
{gtshs2,qwertgfdcvb}@kaist.ac.kr, sungrae.park@navercorp.com, icmoon@kaist.ac.kr

Sub-sequence1 (Action) Sub-sequence2 (Musical)
Musical

Musical

Action

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

≈

≈

Global context
for sequence

≈

≈

≈

≈

Local context
for subsequence
Temporary context
for current

Action Action/Romance

Action

=

≈

Action

≈

A long user history inevitably reflects the transitions of personal interests over time. The analyses on the user history
require the robust sequential model to anticipate the transitions and the decays of user interests. The user history
is often modeled by various RNN structures, but the RNN
structures in the recommendation system still suffer from the
long-term dependency and the interest drifts. To resolve these
challenges, we suggest HCRNN with three hierarchical contexts of the global, the local, and the temporary interests.
This structure is designed to withhold the global long-term
interest of users, to reflect the local sub-sequence interests,
and to attend the temporary interests of each transition. Besides, we propose a hierarchical context-based gate structure
to incorporate our interest drift assumption. As we suggest
a new RNN structure, we support HCRNN with a complementary bi-channel attention structure to utilize hierarchical
context. We experimented the suggested structure on the sequential recommendation tasks with CiteULike, MovieLens,
and LastFM, and our model showed the best performances in
the sequential recommendations.

Sub-sequence3 (Action/Romance)

Action

≈

Abstract

Figure 1: The long user history contains multiple hierarchical context; global context, local context, and temporary
context. To take into account the user’s interest drift, the
temporary context must change at every point (black wave)
but should change more when the new sub-sequence starts
(red wave). The wave means the change of interest, and red
wave means a more drastic change than the black wave.
Moreover, the interest drift should be considered in the hierarchical context. For example, in the figure above, we can
see that the user’s primary interest is the action movie, given
the global and local context. Therefore, even if a movie,
whose genre is action and romance, comes out at t = 7,
we can recommend an action movie at t = 8 rather than a
romance movie if we consider the hierarchical context.

Introduction
A user history is a sequence of user orders or clicks, and
the history represents the user’s interest. Given this user history, many services such as movie recommendations, music
streaming services, etc., are interested in recommending the
next most likely click item. When we perform this recommendation, it has been assumed that the user’s interest can be
hierarchically ranging from general interest to a temporary,
specific need as shown in Figure 1. Here, these hierarchical
interest dynamics are defined as 1) the global context for the
entire sequence; 2) the local context for a sub-sequence, such
as a click-stream of a site visit with a few or dozens of clicks;
3) and the temporary context for a transition of items. The
assumption on the hierarchical contexts has been partially
reflected in NARM that models the attention of the general
interest (Li et al. 2017); and STAMP that directly predicts
the next item by considering temporary contexts (Liu et al.
2018).

The recently proposed models with recurrent neural network (RNN) structures have focused on modeling the local context of sub-sequences (Wu et al. 2017; Smirnova and
Vasile 2017; Yin et al. 2016). For example, GRU4REC (Hidasi et al. 2016) utilized a gated recurrent unit (GRU) (Cho
et al. 2014) with a ranking based loss, to emphasize the best
item selection. This model started modeling the interest dynamics with general structure, GRU, but the general structure can be further modified to model the hierarchical interest dynamics. Another example is NARM whose attention
mechanism is one way of modeling the user’s global context. This attention mechanism emphasizes a specific previous record to consider for the next recommendation, and
this mechanism enables the long sequence modeling. However, this mechanism could be better if we include modeling
on a sudden interest drift of users. In contrast to GRU4REC
and NARM, STAMP is optimized to model the short inter-

∗

Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4983

