The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fair Division with a Secretive Agent
Eshwar Ram Arunachaleswaran,1 Siddharth Barman,1 Nidhi Rathi1
1

Indian Institute of Science
eshwarram.arunachaleswaran@gmail.com, barman@iisc.ac.in, nidhirathi@iisc.ac.in

widely-used websites (e.g., Spliddit and Adjusted Winner 1 ),
which provide methods for fair division of resources, rent,
and tasks. This works contributes to computational thinking
in fair division and, in particular, studies algorithmic aspects
of existential results which show that the preferences of only
n − 1 agents suffice to find a fair division among n agents.
Such an existential result for the case of two agents and
a divisible good (which is metaphorically represented as a
cake) follows directly from the standard divide-and-choose
protocol: considering the valuation of just the first agent we
can partition the cake into two parts of equal value (for the
first agent) and, then, the second agent can select her most
preferred piece. This protocol leads to an envy-free cake division, i.e., in the resulting allocation no agent has a strictly
stronger preference for the other agent’s piece. Envy freeness is a standard notion of fairness ((Foley 1967), (Varian 1974), (Stromquist 1980)) and the divide-and-choose
method shows that a fair division with respect to this notion can be found even if the second agent is secretive and
just selects a piece after we partition the cake.
Asada et al. (2018) showed that this result extends to
higher number of agents who are endowed with ordinal preferences: there exists a division of the cake into n parts,
which depends on the (subjective) preferences of only n − 1
agents, such that the nth (secretive) agent can select an arbitrary piece and still we would be able to allocate the remaining n − 1 pieces in an envy free manner. In other words,
independent of the choice of the secretive agent, there exists an allocation in which no agent has a strictly stronger
preference for the piece of any other agent (including the
secretive one). This result of Asada et al. relies on a fixedpoint argument–specifically, it uses a version of the KnasterKuratowski-Mazurkiewicz (KKM) Lemma (1929).
Frick et al. (2017) show that an analogous result holds
in the context of fair rent division. Rent division is another
well-studied problem in the fair-division literature, and it entails allocating n rooms among n agents and splitting the
rent such that envy freeness is achieved; see, e.g., Su (1999),
Alkan et al. (1991), Aragones (1995), Klijn (2000) and Gal
et al. (2017). Considering agents who have ordinal preferences over the rooms (for every possible division of the

Abstract
We study classic fair-division problems in a partial information setting. This paper respectively addresses fair division
of rent, cake, and indivisible goods among agents with cardinal preferences. We will show that, for all of these settings
and under appropriate valuations, a fair (or an approximately
fair) division among n agents can be efficiently computed using only the valuations of n − 1 agents. The nth (secretive)
agent can make an arbitrary selection after the division has
been proposed and, irrespective of her choice, the computed
division will admit an overall fair allocation.
For the rent-division setting we prove that well-behaved utilities of n − 1 agents suffice to find a rent division among
n rooms such that, for every possible room selection of the
secretive agent, there exists an allocation (of the remaining
n − 1 rooms among the n − 1 agents) which ensures overall
envy freeness (fairness). We complement this existential result by developing a polynomial-time algorithm for the case
of quasilinear utilities. In this partial information setting, we
also develop efficient algorithms to compute allocations that
are envy-free up to one good (EF1) and ε-approximate envy
free. These two notions of fairness are applicable in the context of indivisible goods and divisible goods (cake cutting),
respectively.
One of the main technical contributions of this paper is the
development of novel connections between different fairdivision paradigms, e.g., we use our existential results for
envy-free rent-division to develop an efficient EF1 algorithm.

1

Introduction

The theory of fair division addresses the fundamental problem of dividing resources/goods in a fair manner among
agents with heterogeneous valuations, but equal entitlements
(Moulin 1986). Many recent results in artificial intelligence
and algorithmic game theory address computational aspects
of fair division, see, e.g., (Brandt et al. 2016) and (Rothe
and others 2015) for excellent expositions. A central thread
of research here is to design algorithms that complement
nonconstructive existential results. This computational perspective has lead to notable algorithms, hardness results, and
the development of novel solution concepts; in fact, a number of such notions and algorithms have been integrated into

1
http://www.spliddit.org/,
adjustedwinner/

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1732

http://www.nyu.edu/projects/

