The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Cousin Network Guided Sketch
Recognition via Latent Attribute Warehouse
Kaihao Zhang,1,3 Wenhan Luo,2
1

Lin Ma,2 Hongdong Li1,3

3

Australian National University
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
{kaihao.zhang, hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au quad {whluo.china, forest.linma}@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the problem of sketch image recognition. This problem is plagued with two major challenges: 1) sketch images
are often scarce in contrast to the abundance of natural images, rendering the training task difficult, and 2) the significant domain gap between sketch image and its natural image
counterpart makes the task of bridging the two domains challenging. In order to overcome these challenges, in this paper
we propose to transfer the knowledge of a network learned
from natural images to a sketch network - a new deep net
architecture which we term as cousin network. This network
guides a sketch-recognition network to extract more relevant
features that are close to those of natural images, via adversarial training. Moreover, to enhance the transfer ability of the
classification model, a sketch-to-image attribute warehouse
is constructed to approximate the transformation between the
sketch domain and the real image domain. Extensive experiments conducted on the TU-Berlin dataset show that the proposed model is able to efficiently distill knowledge from natural images and achieves superior performance than the current
state of the art.

Color
…
Textures

Natural Images

Latent Warehouse

Sketch Images

Figure 1: The relationship between natural images and
sketches. Compared with natural images, sketches are absent
of many visual attributes. These different attributes increase
the differences of features captured from two kinds of images, thus it is difficult for models trained from natural images to recognize sketch images. Meanwhile, it is also difficult for sketch recognition model to learn under the guidance
of model pre-trained on natural image datasets. To address
this issue, we propose a Latent Sketch-to-Image Warehouse
Network, which can learn the domain gap between two kinds
of images.

Introduction
Automatic hand-drawn sketch recognition is an important
task in computer vision, and has found many real-world applications. For example, sketch can be used as a convenient
user query input for content based image retrieval. This becomes a popular user interface thanks to the wide use of digital pen. However, sketch recognition remains a very challenging problem, due to multi-fold reasons: (1) Sketches often exhibit high abstraction and intra-class variance. Different person may draw the same object very differently. (2)
The amount of available sketch data is very scarce, and can
be expensive to obtain. Therefore it is unable to meet the requirement of training data needed by most deep neural networks.
In this paper, we notice that the amount of available natural images is enormous and keeps growing. We intend to
bridge the domain of natural images with that of sketches
by the idea of transfer learning, to boost the performance of
sketch recognition. However, as show in Fig. 1, compared
with natural images, sketches are typically absent of many

visual attributes like color, textures etc, which makes the domain transfer task difficult. To address this issue, we propose to exploit models trained solely on natural images (ImageNet) to guide the model aimed for sketch classification.
This is achieved by using Adversarial Learning. In order to
cope with the loss of discriminative power due to the absence of visual attributes in sketch images, we develop a
new mechanism called the “attribute warehouse”. Specifically, we adopt a neural network of ResNet structure as our
basis, which learns feature representation for classification
in different levels from the ImageNet dataset. With the natural images from the TU-Berlin-extend (Zhang et al. 2016)
and TU-Berlin (Eitz, Hays, and Alexa 2012) datasets, this
pre-trained network is fine-tuned to adapt to the categories
of sketches, i.e., from 1000 classes of natural images to 250
classes of sketch images. This fine-tuned network is termed
as a cousin network to guide the target network of sketch
classification to learn the latent representation commonly
shared by both real images and sketch images. The target
network is then initialized as the cousin network. A two-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9203

