The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Communication-Optimal Distributed Dynamic Graph Clustering
Chun Jiang Zhu,1 Tan Zhu,1 Kam-Yiu Lam,2 Song Han,1 Jinbo Bi1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
{chunjiang.zhu, tan.zhu, song.han, jinbo.bi}@uconn.edu
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, PRC
cskylam@cityu.edu.hk

Coordinator
time point τ :

Abstract
We consider the problem of clustering graph nodes over
large-scale dynamic graphs, such as citation networks, images and web networks, when graph updates such as
node/edge insertions/deletions are observed distributively.
We propose communication-efficient algorithms for two
well-established communication models namely the message
passing and the blackboard models. Given a graph with n
nodes that is observed at s remote sites over time [1, t], the
two proposed algorithms have communication costs Õ(ns)
and Õ(n + s) (Õ hides a polylogarithmic factor), almost
matching their lower bounds, Ω(ns) and Ω(n + s), respectively, in the message passing and the blackboard models.
More importantly, we prove that at each time point in [1, t]
our algorithms generate clustering quality nearly as good as
that of centralizing all updates up to that time and then applying a standard centralized clustering algorithm. We conducted extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-life
datasets which confirmed the communication efficiency of
our approach over baseline algorithms while achieving comparable clustering results.

1

time point
τ + 1:

Communication
S1

τ

:

:

τ + 1

S2

τ

:

τ + 1

:

S3

τ

:

τ + 1

:

Figure 1: Illustration of distributed dynamic graph clustering. Thick edges have an edge weight 3 while thin edges
have an edge weight 1. Clustering results are evolving over
time.
Citation Networks. Graph clustering on citation networks
aims to generate groups of papers/manuscripts/patents with
many similar citations. This implies that the authors within
each cluster share similar research interests. The clustering
results can be useful for recommending research collaboration, e.g. in ResearchGate. Large-scale citation networks,
e.g. the US patent citation network (1963-1999)1 , contain
millions of patents and tens of millions of citations, and they
are dynamic with frequent insertions. New papers are published everyday with new citations to be added to the network graph. Citation networks usually have negligible deletions because very few works get revoked.
Large Images. Image segmentation is a fundamental task in
computer vision (Arbelaez et al. 2011). Graph-based image
segmentation has been studied extensively (Shi and Malik
2000; Maier, Luxburg, and Hein 2009; Kim et al. 2011).
In these methods, each pixel is mapped into a node in a
high-dimensional space (considering coordinates and intensity) that then connects to its K-nearest nodes. In many
applications such as in astronomy and microscopy, highresolution images are captured with an extremely large size,
up to gigapixels. Segmentation of these images usually requires pipelining, such as with deblurring as a preprocessing, so new pixels could be added for image segmentation
over time. Similar to citation networks, no pixels and their
edges would be deleted once they are inserted into the images.

Introduction

Graph clustering is one of the most fundamental tasks in
artificial intelligence and machine learning (Giatsidis et
al. 2014; Tian et al. 2014; Anagnostopoulos et al. 2016).
Given a graph consisting of a node set and an edge set,
graph clustering asks to partition graph nodes into clusters such that nodes within the same cluster are “denselyconnected” by graph edges, while nodes in different clusters are “loosely-connected”. Graph clustering on modern
large-scale graphs imposes high computational and storage
requirements, which are too expensive, if not impossible, to
obtain from a single machine. In contrast, distributed computing clusters and server storages are a popular and cheap
way to meet the requirements. Distributed graph clustering
has received considerable research interests (Hui et al. 2007;
Yang and Xu 2015; Chen et al. 2016; Sun and Zanetti 2017).
However, the dynamic nature of modern graphs makes the
clustering problem even more challenging. We discuss several motivational examples and their characteristics as follows.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5957

https://snap.stanford.edu/data/cit-Patents.html

