The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Recurrent Survival Analysis
Kan Ren, Jiarui Qin, Lei Zheng, Zhengyu Yang,
Weinan Zhang, Lin Qiu, Yong Yu
APEX Data & Knowledge Management Lab
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
kren, qinjr, zhenglei, zyyang, wnzhang, lqiu, yyu@apex.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

The goal of survival analysis is to estimate the time until
occurrence of the particular event of interest, which can be
regarded as a regression problem (Lee and Wang 2003; Wu,
Yeh, and Chen 2015). It can also be viewed as to predict the
probability of the event occurring over the whole timeline
(Wang et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2018). Specifically, given the
information of the observing object, survival analysis would
predict the probability of the event occurrence at each time
point.
Nowadays, survival analysis has been widely used in realworld applications, such as clinical analysis in medicine research (Zhu et al. 2017b; Luck et al. 2017; Katzman et al.
2018) taking diseases as events and predicting survival time
of patients; customer lifetime estimation in information systems (Jing and Smola 2017; Grob et al. 2018) which estimates the time until the next visit of users; market modeling in game theory fields (Wu, Yeh, and Chen 2015;
Wang et al. 2016) that predicts the event (i.e., winning) probability over the whole referral space.
Because of the essential applications in the real world,
the researchers in both academic and industrial fields have
devoted great efforts to studying survival analysis in recent
decades. Many works of survival analysis are from the view
of traditional statistic methodology. Among them, KaplanMeier estimator (Kaplan and Meier 1958) bases on nonparametric counting statistics and forecasts the survival rate
at coarse-grained level where different observing objects
may share the same forecasting result, which is not suitable
in recent personalized applications. Cox proportional hazard method (Cox 1992) and its variants such as Lasso-Cox
(Tibshirani 1997) assume specific stochastic process or base
distribution with semi-parametric scaling coefficients for
fine-tuning the final survival rate prediction. Other parametric methods either make specific distributional assumptions,
such as Exponential distribution (Lee and Wang 2003) and
Weibull distribution (Ranganath et al. 2016). These methods
pre-assume distributional forms for the survival rate function, which may not generalize very well in real-world situations.
Recently, deep learning, i.e., deep neural network, has
been paid huge attention and introduced to survival analysis in many tasks (Ranganath et al. 2016; Grob et al. 2018;
Lee et al. 2018). However, in fact, many deep learning
models for survival analysis (Katzman et al. 2018; Ran-

Survival analysis is a hotspot in statistical research for modeling time-to-event information with data censorship handling,
which has been widely used in many applications such as
clinical research, information system and other fields with
survivorship bias. Many works have been proposed for survival analysis ranging from traditional statistic methods to
machine learning models. However, the existing methodologies either utilize counting-based statistics on the segmented
data, or have a pre-assumption on the event probability distribution w.r.t. time. Moreover, few works consider sequential
patterns within the feature space. In this paper, we propose
a Deep Recurrent Survival Analysis model which combines
deep learning for conditional probability prediction at finegrained level of the data, and survival analysis for tackling
the censorship. By capturing the time dependency through
modeling the conditional probability of the event for each
sample, our method predicts the likelihood of the true event
occurrence and estimates the survival rate over time, i.e., the
probability of the non-occurrence of the event, for the censored data. Meanwhile, without assuming any specific form
of the event probability distribution, our model shows great
advantages over the previous works on fitting various sophisticated data distributions. In the experiments on the three realworld tasks from different fields, our model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art solutions under various metrics.

Introduction
Recent advances of modern technology makes redundant
data collection available for time-to-event information,
which facilitates observing and tracking the event of interests. However, due to different reasons, many events would
lose tracking during observation period, which makes the
data censored. We only know that the true time to the occurrence of the event is larger or smaller than, or within the observation time, which have been defined as survivorship bias
categorized into right-censored, left-censored and internalcensored respectively (Lee and Wang 2003). Survival analysis, a.k.a. time-to-event analysis (Lee et al. 2018), is a typical statistical methodology for modeling time-to-event data
while handling censorship, which is a traditional research
problem and has been studied over decades.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4798

