The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Frame and Feature-Context Video Super-Resolution
Bo Yan,∗ Chuming Lin, Weimin Tan
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
{byan, cmlin17, wmtan14}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
For video super-resolution, current state-of-the-art approaches either process multiple low-resolution (LR) frames
to produce each output high-resolution (HR) frame separately
in a sliding window fashion or recurrently exploit the previously estimated HR frames to super-resolve the following
frame. The main weaknesses of these approaches are: 1) separately generating each output frame may obtain high-quality
HR estimates while resulting in unsatisfactory flickering artifacts, and 2) combining previously generated HR frames can
produce temporally consistent results in the case of short information flow, but it will cause significant jitter and jagged
artifacts because the previous super-resolving errors are constantly accumulated to the subsequent frames.
In this paper, we propose a fully end-to-end trainable frame
and feature-context video super-resolution (FFCVSR) network that consists of two key sub-networks: local network
and context network, where the first one explicitly utilizes a
sequence of consecutive LR frames to generate local feature
and local SR frame, and the other combines the outputs of
local network and the previously estimated HR frames and
features to super-resolve the subsequent frame. Our approach
takes full advantage of the inter-frame information from multiple LR frames and the context information from previously
predicted HR frames, producing temporally consistent highquality results while maintaining real-time speed by directly
reusing previous features and frames. Extensive evaluations
and comparisons demonstrate that our approach produces
state-of-the-art results on a standard benchmark dataset, with
advantages in terms of accuracy, efficiency, and visual quality
over the existing approaches.

Figure 1: The proposed approach consistently outperforms
state-of-the-art video super-resolution methods in terms of
reconstruction quality and efficiency (x4 SR on Vid4).
resolution needs to fully exploit spatial statistics, while temporal correlations from multiple input frames are required to
be exploited in order to improve reconstruction in the case
of video super-resolution. Therefore, how to effectively exploit temporal redundancies becomes the key issue for video
super-resolution.
Recent advances in video super-resolution are remarkable, benefiting mostly from the successful application
of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs). However, there is still a large room for improvement over the
DCNN based video super-resolution (SR) models that do not
consider the super-resolution quality and temporal consistency simultaneously. The latest state-of-the-art approaches
(Dong, Chen, and Tang 2016; Kim, Lee, and Lee 2016;
Liu and Sun 2011; Liao et al. 2015; Kappeler et al. 2016b;
Caballero et al. 2017; Tao et al. 2017; Jo et al. 2018) formulate the task of video super-resolution as a great deal of separate multi-frame super-resolution subtasks. They exploit a
sequence of consecutive LR frames to generate a single HR
estimate, focusing on obtaining high-quality reconstruction
results for each single frame. However, the way of separately
generating each HR estimate results in temporally inconsistent frames, producing unsatisfactory flickering artifacts. In

The goal in image and video super-resolution (SR)
is to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) image or video
from its down-sampled low-resolution (LR) version. Superresolution approaches commonly serve as an important step
for a variety of computer vision applications including image and video compression (Li et al. 2017; Kappeler et al.
2016a), medical imaging (Yang et al. 2012), object recognition (Yang et al. 2018), satellite imaging (Demirel and
Anbarjafari 2011), face recognition (Gunturk et al. 2003),
etc. To recover high-frequency details, single image super∗
This work was supported by NSFC (Grant No.: 61772137;
61522202).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5597

