The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hierarchical Attention Network for Image Captioning
Weixuan Wang, Zhihong Chen, Haifeng Hu∗
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China
{wangwx25, chenzhh45}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, huhaif@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, attention mechanism has been successfully applied
in image captioning, but the existing attention methods are
only established on low-level spatial features or high-level
text features, which limits richness of captions. In this paper, we propose a Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN) that
enables attention to be calculated on pyramidal hierarchy of
features synchronously. The pyramidal hierarchy consists of
features on diverse semantic levels, which allows predicting
different words according to different features. On the other
hand, due to the different modalities of features, a Multivariate Residual Module (MRM) is proposed to learn the joint
representations from features. The MRM is able to model
projections and extract relevant relations among different features. Furthermore, we introduce a context gate to balance the
contribution of different features. Compared with the existing methods, our approach applies hierarchical features and
exploits several multimodal integration strategies, which can
significantly improve the performance. The HAN is verified
on benchmark MSCOCO dataset, and the experimental results indicate that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods, achieving a BLEU1 score of 80.9 and a CIDEr score
of 121.7 in the Karpathy’s test split.

Figure 1: The illustration of captions generated by features
of different levels. Text, Patch and Object indicate the semantically strong text features, semantically weak patch features and semantically moderate features respectively.

Wang et al. 2017) produce a spatial mask via calculating the similarity between image patches and generated
words at each time step. (Anderson et al. 2018) generates
bounding boxes with an object detector and highlights regions associated with the generated words. (You et al. 2016;
Wu et al. 2016; Gan et al. 2017) apply the soft attention to
selectively focus on visual concepts. These attention mechanisms are used to distill more discriminative visual information to improve generated sentences. In the aforementioned
methods, the attention mechanisms are based on single level
features, such as semantically weak patch features, semantically moderate object features or semantically strong text
features. However, different words in description sentence
are relevant to features of different levels. Figure 1 illustrates
captions generated by leveraging visual features of different
levels. In Figure 1(a), the model applying text features attends to describe all objects in the image without focusing
on salient objects. With both text features and patch features,
the model prefers to describe objects with higher salience,
but the quantity of described objects is inaccurate. When
leveraging text features, object features and patch features
simultaneously, the model counts objects in images accurately, which indicates different words are relevant to fea-

Introduction
Image captioning, which aims to describe the content of
an image, has emerged as a prominent attractive research
problem in both academia and industry. It is a multidisciplinary task involving computer vision and natural language
processing. Image captioning is difficult for machine since
it not only requires a comprehensive understanding of objects, scene and their mutual relations, but also needs to describe the content of an image with semantically and syntactically correct sentence. In real life, image captioning has
a wide range of applications, ranging from helping visually
impaired people to personal assistants.
Recently, attention mechanism, which plays an important role in image captioning, has been developed into diverse forms. For example, (Xu et al. 2015; Lu et al. 2017;
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8957

