The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Abstractive Summarization: A Survey of the State of the Art
Hui Lin, Vincent Ng
Human Language Technology Research Institute
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083–0688
{hui,vince}@.hlt.utdallas.edu

Source: the sri lanka government on wednesday announced the closure of government schools with immediate effect as a military campaign against tamil separatists
escalated in the north of the country.
Summary: sri lanka closes schools as war escalates.

Abstract
The focus of automatic text summarization research has exhibited a gradual shift from extractive methods to abstractive
methods in recent years, owing in part to advances in neural
methods. Originally developed for machine translation, neural
methods provide a viable framework for obtaining an abstract
representation of the meaning of an input text and generating
informative, fluent, and human-like summaries. This paper
surveys existing approaches to abstractive summarization, focusing on the recently developed neural approaches.

1

Table 1: An example on abstractive summarization taken
verbatim from Zhou et al. (2017). The boldfaced words in
the summary do not appear in the input document.
While several surveys on text summarization have been
published over the years (Radev et al. 2002; Spärck Jones
2007; Lloret and Palomar 2012; Nenkova and McKeown
2012; Saggion and Poibeau 2012; Allahyari et al. 2017), their
foci are extractive rather than abstractive summarization. Our
goal in this paper is to provide the AI audience with a timely
survey on abstractive summarization.

Introduction

Nowadays online users suffer from an information overload:
the vast amount of fast-growing textual information on the
Web makes it challenging for a user to read all the material
she is potentially interested in. Automatic text summarization,
which is arguably one of the important high-level natural language applications, seeks to alleviate this information overload problem by automatically creating a concise summary
of one or more text documents. Broadly, there are two kinds
of text summarization tasks. Extractive summarization aims
to create a summary by selecting a subset of the sentences
in the input text that maximizes the coverage of important
content while minimizing redundancy. In contrast, abstractive summarization aims to create an abstract representation
of the input text and use natural language generation techniques to generate a summary. In comparison to extractive
summaries, abstractive summaries are more challenging to
produce, but are arguably a better approximation of human
summaries as they may contain expressions that do not exist
in the original text (Cohn and Lapata 2008). Table 1 shows
an input document and the corresponding human-generated
abstractive summary.
The focus of text summarization research has exhibited a
gradual shift from extractive techniques to abstractive techniques in recent years, owing in part to significant advances
in the development of neural methods. Originally developed
for machine translation, neural methods have arguably revolutionized the way abstractive summarization research is
conducted, creating new, exciting opportunities for summarization and generation researchers.

2

Evaluation Methods

Two types of evaluation methods are typically used to evaluate machine-produced summaries: manual evaluation and
automatic evaluation.
In manual evaluation, human judges are asked to choose
the best summary among several candidates by manually
scoring each one along multiple dimensions of quality such
as accuracy, clarity, and completeness (Greenbacker 2011).
However, as manual evaluation is time-consuming and is
particularly inefficient for large-scale evaluations, there have
been a lot of attempts to develop automatic evaluation methods. For this reason, several automatic evaluation metrics
have been developed. The widely-used metrics include (1)
BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002), which was originally developed to evaluate machine translation systems; (2) METEOR
(Denkowski and Lavie 2014), which addresses BLEU’s weakness when applied to low-resource languages and has a better
correlation with human judgment at the sentence/segment
level than BLEU; (3) Pyramid (Nenkova et al. 2007), a wellknown method for evaluating content selection in summarization; and (4) ROUGE (Lin 2004), a recall-based evaluation
metric for summarization. Being one of the most popular
metrics, ROUGE has several commonly used variants, such
as ROUGE-N, which computes the n-gram recall between a
candidate summary and a reference summary; ROUGE-SU,
which uses skip-bigrams and unigrams to measure recall;

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9815

