The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Text Assisted Insight Ranking Using Context-Aware Memory Network
Qi Zeng,1∗ Liangchen Luo,2∗ Wenhao Huang,3† Yang Tang2
1

Stony Brook University 2 Peking University 3 Shanghai Discovering Investment
1
qi.zeng@stonybrook.edu 2 {luolc,tangyang ty}@pku.edu.cn
3
huangwh@discoveringgroup.com

Abstract
Extracting valuable facts or informative summaries from
multi-dimensional tables, i.e. insight mining, is an important task in data analysis and business intelligence. However,
ranking the importance of insights remains a challenging and
unexplored task. The main challenge is that explicitly scoring
an insight or giving it a rank requires a thorough understanding of the tables and costs a lot of manual efforts, which leads
to the lack of available training data for the insight ranking
problem. In this paper, we propose an insight ranking model
that consists of two parts: A neural ranking model explores
the data characteristics, such as the header semantics and the
data statistical features, and a memory network model introduces table structure and context information into the ranking
process. We also build a dataset with text assistance. Experimental results show that our approach largely improves the
ranking precision as reported in multi evaluation metrics.

Figure 1: Example of a table and its corresponding description text in an annual report.

Introduction

Previously effort has been made to explore how to extract
insights according to its statistical significance score (Tang
et al. 2017). However, statistical significance has some limitation in insight importance ranking. First, as its scoring
method suggests, it neglects the semantics of the data (such
as the horizontal and vertical headers in the bi-dimensional
table), which is proved to greatly contribute to the importance of data in our later experiments. As a result, insights
that have a higher preference in real-world data are possible to get less attention. For example, in financial reports a
statistically significant increase of “Operating Income” usually enjoys less popularity than that of a more common item
“Total Revenue”, as shown in Figure 1, but is possible to get
a higher statistical significance score. Besides, the significance values of insights in different types are incomparable.
It is inaccurate to rank an insight of trend (shape insight)
and an insight of outliers (point insight) according to their
significant values since the two significant values have their
own statistical meanings under different statistical hypothesis and measurements. Also, the statistical analysis method
is unsuited for small tables since it requires a minimum number of data points to calculate the statistical significance.
The main reason that the previous ranking methods are
usually rule-based is that there is a lack of available training
data for the insight ranking problem, as explicitly scoring an
insight or giving it a rank usually requires domain knowl-

Automatically extracting useful and appealing insights, i.e.
the data mining results, from a multi-dimensional table is a
challenging yet important task in the areas of Business Intelligence (BI), Data Mining, Table-to-Text Generation, etc.
For example, we can derive the insight ”Sales of Brand A is
increasing year over year while sales of Brand B is decreasing from 2015 to 2017 in China” from a multi-dimensional
car sales table. In this work, insight is defined as a data
structure that includes subspace, type, significance value,
and description. It can be described in any forms for different applications. In the whole process of automatic business data analysis, generating abundant insights from multidimensional structured data can be accomplished with elaborate predefined rules, while modeling their usefulness or
interestingness and ranking the top ones are much more difficult. Handcrafted ranking rules are less efficient and cannot cover every possible situation, and therefore a learning
method for insight ranking is worth studying.
∗

Equal contribution.
This work was initiated and completed at the Software Analytics group of Microsoft Research Asia when the third author was
full-time employee researcher and all the other authors were research interns of the group.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

427

