The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Perspective Relevance Matching with
Hierarchical ConvNets for Social Media Search
Jinfeng Rao,1 ∗ Wei Yang,2 Yuhao Zhang,3 Ferhan Ture,4 and Jimmy Lin2
1

Facebook Conversational AI
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
3
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
4
Comcast Applied AI Research
raojinfeng@fb.com, {w85yang,jimmylin}@uwaterloo.ca, yuhao.zhang@stanford.edu, ferhan ture@comcast.com
2

Abstract

2016). In particular, exact match signals still play a critical role in ranking, more than the role of term matching
in, for example, paraphrase detection. Furthermore, in document ranking there is an asymmetry between queries and
documents in terms of length and the richness of signals that
can be extracted; thus, symmetric models such as Siamese
architectures may not be entirely appropriate. Nevertheless,
significant progress has been made, and many neural ranking models have been recently proposed (Shen et al. 2014;
Huang et al. 2013; Pang et al. 2016; Xiong et al. 2017),
which have been shown to be effective for ad hoc retrieval.
Despite much progress, it remains unclear how neural
ranking models designed for “traditional” ad hoc retrieval
tasks perform on searching social media posts such as tweets
on Twitter. We can identify several important differences:

Despite substantial interest in applications of neural networks to information retrieval, neural ranking models have
mostly been applied to “standard” ad hoc retrieval tasks
over web pages and newswire articles. This paper proposes
MP-HCNN (Multi-Perspective Hierarchical Convolutional
Neural Network), a novel neural ranking model specifically
designed for ranking short social media posts. We identify
document length, informal language, and heterogeneous relevance signals as features that distinguish documents in our
domain, and present a model specifically designed with these
characteristics in mind. Our model uses hierarchical convolutional layers to learn latent semantic soft-match relevance
signals at the character, word, and phrase levels. A poolingbased similarity measurement layer integrates evidence from
multiple types of matches between the query, the social media post, as well as URLs contained in the post. Extensive
experiments using Twitter data from the TREC Microblog
Tracks 2011–2014 show that our model significantly outperforms prior feature-based as well as existing neural ranking
models. To our best knowledge, this paper presents the first
substantial work tackling search over social media posts using neural ranking models. Our code and data are publicly
available.1

• Document length. Social media posts are much shorter
than web or newswire articles. For example, tweets are
limited to 280 characters. Thus, ad hoc retrieval in this
domain contains elements of semantic matching because
queries and posts are much closer in length. In particular, neural models that rely on paragraph-level interactions and global matching mechanisms (Mitra, Diaz, and
Craswell 2017) are unlikely to be effective.
• Informality. Idiosyncratic conventions (e.g., hashtags),
abbreviations (“Happy Birthday” as “HBD”), typos, intentional misspellings, and emojis are prevalent in social
media posts. An effective ranking model should account
for such language variations and term mismatches due to
the informality of posts.
• Heterogeneous relevance signals. The nature of social
media platforms drives users to be actively engaged in
real-world news and events; users frequently take advantage of URLs or hashtags to increase exposure to their
posts. Such heterogeneous signals are not well exploited
by existing models, which can potentially boost ranking
effectiveness when modeled together with textual content.

Introduction
In recent years, techniques based on neural networks offer exciting opportunities for the information retrieval (IR)
community. For example, distributed word representations
such as word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) provide a promising
basis to overcome the longstanding vocabulary mismatch
problem in ranking (Ganguly et al. 2015), which refers to
the phenomenon where queries and documents describe the
same concept with different words. Nevertheless, there are
still fundamental challenges to be solved. Guo et al. (2016)
pointed out that relevance matching, which is the core problem in IR, has different characteristics from the semantic
matching problem that many NLP models are designed for,
which is essentially to model how semantically close two
pieces of texts are, such as paraphrase detection (Socher et
al. 2011) and answer sentence selection (Rao, He, and Lin

We present a novel neural ranking model for ad hoc retrieval over short social media posts that is specifically designed with the above characteristics in mind. Our model,
MP-HCNN (Multi-Perspective Hierarchical Convolutional
Neural Network), aims to model the relevance of a social
media post to a query in a multi-perspective manner, and
has three key features:

∗
Work done at the University of Maryland, College Park.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/Jeffyrao/neural-tweet-search

232

