The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Pathological Evidence Exploration in Deep Retinal Image Diagnosis
Yuhao Niu,1,2,∗ Lin Gu,4,∗ Feng Lu,1,2,3,† Feifan Lv,1,3 Zongji Wang,1 Imari Sato,4
Zijian Zhang,5 Yangyan Xiao,6 Xunzhang Dai,5 Tingting Cheng5
1

2

State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
5
Xiangya Hospital Central South University, China
6
The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, China

Abstract

makes decision. In particular, we take the diabetic retinopathy detection network (Antony 2016) for example. Noted
that not limited for (Antony 2016), this strategy could also
be extended to interpret more general deep learning model.
We at first apply (Antony 2016) on the reference image
(Fig 1.(a)) and extract the pathological descriptor (Fig 1.(b))
that encodes the neuron activation directly related to prediction. Picking thousand out of millions of parameters in neuron network is like separating the potential pathogen. Koch’s
Postulates claims that the property of pathogen, though invisible for naked eye, could be determined by observing the
arose symptom after injecting it into subject. Similarly, we
inject the pathologic descriptor into the binary vessel segmentation (Fig 1.(c)) to synthesize the retinal image. We
achieve this with a GAN based network as illustrated in
Fig 5. Given pathologic descriptor and binary vessel segmentation, our generated image (Fig 1.(d)) exhibits the expected symptom such as microaneurysms and hard exudates that appear in the target image. Since our descriptor
is lesion-based and spatial independent, we could arbitrarily
manipulate the position and number of lesions. Evaluated
With a panel of 5 licensed ophthalmologists, our generated
retinal images are qualitatively and quantitatively superior
to existing methods.
Specifically, we encode a series of pathological descriptor as illustrated in Fig 2. According to our analysis, the diabetic retinopathy detection network (Antony 2016) predicts
the diabetic level through a few dimensions (6 among 1024,
lighted with colors) of bottleneck feature in Fig 2. We then
identify the neurons that directly contribute to these 6 dimension bottleneck features in the activation net and record
their position and activation value as the pathologic descriptor. Since neuron activation is spatially correlated with individual lesion, our descriptor is defined as lesion-based that
allows us to manipulate its position and quantity.
Our main contributions are mainly three-folds:

Though deep learning has shown successful performance in
classifying the label and severity stage of certain disease,
most of them give few evidence on how to make prediction.
Here, we propose to exploit the interpretability of deep learning application in medical diagnosis. Inspired by Koch’s Postulates, a well-known strategy in medical research to identify
the property of pathogen, we define a pathological descriptor
that can be extracted from the activated neurons of a diabetic
retinopathy detector. To visualize the symptom and feature
encoded in this descriptor, we propose a GAN based method
to synthesize pathological retinal image given the descriptor
and a binary vessel segmentation. Besides, with this descriptor, we can arbitrarily manipulate the position and quantity
of lesions. As verified by a panel of 5 licensed ophthalmologists, our synthesized images carry the symptoms that are
directly related to diabetic retinopathy diagnosis. The panel
survey also shows that our generated images is both qualitatively and quantitatively superior to existing methods.

Introduction
Deep learning has become a popular methodology in analyzing medical images such as diabetic retinopathy detection (Gulshan et al. 2016), classifying skin cancer (Esteva et
al. 2017). Though these algorithms have proven quite accurate in classifying specific disease label and severity stage,
most of them lack the ability to explain its decision, a common problem that haunts deep learning community. Lacking
interpretability is especially imperative for medical image
application, as physicians or doctors relies on medical evidence to determine whether to trust the machine prediction
or not.
In this paper, we propose a novel technique inspired by
Koch’s Postulates to give some insights into how convolutional neural network (CNN) based pathology detector
∗

These two authors contributed equally to the paper.
Corresponding Author: Feng Lu (lufeng@buaa.edu.cn)
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. We define a pathological descriptor that encodes the key
parameters of CNN which is directly related to disease
prediction. This descriptor is associated with individual

†

1093

