The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Cubic LSTMs for Video Prediction
Hehe Fan, Linchao Zhu, Yi Yang
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
{hehe.fan,linchao.zhu}@student.uts.edu.au, yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract

Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Cho et al. 2014), have been widely
applied to video prediction. One of the earliest RNN models for video prediction (Ranzato et al. 2014) directly borrows a structure from the language modeling literature (Bengio et al. 2003). It quantizes the space of frame patches as
visual words and therefore can be seen as patch-level prediction. Later work (Srivastava, Mansimov, and Salakhutdinov 2015) builds encoder-decoder predictors using the
fully connected LSTM (FC-LSTM). In addition to patchlevel prediction, it also learns to predict future frames at
the feature level. Since the traditional LSTM (or GRU)
units learn from one-dimensional vectors where the feature representation is highly compact and the spatial information is lost, both of these methods attempt to avoid
directly predicting future video frames at the image level.
To predict spatio-temporal sequences, convolutional LSTM
(ConvLSTM) (Shi et al. 2015) modifies FC-LSTM by taking three-dimensional tensors as the input and replacing
fully connected layers by convolutional operations. ConvLSTM has become an important component in several video
prediction works (Finn, Goodfellow, and Levine 2016;
Wang et al. 2017; Babaeizadeh et al. 2018; Lotter, Kreiman,
and Cox 2017).
Like most traditional LSTM units, FC-LSTM is designed
to learn only one type of information, i.e., the dependency
of sequences. Directly adapting FC-LSTM makes it difficult for ConvLSTM to simultaneously exploit the temporal
information and the spatial information in videos. The convolutional operation in ConvLSTM has to process motions
on one hand and capture moving objects on the other hand.
Similarly, the state of ConvLSTM must be able to carry the
motion information and object information at the same time.
It could be insufficient to use only one convolution and one
state for spatio-temporal prediction.
In this paper, we propose a new unit for video prediction,
i.e., the Cubic Long Short-Term Memory (CubicLSTM)
unit. This unit is equipped with two states, a temporal state
and a spatial state, which are respectively generated by two
independent convolutions. The motivation is that different
kinds of information should be processed and carried by different operations and states. CubicLSTM consists of three
branches, which are built along the three axes in the Cartesian coordinate system.

Predicting future frames in videos has become a promising direction of research for both computer vision and robot learning communities. The core of this problem involves moving object capture and future motion prediction. While object
capture specifies which objects are moving in videos, motion
prediction describes their future dynamics. Motivated by this
analysis, we propose a Cubic Long Short-Term Memory (CubicLSTM) unit for video prediction. CubicLSTM consists of
three branches, i.e., a spatial branch for capturing moving objects, a temporal branch for processing motions, and an output branch for combining the first two branches to generate
predicted frames. Stacking multiple CubicLSTM units along
the spatial branch and output branch, and then evolving along
the temporal branch can form a cubic recurrent neural network (CubicRNN). Experiment shows that CubicRNN produces more accurate video predictions than prior methods on
both synthetic and real-world datasets.

Introduction
Videos contain a large amount of visual information in
scenes as well as profound dynamic changes in motions.
Learning video representations, imagining motions and understanding scenes are fundamental missions in computer
vision. It is indisputable that a model, which is able to predict future frames after watching several context frames,
has the ability to achieve these missions (Srivastava, Mansimov, and Salakhutdinov 2015). Compared with video recognition (Zhu, Xu, and Yang 2017; Fan et al. 2017; 2018),
video prediction has an innate advantage that it usually
does not require external supervised information. Videos
also provide a window for robots to understand the physical world. Predicting what will happen in future can help
robots to plan their actions and make decisions. For example, action-conditional video prediction (Oh et al. 2015;
Finn, Goodfellow, and Levine 2016; Ebert et al. 2017;
Babaeizadeh et al. 2018) provides a physical understanding
of the object in terms of the factors (e.g., forces) acting upon
it and the long term effect (e.g., motions) of those factors.
As video is a kind of spatio-temporal sequences, recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), especially Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and Gated
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• The temporal branch flows along the x-axis (temporal
8263

