The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Model AI Assignments 2019
Todd W. Neller,1 Raja Sooriamurthi,2 Michael Guerzhoy,3 Lisa Zhang,4 Paul Talaga,5
Christopher Archibald,6 Adam Summerville,7 Joseph Osborn,8 Cinjon Resnick,9 Avital Oliver,10
Surya Bhupatiraju,11 Kumar Krishna Agrawal,10 Nate Derbinsky,12 Elena Strange,12
Marion Neumann,13 Jonathan Chen,13 Zac Christensen,13 Michael Wollowski,14
Oscar Youngquist14
1

Gettysburg College, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Princeton University, 4 University of Toronto Mississauga,
University of Indianapolis, 6 Mississippi State University, 7 California State Polytechnic University, Pomona,
8
Pomona College, 9 New York University, 10 Google Brain, 11 DeepMind Technologies, 12 Northeastern University,
13
Washington University in St. Louis, 14 Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
5

Abstract

Building a Fake News Detector

The Model AI Assignments session seeks to gather and disseminate the best assignment designs of the Artificial Intelligence (AI) Education community. Recognizing that assignments form the core of student learning experience, we
here present abstracts of ten AI assignments from the 2019
session that are easily adoptable, playfully engaging, and
flexible for a variety of instructor needs. Assignment specifications and supporting resources may be found at http:
//modelai.gettysburg.edu.

Michael Guerzhoy, Lisa Zhang
In this assignment, students build a fake news detector. We
supply a dataset with news headlines labelled as “fake” or
“real”, and students build several models for classifying
the headlines: a Naive Bayes classifier, a logistic regression
classifier, and a decision tree. Students improve on the fake
news detector they built by using more sophisticated algorithms and by collecting their own training sets.
We emphasize model interpretation: students analyze
their Naive Bayes and logistic regression models to obtain
the words whose presence and absence indicate “fake” and
“real” most strongly. Students visualize the decision tree that
they build, and generate new data from the Naive Bayes
model.
We hold a Kaggle-style class-wide competition, and
award bonus marks to student teams that classify our secret hand-curated fake news dataset most accurately. Participating in the competition allows students to experiment
with state-of-the-art text classification algorithms, follow
best practices (such as using ensembles of classifiers), and
be exposed to the issues involved in assembling a training
set without knowing what the test set will look like.

Implementing a Recommender
System Using MapReduce
Raja Sooriamurth
This assignment combines two prominent machine learning and big data technologies: MapReduce and recommendation. Nearly 20 years ago, as Google scaled, they created several new technologies. Foundational amongst those
technologies are the resilient Google File System (GFS)
and a computing paradigm known as MapReduce. Google
published their work in a few highly influential papers.
Researchers, inspired by these descriptions, created open
source versions, which eventually became the big data platform now known as Hadoop. Yelp created a Python based library to write MapReduce programs known as mrjob. Based
on user preferences, recommender systems produce an ordered set of recommendations. In this series of exercises,
students gain hands on experience with how user-based,
item-based, and content-based recommender systems work.
Modeling the core computation in a spreadsheet helps convey the essence of these algorithms. With this background
students then express the recommender algorithm in the
MapReduce paradigm using mrjob. Experiments are done
using the Movielens data set1 . The assignment also forms
the context for discussing the Netflix prize.

Using Ultimate Tic Tac Toe to
Motivate AI Game Agents
Paul Talaga
Ultimate Tic Tac Toe is an extension to the classic Tic Tac
Toe game. In an introductory AI course covering adversarial search methods, Tic Tac Toe is a good game to demonstrate decision-making algorithms by way of its simple rules,
gameplay, and relatively small state space. In this assignment, students are tasked with extending the Tic Tac Toe
game code to Ultimate Tic Tac Toe, adding an AI agent,
and/or experimenting with parallel implementations. Or, students could be provided with a working Ultimate Tic Tac
Toe implementation and asked to add an AI agent. If a common gameplay program and game state structure is man-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/

9751

