On the Inducibility of Stackelberg Equilibrium for Security Games
Qingyu Guo,1 Jiarui Gan,2 Fei Fang,3 Long Tran-Thanh,4 Milind Tambe,5 Bo An1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, {qguo005, boan}@ntu.edu.sg
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, jiarui.gan@cs.ox.ac.uk
3
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, feifang@cmu.edu
4
Department of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, ltt08r@ecs.soton.ac.uk
5
Center for Artificial Intelligence in Society, University of Southern California, tambe@usc.edu
Abstract

responses of the follower when evaluating the benefit of
deviations. The tie-breaking rules differentiates two forms
of Stackelberg equilibria. The strong form of the Stackelberg equilibrium, called the strong Stackelberg equilibrium (SSE), assumes that the follower always breaks ties by
choosing the best action for the defender, whereas its counterpart, the weak Stackelberg equilibrium (WSE), assumes
that the follower always chooses the worst action. The SSE
is commonly adopted as the standard solution concept because the WSE may not exist (Von Stengel and Zamir 2004);
and the counter-intuitive tie-breaking rule is justified, implicitly or explicitly in the literature, by the assertion that the
defender can often induce the favorable strong equilibrium
by selecting a strategy arbitrarily close to the equilibrium.
Unfortunately, the assertion may break, especially in scenarios with various resource assignment constraints, such as
scheduling constraints in the Federal Air Marshals Service
(FAMS) domain, constraints on patrol paths for protecting
ports, and constraints in the form of protection externalities (Tsai et al. 2009; Jain et al. 2010; Shieh et al. 2012;
Gan, An, and Vorobeychik 2015). Most existing works
failed to realize the potential impossibility to induce SSE
in such domains. If the desired SSE cannot be induced, results claimed would questionably be overly optimistic. Such
overoptimism is problematic in its own right and may even
cause greater risks for the following reasons. First, these
results may be used in making security resource acquisition decisions, i.e., what combination of security resources
need to be procured (McCarthy et al. 2016); overoptimism
of SSE may cause an insufficient number or wrong types of
resources to be deployed. Second, statements made based
on comparisons between the expected utility of SSE with
some heuristic strategies or human-generated solutions to
claim superiority of SSE strategies would be in potential
jeopardy (Pita et al. 2008; Tsai et al. 2009; Xu et al. 2017).
Third, the SSE strategy recommended may not be the optimal one, thus failing in optimizing the use of limited security
resources, which is the primary mission of security games.
In this paper, we remedy the inadequacy of the SSE in
security games and make the following key contributions.
1) We formalize the notion of overoptimism by defining the
utility guarantee of the defender’s strategies, and show with
a motivating example that the utility claimed to be guaranteed by the SSE is much higher than the actually guar-

Strong Stackelberg equilibrium (SSE) is the standard solution concept of Stackelberg security games. As opposed to
the weak Stackelberg equilibrium (WSE), the SSE assumes
that the follower breaks ties in favor of the leader and this is
widely acknowledged and justified by the assertion that the
defender can often induce the attacker to choose a preferred
action by making an infinitesimal adjustment to her strategy.
Unfortunately, in security games with resource assignment
constraints, the assertion might not be valid; it is possible
that the defender cannot induce the desired outcome. As a result, many results claimed in the literature may be overly optimistic. To remedy, we first formally define the utility guarantee of a defender strategy and provide examples to show that
the utility of SSE can be higher than its utility guarantee. Second, inspired by the analysis of leader’s payoff by Von Stengel and Zamir (2004), we provide the solution concept called
the inducible Stackelberg equilibrium (ISE), which owns the
highest utility guarantee and always exists. Third, we show
the conditions when ISE coincides with SSE and the fact
that in general case, SSE can be extremely worse with respect to utility guarantee. Moreover, introducing the ISE does
not invalidate existing algorithmic results as the problem of
computing an ISE polynomially reduces to that of computing
an SSE. We also provide an algorithmic implementation for
computing ISE, with which our experiments unveil the empirical advantage of the ISE over the SSE.

Introduction
The past few years have witnessed the huge success of game
theoretic reasoning in the security domain (Tambe 2011;
An 2017). Models based on the Stackelberg security game
(SSG) have been deployed to protect high-profile infrastructures, natural resources, large public events, etc. (e.g., (Tsai
et al. 2009; Jain et al. 2010; Yin, An, and Jain 2014;
Fang et al. 2016; Basilico et al. 2017)). An SSG models the
interaction between a defender and an attacker, where the
defender commits to a mixed strategy first, and the attacker
best responds with knowledge of the defender strategy.
The Stackelberg equilibrium is the standard solution concept for Stackelberg games (Leitmann 1978). In such an
equilibrium, no player has the incentive to deviate and the
leader assumes that deviations made will result in optimal
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2020

