The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adversarial Training for Community Question Answer Selection
Based on Multi-Scale Matching
Xiao Yang,1∗ Madian Khabsa,2∗ Miaosen Wang,3∗ Wei Wang4
Ahmed Hassan Awadallah,4 Daniel Kifer,1 , C. Lee Giles1
1

Pennsylvania State University, 2 Apple, 3 Google, 4 Microsoft
xuy111@psu.edu, madian@apple.com, miaosen@google.com, wawe@microsoft.com
hassanam@microsoft.com, duk17@psu.edu, giles@ist.psu.edu
Abstract

lexical gap describes the phenomenon that text in questions may lead to causally related content in answers, rather
than semantically related content such as synonymy. In other
words, a sentence sharing many overlapping words with the
question may not necessarily be a relevant answer.
To tackle the lexical gap problem, many methods explicitly model the correlations between text fragments in questions and answers, and frame this task as a binary classification problem. Under this setting, each question/answer
pair is labeled as either relevant or irrelevant. Consequently,
the CQA selection task can be approached by first predicting the relevance/confidence score of a candidate answer to
a question, then re-ranking these answers to find the most
appropriate one.
When treating CQA selection as a binary classification
task, a practical issue is label imbalance. First, the total number of relevant answers is naturally smaller than that of irrelevant ones. For example, in SemEval 2016 dataset, only
9.3% of the total answers are relevant. In SemEval 2017
dataset, the number is even smaller: 2.8%. Furthermore, in
order to better utilize labeled data and provide more training
question/answer pairs, many researches augment negative
samples by randomly coupling a question with an answer
from a different question thread. The underlying assumption
is that answers from other questions are unlikely to be qualified as relevant to the current question. While such data augmentation can provide much more training samples, it also
amplifies the problem of label imbalance. Inspired by Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014),
we present an adversarial training strategy, which employs a
generative model G to select a small subset of challenging
negative samples. A fair amount of negative samples (especially those generated by random coupling described above)
can be easily classified (e.g. the topics of answers are completely irrelevant to the questions), making little contribution
to the gradients. On the contrary, samples selected by a generative model are expected to be more challenging, therefore
are more likely to fool the classification model D, and consequently result in larger gradients. By alternately optimizing
the generative model and the classification model, we can
finally obtain a more robust and accurate classifier.
For the classification model D, the “matchingaggregating” framework
(Wang and Jiang 2016;
Parikh et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2017b;

Community-based question answering (CQA) websites represent an important source of information. As a result, the
problem of matching the most valuable answers to their
corresponding questions has become an increasingly popular research topic. We frame this task as a binary (relevant/irrelevant) classification problem, and present an adversarial training framework to alleviate label imbalance issue.
We employ a generative model to iteratively sample a subset of challenging negative samples to fool our classification
model. Both models are alternatively optimized using REINFORCE algorithm. The proposed method is completely different from previous ones, where negative samples in training
set are directly used or uniformly down-sampled. Further, we
propose using Multi-scale Matching which explicitly inspects
the correlation between words and ngrams of different levels
of granularity. We evaluate the proposed method on SemEval
2016 and SemEval 2017 datasets and achieves state-of-the-art
or similar performance.

1

Introduction

Community-based question answering (CQA) websites such
as Yahoo Answer and Quora are important sources of knowledge. They allow users to submit questions and answers covering a wide range of topics. These websites often organize
such user-generated content in the form of a question followed by a list of candidate answers. Over time, a large
amount of crowd-sourced question/answer pairs has been
accumulated, which can be leveraged to automatically answer a newly submitted question.
To fully make use of the knowledge stored in CQA systems, the CQA selection task has received much attention
recently. CQA selection task aims at automatically retrieving archived answers that are relevant to a newly submitted
question. Since many users tend to submit new questions
rather than searching existing questions (Nakov, Màrquez,
and Guzmán 2016), a large number of questions reoccur
and they may already be answered by previous content. Several challenges exist for this task, among which lexical gap
is a fundamental one that differentiate this task from other
general-purpose information retrieval (IR) tasks. The term
∗

Work done at Microsoft.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

395

