The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Numerical Optimization to AI, and Back
Sathya N. Ravi
University of Wisconsin, ravi5@wisc.edu

The impact of numerical optimization on modern data
analysis has been quite significant – today, these methods
lie at the heart of most statistical machine learning applications in domains spanning genomics, finance and medicine.
The expanding scope of these applications (and the complexity of the associated data) has continued to raise the
expectations of various criteria associated with the underlying algorithms. Broadly speaking, my research work can
be classified into two AI categories: Optimization in ML
(Opt-ML) and Optimization in CV (Opt-CV). The expanding scope of these applications (and the complexity of the
associated data) has continued to raise the expectations of
various criteria associated with the underlying algorithms. It
is well known that problems in these areas are not only mathematically interesting but also motivated by practical considerations that arise in the analysis of real world datasets.
My research contributes to this endeavor by focusing on the
algorithmic and learning issues involved in ML and CV by
borrowing ideas from Statistics and Probability theory. I will
describe two projects in detail for each of the above two
categories (one ongoing and one published for each category), and a brief description of a slightly more theoretical
project that I have contributed to in nontrivial ways, during
the course of my PhD at UW Madison. A checkmark ( )
indicates that the project has been peer reviewed and published, whereas a ü indicates that the paper is under review.
Experimental Design (ED) is a problem with deep
foundations dating back at least to the early 1900s in
Opt-ML. Here, given the features/covariates xi ’s, an experimenter must conduct an experiment in order to obtain
the value of the dependent (or response) variables yi ’s.
The focus of much of the classical work on this topic
is to maximize the amount of information that the full
experiment yields for a given (or least) amount of work.
Although the literature is very mature, not many strategies
are available when these design problems appear in the
context of sparse linear models commonly encountered
in high dimensional machine learning. In this work, we
study this budget constrained design where the underlying
regression model involves a `1 -regularized linear function.
More practically, this makes the model interpretable in
the sense that it identifies the important features that are

used for predictions. While the obvious strategy involves
solving a combinatorial nonlinear optimization problem,
we provided two tractable formulations: the first is
motivated geometrically whereas the second is algebraic in
nature. We show how both these formulations can be solved
efficiently for large datasets. In particular, our algorithms
require one largest eigenvector computation or a rank one
update in addition to the first order oracle (gradient, function
value). As practical application of our algorithms, with the
help of my adviser, I was able to test the formulations on
a large neuroimaging dataset and show that cost savings
in longitudinal studies aimed at clinical trials are possible
(Ravi et al. 2016). Our paper was presented in ICML, 2016.
Fast Filter Flow is a framework that can be used to
model various problems in CV. We proposed an algorithm
to solve the Filter Flow problem (Ravi et al. 2017). To state
the problem, let us suppose that relationships between pairs
of images are modeled using a linear transformation on a
(very) high dimensional space. Then, various constraints
are specifically imposed based on the problem one wishes
to solve, say Optical Flow, Stereo Matching etc.. The
goal is to learn an appropriate relationship that minimizes
reconstruction error while satisfying the catalog of constraints. But the computational time involved in solving
Filter Flow makes it infeasible for practical purposes,
for instance, it takes 10 hours to compute optical flow
using standard optimization solvers. I showed that even if
one wishes to impose these set of constraints, the problem is
amenable to powerful convex optimization algorithms that
can exploit multiple processors in a computer. In this paper,
I explored different optimization formulations to make it
efficient and at the same time preserved the theoretical
properties that Filter Flow offers. While the formulation
was proposed earlier in 2013, the authors used generic
all-purpose optimization software which can be extremely
slow on real world examples. Using techniques from convex
optimization, we developed a lock-free algorithm that
can be used to efficiently solve the filter flow problem.
Empirically, we achieved a 20x speed up for optimization
and also provided convergence analysis for our proposed
algorithm. Our paper was presented in CVPR, 2017.
üHow to use constraints in the era of Deep Learning? A
number of results have recently demonstrated the benefits
of incorporating various constraints when training deep

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9894

