The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Open-World Extension to Knowledge Graph Completion Models
Haseeb Shah,1 Johannes Villmow,2 Adrian Ulges,2 Ulrich Schwanecke,2 Faisal Shafait1
1

National University of Science and Technology, Pakistan
2
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences, Germany
{hshah.bese15seecs, faisal.shafait}@seecs.edu.pk
{johannes.villmow, adrian.ulges, ulrich.schwanecke}@hs-rm.de

Abstract

only. For many applications, however, it is of interest to infer knowledge about entities not present in the graph. Imagine answering the question “What is German actress Julia Lindig known for?”, where Julia Lindig is not a known
entity. Here, information can be inferred from the question, typically using word embeddings (Mikolov et al. 2013;
Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014; Peters et al. 2018).
Similar to entity embeddings, these techniques represent
words with embedding vectors. These can be pre-trained on
text corpora, thereby capturing word similarity and semantic relations, which may help to predict the plausibility of the
triple (Julia Lindig, starred in, Lola Rennt). This challenge is known as open-world (or zero-shot) KGC. To the
best of our knowledge, few open-world KGC models have
been proposed so far, all of which are full replacements for
regular KGC models and require textual descriptions for all
entities (Xie et al. 2016; Shi and Weninger 2017a).
In this paper, we suggest a different approach, namely
to extend existing KGC models with pre-trained word embeddings. Given an new entity, we aggregate its name and
description into a text-based entity representation. We then
learn a transformation from text-based embedding space to
graph-based embedding space, where we can now apply the
graph-based model for predicting links. We show that this
simple approach yields competitive results, and offers two
key benefits: First, it is independent of the specific KGC
model used, which allows us to use multiple different link
prediction models from which we can pick the best one.
Second, as training on the graph structure happens independently from training on text, our approach can exploit the
full-scale knowledge graph structure in situations where textual information is scarce because learning the transformation is robust even for such situations. We coin our approach
OWE for Open World Extension and combine it with several
common KGC models, obtaining TransE-OWE, DistMultOWE, and ComplEx-OWE.
We demonstrate competitive results on common datasets
for open-world prediction, and also introduce a new dataset
called FB15k-237-OWE, which avoids bias towards long
textual descriptions and trivial regularities like inverse relations. The code and the new FB15k-237-OWE dataset are
available online1 .

We present a novel extension to embedding-based knowledge graph completion models which enables them to perform open-world link prediction, i.e. to predict facts for entities unseen in training based on their textual description.
Our model combines a regular link prediction model learned
from a knowledge graph with word embeddings learned from
a textual corpus. After training both independently, we learn
a transformation to map the embeddings of an entity’s name
and description to the graph-based embedding space.
In experiments on several datasets including FB20k, DBPedia50k and our new dataset FB15k-237-OWE, we demonstrate competitive results. Particularly, our approach exploits
the full knowledge graph structure even when textual descriptions are scarce, does not require a joint training on graph and
text, and can be applied to any embedding-based link prediction model, such as TransE, ComplEx and DistMult.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs are a vital source for disambiguation and
discovery in various tasks such as question answering (Ferrucci et al. 2010), information extraction (Dong et al. 2014)
and search (Singhal 2012). They are, however, known to suffer from data quality issues (Paulheim 2017). Most prominently, since formal knowledge is inherently sparse, relevant
facts are often missing from the graph.
To overcome this problem, knowledge graph completion
(KGC) or link prediction strives to enrich existing graphs
with new facts. Formally, a knowledge graph G ⊂ E×R×E
consists of facts or triples (head, rel, tail), where E and
R denote finite sets of entities and relations respectively.
Knowledge graph completion is targeted at assessing the
probability of triples not present in the graph. To do so,
a common approach involves representing the entities and
relations in triples using real-valued vectors called embeddings. The probability of the triple is then inferred by geometric reasoning over the embeddings. Embeddings are
usually generated by learning to discriminate real triples
from randomly corrupted ones (Nickel et al. 2016; Shi and
Weninger 2017b; Trouillon et al. 2016).
A key problem with most existing approaches is that the
plausibility of links can be determined for known entities
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3044

https://github.com/haseebs/OWE

