The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Relation Structure-Aware Heterogeneous Information Network Embedding
Yuanfu Lu,1 Chuan Shi,1∗ Linmei Hu,1 Zhiyuan Liu2
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{luyuanfu, shichuan, hulinmei}@bupt.edu.cn, liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Relations
P
A

Heterogeneous information network (HIN) embedding aims
to embed multiple types of nodes into a low-dimensional
space. Although most existing HIN embedding methods consider heterogeneous relations in HINs, they usually employ
one single model for all relations without distinction, which
inevitably restricts the capability of network embedding. In
this paper, we take the structural characteristics of heterogeneous relations into consideration and propose a novel Relation structure-aware Heterogeneous Information Network
Embedding model (RHINE). By exploring the real-world networks with thorough mathematical analysis, we present two
structure-related measures which can consistently distinguish
heterogeneous relations into two categories: Affiliation Relations (ARs) and Interaction Relations (IRs). To respect the
distinctive characteristics of relations, in our RHINE, we propose different models specifically tailored to handle ARs and
IRs, which can better capture the structures and semantics of
the networks. At last, we combine and optimize these models in a unified and elegant manner. Extensive experiments
on three real-world datasets demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in various
tasks, including node clustering, link prediction, and node
classification.

1

C
P

C

P
…

T

A
a1

p1
p2

a2

t1
c1

p4

a4
Author (A)

P

(b) Conventional Models

t2

Affiliation Relations

p3
a3

A

c2

t3

p5
t4
Paper (P) Conf. (C) Term (T)

(a) An example of HIN

P
A

C
P

C

…
Interaction Relations
A
A

P
P

T

…
(c) Our Model

Figure 1: The illustration of an HIN and the comparison between conventional methods and our method (nondifferentiated relations v.s. differentiated relations).

publish/published relations, etc. In addition, there are composite relations represented by meta-paths (Sun et al. 2011)
such as APA (co-author relation) and APC (authors write papers published in conferences), which are widely used to
exploit rich semantics in HINs. Thus, compared to homogeneous networks, HINs fuse more information and contain
richer semantics. Directly applying traditional homogeneous
models to embed HINs will inevitably lead to reduced performance in downstream tasks.
To model the heterogeneity of networks, several attempts
have been done on HIN embedding. For example, some
models employ meta-path based random walk to generate node sequences for optimizing the similarity between
nodes (Shang et al. 2016; Dong, Chawla, and Swami 2017;
Fu, Lee, and Lei 2017). Some methods decompose the HIN
into simple networks and then optimize the proximity between nodes in each sub-network (Tang, Qu, and Mei 2015;
Xu et al. 2017; Shi et al. 2018). There are also some
neural network based methods that learn non-linear mapping functions for HIN embedding (Chang et al. 2015;
Wang et al. 2018; Han et al. 2018). Although these methods
consider the heterogeneity of networks, they usually have
an assumption that one single model can handle all relations
and nodes, through keeping the representations of two nodes

Introduction

Network embedding has shed a light on the analysis of networks as it is effective to learn the latent features that encode
the properties of a network (Cui et al. 2018; Cai, Zheng, and
Chang 2018). Although the state-of-the-arts (Perozzi, AlRfou, and Skiena 2014; Grover and Leskovec 2016; Tang et
al. 2015; Wang, Cui, and Zhu 2016) have achieved promising performance in many data mining tasks, most of them
focus on homogeneous networks, which only contain one
single type of nodes and edges. In reality, many networks
are usually with multiple types of nodes and edges, widely
known as heterogeneous information networks (HINs) (Sun
et al. 2011; Shi et al. 2017). Taking the DBLP network for
example, as shown in Figure 1(a), it contains four types of
nodes: Author (A), Paper (P), Conference (C) and Term (T),
and multiple types of relations: writing/written relations, and
∗

Corresponding author: Chuan Shi (shichuan@bupt.edu.cn).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4456

