The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Learning for Cost-Optimal Planning: Task-Dependent Planner Selection
Silvan Sievers

Michael Katz

University of Basel
Basel, Switzerland
silvan.sievers@unibas.ch

IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
michael.katz1@ibm.com

Shirin Sohrabi, Horst Samulowitz

Patrick Ferber

IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
{ssohrab,samulowitz}@us.ibm.com

University of Basel
Basel, Switzerland
patrick.ferber@unibas.ch

Abstract

While some portfolios settle on a schedule offline (Helmert
et al. 2011; Núñez, Borrajo, and Linares López 2014; Seipp,
Sievers, and Hutter 2014a; 2014b; 2014c), i.e., ahead of execution, others try to select good planners online based on the
given task (Cenamor, de la Rosa, and Fernández 2016; 2014;
2018). The latter is based on machine learning techniques,
training a classifier on planning instances, represented as a
vector of hand-crafted features. The need for extracting such
features manually was alleviated in machine learning community with the popularization of deep learning techniques.
While there exists some work employing deep learning
techniques for learning policies in probabilistic planning
(Toyer et al. 2018; Issakkimuthu, Fern, and Tadepalli 2018),
to the best of our knowledge, there is no published work
on applying deep learning to classical planning task classification. The direction, however, is most promising, as evidenced by a sequential online planning portfolio called Delfi
for DEap Learning of PortFolIos (Katz et al. 2018). Delfi1,
the winning planning system of the cost-optimal track of the
International Planning Competition (IPC) 2018, represents
planning tasks as images and employs image convolution for
binary classification. Delfi raises several interesting questions regarding both the data representation and the model
selection and makes some practical decisions on how to resolve these issues.
In this work, focusing on deep learning for planning task
classification for cost-optimal planning, we elaborate on the
approach and revisit the decisions made by Delfi. We start by
introducing a way to represent planning tasks as images. We
then explore the space of possible models that exploit image
convolution for planning task classification. Specifically, we
explore three questions.
The first one deals with the various levels of abstraction
for planner performance data. We suggest four conceptual
methods: perform regression using either the raw or normalized total runtime to solution, or perform classification using
either a discretized set of (runtime) values or a binary value
encoding whether the task was solved by that planner.
The second question concerns the number of planners in
a portfolio, given the limited amount of existing data. Starting with the collection of planners used by Delfi, we add to
the collection the planners from the latest IPC 2018. As a

As classical planning is known to be computationally hard, no
single planner is expected to work well across many planning
domains. One solution to this problem is to use online portfolio planners that select a planner for a given task. These portfolios perform a classification task, a well-known and wellresearched task in the field of machine learning. The classification is usually performed using a representation of planning
tasks with a collection of hand-crafted statistical features. Recent techniques in machine learning that are based on automatic extraction of features have not been employed yet due
to the lack of suitable representations of planning tasks.
In this work, we alleviate this barrier. We suggest representing
planning tasks by images, allowing to exploit arguably one
of the most commonly used and best developed techniques
in deep learning. We explore some of the questions that inevitably rise when applying such a technique, and present
various ways of building practically useful online portfoliobased planners. An evidence of the usefulness of our proposed technique is a planner that won the cost-optimal track
of the International Planning Competition 2018.

Introduction
Domain-independent planning is known to be challenging
not only due to its computational complexity (Bylander
1994), but also due to the various and very different types of
domains that planners are expected to solve. Consequently,
research in planning has not only focused on individual
planning techniques such as the predominant planning-asheuristic-search paradigm, but also on the question of how to
combine and exploit different planning techniques for solving a variety of planning tasks.
One such approach is to create portfolios of planners
to leverage their combined strengths (Seipp et al. 2012;
Vallati 2012; Cenamor, de la Rosa, and Fernández 2013;
Seipp et al. 2015). Besides parallel portfolios that are wellsuited to exploit multiple CPUs, many portfolios are sequential, which means that they execute one or more planners
sequentially on a given task. The decision such a portfolio
has to make is which planner to run next and for how long.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7715

