The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

End-to-End Safe Reinforcement Learning through
Barrier Functions for Safety-Critical Continuous Control Tasks
Richard Cheng,1 Gábor Orosz,2 Richard M. Murray,1 Joel W. Burdick1
1

California Institute of Technology, 2 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Abstract

of physical systems has been limited to simulations, where
many failed iterations can occur before success.
Safe RL tries to learn a policy that maximizes the expected return, while also ensuring (or encouraging) the satisfaction of some safety constraints (Garcı́a and Fernández
2015). Previous approaches to safe reinforcement learning include reward-shaping, policy optimization with constraints (Gaskett 2003; Moldovan and Abbeel 2012; Achiam
et al. 2017; Wachi et al. 2018), or teacher advice (Abbeel
and Ng 2004; Abbeel, Coates, and Ng 2010; Tang et al.
2010). However, these model-free approaches do not guarantee safety during learning – safety is only approximately
guaranteed after a sufficient learning period. The fundamental issue is that without a model, safety must be learned
through environmental interactions, which means it may be
violated during initial learning interactions.
Model-based approaches have utilized Lyapunov-based
methods or model predictive control to guarantee safety under system dynamics during learning (Wang, Theodorou,
and Egerstedt 2017; Berkenkamp et al. 2017; Chow et al.
2018; Ohnishi et al. 2018; Koller et al. 2018), but they do not
address the issue of exploration and performance optimization. Other works guarantee safety by switching between
backup controllers (Perkins and Barto 2003; Mannucci et al.
2018), though this overly constrains policy exploration.
We draw inspiration from recent work that has incorporated model information into model-free RL algorithms to
ensure safety during exploration (Fisac et al. 2018; Li, Kalabic, and Chu 2018; Gillula and Tomlin 2012). However,
these approaches utilize backup safety controllers that do not
guide the learning process (limiting exploration efficiency).
This paper develops a framework for integrating existing model-free RL algorithms with control barrier functions
(CBFs) to guarantee safety and improve exploration efficiency in RL, even with uncertain model information. The
CBFs require a (potentially poor) nominal dynamics model,
but can ensure online safety of nonlinear systems during the
entire learning process and help the RL algorithm efficiently
search the policy space. This methodology effectively constrains the policy exploration process to a set of safe polices defined by the CBF. An on-line process learns the governing dynamical system over time, which allows the CBF
controller to adapt and become less conservative over time.
This general framework allows us to utilize any model-free

Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms have found limited
success beyond simulated applications, and one main reason
is the absence of safety guarantees during the learning process. Real world systems would realistically fail or break before an optimal controller can be learned. To address this issue, we propose a controller architecture that combines (1)
a model-free RL-based controller with (2) model-based controllers utilizing control barrier functions (CBFs) and (3) online learning of the unknown system dynamics, in order to
ensure safety during learning. Our general framework leverages the success of RL algorithms to learn high-performance
controllers, while the CBF-based controllers both guarantee
safety and guide the learning process by constraining the set
of explorable polices. We utilize Gaussian Processes (GPs) to
model the system dynamics and its uncertainties.
Our novel controller synthesis algorithm, RL-CBF, guarantees safety with high probability during the learning process,
regardless of the RL algorithm used, and demonstrates greater
policy exploration efficiency. We test our algorithm on (1)
control of an inverted pendulum and (2) autonomous carfollowing with wireless vehicle-to-vehicle communication,
and show that our algorithm attains much greater sample efficiency in learning than other state-of-the-art algorithms and
maintains safety during the entire learning process.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) focuses on finding an agent’s
policy (i.e. controller) that maximizes a long-term reward.
It does this by repeatedly observing the agent’s state, taking an action (according to a current policy), and receiving
a reward. Over time, the agent modifies its policy to maximize its long-term reward. This method has been successfully applied to continuous control tasks (Duan et al. 2016;
Lillicrap et al. 2015) where controllers have learned to stabilize complex robots (after many policy iterations).
However, since RL focuses on maximizing the long-term
reward, it is likely to explore unsafe behaviors during the
learning process. This feature is problematic for any RL algorithm that will be deployed on hardware, as unsafe learning policies could damage the hardware or bring harm to a
human. As a result, most success in the use of RL for control
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3387

