The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SCNN: A General Distribution Based Statistical
Convolutional Neural Network with Application to Video Object Detection
Tianchen Wang,1 Jinjun Xiong,2 Xiaowei Xu,3 Yiyu Shi4
1,3,4

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame
2
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
{1 twang9, 3 xxu8, 4 yshi4}@nd.edu, 2 jinjun@us.ibm.com

Abstract

this mainstay, in this paper we propose to explicitly model
such correlation by extracting parameterized canonical distributions from correlated inputs (such as adjacent frames in a
video), and design a statistical convolutional neural network
(SCNN) to propagate these correlated distributions directly.
Our SCNN can be easily integrated into existing CNN architectures by replacing their deterministic operations with our
statistical counterparts operating on parameterized canonical
distributions. Then with little modification to the existing
gradient descent based scheme, our SCNN can be trained
using the same forward and back propagation procedures.
More specifically, we first build a linear parameterized
canonical form via independent component analysis (ICA)
to represent the statistical distribution of each input component to capture its temporal and contextual correlation.
We then define all the required CNN operations (such as
convolution, ReLU, batch normalization etc.) in terms of
the parameterized canonical form, including their various
partial gradients for backward propagation, thus enabling
us to integrate SCNN with any existing CNN implementation frameworks easily. To show the effectiveness of the
proposed SCNN, we further apply it to video object detection task and propose a new objective function that improves
SCNN based training. Even though many great successes
have been achieved in objection detection for static images
(Ren et al. 2015; Redmon and Farhadi 2017; Lin et al. 2018;
Liu et al. 2016), the performance of video object detection
still has a large room for improvement, especially for its realtime throughput. Since its introduction in ImageNet competition, multiple solutions have been proposed (Kang et al. 2017;
Han et al. 2016), most of which solve the problem by extending static image object detection methods to consider adjacent
frames for temporal information. Their efficiency is, however, not satisfactory for online detection, and for training,
it would take several days to generate video tubelets (Kang
et al. 2017). A recent research (Zhu et al. 2017) proposed a
flow-guided feature aggregation where it considers adjacent
frames at feature level rather than at the box level, but it
requires repeated sampling and complex modeling. It is still
desirable to have a more direct and effective way of modeling
correlated adjacent frames.
Our main contributions in this paper are as follows. 1) We
propose a novel statistical convolutional neural network that
can act as a backbone alternative to any existing CNN ar-

Various convolutional neural networks (CNNs) were developed recently that achieved accuracy comparable with that of
human beings in computer vision tasks such as image recognition, object detection and tracking, etc. Most of these networks, however, process one single frame of image at a time,
and may not fully utilize the temporal and contextual correlation typically present in multiple channels of the same image
or adjacent frames from a video, thus limiting the achievable
throughput. This limitation stems from the fact that existing
CNNs operate on deterministic numbers. In this paper, we propose a novel statistical convolutional neural network (SCNN),
which extends existing CNN architectures but operates directly
on correlated distributions rather than deterministic numbers.
By introducing a parameterized canonical model to model
correlated data and defining corresponding operations as required for CNN training and inference, we show that SCNN
can process multiple frames of correlated images effectively,
hence achieving significant speedup over existing CNN models. We use a CNN based video object detection as an example
to illustrate the usefulness of the proposed SCNN as a general
network model. Experimental results show that even a nonoptimized implementation of SCNN can still achieve 178%
speedup over existing CNNs with slight accuracy degradation.

Introduction
With strong feature extraction capabilities from deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and many optimized implementations (Xu et al. 2017) of the associated deep learning
frameworks, the performance of various computer vision
tasks has been drastically improved. For example in image
recognition and object detection, deep CNN architectures as
ResNet (He et al. 2016), DenseNet (Huang et al. 2017) and
frameworks as YOLO (Redmon and Farhadi 2017), faster
R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015) all outperform then state-of-the-art
by an impressive margin at the time of their publication.
However, a mainstay for any CNN based framework is
that it operates on deterministic weights and inputs (Xu et
al. 2018a; 2018b). These frameworks process one image at a
time during both training and inference. This is obviously not
ideal as it largely ignores both temporal and contextual correlation existing among channels and adjacent frames. To break
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5321

