The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Self-Supervised Mixture-of-Experts by Uncertainty Estimation
Zhuobin Zheng,1,2 Chun Yuan,2 Xinrui Zhu,1,2 Zhihui Lin,1,2
Yangyang Cheng,1,2 Cheng Shi,1,2 Jiahui Ye1,3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technologies, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
3
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institue, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
{zhengzb16, zhuxr17, lin-zh14, cheng-yy13, shic17, yejh16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

fore obtaining acceptable behaviors, especially when solving multiple related problems.
One effective direction for improving data efficiency is
multi-task learning (Caruana 1997), which shares similar
characteristics and transfers reusable representations across
multiple tasks. Intuitively, by applying multi-task strategies,
algorithms can accelerate the convergence and improve the
performance of each task w.r.t. single-task learning, while
requiring less training data overall. This further renders
the agent applicable to complex real-world environments
with robust generalization in different situations (Finn et al.
2017). However, in practice when RL combines with multitask techniques such as shared structure, the learning process
tends to be unstable due to the different complexity and reward schemes between tasks (Teh et al. 2017). We ascribe
this negative effect to the interference caused by noised gradients from different domains, which misleads the training
of vanilla multi-task approaches.
Another issue is deep RL agent “robustly” suffers from
overfitting (Zhang et al. 2018), which negatively affects the
performance of transfer. As deep RL algorithms are increasingly employed in critical problems such as autonomous
control, healthcare, finance, and safety (Amodei et al. 2016),
it is crucial to understand the generalization and adaptation abilities of trained agents before real-world deployment.
Besides, the crux of multi-task RL is not only exploiting
reusable representations but furthermore transferring them
across domains effectively. Apart from techniques for mitigating overfitting, quantifying the uncertainty of specific
tasks brings a more intuitive understanding of generalization capacity in deep models. In this case, multi-task RL
agents with well-calibrated predictive uncertainty estimation can avert overconfident incorrect predictions (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017) and accomplish multiple tasks by robust generalization and efficient transfer.
In this paper, we propose Self-Supervised Mixture-ofExperts (SUM), an effective approach for multi-task RL
aiming to improve both data efficiency and generalization
capacity in multiple tasks by effective knowledge sharing
and expert scheduling. Based on multi-head DDPG (Zheng
et al. 2018), SUM extends the model to Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) architecture consisting of an agent and a selfsupervised gating network, which is suitable for the multitask environment. The agent is constructed by experts in-

Learning related tasks in various domains and transferring
exploited knowledge to new situations is a significant challenge in Reinforcement Learning (RL). However, most RL
algorithms are data inefficient and fail to generalize in complex environments, limiting their adaptability and applicability in multi-task scenarios. In this paper, we propose SelfSupervised Mixture-of-Experts (SUM), an effective algorithm driven by predictive uncertainty estimation for multitask RL. SUM utilizes a multi-head agent with shared parameters as experts to learn a series of related tasks simultaneously by Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG).
Each expert is extended by predictive uncertainty estimation
on known and unknown states to enhance the Q-value evaluation capacity against overfitting and the overall generalization ability. These enable the agent to capture and diffuse the
common knowledge across different tasks improving sample efficiency in each task and the effectiveness of expert
scheduling across multiple tasks. Instead of task-specific design as common MoEs, a self-supervised gating network is
adopted to determine a potential expert to handle each interaction from unseen environments and calibrated completely
by the uncertainty feedback from the experts without explicit
supervision. To alleviate the imbalanced expert utilization as
the crux of MoE, optimization is accomplished via decayedmasked experience replay, which encourages both diversification and specialization of experts during different periods.
We demonstrate that our approach learns faster and achieves
better performance by efficient transfer and robust generalization, outperforming several related methods on extended
OpenAI Gym’s MuJoCo multi-task environments.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998)
trains an agent to solve sequential decision-making problems through trial and error interactions with the environment. With the significant advance of deep neural networks
as effective function approximators, Deep RL has been
scaled and demonstrated success in various complex domains like Go game (Silver et al. 2017), video games (Mnih
et al. 2015) and robotic control tasks (Gu et al. 2017). However, most typical RL methods are sample inefficient requiring substantial experiences and large computational cost beCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5933

