The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Write Stories with Thematic Consistency and Wording Novelty
Juntao Li,1,2 Lidong Bing,3 Lisong Qiu,1,2 Dongmin Chen,1 Dongyan Zhao,1,2 Rui Yan1,2∗
1

Center for Data Science, Academy for
Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
R&D Center Singapore, Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba DAMO Academy
{lijuntao,qiuls,dongminchen,zhaody,ruiyan}@pku.edu.cn
l.bing@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

be connected with believable logic and thematic consistency.
Previous story generation methods mainly focus on learning
mid-level representations, e.g., event sequences (Martin et
al. 2017) and prompts (keywords) (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin
2018) to plan a story, where each sentence is generated with
a specific event or keyword. Such a strategy is risky since the
mid-level representations are generated in a single pass without considering the previous generated sentences. For another, stories generally contain vivid wordings, i.e. wording
novelty. However, most of previous works have not formulated such an aspect and thus cannot guarantee the wording
novelty of stories. These story generation models with recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are prone to generate common
words with high occurrence frequencies (Zhang et al. 2017).
The issue stems from the fact that RNN is inclined to learn
local word co-occurrences, which fails to capture global semantic information such as topic (Bowman et al. 2015).
In fact, the above requirements, i.e. consistency and wording novelty, are not specific to the task of story generation,
but also essential aspects for any text generation task outputting a long passage. In the paradigm of deep learning
based text generation, one initial attempt for tackling these
issues is to combine RNN with autoencoder for sequence
learning, where the latent representation learned by the autoencoder has been proven appealing in modeling global attributes such as syntactic, thematic and discourse information (Li, Luong, and Jurafsky 2015). Later on, researchers
enhanced autoencoder with the advantage of variational inference (Kingma and Welling 2014), also known as VAE,
which can generate not only fluent but also novel word sequences (Bowman et al. 2015). To extend VAE for broader
scenarios, conditional variational autoencoders (CVAE) are
proposed to supervise the generation process of VAE conditioned on certain attributes while retaining the merits of
VAE. It is confirmed in dialogue generation (Serban et al.
2017; Shen et al. 2017; Zhao, Zhao, and Eskenazi 2017)
and poem composition (Yang et al. 2017) that CVAE can
generate better responses and poems with creative words.
Apart from autoencoders, researchers also explored enhancing deep neural models with memory unit, which is proven
effective for modeling long-range dependencies, as demonstrated in machine translation (Feng et al. 2017; Meng et al.
2018) and poem generation (Zhang et al. 2017).
In this paper, we tackle the challenges of story genera-

Automatic story generation is a challenging task, which involves automatically comprising a sequence of sentences or
words with a consistent topic and novel wordings. Although
many attention has been paid to this task and prompting
progress has been made, there still exists a noticeable gap between generated stories and those created by humans, especially in terms of thematic consistency and wording novelty.
To fill this gap, we propose a cache-augmented conditional
variational autoencoder for story generation, where the cache
module allows to improve thematic consistency while the
conditional variational autoencoder part is used for generating stories with less common words by using a continuous latent variable. For combing the cache module and the autoencoder part, we further introduce an effective gate mechanism.
Experimental results on ROCStories and WritingPrompts indicate that our proposed model can generate stories with consistency and wording novelty, and outperforms existing models under both automatic metrics and human evaluations.

Introduction
Story writing is the new frontier in the research of text generation, and it involves various challenges that exist in the
current neural generation systems (Wiseman, Shieber, and
Rush 2017). Conventionally, case-based reasoning (Gervás
et al. 2005; Swanson and Gordon 2012), agent-based simulation (Brenner 2010), planning (Porteous, Cavazza, and
Charles 2010), and plot graphs (Li et al. 2013) are studied for this task. Recently, deep neural networks are employed for open story generation without being limited by
prior engineered domain knowledge (Martin et al. 2017;
May and Knight 2018). Despite the encouraging progress,
the thematic consistency and creativity of generated stories
are still not satisfactory, which requires modeling long-range
dependencies across the whole story and improving wording
novelty respectively (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018).
For story composition, thematic consistency and wording
novelty are to some extent mutually exclusive: consistent
stories may have restricted word choice, while diversified
wordings could lead to the risk of inconsistency. For one
thing, all sentences of a well composed story are supposed to
∗

Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@pku.edu.cn)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1715

