The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Free VQA Models from Knowledge
Inertia by Pairwise Inconformity Learning
Yiyi Zhou,1 Rongrong Ji,1,3 Jinsong Su,2 Xiangming Li,1 Xiaoshuai Sun1∗
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Department of Cognitive Science,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Software Engineering, Xiamen University, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
Abstract

Q: How many
clocks are showing?

In this paper, we uncover the issue of knowledge inertia in
visual question answering (VQA), which commonly exists in
most VQA models and forces the models to mainly rely on
the question content to “guess” answer, without regard to the
visual information. Such an issue not only impairs the performance of VQA models, but also greatly reduces the credibility of the answer prediction. To this end, simply highlighting
the visual features in the model is undoable, since the prediction is built upon the joint modeling of two modalities and
largely influenced by the data distribution. In this paper, we
propose a Pairwise Inconformity Learning (PIL) to tackle the
issue of knowledge inertia. In particular, PIL takes full advantage of the similar image pairs with diverse answers to
an identical question provided in VQA2.0 dataset. It builds
a multi-modal embedding space to project pos./neg. feature
pairs, upon which word vectors of answers are modeled as anchors. By doing so, PIL strengthens the importance of visual
features in prediction with a novel dynamic-margin based
triplet loss that efficiently increases the semantic discrepancies between pos./neg. image pairs. To verify the proposed
PIL, we plug it on a baseline VQA model as well as a set of
recent VQA models, and conduct extensive experiments on
two benchmark datasets, i.e., VQA1.0 and VQA2.0. Experimental results show that PIL can boost the accuracy of the
existing VQA models (1.56%-2.93% gain) with a negligible
increase in parameters (0.85%-5.4% parameters). Qualitative
results also reveal the elimination of knowledge inertia in the
existing VQA models after implementing our PIL.

Predict: 2

CNN

Question: Is Big Ben in the photo?

Attention
Fusion

LSTM

Q: What color are the
leaves on the trees?

Predict

VQA model
(1)

Attention

Answer: Yes
Answer: No
(1)
Question: What color are the bater's sneakers?

Predict: Green
CNN

Attention
Fusion

LSTM

Predict

VQA model
(2)

Attention

(a) Two typical cases of knowledge inertia.

Answer: Black

Answer: Red
(2)

(b) Examples of the image pair setting.

Figure 1: Illustrations of the knowledge inertia (a) and the
image pair setting (b). In (a), the model focuses on the correct answer entities in images, but still predicts the wrong
answer due to the negative impact of knowledge inertia. In
(b), the pair of similar images has the same question, similar content but different answers. This setting is used in this
paper to enhance the role of visual information in prediction.
al. 2015; Goyal et al. 2017). In particular, as revealed latter in Sec.3, the existing VQA models tend to rely solely on
the content of a given question to predict the answer, without regard to the given image, i.e., a phenomenon termed as
knowledge inertia (Liao 2002)1 in this paper. Fig.1.(a) illustrates two typical cases of knowledge inertia.
To eliminate the negative effect of knowledge inertia, a
natural solution is to force the VQA model to make predictions more based on the visual content, i.e., by emphasizing the weightings of visual features, as argued in Goyal et
al. (2017). However, doing so is intractable in the existing
VQA models. First, the objective function of existing VQA
models is to maximize the answer probability conditioned
on the given question and image. The prediction is built upon
the joint modeling of the textual and visual features, where
the weightings of two modalities are automatically learned
by the training examples and can not be manually adjusted.
Second, as a classification task, VQA also faces the problem
of extremely uneven data distributions, which subsequently
exacerbates the issue of knowledge inertia.

Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) is a task of answering the
human question based on a given image. The challenge lies
in how to jointly understand comprehensive visual and textual information. The existing VQA models (Lu et al. 2016;
Fukui et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2017; Anderson et al. 2018) have
demonstrated the ability to answer human questions in various tasks, such as text understanding, object or scene recognition, counting and visual reasoning etc.
Despite the exciting progress, the strong language priors has long plagued the development of VQA (Antol et

1

∗

It is borrowed from social science to define a solving strategy
that uses redundant and stagnant knowledge and past experience
without regard to new inputs.

Corresponding Author. E-mail: xiaoshuaisun.hit@gmail.com
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9316

