The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Deep Reinforcement Learning Framework
for Rebalancing Dockless Bike Sharing Systems∗
Ling Pan,1 Qingpeng Cai,1 Zhixuan Fang,2 Pingzhong Tang,1 Longbo Huang1
1

IIIS, Tsinghua University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{pl17, cqp14}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zxfang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {kenshin, longbohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

at fixed docking stations, users can access and park sharing
bikes at any valid places. This relieves users’ concerns about
finding empty docks when they want to use bikes, or getting
into fully occupied stations when they want to return them.
However, due to similar travel patterns of most users, the
rental mode of BSS leads to bike imbalance, especially during rush hours. For example, people mostly ride from home
to work during morning peak hours. This results in very
few bikes in residential areas, which in turn suppresses potential future demand, while subway stations and commercial areas are paralyzed due to the overwhelming number of
shared bikes. This problem is further exaggerated for dockless BSS, due to unrestrained users’ parking locations. This
imbalance can cause severe problems not only to users and
service providers, but also to cities. Therefore, it is crucial
for bike sharing providers to rebalance bikes efficiently, so
as to serve users well and to avoid congesting city sidewalks
and causing a bike mess.
Bike rebalancing faces several challenges. First, it is a
resource-constrained problem, as service providers often
pose limited budgets for rebalancing the system. Naively
spending the budget to increase the supply of bikes will not
resolve the problem and is also not cost-efficient. Moreover,
the number of bikes allowed is often capped due to regulation. Second, the problem is computationally intractable
due to the large number of bikes and users. Third, the user
demand is usually highly dynamic and changes both temporally and spatially. Fourth, if users are also involved in
rebalancing bikes, the rebalancing strategy needs to efficiently utilize the budget and incentivize users to help, without knowing users’ private costs.
There have been a considerable set of recent results on
bike rebalancing, which mainly focuses on two approaches,
i.e., the vehicle-based approach (O’Mahony and Shmoys
2015; Liu et al. 2016; Ghosh, Trick, and Varakantham 2016;
Li, Zheng, and Yang 2018; Ghosh and Varakantham 2017)
and the user-based approach (Singla et al. 2015; Chemla
et al. 2013; Fricker and Gast 2016). The vehicle-based approach utilizes multiple trucks/bike-trailers to achieve repositioning by loading or unloading bikes in different regions.
However, its rebalancing effect depends heavily on the accuracy of demand prediction. Also, it can be inflexible as it
is hard to adjust the repositioning plan in real time to cater
to the fluctuating demand. Additionally, due to the mainte-

Bike sharing provides an environment-friendly way for traveling and is booming all over the world. Yet, due to the high
similarity of user travel patterns, the bike imbalance problem constantly occurs, especially for dockless bike sharing
systems, causing significant impact on service quality and
company revenue. Thus, it has become a critical task for
bike sharing operators to resolve such imbalance efficiently.
In this paper, we propose a novel deep reinforcement learning framework for incentivizing users to rebalance such systems. We model the problem as a Markov decision process
and take both spatial and temporal features into consideration. We develop a novel deep reinforcement learning algorithm called Hierarchical Reinforcement Pricing (HRP),
which builds upon the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
algorithm. Different from existing methods that often ignore
spatial information and rely heavily on accurate prediction,
HRP captures both spatial and temporal dependencies using
a divide-and-conquer structure with an embedded localized
module. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate HRP,
based on a dataset from Mobike, a major Chinese dockless
bike sharing company. Results show that HRP performs close
to the 24-timeslot look-ahead optimization, and outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in both service level and bike distribution. It also transfers well when applied to unseen areas.

Introduction
Bike sharing, especially dockless bike sharing, is booming
all over the world. For example, Mobike, a Chinese bikesharing giant, has deployed over 7 million bikes in China
and abroad. Being an environment-friendly approach, bike
sharing provides people with a convenient way for commuting by sharing public bikes among users, and solves the “last
mile” problem (Shaheen, Guzman, and Zhang 2010). Different from traditional docked bike sharing systems (BSS),
e.g., Hubway, where bikes can only be rented and returned
∗

The work of Longbo Huang and Ling Pan was supported in
part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grants
61672316, 61303195, the Tsinghua Initiative Research Grant, and
the China Youth 1000-Talent Grant. Pingzhong Tang and Qingpeng
Cai were supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61561146398, a China Youth 1000-talent
program and an Alibaba Innovative Research program.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1393

