The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Diverse Bayesian Networks
Cong Chen, Changhe Yuan

Graduate Center and Queens College
City University of New York
{cong.chen, changhe.yuan}@qc.cuny.edu

However, even the optimal Bayesian network may fail to
capture the true underlying network structure. Such discrepancy is called generalization error of the learning problem,
which may come from the approximation error, due to the
limitations of the models, or estimation error, due to the insufficiencies of the data (Bousquet and Bottou 2008). One
can potentially address the limitation of the optimal model
by finding multiple best Bayesian networks with the highest
scores (K-Best) in hope that one of them recovers the true
model. It is often the case, however, that some of these top
models come from the same peak(s) and are very similar to
each other. For example, one of the top solutions may be obtained from modifying the best Bayesian network a bit by
selecting a slightly worse parent set for one of the variables.
Such a solution should not be considered as a top solution
for two reasons: (1) it is too similar to another better solution, and (2) it is not even optimal respective to any causal
ordering.
In this paper, we propose a novel method for finding a
set of diverse top Bayesian networks, called modes, such
that each network is guaranteed to be optimal in a local
neighborhood. Such a diverse set of mode models are expected to provide a much better coverage of true underlying model. This work is inspired by recent success in developing methods for finding multiple diverse predictions, including Diverse M-Best (Batra et al. 2012), joint Diverse MBest (Kirillov et al. 2015), and M-Modes (Chen et al. 2013;
2018). Based on a global-local theorem showing that a mode
Bayesian network must be optimal in all local scopes, we introduce an A* search algorithm to efficiently find the top M
Bayesian networks which are highly probable and naturally
diverse. Empirical evaluations show that our top mode models have much better accuracy in discovering the true causal
model than the most likely models found by K-Best.

Abstract
Much effort has been directed at developing algorithms for
learning optimal Bayesian network structures from data.
When given limited or noisy data, however, the optimal
Bayesian network often fails to capture the true underlying
network structure. One can potentially address the problem
by finding multiple most likely Bayesian networks (K-Best)
in the hope that one of them recovers the true model. However, it is often the case that some of the best models come
from the same peak(s) and are very similar to each other; so
they tend to fail together. Moreover, many of these models
are not even optimal respective to any causal ordering, thus
unlikely to be useful. This paper proposes a novel method for
finding a set of diverse top Bayesian networks, called modes,
such that each network is guaranteed to be optimal in a local
neighborhood. Such mode networks are expected to provide
a much better coverage of the true model. Based on a globallocal theorem showing that a mode Bayesian network must be
optimal in all local scopes, we introduce an A* search algorithm to efficiently find top M Bayesian networks which are
highly probable and naturally diverse. Empirical evaluations
show that our top mode models have much better diversity as
well as accuracy in discovering true underlying models than
those found by K-Best.

Introduction
Bayesian networks (BN) (Pearl 1988) are graphical models
that represent probabilistic dependencies between random
variables. While BNs have become one of the most popular and well-studied probabilistic models, a common bottleneck lies in deciding upon their structure. Exactly learning the network structures from the data is known to be
NP-hard, even if we restrict each variable to have at most
two parents (Chickering 1996). Despite the difficulty of
structure learning, a variety of algorithms have been proposed to learn optimal Bayesian networks, including dynamic programming (Koivisto and Sood 2004; Silander and
Myllymäki 2006), linear programming (Jaakkola et al. 2010;
Cussens 2011), and admissible heuristic search (Yuan, Malone, and Wu 2011; Yuan and Malone 2013). They all take
scores of candidate parent sets of all variables as input, and
use various optimization techniques to find a structure that
is a good predictor of the data.

Bayesian Network Structure Learning
A Bayesian network is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) that
represents the uncertain relations between a set of random
variables V = { v1 , . . . , v|V | }. The relations are quantified
using aset of conditional probability distributions Pr vi |
pa(vi ) , where pa(vi ) represents the immediate predecessors of vi in the model. The joint probability distribution
over all the variables factorizes as the product of the condi-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7793

