The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Molecular Property Prediction: A Multilevel Quantum Interactions
Modeling Perspective
Chengqiang Lu,† Qi Liu,† * Chao Wang,† Zhenya Huang,† Peize Lin,‡ Lixin He‡
†

Anhui Province Key Lab. of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of S&T of China
‡
Key Laboratory of Quantum Information, University of S&T of China
{qiliuql, helx}@ustc.edu.cn, {lunar, wdyx2012, huangzhy, linpz}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

D ƚŽŵ
E WĂŝƌͲǁŝƐĞ

Predicting molecular properties (e.g., atomization energy)
is an essential issue in quantum chemistry, which could
speed up much research progress, such as drug designing
and substance discovery. Traditional studies based on density functional theory (DFT) in physics are proved to be
time-consuming for predicting large number of molecules.
Recently, the machine learning methods, which consider
much rule-based information, have also shown potentials for
this issue. However, the complex inherent quantum interactions of molecules are still largely underexplored by existing solutions. In this paper, we propose a generalizable and
transferable Multilevel Graph Convolutional neural Network
(MGCN) for molecular property prediction. Specifically, we
represent each molecule as a graph to preserve its internal structure. Moreover, the well-designed hierarchical graph
neural network directly extracts features from the conformation and spatial information followed by the multilevel interactions. As a consequence, the multilevel overall representations can be utilized to make the prediction. Extensive experiments on both datasets of equilibrium and off-equilibrium
molecules demonstrate the effectiveness of our model. Furthermore, the detailed results also prove that MGCN is generalizable and transferable for the prediction.

J dƌŝƉůĞͲǁŝƐĞ
‫ڮڮ‬

a  DŽůĞĐƵůĞ

/ŶƚĞƌĂĐƚŝŽŶ
b
'ƌĂƉŚ

c DƵůƚŝƐĐĂůĞ
/ŶƚĞƌĂĐƚŝŽŶƐ

WƌŽƉĞƌƚǇ

sĂůƵĞ

hϬ

Ͳϭϴϴ͘ϵϳϯϲ

'

Ͳϭϴϴ͘ϵϱϰϮ

,

Ͳϭϴϳ͘Ϯϳϴϰ

;‫Ϳ݁݁ݎݐݎܽܪ‬
;‫Ϳ݁݁ݎݐݎܽܪ‬
;‫Ϳ݁݁ݎݐݎܽܪ‬

d  KƵƚƉƵƚ

Figure 1: Illustration of the process of a molecule (CH2 O2 )
via our method.

molecules for the prediction (Hohenberg and Kohn 1964;
Kohn and Sham 1965). However, DFTs are computationally
costly since they usually use specific functions to determine
the interactions of particles, which proves to be extraordinarily time consuming. For example, experimental results
indicated that it took nearly an hour to predict the properties
of merely one molecule with 20 atoms (Gilmer et al. 2017).
Obviously, it is unacceptable to make prediction on large
number of molecules in chemical compound space. Therefore, it is necessary to find more effective solutions.
Recently, inspired by the remarkable success of machine
learning in many tasks including computer vision, natural
language processing, natural and social science (Karpathy et
al. 2014; He et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2018;
Liu et al. 2018), researchers have shown the potentials of
these data-driven techniques for molecular property prediction (Faber et al. 2017; Schütt et al. 2017a). Generally, these
studies mainly rely on rule-based feature engineering (e.g.,
bag of atom bonds) or treat molecules as grid-like structures
(e.g., 2D images or text). However, few of them directly take
the inherent quantum interactions of molecules into consideration, causing severe information loss, which makes the
molecular property prediction problem pretty much open.
Unfortunately, there are many technical and domain challenges along this line. First, there are highly complex quantum interactions, such as distracted attraction, exchange repulsion and electrostatic interaction in molecules, especially
in the large molecules (Kollman 1985). It is hard to model
them with analytical methods. Second, compared with traditional tasks including computer vision, the amount of labeled molecule data is significantly limited, which requires a
generalizable approach for the prediction. Last but not least,
in practice, we are often provided with labeled data of small

Introduction
Predicting molecular properties, such as atomization energy,
is one of the fundamental issues in quantum chemical science. Indeed, it has attracted much attention in relevant fields
of physics, chemistry and computer science, since it speeds
up the societal and technological progress in the application
of discovering substances with desired characteristics, such
as drug design with specific target and new material manufacture (Becke 2007; Oglic, Garnett, and Gärtner 2017).
In the literature, density functional theory (DFT) plays
an important role in physics for molecular property prediction. It holds a common statement that the quantum interactions between particles (e.g., atom) create the correlation and entanglement of molecules which are closely related to their inherent properties (Thouless 2014). Along
this line, many quantum mechanical methods based on DFT
have been developed to model the quantum interactions of
* Contact author.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1052

