The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Non-Uniform Hypergraph for Multi-Object Tracking
Longyin Wen,1∗ Dawei Du,2∗ Shengkun Li,2 Xiao Bian,3 Siwei Lyu2
1

JD Finance, Mountain View, CA, USA
University at Albany, State University of New York, NY, USA
3
GE Global Research, NY, USA
longyin.wen@jd.com, ddu@albany.edu, sli29@albany.edu, bian.xiao@ge.com, slyu@albany.edu
2

Abstract
The majority of Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) algorithms
based on the tracking-by-detection scheme do not use higher
order dependencies among objects or tracklets, which makes
them less effective in handling complex scenarios. In this
work, we present a new near-online MOT algorithm based
on non-uniform hypergraph, which can model different degrees of dependencies among tracklets in a unified objective.
The nodes in the hypergraph correspond to the tracklets and
the hyperedges with different degrees encode various kinds
of dependencies among them. Specifically, instead of setting the weights of hyperedges with different degrees empirically, they are learned automatically using the structural support vector machine algorithm (SSVM). Several experiments
are carried out on various challenging datasets (i.e., PETS09,
ParkingLot sequence, SubwayFace, and MOT16 benchmark),
to demonstrate that our method achieves favorable performance against the state-of-the-art MOT methods.

Figure 1: (a) Two previous methods using 3-uniform hypergraph H2 T (Wen et al. 2014) and FH2 T (Wen et al. 2016), often fails to describe the dependencies among tracklets, when
occlusion or missed detection happen. (b) The proposed
method uses the non-uniform hypergraph to encode different degrees of dependencies among tracklets effectively.

Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) is an important problem in
computer vision with many applications, such as surveillance, behavior analysis, and sport video analysis. Although
the performance of MOT has been significantly improved in
recent years (Choi 2015; Kim et al. 2015; Wen et al. 2016;
Tang et al. 2017), it is still a challenging problem due to
factors such as missed detections, false detections, and identification switches.
An automatic MOT system usually employs a pre-trained
object detector to locate candidate object regions in each
frame, then match the detections across frames to form target trajectories. Most existing methods only consider the
pairwise dependencies of detections (e.g., (Rezatofighi et al.
2015; Dehghan, Assari, and Shah 2015; Milan, Schindler,
and Roth 2016; Fagot-Bouquet et al. 2016)), and do not
take full advantage of the high-order dependencies among
multiple targets across frames. This strategy is less effective
when nearby objects with similar appearance or motion patterns occlude each other in the video. Several recent methods (Kim et al. 2015; Collins 2012; Shi et al. 2014; Kim

et al. 2015; Wen et al. 2014; 2016) attempt to use the highorder information to improve the tracking performance, such
as dense structure search on hypergraph (Wen et al. 2014;
2016), tensor power iterations (Shi et al. 2014), high-order
motion constraints (Collins 2012; Butt and Collins 2013),
and multiple hypothesis tracking (Kim et al. 2015). However, the aforementioned methods merely exploit fixed degrees of dependencies among objects, which limits the flexibility of the hypergraph model1 in complex environments,
and calls for adaptive dependency patterns. As shown in Figure 1, 3-uniform hypergraph is unable to describe the dependencies between two tracklets of target 1 and 4 correctly. On
the contrary, non-uniform hypergraph better adapts to different degrees of dependencies among tracklets, and achieves
more reliable performance.
In this paper, we describe a new non-uniform hypergraph

∗

Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A hypergraph is a generalization of a conventional graph
where an edge can join more than two nodes.

8981

