The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Scientific Article Search System
Based on Discourse Facet Representation
Yuta Kobayashi,1 Hiroyuki Shindo,1,2 Yuji Matsumoto1,2
1

2

Nara Institute of Science and Technology
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP)
{kobayashi.yuta.kp1, shindo, matsu}@is.naist.jp

Abstract
We present a browser-based scientific article search system
with graphical visualization. This system is based on triples
of distributed representations of articles, each triple representing a scientific discourse facet (Objective, Method, or Result) using both text and citation information. Because each
facet of an article is encoded as a separate vector, the similarity between articles can be measured by considering the
articles not only in their entirety but also on a facet-by-facet
basis. Our system provides three search options: a similarity
ranking search, a citation graph with facet-labeled edges, and
a scatter plot visualization with facets as the axes.

Figure 1: Facet-based article similarity calculation
options are based on vector representations that encode not
the full article, but each individual discourse facet. Our system enables users to search for scientific articles based on
the similarity of discourse facets (Objective, Method, and
Result), represented by multi-vector representations of both
the text and citation graphs (Figs.1 and 2).

Introduction
Finding relevant articles can be a challenge for scientists,
because they are faced with a flood of digital publications.
Therefore, there has been increasing interest in applying
natural language processing technologies to scholarly document analysis. In search systems of scientific articles such
as the ACL Anthology Searchbench1 (Schäfer et al. 2011),
once a search has been performed, the only option for expanding it is a citation browser that displays a citation graph.
One technology that can be used for expanding a search
is discourse structure analysis of scientific literature (Teufel,
Siddharthan, and Tidhar 2006), which seeks to automatically
classify the body texts and citation contexts by their scientific discourse facets. Previous studies have identified common discourse facets in scientific articles, of which we focus
on three: Objective, Method, and Result. If a system can recognize the discourse facets of articles, the similarity between
articles can be measured not only based on their full text
but also on a facet-by-facet basis. In literature retrieval systems, this opens the possibility for answering queries such
as: “find an article with a different objective than the one
at hand but with a similar methodology”; It is probable that
such queries cannot be answered by a mere keyword search.
As the first step toward our goal, we focus on the steps
after selecting an anchor article and provide three faceted
search options: a similarity ranking search, a facet-labeled
citation graph, and a scatter plot visualization. These search

Steps for Building Article Facet Vectors
Step 1: Preprocessing dataset We crawled PDF files
from the ACL Anthology and built a retrieval dataset. The
body text was extracted from the PDFs as XHTML by our
customized Poppler, and some collapsed articles were eliminated. To build the citation graph, we extract citations from
the XHTML using regular expressions. This preprocessing
resulted in 20,796 articles and 303,767 citation links. Next,
we carried out unsupervised learning of the word vector representations using fastText (Bojanowski et al. 2016) with the
original corpus composed of the text in English Wikipedia
and the ACL Anthology.
Step 2: Section facet classification and learning facet vectors We classified sections of the articles using an annotation dataset for structured abstracts, which are summaries
of articles comprising labeled sections for rapid comprehension. We used the National Library of Medicine Category Mappings file2 , a dataset attached to the medical article database MEDLINE. The file contains a list of 3,032
translation rules for canonicalizing various section titles appearing in structured abstracts into one of the facets. First,

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://aclasb.dfki.de

2

9859

https://structuredabstracts.nlm.nih.gov/

