The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exploiting Time-Series Image-to-Image Translation to
Expand the Range of Wildlife Habitat Analysis
Ruobing Zheng,1,2 Ze Luo,2 Baoping Yan2
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
2
e-Science Technology and Application Laboratory,
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
{zhengruobing, luoze, ybp}@cnic.cn
Abstract

animals and their environment. In the old days, locational
data were gathered by field observation or trapping methods.
Such sampling ways are very laborious, which limited the
sampling field and monitoring period. Nowadays, most locational data are automatically obtained by the radio-tracking
device carried by animals. The development of GIS technology facilitates the sampling procedure, but the sample size
is still far from enough. In practice, scientists often capture
and mark a fixed amount of target species, receiving animal relocations during the validity period of the vulnerable
GPS transmitters (Takekawa et al. 2010). The whole work
is costly and in most cases a one time job. Therefore, the
insufficient locational data still restrict the range of wildlife
habitat analysis, both in the spatial and temporal dimension.
Habitat mappings (Nagendra et al. 2013), a type of ecological applications of remote sensing, provide alternatives
for modeling habitat. They succeed in mapping the quality and extent of animal habitat from remote sensing imagery, which demonstrates the strong connection between
wildlife and their environment. However, most of these studies can be hardly expected to map general habitat models.
That is because they mostly focus on the specific species
and map the self-defined habitat category or index (Lee et
al. 2017). Moreover, their mapping models are mainly the
traditional machine learning classifiers or regressors which
work on individual pixels (Chegoonian, Mokhtarzade, and
Valadan Zoej 2017). As we know, remote sensing imagery is
highly structured. When mapping more complex target, such
as a complete probability density map, the traditional pixelbased scheme is far from satisfactory (Zheng et al. 2018b).
To overcome this limitation, we pay attention to the
emerging image-to-image translation technology. These
studies aim to learn the mapping between input images
and output images using a set of aligned image pairs,
showing promise in various applications (Sangkloy et al.
2017; Pathak et al. 2016). Typically, pix2pix investigates
Conditional Generative Adversarial Network (CGAN) as
a general-purpose solution to image-to-image translation
problems (Isola et al. 2016), leading to a substantial boost of
sampling quality. Following studies further focus on some
specific domain, such as multimodal (Zhu et al. 2017b) and
unpaired (Zhu et al. 2017a) image-to-image translation.
Inspired by the above studies, we consider our mapping
task as a specific image-to-image translation problem. Dif-

Characterizing wildlife habitat is one of the main topics in
animal ecology. Locational data obtained from radio tracking and field observation are widely used in habitat analysis.
However, such sampling methods are costly and laborious,
and insufficient relocations often prevent scientists from conducting large-range and long-term research. In this paper, we
innovatively exploit the image-to-image translation technology to expand the range of wildlife habitat analysis. We proposed a novel approach for implementing time-series imageto-image translation via metric embedding. A siamese neural network is used to learn the Euclidean temporal embedding from the image space. This embedding produces temporal vectors which bring time information into the adversarial
network. The well-trained framework could effectively map
the probabilistic habitat models from remote sensing imagery,
helping scientists get rid of the persistent dependence on animal relocations. We illustrate our approach in a real-world
application for mapping the habitats of Bar-headed Geese
at Qinghai Lake breeding ground. We compare our model
against several baselines and achieve promising results.

Introduction
The analysis of space use and habitat selection by animals
is a well-studied topic in ecology (Calenge 2006). The measurement of wildlife habitat is not only valuable in predicting the appearance of animals but also plays an important
role in resource management and animal conservation. The
original habitat studies used to define the space use of animals as a uniform area surrounded by borders (Mohr 1947).
However, in reality, animals are unlikely to uniformly use
their habitat. Therefore, some probabilistic habitat models
(Worton 1989; Clark, Dunn, and Smith 1993) have emerged
in the literature. These models take the form of a twodimensional probability density map to represent the possibility of animals occurring, or score the habitat suitability
at each location. We mainly focus on this type of habitat
models in the following work.
Locational data are extensively used in characterizing
wildlife habitat (Bayliss, Simonite, and Thompson 2005;
Horne et al. 2007), either directly used in kernel density
estimations or helping to capture the relationship between
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

825

