The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dynamic Explainable Recommendation Based on Neural Attentive Models
Xu Chen

Yongfeng Zhang

Zheng Qin ∗

TNList, School of Software
Tsinghua University
xu-ch14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
yongfeng.zhang@rutgers.edu

School of Software
Tsinghua University
qinzh@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

more accurate user-item-feature explanations based on tensor factorization techniques. NARRE (Chen et al. 2018a)
leveraged attention mechanism to extract valuable item reviews to explain the rating prediction process.
Despite effectiveness, these explainable recommender
models still suffer from some inherent limitations. To begin
with, most of them represent a user as a static latent vector, thus, they fail to capture user dynamic preference in the
context of explainable recommendation, which may weaken
the recommendation performance according to many previous studies (Tang and Wang 2018; Hidasi et al. 2016). More
importantly, the explanations provided by these models are
usually invariant, which is less effective in satisfying users’
actually dynamic preference in real scenarios. For example,
a user may care more about the socks’ breathability in the
beginning, and after a period of time, she may become more
interested in the warmth because the weather started getting
cold. The mismatching between the explanation and user
preference may degrade costumers’ satisfaction, confidence
and trust for the recommender system.
Inspired by these limitations, in this paper, we design a
novel Dynamic Explainable Recommender (called DER)
for more accurate user modeling and recommendation explanations. We believe a persuasive explanation should accurately tell an item’s properties (what) that the user (who)
cares most at present (when). To solve the problem of when,
gated recurrent unit (GRU) is selected as the basic architecture to capture user dynamic preference. A key problem
of GRU is that it models a sequence without considering
the time interval information between two successive steps,
which is yet an important signal for user behavior modeling, e.g., a user tend to have similar preferences within a
short time, while large time gap may have more opportunities to change user interest (Zhu et al. 2017). To solve this
problem, we revise traditional GRU by adding a time gate to
make it more applicable for the field of personalized recommendation. For what, we extract item properties from the
review information based on sentence-level convolutional
neural network (CNN). Finally, we adopt a “personalized
attention mechanism” for merging different review information to address the issue of who. Based on the above designs,
we predict the likeness from a user to an item, and also highlight valuable review information to explain the prediction
according to the user’s current preference.

Providing explanations in a recommender system is getting
more and more attention in both industry and research communities. Most existing explainable recommender models regard user preferences as invariant to generate static explanations. However, in real scenarios, a user’s preference is always dynamic, and she may be interested in different product
features at different states. The mismatching between the explanation and user preference may degrade costumers’ satisfaction, confidence and trust for the recommender system.
With the desire to fill up this gap, in this paper, we build a
novel Dynamic Explainable Recommender (called DER) for
more accurate user modeling and explanations. In specific,
we design a time-aware gated recurrent unit (GRU) to model
user dynamic preferences, and profile an item by its review
information based on sentence-level convolutional neural network (CNN). By attentively learning the important review information according to the user current state, we are not only
able to improve the recommendation performance, but also
can provide explanations tailored for the users’ current preferences. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate
the superiority of our model for improving recommendation
performance. And to evaluate the explainability of our model,
we first present examples to provide intuitive analysis on
the highlighted review information, and then crowd-sourcing
based evaluations are conducted to quantitatively verify our
model’s superiority.

Introduction
Explainable recommendation has attracted increasing attention in both industry and academic communities, because
it can not only enhance customers’ satisfaction, confidence
and trust for the recommender system, but also can help
them to make better and faster choices (Zhang and Chen
2018). With the desire to make a recommender system
more interpretable, user reviews–which contain rich user
preference–have been widely leveraged as an important resource to provide recommendation explanations, for example, EFM (Zhang et al. 2014) explained a recommendation
by filling user cared features learned from the review information into pre-defined templates. LRPPM (Chen et al.
2016b) and MTER (Wang et al. 2018) extended EFM for
∗

Corresponding author
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

53

