The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Paraphrase Diversification Using Counterfactual Debiasing
Sunghyun Park,1,2 Seung-won Hwang,1 * Fuxiang Chen,2,4
Jaegul Choo,3 Jung-Woo Ha,2 Sunghun Kim,2,4 Jinyeong Yim2
1

Yonsei University 2 Clova AI Research, NAVER 3 Korea University 4 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract

Existing paraphrasing work mainly focuses on preserving
the original sentence’s semantic meaning but less on generating diversified paraphrases (see Section 2.3). This study
addresses the generation problem, with a focus on diversification. With the advent of sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq)
models, after encoding the given sentence, paraphrase can
be decoded in various forms from a given encoded sentence, by adding random noise to deep generative models, such as a variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and
Welling 2014). However, these models reportedly have common weaknesses. The generated sentences, to preserve the
semantic meaning, are often safe yet tedious repetitions of
the original sentence, as frequently observed in generative
models (Xu et al. 2018). Our objective is to generate a set of
paraphrases p1 , . . . , pk to maximize diversity.
Another closely related task is a style transfer that
rephrases a given sentence to impose a particular style property. One can view the style transfer satisfying paraphrase
identification as a special paraphrase case. This property can
be implicitly trained using a paired or an unpaired corpus
(Fu et al. 2017) or in an explicitly guided manner (Iyyer et
al. 2018), such as enforcing the syntactic structure of a paraphrase.
While style transfer focuses on imposing a single fixed
form of diversity, we extend that to paraphrase diversification for a generated set of paraphrases p1 , . . . , pk , given the
original sentence o and its paraphrase p, as well as the generated paraphrase history. When generating the first paraphrase (without any history), history is set as null. Specifically, we generate an uncontrolled random noise z, then
transformed it into z 0 to provide diversity guidance during
generation.
Due to the challenging fact in pre-materializing the existing paraphrase training data to include all possible diversity
guidance during generation, our factual training instances
are often biased (e.g., having syntax that is too similar).
Training using counterfactual debiasing instances (having
dissimilar syntax) thus pave way to allow for more diversity
guidance. To allow that, in this work, we provide a debiasing guiding vector for generating counterfactual (debiased)
training instances.
We summarize our key contributions as follows.

The problem of generating a set of diverse paraphrase sentences while (1) not compromising the original meaning of
the original sentence, and (2) imposing diversity in various
semantic aspects, such as a lexical or syntactic structure, is
examined. Existing work on paraphrase generation has focused more on the former, and the latter was trained as a
fixed style transfer, such as transferring from positive to negative sentiments, even at the cost of losing semantics. In this
work, we consider style transfer as a means of imposing diversity, with a paraphrasing correctness constraint that the
target sentence must remain a paraphrase of the original sentence. However, our goal is to maximize the diversity for a set
of k generated paraphrases, denoted as the diversified paraphrase (DP) problem. Our key contribution is deciding the
style guidance at generation towards the direction of increasing the diversity of output with respect to those generated previously. As pre-materializing training data for all style decisions is impractical, we train with biased data, but with debiasing guidance. Compared to state-of-the-art methods, our
proposed model can generate more diverse and yet semantically consistent paraphrase sentences. That is, our model,
trained with the MSCOCO dataset, achieves the highest embedding scores, .94/.95/.86, similar to state-of-the-art results,
but with a lower mBLEU score (more diverse) by 8.73%.

1

Introduction

Paraphrasing is the task of rephrasing a given sentence into
another with the same semantic meaning. Related tasks
include paraphrase identification, classifying whether the
given pair of sentences is a paraphrase of each other. Another
task is to generate a paraphrase sentence of a given input sentence. Both tasks are useful in numerous NLP tasks, including question answering (QA) and information retrieval (IR).
For example, a new question can be a paraphrase of an existing QA pair, which can be retrieved as an answer to a new
question. Similarly, in IR, a part of a document that matches
the query as its paraphrase can be a good retrieval candidate.
However, in both scenarios, we often fail to find paraphrase
pairs, due to lexical and structural differences (Zhou et al.
2015).
* corresponding email:seungwonh@yonsei.ac.kr
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Random noise z is uncontrollable such that a particular
style property cannot be imposed; so, it is transformed
6883

