The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DSINE: Deep Structural Influence Learning via Network Embedding
Jianjun Wu,1,2 Ying Sha,1,2 Bo Jiang,1,2 Jianlong Tan1,2
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
No.91 Min Zhuang Road, Haidian District, Beijing, China 100093
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing, China 100029
{wujianjun, shaying, jiangbo, tanjianlong}@iie.ac.cn

xˆ

yˆu(1)

Self-Fusion
Eigenmaps

Pu(2)

second-order
proximity

yu(1)

action

yu(k)

high-order
proximity

Pu(1)

Structural representations of user social influence are critical
for a variety of applications such as viral marketing and recommendation products. However, existing studies only focus
on capturing and preserving the structure of relations, and ignore the diversity of influence relations patterns among users.
To this end, we propose a deep structural influence learning
model to learn social influence structure via mining rich features of each user, and fuse information from the aligned selfnetwork component for preserving global and local structure
of the influence relations among users. Experiments on two
real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms for learning rich representations in multi-label classification task.

Decoder

u

Encoder
first-order
proximity

Pu(3)

Origin proximity network (r)

heterogeneous network

xu

Abstract

weighted graph

Self-network (o)

yu

 (u )

prior knowledge

random walk on social link graph

Figure 1: The framework of DSINE.

The DSINE Model

Introduction

The DSINE extends the auto-encoder model via aligned
self-network, as shown in Fig.1. The origin proximity network r preserves structure of first-order, second-order, highorder proximity among vertexes. Likewise, self-network o
can learn a mapping of vertexes to a low-dimensional space
of features based on random walk procedure.
In our model, we take different feature vectors extracted
from first-order, second-order, high-order proximity between users as the input data of origin proximity network
(1)
r. The term pu , which is the row in first-order proximity
(1)
matrix P , represents the input feature vectors for user u.
As described in (Zhang 2017), the order proximity for each
user can be independently calculated to the embedding vectors by multiple non-linear mapping functions and then map
these vectors to a lower-dimensional feature space, which
will combine those vectors to generate result embedding
(k)
vector yu for user u. Meanwhile, we align origin proximity
network r with self-network, which learns embedding representations based on random walk guided by prior knowledge, to incorporate the embedding results into the origin
proximity network to alleviate the data sparsity.
To learn different influence and preserve micro-, mesoand macro- structure between users, we design the four
components to exploit first-order proximity, second-order
proximity, high-order proximity and information transferring aligned self-work for maximizing the likelihood of preserving both the global and local structure of the influence

The use of relation information in social networks plays an
important role in recommending products, promoting public opinions and detecting information anomalies. Most of
existing studies focus on the homogeneous networks. These
methods assume similar users are more likely to be linked together and have a closer relationship (Tang 2015). However,
the relation patterns learned by these models have higher locality, resulting in a large structure overlap and a limited local structure. Meanwhile, the information sparsity is still not
fully solved. To alleviate the social data sparsity problem,
several effective strategies such as random walk, breadthfirst and depth-first have been proposed on heterogeneous
networks. However, the above studies are hard to learn the
global influence relations.
In this paper, we propose a deep structural influence
learning model using network embedding, named DSINE.
This model first learns the structural representations of relationships of entities to preserve first-order, second-order,
and high-order proximity influence structure, and then maps
these learned representations to a low-dimensional space of
features that maximize the likelihood of preserving both the
global and local structure of the influence relations of vertexes in embedding space.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10065

