The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robustness Envelopes for Temporal Plans
Michael Cashmore,1 Alessandro Cimatti,2 Daniele Magazzeni,1 Andrea Micheli,2 Parisa Zehtabi1
1

King’s College London, United Kingdom
{michael.cashmore, daniele.magazzeni, parisa.zehtabi}@kcl.ac.uk,
2
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy
{cimatti, amicheli}@fbk.eu

Abstract

In this paper, we tackle both problems in a unified framework. First, we propose techniques to formally validate
an STN plan and to synthesize its least restrictive validity
bounds in a PDDL2.1 setting. Existing works are limited
to the generation of valid-by-construction STN plans (e.g
(Frank and Jónsson 2003; Cesta et al. 2009)) or to their validation for purely temporal timelines (Cesta et al. 2010).
Second, we propose an algorithm to formally synthesize
all the values of a set of parameters in the planning model
that preserve the validity of a given STN plan. This tells us
to which extent an STN plan is robust to discrepancies in the
values of such parameters between the formal model and the
execution environment.
Both of these problems aim at synthesizing a representation of all the variations either in the plan execution or in
the domain model that retain the formal validity of the plan
according to the planning language semantics. We call such
a representation the ”robustness envelope” of the plan.
We uniformly approach these problems by adopting the
framework of Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT): we encode all the possible execution traces of the STN plan as an
SMT formula. We use real-valued parameters to symbolically represent the quantities subject to the synthesis in the
plan and in the problem, and we use quantifier elimination
techniques to synthesize a closed-form of the set of parameter values. The approach is made practical by the availability of efficient SMT solvers, and can be applied to temporal
plans with discrete as well as continuous change.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we give
the needed SMT background. Section 3 formalizes the problems we tackle, while in Section 4 we describe the encoding we use to solve them. Section 5 presents an underapproximation technique aimed at simplify robustness envelopes. In Section 6 we discuss related work and Section 7
experimentally analyzes our techniques. Finally, in Section
8 we draw conclusions and discuss future work.

To achieve practical execution, planners must produce temporal plans with some degree of run-time adaptability. Such
plans can be expressed as Simple Temporal Networks (STN),
that constrain the timing of action activations, and implicitly
represent the space of choices for the plan executor.
A first problem is to verify that all the executor choices allowed by the STN plan will be successful, i.e. the plan is
valid. An even more important problem is to assess the effect
of discrepancies between the model used for planning and the
execution environment.
We propose an approach to compute the ”robustness envelope” (i.e., alternative action durations or resource consumption rates) of a given STN plan, for which the plan remains
valid. Plans can have boolean and numeric variables as well
as discrete and continuous change. We leverage Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) to make the approach formal and
practical.

1

Introduction

Planning is the problem of automatically synthesizing a
course of actions to achieve a desired goal. In many applications, time and continuous resources need to be modeled,
using languages such as PDDL2.1 (Fox and Long 2003). In
this setting, plans can be represented as Simple Temporal
Networks (STNs) (Dechter, Meiri, and Pearl 1991), so that
the specific timing of action execution is not constrained at
planning time (e.g. with a fixed schedule). This gives the executor the ability to choose such timings, but some runtime
reasoning is required to respect the plan constraints. A vast
literature is concerned with the efficient execution of STN
plans (e.g. (Muscettola, Morris, and Tsamardinos 1998)).
When employing STN plans, one first issue is to verify
that all executor choices allowed by the plan will be successful, i.e. the plan is valid. An even more important issue
is to assess the effect of any discrepancy between the model
used for planning and the execution environment (e.g. a difference in the consumption rate of a resource). A valid plan
is guaranteed to be successful for any choice of the executor — but only under the assumption that the domain model
faithfully represents the actual execution environment. Unfortunately, this may not be the case.

2

Logical Background

Given a first-order formula ψ in a background theory T the
satisfiability modulo theory (SMT) problem consists in deciding whether there exists a model (i.e. an assignment to
the free variables in ψ) that satisfies ψ. For example, consider the formula (x ≤ y) ∧ (x + 3 = z) ∨ (z ≥ y) in the

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7538

