The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Lifted Inference Using Neural Embeddings
Mohammad Maminur Islam,1 Somdeb Sarkhel,2 Deepak Venugopal1
1

The University of Memphis 2 Adobe Research
mislam3@memphis.edu, sarkhel@adobe.com, dvngopal@memphis.edu.

Abstract

identify a relatively small subset of symmetries and are
severely limited when the MLN is conditioned on evidence variables (Van den Broeck and Darwiche 2013).
Consequently, more recent lifted inference algorithms try
to exploit approximate symmetries using matrix factorization for binary evidence (Van den Broeck and Darwiche
2013) or clustering (Venugopal and Gogate 2014). Further,
algorithm-specific scalable lifting methods include clustering for MAP (Sarkhel, Singla, and Gogate 2015) and approximate messaging in BP (Singla, Nath, and Domingos
2014). Other lifted inference techniques focus on detecting
symmetries using the graph structure of the Markov network underlying the MLN have been proposed. Specifically,
Bui et al. (Bui, Huynh, and Riedel 2013) connected automorphism groups in the Markov network structure with
lifted variational inference. Similar approaches have been
developed for MAP inference using ILPs (Apsel, Kersting,
and Mladenov 2014) and marginal inference (Mladenov and
Kersting 2015). However, these approaches are essentially
“bottom-up” approaches meaning that they work by instantiating the MLN to create the Markov network and then detect
symmetries. For practical problems in domains such as information extraction (Venugopal et al. 2014) or question answering (Khot et al. 2015; Venugopal and Rus 2016), creating the Markov network quickly becomes infeasible. Therefore, we develop a generic, scalable approach that learns
subsymbolic vector representations for the MLN based on
symmetries.

We present a dense representation for Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) called Obj2Vec that encodes symmetries in
the MLN structure. Identifying symmetries is a key challenge
for lifted inference algorithms and we leverage advances in
neural networks to learn symmetries which are hard to specify using hand-crafted features. Specifically, we learn an embedding for MLN objects that predicts the context of an object, i.e., objects that appear along with it in formulas of the
MLN, since common contexts indicate symmetry in the distribution. Importantly, our formulation leverages well-known
skip-gram models that allow us to learn the embedding efficiently. Finally, to reduce the size of the ground MLN, we
sample objects based on their learned embeddings. We integrate Obj2Vec with several inference algorithms, and show
the scalability and accuracy of our approach compared to
other state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Neural embeddings have been extremely successful as a
general approach to learn efficient and effective representations for a variety of real-world domains including
words (Mikolov et al. 2013; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014), knowledge graphs (Nickel et al. 2016), images (Kiela and Bottou 2014), etc. Inspired by these successes, in this paper, we present a novel representation for
Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) (Domingos and Lowd
2009) using neural embeddings to represent symmetries in
the model. Our main motivation for such a representation
stems from the fact that over the last several years, it has
been widely recognized that exploiting symmetries in MLNs
(and in other statistical relational models such as PSL (Bach
et al. 2017)) yields exponential improvements in the scalability of inference algorithms. Thus, several algorithms that
are collectively referred to as lifted inference (Poole 2003)
algorithms have been proposed that exploit symmetries in
the MLN.
However, identifying symmetries in the MLN efficiently
and effectively is non-trivial. Previous lifted inference methods have developed first-order rules to identify symmetries (de Salvo Braz 2007; Van den Broeck et al. 2011;
Gogate and Domingos 2011). However, such rules can

Our main contribution in this paper is Obj2Vec, a distributed representation for objects in the MLN. Specifically,
if two objects are symmetrical, they are exchangeable in
ground formulas of the MLN. Thus, one possible representation is to vectorize objects using ground formulas and learn
a dense embedding from these vectors. However, learning
from vectors that directly encode ground formulas is not
scalable since the input representation is as big as the ground
Markov network. Therefore, inspired by the successful skipgram model, we propose a novel, more scalable approach
that creates an embedding based on local context information for objects. Specifically, we train the neural network to
predict objects based on surrounding objects in the ground
formulas of the MLN. The embedding layer will then learn
similar representations for objects that have similar contexts.
Using this formulation, we can adapt skip-gram model ar-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7916

