The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Data-Distortion Guided Self-Distillation for Deep Neural Networks
Ting-Bing Xu,1,2 Cheng-Lin Liu1,2,3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence of Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
{tingbing.xu, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Static model

Abstract
images

Knowledge distillation is an effective technique that has been
widely used for transferring knowledge from a network to
another network. Despite its effective improvement of network performance, the dependence of accompanying assistive models complicates the training process of single network in the need of large memory and time cost. In this paper,
we design a more elegant self-distillation mechanism to transfer knowledge between different distorted versions of same
training data without the reliance on accompanying models.
Specifically, the potential capacity of single network is excavated by learning consistent global feature distributions and
posterior distributions (class probabilities) across these distorted versions of data. Extensive experiments on multiple
datasets (i.e., CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet) demonstrate that
the proposed method can effectively improve the generalization performance of various network architectures (such as
AlexNet, ResNet, Wide ResNet, and DenseNet), outperform
existing distillation methods with little extra training efforts.

Distillation

Student net
Teacher-to-student

Student net

imgs1

Mutual learning

images

Student net
Student-to-student

imgs2

images

Single net
Self-distillation

Figure 1: The diagrams of three distillation mechanisms.
large network, it is harder to train from scratch and excavate own potential capacity to a more desired solution (robust minima). To better train a small network, model distillation, i.e., teacher-to-student mechanism that directly trains
a student network to inherit the knowledge (e.g., class probabilities (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015), logits (Ba and
Caruana 2014), intermediate feature maps (Romero et al.
2015), attention map (Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2017))
of a deeper or more complex teacher network, has been
introduced. In this way, the student model can approximate the capacity of the powerful pre-trained teacher model
by absorbing the extra supervised information. Instead of
knowledge transfer from a static teacher to a student, a new
student-to-student mechanism is designed in (Zhang et al.
2018b) to allow an ensemble of students to teach each other
with deep mutual learning throughout the whole training
process. This enables each student in such a peer-teaching
based scenario to learn a better solution than directly supervised training of student or distilling from a fixed pre-trained
teacher model.
Although the above two methods of model distillation can
boost the accuracy and generalization ability of student network, they have some obvious drawbacks: 1) The whole
training process is expensive due to the involvement of either a cumbersome teacher model or multiple student networks; 2) A teacher network that overfits the training set
can be less effective due to the limitation of valuable information beyond the common hard label (Anil et al. 2018);
3) It remains unclear how a teacher model boost another
model in principle, considering the facts that slight mistakes
made by the teacher model may be helpful for training the
student model (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015), and two
entirely same student networks are also able to teach each
other (Zhang et al. 2018b). These shortages motivate us to
develop a new mechanism that directly optimizes student
network to reach a more desired solution from the raw training data without going through another teacher or intermediate network.

Introduction
Recent years have been witnessed significant progress in
the performance of various pattern recognition tasks (He et
al. 2016a; Huang, Liu, and Weinberger 2017), relying on
deep convolutional neural networks. However, state-of-theart models usually involve very deep networks with tremendous parameters and a large number of floating point operations, which hinders them from real-world applications
on low-resource devices, such as smartphones and wearable gadgets. To alleviate this bottleneck, a variety of network compression methods such as low-rank decomposition (Denton et al. 2014), weight pruning (Han, Mao, and
Dally 2016) and structured sparsity (Liu et al. 2017), have
been exploited to obtain a small model that can work as well
as a trained large model while reducing the time and memory space in the inference process effectively.
From a network compression perspective, a large network
can be compressed to the corresponding small network of
similar accuracy (Denton et al. 2014; Han, Mao, and Dally
2016) by layer-wise decomposition or iteratively pruning.
Though small network is capable of preserving complex
fitting function with reasonable performance, compared to
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5565

