The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Understanding Actors and Evaluating Personae with Gaussian Embeddings
Hannah Kim,1* Denys Katerenchuk,2* Daniel Billet,3 Jun Huan,4 Haesun Park,1 Boyang Li4*
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 The City University of New York, 3 Independent Actor, 4 Big Data Lab, Baidu Research
hannahkim@gatech.edu, dkaterenchuk@gradcenter.cuny.edu, dbillet@gmail.com
hpark@cc.gatech.edu, {huanjun, boyangli}@baidu.com

Abstract

not possess sufficient literary understanding to provide reliable persona annotation. In comparison, literary scholars are
authoritative sources of annotation, but their limited availability often results in low annotation coverage.
Actors in movies and TV shows are an integral part of
narratives, but have been largely ignored by the literature on
narrative understanding. Computational modeling of actors
may benefit downstream applications like movie recommendation based on actor similarity. More importantly, actors
and the characters they portray are correlated. By modeling
actors, we create two complimentary evaluation metrics for
automatically discovered personae: cast prediction and versatility ranking.
The cast prediction task aims to predict which actors
played for a particular role in a given movie. Through the
controversial but “inescapable” (Wojcik 2003) practice of
typecasting, many actors repeatedly play similar roles. An
accurate understanding of the character roles could filter actors who never played similar characters (thereby improving
precision) but keep those who did (thereby improving recall). Thus, cast prediction may be utilized as an evaluation
for persona descriptors.
However, skilled actors are not limited to playing one
type of characters. Versatility is defined as an actor’s ability
to successfully “disappearing” into widely divergent roles
and is widely recognized as the hallmark of acting skill. We
reckon that persona may not be effective at predicting what
roles that versatile actors could play. As a remedy, we introduce a second task, versatility ranking, which aims to order
actors by their versatility. Recognizing different personae
played by actors should help in quantifying their versatility.
As a computational model for actors and an evaluation
algorithm for a given set of personae, we present a joint representation learning technique that embeds actors, movies,
genres, and keywords that describe movies as Gaussian distributions (Vilnis and McCallum 2015) and the personae as
translation vectors on the Gaussian means. The Gaussian
representation offers two advantages. First, it models the inherent uncertainty that exists in the meanings of entities and
occurrence of relations in-between. For example, the meaning of user-supplied keywords is subject to users’ interpretation. Casting decisions may be influenced by random events
such as schedule conflicts and actor injuries. Second, there
is a natural correspondence between the Gaussian variance

Understanding narrative content has become an increasingly
popular topic. Nonetheless, research on identifying common
types of narrative characters, or personae, is impeded by the
lack of automatic and broad-coverage evaluation methods.
We argue that computationally modeling actors provides benefits, including novel evaluation mechanisms for personae.
Specifically, we propose two actor-modeling tasks, cast prediction and versatility ranking, which can capture complementary aspects of the relation between actors and the characters they portray. For an actor model, we present a technique
for embedding actors, movies, character roles, genres, and descriptive keywords as Gaussian distributions and translation
vectors, where the Gaussian variance corresponds to actors’
versatility. Empirical results indicate that (1) the technique
considerably outperforms TransE (Bordes et al. 2013) and
ablation baselines and (2) automatically identified persona
topics (Bamman, O’Connor, and Smith 2013) yield statistically significant improvements in both tasks, whereas simplistic persona descriptors including age and gender perform
inconsistently, validating prior research.

Introduction
Despite renewed interest in narrative text understanding (Ouyang and McKeown 2015; Chaturvedi, Iyyer, and
Daume III 2017), the extraction of high-level narrative semantics, such as persona, remains a formidable challenge.
A persona (Bamman, O’Connor, and Smith 2013; Bamman, Underwood, and Smith 2014) refers to a class of story
characters that share traits, behaviors, and motivation. For
example, the narratologist Campbell (1949) identified the
hero persona, whose typical journey includes entering an unknown world, overcoming many difficulties, and receiving a
reward in the end. Bamman et al’s work (2013; 2014) pioneer computational persona discovery from narrative text.
Since then, however, progress on this topic has been limited.
A major obstacle in this line of research is the lack of
automatic and broad-coverage evaluation methods. Existing
work mostly relied on human evaluation, which is expensive and time-consuming to perform. Crowd workers may
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
The main technique was conceived when Hannah Kim,
Denys Katerenchuk, and Boyang Li worked at Disney Research.

6570

