The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Off-Policy Deep Reinforcement Learning by Bootstrapping the Covariate Shift
Carles Gelada, Marc G. Bellemare
Google Brain
cgel@google.com, bellemare@google.com

Abstract

Further, under off-policy learning, the quality of the Bellman fixed point suffers as studied by Kolter (2011) and
Munos (2003). The value function error can be unboundedly large even if the value function can be perfectly approximated. Hence, even in the case where convergence to
the fixed point with off-policy data occurs, solutions can be
of poor quality. Thus, the existing TD learning algorithms
with convergence guarantees under off-policy data (Maei et
al. 2009), (Sutton et al. 2009) can still suffer from off-policy
issues.
This paper studies the covariate shift method for dealing with the off-policy problem. The covariate shift method,
studied by Hallak and Mannor (2017) and Sutton, Mahmood, and White (2016), reweights online updates according to the ratio of the target and behavior stationary distributions. Under optimal conditions, the covariate shift method
recovers convergent behavior with linear approximation,
breaking what Sutton and Barto (2018) call the “deadly
triad” of reinforcement learning. We argue the method is
particularly appealing in the context of replay memories,
where the reweighting can be replaced by a reprioritization
scheme similar to that of Schaul et al. (2016).
We improve on Hallak and Mannor’s COP-TD algorithm,
which has provable guarantees but is difficult to implement
in a deep reinforcement learning setting. First, we introduce
a discount factor into their update rule to obtain a more stable algorithm. Second, we develop an alternative normalization scheme that can be combined with deep networks,
avoiding the projection step necessary in the original algorithm. We perform an empirical study of the two methods
and their variants on the game Pong from the Arcade Learning Environment and find that our improvements give rise to
significant benefits for off-policy learning.

In this paper we revisit the method of off-policy corrections
for reinforcement learning (COP-TD) pioneered by Hallak et
al. (2017). Under this method, online updates to the value
function are reweighted to avoid divergence issues typical of
off-policy learning. While Hallak et al.’s solution is appealing, it cannot easily be transferred to nonlinear function approximation. First, it requires a projection step onto the probability simplex; second, even though the operator describing
the expected behavior of the off-policy learning algorithm is
convergent, it is not known to be a contraction mapping, and
hence, may be more unstable in practice. We address these
two issues by introducing a discount factor into COP-TD. We
analyze the behavior of discounted COP-TD and find it better
behaved from a theoretical perspective. We also propose an
alternative soft normalization penalty that can be minimized
online and obviates the need for an explicit projection step.
We complement our analysis with an empirical evaluation of
the two techniques in an off-policy setting on the game Pong
from the Atari domain where we find discounted COP-TD
to be better behaved in practice than the soft normalization
penalty. Finally, we perform a more extensive evaluation of
discounted COP-TD in 5 games of the Atari domain, where
we find performance gains for our approach.

Introduction
Central to reinforcement learning is the idea that an agent
should learn from experience. While many algorithms learn
in a purely online fashion, sample-efficient methods typically make use of past data, viewed either as a fixed dataset,
or stored in a replay memory (Lin 1993, Mnih et al. 2015).
Because this past data may not be generated according to
the policy currently under evaluation, the agent is said to be
learning off-policy (Sutton and Barto 2018).
By now it is well-documented that off-policy learning
may carry a significant cost when combined to function approximation. Early results have shown that estimating the
value function off-policy, using Bellman updates, may diverge (Baird 1995), (Tsitsiklis and Van Roy 1997). More
recently, value divergence was perhaps the most significant
issue dealt with in the design of the DQN agent (Mnih et al.
2015), and remains a source of concern in deep reinforcement learning (van Hasselt, Guez, and Silver 2016).

Background
We study the standard RL setting in which an agent interacts with an environment by observing a state, selecting an action, receiving a reward, and observing the next
state. We model this process with a Markov Decision Process hS, A, R, P, γi. Here, S, A denote the state and action
spaces and P is the transition function. Throughout we will
assume that S and A are finite and write n := |S|. A policy
π maps a state to a distribution over actions, R : S × A → R
is the reward function, and γ is the discount factor.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3647

