The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Re-Evaluating ADEM: A Deeper Look at Scoring Dialogue Responses
Ananya B. Sai,1,2,4 Mithun Das Gupta,3 Mitesh M. Khapra,1,2 Mukundhan Srinivasan4
2

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Robert Bosch Center for Data Sciences and AI (RBC-DSAI), Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
3
Microsoft, India
4
NVIDIA, India
{ananyasb,miteshk}@cse.iitm.ac.in, migupta@microsoft.com, msrinivasan@nvidia.com

Context:
Valid
responses:

Abstract
Automatically evaluating the quality of dialogue responses for unstructured domains is a challenging problem.
ADEM (Lowe et al. 2017) formulated the automatic evaluation of dialogue systems as a learning problem and showed
that such a model was able to predict responses which correlate significantly with human judgements, both at utterance
and system level. Their system was shown to have beaten
word-overlap metrics such as BLEU with large margins. We
start with the question of whether an adversary can game
the ADEM model. We design a battery of targeted attacks
at the neural network based ADEM evaluation system and
show that automatic evaluation of dialogue systems still has
a long way to go. ADEM can get confused with a variation as
simple as reversing the word order in the text! We report experiments on several such adversarial scenarios that draw out
counterintuitive scores on the dialogue responses. We take a
systematic look at the scoring function proposed by ADEM
and connect it to linear system theory to predict the shortcomings evident in the system. We also devise an attack that
can fool such a system to rate a response generation system
as favorable. Finally, we allude to future research directions
of using the adversarial attacks to design a truly automated
dialogue evaluation system.

Do you want to watch a movie today?
Sure, Avengers infinity war is out.
I didn’t finish my assignment.
Yeah, but will it rain tonight?

Table 1: Diversity of valid responses in a Dialogue

evaluating dialogue systems. This has led to adoption of the
existing automatic evaluation metrics for the task of scoring
the generated dialogues. Popular word overlap based metrics
such as BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002), METEOR (Banerjee
and Lavie 2005), ROUGE (Lin 2004) and the various word
embedding based metrics have been used to score dialogue
generation systems. However, they can’t handle the diversity
of the range of valid responses and are shown to correlate
poorly with human judgement (Liu et al. 2016).
Consider the conversation in Table 1. All of the responses
sound reasonable and logical given the context. However,
one can notice that there is no word overlap across any pair
of the responses. Should any one of the responses be considered the ground truth, a model that produces any other
response will receive very low scores. The popular BLEU
metric would assign the responses a score of 0. Even the
word embeddings based metrics face a similar issue. The
task of dialogue generation is tough to evaluate due to the
huge number of valid responses possible.
Simultaneously research efforts are underway in the direction of using generative adversarial network (GAN)
based dialogue systems where the generator and discriminator are trained in parallel. The discriminator’s role is to
determine whether the given dialogue is machine-generated
or human-generated. However, it is tricky to use the discriminator trained this way as one cannot be sure if it is infact a
good discriminator or seems good due to a poorer generator. Such training might also lead to a very model specific
evaluator rather than a generic one.
In this work we look at one such recently proposed metric, viz. Automatic Dialogue Evaluation Model (ADEM) by
Lowe et al. (2017) which trains a neural net based model
to score the overall quality of dialogue responses on a scale
of 1-5. ADEM is trained on Twitter corpus with the help
of AMT (Amazon Mechanical Turk) for obtaining human
scores for the dialogues. ADEM uses a hierarchical RNN en-

Introduction
AI agents capable of having human-like conversations find
various applications such as providing an automated helpdesk for customer service and technical support, serving as
language learning tools, personal assistants and as a source
of entertainment/recreation. The research community has
accessibility to a number of datasets for the task of dialogue generation (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2010; Lowe et
al. 2015; Saha, Khapra, and Sankaranarayanan 2018). This
has led to the emergence of goal-driven as well as non-goaldriven conversation models (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011;
Vinyals and Le 2015; Wen et al. 2015; Sordoni et al. 2015;
Yu et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017). However it is hard to measure the scientific progress towards a conversational agent
due to the lack of good evaluation metrics. Human evaluations and comparisons are reported in most of the works on
samples of the data. However, it is infeasible to have a human in the loop to give feedback and scores for training and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6220

