The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Cooperative Multimodal Approach to Depression Detection in Twitter
Tao Gui,1∗ Liang Zhu,1∗ Qi Zhang,1 Minlong Peng,1 Xu Zhou,1 Keyu Ding,2 Zhigang Chen2
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
2
iFlytek Co., Ltd.
1
{tgui16, liangzhu17, qz, mlpeng16, xuzhou16}@fudan.edu.cn, 2 {kyding, zgchen}@iflytek.com

Abstract
The advent of social media has presented a promising new
opportunity for the early detection of depression. To do so
effectively, there are two challenges to overcome. The first
is that textual and visual information must be jointly considered to make accurate inferences about depression. The
second challenge is that due to the variety of content types
posted by users, it is difficult to extract many of the relevant indicator texts and images. In this work, we propose the
use of a novel cooperative multi-agent model to address these
challenges. From the historical posts of users, the proposed
method can automatically select related indicator texts and
images. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin (over 30% error reduction). In several experiments and
examples, we also verify that the selected posts can successfully indicate user depression, and our model can obtained a
robust performance in realistic scenarios.

Figure 1: An example of a multimodal tweet. If we consider
only the textual content “Everyone is so happy,” we cannot
easily determine the actual feelings of the author. Images
posted by users can provide a wealth of information for detecting depression.

Introduction
Previous deep learning methods have mainly focused on
the use of textual information for detecting depression and
have achieved great success (Yates, Cohan, and Goharian
2017). None have yet harnessed the wealth of visual data
posted on social media. However, many tweets contain both
textual content and images. According to a statistical analysis, more than 42% of tweets contain more than one image2 .
Figure 1 shows an example of a multimodal tweet. If we
only consider the textual content “Everyone is so happy,”
our understanding of the feelings of the user who posted it
may be minimal. In this scenario, images posted by individuals diagnosed with depression can be reliably distinguished
from those made by emotionally healthy individuals (Reece
and Danforth 2017). Without taking into consideration any
visual information, the meanings of certain tweets cannot be
easily determined.
What’s more, a diagnosis of depression does not mean
that the depressive state persists throughout every moment
of every day, and to conduct analysis of an individual’s entire posting history with respect to a single unit of observation is therefore rather unrepresentative (Reece and Danforth
2017). Because we have no labels at the text and image level,

Depression is a major contributor to the overall global disease burden. According to a recent fact sheet provided by
World Health Organization, globally, more than 300 million people of all ages suffer from depression1 . Although
there are known and effective treatments for depression,
fewer than half of those affected around the world (in
many countries, fewer than 10%) receive treatment (Olfson, Blanco, and Marcus 2016). The traditional diagnosis of depression requires a face-to-face conversation with
a medical doctor, which limits the likelihood of the identification of potential patients (Saxena et al. 2007). Unlike the documentation produced by healthcare professionals, social media data captures people’s thoughts, feelings,
and conversations in their own voices, and these types of
data sources are becoming very important for monitoring a
number of public health issues including depression (Benton, Coppersmith, and Dredze 2017). In recent years, the
concept of detecting depression by harvesting social media data has opened up new possibilities (Shen et al. 2017;
Suhara, Xu, and Pentland 2017).
∗
Equal contributions
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs369/en/

2
https://thenextweb.com/socialmedia/2015/11/03/whatanalyzing-1-million-tweets-taught-us/

110

