The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Logic Attention Based Neighborhood
Aggregation for Inductive Knowledge Graph Embedding
Peifeng Wang,1∗ Jialong Han,2 Chenliang Li,3 Rong Pan1∗
1

1

Sun Yat-sen University, China, 2 Tencent AI Lab, China, 3 Wuhan University, China
{wangpf3@mail2., panr@}sysu.edu.cn, 2 jialonghan@gmail.com, 3 cllee@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

KG

Knowledge graph embedding aims at modeling entities and
relations with low-dimensional vectors. Most previous methods require that all entities should be seen during training,
which is unpractical for real-world knowledge graphs with
new entities emerging on a daily basis. Recent efforts on
this issue suggest training a neighborhood aggregator in conjunction with the conventional entity and relation embeddings, which may help embed new entities inductively via
their existing neighbors. However, their neighborhood aggregators neglect the unordered and unequal natures of an entity’s neighbors. To this end, we summarize the desired properties that may lead to effective neighborhood aggregators.
We also introduce a novel aggregator, namely, Logic Attention Network (LAN), which addresses the properties by aggregating neighbors with both rules- and network-based attention weights. By comparing with conventional aggregators
on two knowledge graph completion tasks, we experimentally
validate LAN’s superiority in terms of the desired properties.

American
Chicago_Bulls

News
Article

Basketball_Player

?

nationality work_as
play_for
live_in
Emerging Entity

Figure 1: A motivating example of emerging KG entities.
Dotted circles and arrows represent the existing KG while
solid ones are brought by the emerging entity.

training the embeddings. However, Shi and Weninger (2018)
suggest that, on DBpedia, 200 new entities emerge on a daily
basis between late 2015 and early 2016. Given the infeasibility of retraining embeddings from scratch whenever new
entities come, missing facts about emerging entities are, unfortunately, not guaranteed to be inferred in time.
By transforming realistic networks, e.g., citation graphs,
social networks, and protein interaction graphs, to simple
graphs with single-typed and undirected edges, recent explorations (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017b) shed light
on the evolution issue for homogeneous graphs. While learning embeddings for existing nodes, they inductively learn a
neighborhood aggregator that represents a node by aggregating its neighbors’ embeddings. The embeddings of unseen nodes can then be obtained by applying the aggregator
on their existing neighbors.
It is well received that KGs differ from homogeneous
graphs by their multi-relational structure (Shi et al. 2017).
Despite the difference, it seems promising to generalize the
neighborhood aggregating scheme to embed emerging KG
entities in an inductive manner. For example, in Figure 1, a
news article may describe an emerging entity (marked gray)
as well as some facts involving existing entities. By generalizing structural information in the underlying KG, e.g., other
entities residing in a similar neighborhood or involving similar relations, to the current entity’s neighborhood, we can
infer that it may probably live in Chicago.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) such as Freebase (Bollacker et al.
2008), DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007), and YAGO (Mahdisoltani, Biega, and Suchanek 2014) play a critical role in
various NLP tasks, including question answering (Hao et
al. 2017), information retrieval (Xiong and Callan 2015),
and personalized recommendation (Zhang et al. 2016). A
typical KG consists of numerous facts about a predefined set of entities. Each fact is in the form of a triplet
(subject, relation, object) (or (s, r, o) for short), where s
and o are two entities and r is a relation the fact describes.
Due to the discrete and incomplete natures of KGs, various
KG embedding models are proposed to facilitate KG completion tasks, e.g., link prediction and triplet classification.
After vectorizing entities and relations in a low-dimensional
space, those models predict missing facts by manipulating
the involved entity and relation embeddings.
Although proving successful in previous studies, traditional KG embedding models simply ignore the evolving
nature of KGs. They require all entities to be present when
∗
This work was done during Peifeng Wang’s internship at Tencent AI Lab. The corresponding author is Rong Pan.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7152

