The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Interaction-Aware Factorization Machines for Recommender Systems
Fuxing Hong, Dongbo Huang, Ge Chen
Advertising and Marketing Services, Corporate Development Group, Tencent Inc.
cstur4@zju.edu.cn, {andrewhuang,gechen}@tencent.com

Abstract

Although the feature vector might have billions of dimensions, each instance will typically have only hundreds of
non-zero values, and FTRL(McMahan et al. 2013) can save
both time and memory when making predictions. However,
feature engineering is an important but labor-intensive and
time-consuming work, and the “cold-start” problem may
hurt performance, especially in a sparse dataset, where only
a few cross features are observed; the parameters for unobserved cross features cannot be estimated.
To address the generalization issue, factorization machines (FMs)(Rendle 2010) were proposed, which factorizes coefficients into a product of two latent vectors to utilize collaborative information and demonstrate superior performance to a linear model based on the explicit form of
degree-2 mappings. In FM, unseen feature interactions can
be learned from other pairs, which is useful, as demonstrated
by the effectiveness of latent factor models(Chen et al. 2014;
Hong, Zheng, and Chen 2016). In fact, by specifying the input feature vector, FM can achieve the same express capacity
of many factorization models, such as matrix factorization,
the pairwise interaction tensor factorization model(Rendle
and Schmidt-Thieme 2010), and SVD++(Koren 2008).
Despite the successful application of FM, two-folds significant shortcomings still exist. (1) Feature aspect. On one
hand, the interactions of a useless feature may introduce
noises. On the other hand, treating every feature interaction
fairly may degrade the performance. (2) Field1 aspect. A latent factor2 may also have different importance in feature
interactions from different fields. Assuming that there is a
latent factor indicating the quality of a phone, this factor
may be more important to the interaction between a phone
brand and a location than the interaction between gender
and a location. To solve the above problems, we propose
a novel model called Interaction-aware Factorization Machine (IFM) to learn flexible interaction importance on both
feature aspect and field aspect.
Meanwhile, as a powerful approach to learning feature
representation, deep neural networks are becoming increasingly popular and have been employed in predictive models.

Factorization Machine (FM) is a widely used supervised
learning approach by effectively modeling of feature interactions. Despite the successful application of FM and its many
deep learning variants, treating every feature interaction fairly
may degrade the performance. For example, the interactions
of a useless feature may introduce noises; the importance
of a feature may also differ when interacting with different features. In this work, we propose a novel model named
Interaction-aware Factorization Machine (IFM) by introducing Interaction-Aware Mechanism (IAM), which comprises
the feature aspect and the field aspect, to learn flexible interactions on two levels. The feature aspect learns feature interaction importance via an attention network while the field aspect learns the feature interaction effect as a parametric similarity of the feature interaction vector and the corresponding field interaction prototype. IFM introduces more structured control and learns feature interaction importance in a
stratified manner, which allows for more leverage in tweaking the interactions on both feature-wise and field-wise levels. Besides, we give a more generalized architecture and propose Interaction-aware Neural Network (INN) and DeepIFM
to capture higher-order interactions. To further improve both
the performance and efficiency of IFM, a sampling scheme
is developed to select interactions based on the field aspect
importance. The experimental results from two well-known
datasets show the superiority of the proposed models over the
state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Learning the effects of feature conjugations, especially
degree-2 interactions, is important for prediction accuracy(Chang et al. 2010). For instance, people often download apps for food delivery at meal-time, which suggests
that the (order-2) interaction between the app category and
the time-stamp is an important signal for prediction(Guo et
al. 2017). Applying a linear model on the explicit form of
degree-2 mappings can capture the relationship between features, where feature interactions can be easily understood
and domain knowledge can be absorbed. The widely used
generalized linear models (e.g., logistic regression) with
cross features are effective for learning on a massive scale.

1

A field can be viewed as a class of features. For instance, two
features male and female belong to the field gender.
2
A variable in a latent vector corresponding to an abstract concept.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3804

