The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Weakly-Supervised Simultaneous Evidence Identification and Segmentation
for Automated Glaucoma Diagnosis
Rongchang Zhao,1,2 Wangmin Liao,1,2 Beiji Zou,1,2 Zailiang Chen,1,2 Shuo Li3∗
1

2

School of Information Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China
Hunan Engineering Research Center of Machine Vision and Intelligent Medicine, Changsha, China
3
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada
zhaorc@csu.edu.cn, slishuo@gmail.com
Abstract

Although most previous works are devoted to segmentation of optic disc as evident for glaucoma diagnosis(Cheng
et al. 2013; Chen et al. 2015; Almazroa et al. 2015), designing the well-performing model to simultaneously identify evidence, segment optic disc and diagnose glaucoma is
still challenging due to some limitations. (1) Lack of largescale segmentation ground truth even though plenty of training data with binary diagnostic labels (normal/glaucoma).
Since diagnostic labels are readily available and efficiently
obtained from diagnostic reports, it would be great to design the algorithm taking the report directly for training. (2)
Lack of effective framework to model the relationships between evidence identification, optic disc segmentation and
glaucoma diagnosis since they are heterogeneous tasks for
mutually exclusive objectives. (3) Lack of effective method
to deal with the high variability and extreme inhomogeneity
of optic disc structure from fundus image across subjects.
The weakly-supervised method has great potential since
it can learn from large-scale weak-label data to discover
the evidence and optic disc, further enhance the diagnosis confidence of glaucoma. Recently, it has been demonstrated that convolutional neural networks (CNN) trained
with diagnostic labels have the remarkable capability in abnormalities localization (Wang et al. 2017; Zhang, Bhalerao,
and Hutchinson 2017). In those models, the standard global
max/average-pooling (Zhou et al. 2016) retains the spatial
structure of pixels that can be exploited to discover discriminative local regions. However, those models usually identify some sparse regions to deal with the single task, which
deviate from the requirement of optic disc segmentation and
glaucoma diagnosis that needs pixel-wise inference. Therefore, existing models are unsuitable to be used directly for
simultaneous identification, segmentation and diagnosis.
In this paper, we propose the Weakly-Supervised MultiTask Learning method (WSMTL, shown in Fig.1) to deliver
evidence identification, optic disc segmentation and glaucoma diagnosis simultaneously. Our basic assumption is that
the information extracted from high-level diagnosis task can
act as helpful supervision for low-level evidence identification and segmentation tasks, when the low-level label information is insufficient. Specifically, we first built model to
construct pyramid evidence maps based on the multi-scale
features representation extracted from the diagnosis network
when training with the binary diagnosis labels. Take the ev-

Evidence identification, optic disc segmentation and automated glaucoma diagnosis are the most clinically significant tasks for clinicians to assess fundus images. However,
delivering the three tasks simultaneously is extremely challenging due to the high variability of fundus structure and
lack of datasets with complete annotations. In this paper, we
propose an innovative Weakly-Supervised Multi-Task Learning method (WSMTL) for accurate evidence identification,
optic disc segmentation and automated glaucoma diagnosis.
The WSMTL method only uses weak-label data with binary
diagnostic labels (normal/glaucoma) for training, while obtains pixel-level segmentation mask and diagnosis for testing.
The WSMTL is constituted by a skip and densely connected
CNN to capture multi-scale discriminative representation of
fundus structure; a well-designed pyramid integration structure to generate high-resolution evidence map for evidence
identification, in which the pixels with higher value represent higher confidence to highlight the abnormalities; a constrained clustering branch for optic disc segmentation; and a
fully-connected discriminator for automated glaucoma diagnosis. Experimental results show that our proposed WSMTL
effectively and simultaneously delivers evidence identification, optic disc segmentation (89.6% TP Dice), and accurate
glaucoma diagnosis (92.4% AUC). This endows our WSMTL
a great potential for the effective clinical assessment of glaucoma.

Introduction
Evidence identification, optic disc segmentation and glaucoma diagnosis are the indispensable parts of clinical practice since they provide quantitative evaluation and precise
diagnosing for glaucoma assessment. In practice, a clinician
often inspects fundus images for identifying the suspicious
regions, then zooms-in to manually contour the optic disc,
evaluates its appearance and strives the diagnosis of glaucoma. In the process, evidence regions indicate where the
abnormalities appear and the segmented optic disc provides
quantitative evaluation for discrimination between the normal and glaucomatous cases. Therefore, the tasks of identification, segmentation and diagnosis are the three key parts
for clinical assessment of fundus image.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

809

