The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fast PMI-Based Word Embedding with Efficient Use of Unobserved Patterns
Behrouz Haji Soleimani,1 Stan Matwin1,2
1

Institute for Big Data Analytics, Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax NS, Canada
2
Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
behrouz.hajisoleimani@dal.ca, stan@cs.dal.ca

Abstract

among the most popular word embedding algorithms that directly work on the co-occurrence matrix. It applies a handcrafted weighting scheme in the optimization for each of
the word-pair frequencies which is its main advantage over
the unweighted optimization in matrix factorization based
approaches. Another family of word embedding algorithms
uses neural network based approaches to learn the word
vectors. (Collobert and Weston 2008) proposed to learn
the word embeddings using a feed-forward neural network
that predicts a word by looking two words ahead and two
words behind. More recently, (Mikolov et al. 2013a) proposed log-bilinear models known as Continuous Bag-OfWords (CBOW) and Skip-Gram to learn continuous representations of words. Lately, contextual word representations
derived from bidirectional language models (biLMs) have
been shown to improve the performance for many NLP tasks
(Peters et al. 2018).

Continuous word representations that can capture the semantic information in the corpus are the building blocks of many
natural language processing tasks. Pre-trained word embeddings are being used for sentiment analysis, text classification, question answering and so on. In this paper, we propose
a new word embedding algorithm that works on a smoothed
Positive Pointwise Mutual Information (PPMI) matrix which
is obtained from the word-word co-occurrence counts. One
of our major contributions is to propose an objective function
and an optimization framework that exploits the full capacity
of “negative examples”, the unobserved or insignificant wordword co-occurrences, in order to push unrelated words away
from each other which improves the distribution of words in
the latent space. We also propose a kernel similarity measure
for the latent space that can effectively calculate the similarities in high dimensions. Moreover, we propose an approximate alternative to our algorithm using a modified Vantage
Point tree and reduce the computational complexity of the algorithm to |V | log |V | with respect to the number of words in
the vocabulary. We have trained various word embedding algorithms on articles of Wikipedia with 2.1 billion tokens and
show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art in most
word similarity tasks by a good margin.

In this paper, we propose a new word embedding algorithm that exploits some information that other algorithms
pay little or no attention to. Most word embedding algorithms only use the word pairs that occur in the corpus
(i.e. positive examples) and maximize the similarity of those
word vectors based on how frequent they co-occur. This can
result in a concentration effect: word clusters from totally
different topics can be placed somewhat close to each other.
There are lots of possible word pairs that never co-occur in
the corpus or they co-occur insignificantly, which we call
negative examples. We argue that minimizing the similarity
of negative examples is also crucial for the quality of the final embedding and results in a better distribution of words
in the latent space. Our first major contribution is to design
an optimization framework that exploits the full capacity of
negative examples in order to push unrelated words away
from each other which leads to a better use of the latent
space and improves the distribution of words. Skip-Gram
with Negative Sampling (SGNS) makes use of the negative
examples to a smaller extent in that for each word, it randomly samples k context words as negative examples and
minimizes the similarity of the word with those k context
words. However, in SGNS, these contexts are employed in
an unweighted manner in that they all have the same strength
in the optimization. Our second major contribution is that we
incorporate a kernelized weighting scheme for the negative
examples where their influence in the optimization is propor-

Introduction
Learning continuous representations of words (i.e. word embeddings) are becoming increasingly popular in the machine
learning and Natural Language Processing (NLP) community. The goal is to learn a vector space representation for
words aiming to capture semantic similarities and syntactic
relationships between words. These representations are typically learned from large unlabeled corpora.
Classical vector space models use linear algebraic techniques on the matrix of word-word co-occurrence counts
as studied in (Turney and Pantel 2010; Baroni and Lenci
2010). These methods include Latent Semantic Analysis
(Deerwester et al. 1990), factorizations of the co-occurrence
matrix, factorizations of the Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI) and Positive PMI (PPMI) matrices and so on
which can be collectively called as count-based methods.
GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) is certainly
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7031

