The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Mixture of Expert/Imitator Networks:
Scalable Semi-Supervised Learning Framework
Shun Kiyono,1 Jun Suzuki,1,2 Kentaro Inui1,2
1

Tohoku University, 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
{kiyono, jun.suzuki, inui}@ecei.tohoku.ac.jp

Abstract
The current success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in an
increasingly broad range of tasks involving artificial intelligence strongly depends on the quality and quantity of labeled
training data. In general, the scarcity of labeled data, which
is often observed in many natural language processing tasks,
is one of the most important issues to be addressed. Semisupervised learning (SSL) is a promising approach to overcoming this issue by incorporating a large amount of unlabeled data. In this paper, we propose a novel scalable method
of SSL for text classification tasks. The unique property of
our method, Mixture of Expert/Imitator Networks, is that imitator networks learn to “imitate” the estimated label distribution of the expert network over the unlabeled data, which
potentially contributes a set of features for the classification.
Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed method consistently improves the performance of several types of baseline DNNs. We also demonstrate that our method has the
more data, better performance property with promising scalability to the amount of unlabeled data.

1

Figure 1: Overview of our framework: the Mixture of Expert/Imitator Networks (MEIN)
because, in typical NLP tasks, creating the labeled data often requires the professional supervision of several highly
skilled annotators. As a result, the cost of data creation is
high relative to the amount of data.
Unlike labeled data, unlabeled data for NLP tasks is essentially a collection of raw texts; thus, an enormous amount
of unlabeled data can be obtained from the Internet, such
as through the Common Crawl website1 , at a relatively low
cost. With this background, semi-supervised learning (SSL),
which leverages unlabeled data in addition to labeled training data for training the parameters of DNNs, is one of
the promising approaches to practically addressing the labeled data scarcity issue in NLP. In fact, some intensive
studies have recently been undertaken with the aim of developing SSL methods for DNNs and have shown promising results (Mikolov et al. 2013; Dai and Le 2015; Miyato, Dai, and Goodfellow 2017; Clark, Luong, and Le 2018;
Peters et al. 2018).
In this paper, we also follow this line of research topic,
i.e., discussing SSL suitable for NLP. Our interest lies in
the more data, better performance property of the SSL approach over the unlabeled data, which has been implicitly demonstrated in several previous studies (Pennington,
Socher, and Manning 2014; Peters et al. 2018). In order
to take advantage of the huge amount of unlabeled data
and improve performance, we need an SSL approach that
scales with the amount of unlabeled data. However, the scalability of an SSL approach has not yet been widely dis-

Introduction

It is commonly acknowledged that deep neural networks
(DNNs) can achieve excellent performance in many tasks
across numerous research fields, such as image classification (He et al. 2016), speech recognition (Amodei et al.
2016), and machine translation (Wu et al. 2016). Recent
progress in these tasks has been primarily driven by the following two factors: (1) A large amount of labeled training
data exists. For example, ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009), one
of the major datasets for image classification, consists of approximately 14 million labeled images. (2) DNNs have the
property of achieving better performance when trained on
a larger amount of labeled training data, namely, the more
data, better performance property.
However, collecting a sufficient amount of labeled training data is not always easy for many actual applications. We
refer to this issue as the labeled data scarcity issue. This
issue is particularly crucial in the field of natural language
processing (NLP), where only a few thousand or even a few
hundred labeled data are available for most tasks. This is
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4073

http://commoncrawl.org

