The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fair Knapsack
Till Fluschnik,1 Piotr Skowron,2 Mervin Triphaus,1 Kai Wilker1
1

Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Faculty IV, TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
till.fluschnik@tu-berlin.de, {mervin.triphaus,wilker}@campus.tu-berlin.de
2
Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics, and Mechanics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl

through recommendation systems (Lu and Boutilier 2011)1 ,
to resource allocation and facility location problems. In each
of these settings it is quite natural to consider that different items/candidates can incur different costs. Further, algorithms for multiagent knapsack can be viewed as tools for
participatory budgeting (Cabannes 2004), where the authorities aggregate citizens’ preferences to decide which of the
potential local projects should obtain funding.
Perhaps the most straightforward way to aggregate voters’
preferences is to select a subset (a knapsack) that maximizes
the sum of the utilities of all the voters over all selected
items. This approach—which we call selecting an individually best knapsack—subject to differences in methods used
for eliciting voters’ preferences has been taken by Benabbou
and Perny (2016), and in the context of participatory budgeting by Goel et al. (2016) and Benade et al. (2017). However,
by selecting an individually best knapsack we can disadvantage even large minorities of voters, which is illustrated by
the following example: assume that the set of items can be
divided into two subsets A1 and A2 , that all items have the
same cost, and that 51% of the voters like items from A1
(assigning the utility of 1 to them, and the utility of 0 to
the other items) and the remaining 49% of voters like only
items from A2 . An individually best knapsack would contain only items from A1 , that is 49% of the voters would be
effectively disregarded.
In this paper we introduce two other approaches to aggregating voters’ preferences for selecting a multiagent knapsack. One such approach—which we call selecting a diverse knapsack—is inspired by the Chamberlin–Courant
rule (Chamberlin and Courant 1983) from the literature on
multiwinner voting. Informally speaking, in this approach
we aim at maximizing the number of voters who have at
least one preferred item in the selected knapsack. For the
second approach—which is the main focus of the paper and
which we call selecting a fair knapsack—we use the concept
of Nash welfare (Nash 1950) from the literature on fair allocation. Nash welfare is a well-established solution concept
that implements a tradeoff between having an objectively ef-

Abstract
We study the following multiagent variant of the knapsack
problem. We are given a set of items, a set of voters, and a
value of the budget; each item is endowed with a cost and
each voter assigns to each item a certain value. The goal is
to select a subset of items with the total cost not exceeding
the budget, in a way that is consistent with the voters’ preferences. Since the preferences of the voters over the items
can vary significantly, we need a way of aggregating these
preferences, in order to select the socially best valid knapsack. We study three approaches to aggregating voters’ preferences, which are motivated by the literature on multiwinner elections and fair allocation. This way we introduce the
concepts of individually best, diverse, and fair knapsack. We
study the computational complexity (including parameterized
complexity, and complexity under restricted domains) of the
aforementioned multiagent variants of knapsack.

1

Introduction

In the classic knapsack problem we are given a set of items,
each having a cost and a value, and a budget. The goal is
to find a subset of items with the maximal sum of the values subject to the constraint that the total cost of the selected
items must not exceed the budget. In this paper we are studying the following variant of the knapsack problem: instead
of having a single objective value for each item we assume
that there is a set of agents (also referred to as voters) who
have potentially different valuations (expressed through utilities) of the items. When choosing a subset of items we want
to take into account possibly conflicting preferences of the
voters with respect to which items should be selected: in this
paper we discuss three different approaches to how the voters’ valuations can be aggregated.
Multiagent knapsack forms an abstract model for a number of real-life scenarios. First, let us note that if the costs
of the items are all the same, then the multiagent knapsack
model collapses to the model for multiwinner elections (Faliszewski et al. 2017) (in the literature on multiwinner elections, items are often called candidates). Multiwinner voting rules are applicable in a broad class of scenarios, ranging from selecting a representative committee of experts,

1

An example often described in the literature is when an
enterprise considers which set of products should be pushed
to production—it is natural to view such a problem as an instance of multiwinner elections with products corresponding to the
items/candidates and potential customers to the voters.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1941

