The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

The Goldilocks Zone: Towards Better
Understanding of Neural Network Loss Landscapes
Stanislav Fort

Adam Scherlis

Physics Department / KIPAC
Stanford University
382 Via Pueblo, Stanford, CA 94305
sfort1@stanford.edu

Physics Department / SITP
Stanford University
382 Via Pueblo, Stanford, CA 94305
scherlis@stanford.edu

Abstract

by the neural network whose weights are populated by the
parameter assignment P . Training a neural network corresponds to optimization over the objective landscape, searching for a point – a configuration of weights and biases –
producing a loss as low as possible.
The dimensionality, D, of the objective landscape is typically very high, reaching hundreds of thousands even for the
most simple of tasks. Due to the complicated mapping between the individual weight elements and the resulting loss,
its analytic study proves challenging. Instead, the objective
landscape has been explored numerically. The high dimensionality of the objective landscape brings about considerable geometrical simplifications that we utilize in this paper.

We explore the loss landscape of fully-connected and convolutional neural networks using random, low-dimensional hyperplanes and hyperspheres. Evaluating the Hessian, H, of
the loss function on these hypersurfaces, we observe 1) an
unusual excess of the number of positive eigenvalues of H,
and 2) a large value of Tr(H)/||H|| at a well defined range
of configuration space radii, corresponding to a thick, hollow,
spherical shell we refer to as the Goldilocks zone. We observe
this effect for fully-connected neural networks over a range
of network widths and depths on MNIST and CIFAR-10
datasets with the ReLU and tanh non-linearities, and a similar effect for convolutional networks. Using our observations,
we demonstrate a close connection between the Goldilocks
zone, measures of local convexity/prevalence of positive curvature, and the suitability of a network initialization. We show
that the high and stable accuracy reached when optimizing
on random, low-dimensional hypersurfaces is directly related
to the overlap between the hypersurface and the Goldilocks
zone, and as a corollary demonstrate that the notion of intrinsic dimension is initialization-dependent. We note that common initialization techniques initialize neural networks in this
particular region of unusually high convexity/prevalence of
positive curvature, and offer a geometric intuition for their
success. Furthermore, we demonstrate that initializing a neural network at a number of points and selecting for high measures of local convexity such as Tr(H)/||H||, number of positive eigenvalues of H, or low initial loss, leads to statistically
significantly faster training on MNIST. Based on our observations, we hypothesize that the Goldilocks zone contains
an unusually high density of suitable initialization configurations.

1
1.1

Figure 1: An illustration of the loss landscape. The thin
spherical shell on which common initialization procedures
initialize neural networks is shown in yellow, and its radius
in gray. A random, low-dimensional hyperplane intersecting such a configuration P is shown in purple, together with
two of its coordinate directions θ̂1 and θ̂2 . A thick shell – the
Goldilocks zone – of unusually high convexity/prevalence of
positive curvature (e.g. unusual behavior of Tr(H)/||H||) is
shown as blue shading. Cuts through the region by hyperplanes at 4 different radii are shown schematically. The radii
of common initializations lie well within the Goldilocks
zone, therefore a random hyperplane perpendicular to r̂ is
bound to have a significant overlap with the zone.

Introduction

Objective Landscape

A neural networks is fully specified by its architecture –
connections between neurons – and a particular choice of
weights {W } and biases {b} – free parameters of the model.
Once a particular architecture is chosen, the set of all possible value assignments to these parameters forms the objective landscape – the configuration space of the problem.
Given a specific dataset and a task, a loss function L characterizes how unhappy we are with the solution provided

1.2

Related Work

Neural network training is a large-scale non-convex optimization task, and as such provides space for poten-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3574

