The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Explainable Reasoning over Knowledge Graphs for Recommendation
Xiang Wang,1∗ Dingxian Wang,2† Canran Xu,2 Xiangnan He,3 Yixin Cao,1 Tat-Seng Chua1
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, 2 eBay
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
xiangwang1223@gmail.com, {diwang, canxu}@ebay.com, {xiangnanhe, caoyixin2011}@gmail.com, dcscts@nus.edu.sg
3

Abstract
Incorporating knowledge graph into recommender systems
has attracted increasing attention in recent years. By exploring the interlinks within a knowledge graph, the connectivity
between users and items can be discovered as paths, which
provide rich and complementary information to user-item interactions. Such connectivity not only reveals the semantics
of entities and relations, but also helps to comprehend a user’s
interest. However, existing efforts have not fully explored this
connectivity to infer user preferences, especially in terms of
modeling the sequential dependencies within and holistic semantics of a path.
In this paper, we contribute a new model named Knowledgeaware Path Recurrent Network (KPRN) to exploit knowledge
graph for recommendation. KPRN can generate path representations by composing the semantics of both entities and
relations. By leveraging the sequential dependencies within
a path, we allow effective reasoning on paths to infer the
underlying rationale of a user-item interaction. Furthermore,
we design a new weighted pooling operation to discriminate
the strengths of different paths in connecting a user with an
item, endowing our model with a certain level of explainability. We conduct extensive experiments on two datasets about
movie and music, demonstrating significant improvements
over state-of-the-art solutions Collaborative Knowledge Base
Embedding and Neural Factorization Machine.

Figure 1: Illustration of KG-aware recommendation in the
music domain. The dashed lines between entities are the corresponding relations, while the sold lines are the user-item
interactions.

within a KG, the connectivity between users and items reflects their underlying relationships, which are complementary to user-item interaction data.
Extra user-item connectivity information derived from
KG endows recommender systems the ability of reasoning
and explainability. Taking music recommendation as an example (Figure 1), a user is connected to I See Fire since she
likes Shape of You sung by the same singer Ed Sheeran. Such
connectivity helps to reason about unseen user-item interactions (i.e., a potential recommendation) by synthesizing
information from paths.
Running Example: (Alice, Interact, Shape of You)∧(Shape
of You, SungBy, Ed Sheeran)∧(Ed Sheeran, IsSingerOf, I See
Fire)⇒(Alice, Interact, I See Fire).
Clearly, the reasoning unveils the possible user intents behind an interaction, offering explanations behind a recommendation. How to model such connectivity in KGs, hence,
is of critical importance to inject knowledge into a recommender systems.
Prior efforts on knowledge-aware recommendation are
roughly categorized into path and embedding fashion. Pathbased methods (Yu et al. 2014; 2013; Gao et al. 2018) introduce meta-paths to refine the similarities between users and
items. However, we argue that meta-path is inefficient in reasoning over KGs, owing to the following limitations: 1) As
relations are usually excluded from meta-paths, they hardly
specify the holistic semantics of paths, especially when similar entities but different relations are involved in a metapath; and 2) They fail to automatically uncover and reason

Introduction
Prior efforts have shown the importance of incorporating
auxiliary data into recommender systems, such as user profiles (Wang et al. 2017; 2018c) and item attributes (Bayer
et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2018). Recently, knowledge graphs
(KGs) have attracted increasing attention (Zhang et al. 2016;
Shu et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018a), due to its comprehensive auxiliary data: background knowledge of items and
their relations amongst them. It usually organizes the facts
of items in the form of triplets like (Ed Sheeran, IsSingerOf,
Shape of You), which can be seamlessly integrated with useritem interactions (Chaudhari, Azaria, and Mitchell 2016;
Cao et al. 2017). More important, by exploring the interlinks
∗

The first three authors have equal contribution.
Dingxian Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

5329

