The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

TET-GAN: Text Effects Transfer via Stylization and Destylization
Shuai Yang, Jiaying Liu,∗ Wenjing Wang, Zongming Guo
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
{williamyang, liujiaying, daooshee, guozongming}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Destylization

Text effects transfer technology automatically makes the text
dramatically more impressive. However, previous style transfer methods either study the model for general style, which
cannot handle the highly-structured text effects along the
glyph, or require manual design of subtle matching criteria
for text effects. In this paper, we focus on the use of the powerful representation abilities of deep neural features for text
effects transfer. For this purpose, we propose a novel Texture
Effects Transfer GAN (TET-GAN), which consists of a stylization subnetwork and a destylization subnetwork. The key
idea is to train our network to accomplish both the objective
of style transfer and style removal, so that it can learn to disentangle and recombine the content and style features of text
effects images. To support the training of our network, we
propose a new text effects dataset with as much as 64 professionally designed styles on 837 characters. We show that
the disentangled feature representations enable us to transfer or remove all these styles on arbitrary glyphs using one
network. Furthermore, the flexible network design empowers
TET-GAN to efficiently extend to a new text style via oneshot learning where only one example is required. We demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method in generating
high-quality stylized text over the state-of-the-art methods.

TET-GAN
Stylization
Input

Output

Figure 1: Overview: Our TET-GAN implements two functions: destylization for removing style features from the text
and stylization for transferring the visual effects from highly
stylized text onto other glyphs.
minimizing the difference of Gram matrices (Gatys, Ecker,
and Bethge 2015). However, this global statistics representation for general styles does not apply to the text effects. Text
effects are highly structured along the glyph and cannot be
simply characterized as the mean, variance or other global
statistics (Li et al. 2017a; Dumoulin, Shlens, and Kudlur
2016; Huang and Belongie 2017; Li et al. 2017c) of the texture features. Instead, the effects should be learned with the
corresponding glyphs. For this reason, we develop a new text
effects dataset, driven by which we show our network can
learn to properly rearrange textures to fit new glyphs.
From a perspective of texture rearrangement, modelling
the style of text effects using local patches seems to be more
suitable than global statistics. Valuable efforts have been
devoted to patch-based style transfer (Li and Wand 2016a;
Chen and Schmidt 2016; Yang et al. 2017). The recent work
of (Yang et al. 2017) is the first study of text effects transfer,
where textures are rearranged to correlated positions on text
skeleton. However, matching patches in the pixel domain,
this method fails to find proper patches if the target and example glyphs differ a lot. The recent deep-based methods (Li
and Wand 2016a; Chen and Schmidt 2016) address this issue by matching glyphs in the feature domain, but they use
a greedy optimization, causing the disorder of the texture
in the spatial distribution. To solve this problem, we introduce a novel distribution-aware data augmentation strategy
to constrain the spatial distribution of textures.
To handle a particular style, researchers have looked at

Introduction
Text effects are additional style features for text, such as colors, outlines, shadows, reflections, glows and textures. Rendering text in the style specified by the example stylized
text is referred to as text effects transfer. Applying visual effects to text is very common yet important in graphic design.
However, manually rendering text effects is labor intensive
and requires great skills beyond normal users. In this work,
we propose a neural network architecture that automatically
synthesizes high-quality text effects on arbitrary glyphs.
The success of the pioneering Neural Style Transfer (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016) has sparked a research
boom of deep-based image stylization. The key idea behind
it is to match the global feature distributions between the
style image and the generated image (Li et al. 2017a) by
∗

Corresponding author. This work was supported by National
Natural Science Foundation of China under contract No. 61772043
and Peking University - Tencent Rhino Bird Innovation Fund.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1238

