The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

ActivityNet-QA: A Dataset for
Understanding Complex Web Videos via Question Answering
Zhou Yu,1 Dejing Xu,2 Jun Yu,1∗ Ting Yu,1 Zhou Zhao,2 Yueting Zhuang,2 Dacheng Tao3
1

Key Laboratory of Complex Systems Modeling and Simulation,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China.
2
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
{yuz, yujun , yuting}@hdu.edu.cn, {xudejing, zhaozhou, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au
Abstract
Q: What color is the gloves worn by the person who is skiing?
Recent developments in modeling language and vision have
been successfully applied to image question answering. It is
both crucial and natural to extend this research direction to
the video domain for video question answering (VideoQA).
Compared to the image domain where large scale and fully
annotated benchmark datasets exists, VideoQA datasets are
limited to small scale and are automatically generated, etc.
These limitations restrict their applicability in practice. Here
we introduce ActivityNet-QA, a fully annotated and large
scale VideoQA dataset. The dataset consists of 58,000 QA
pairs on 5,800 complex web videos derived from the popular
ActivityNet dataset. We present a statistical analysis of our
ActivityNet-QA dataset and conduct extensive experiments
on it by comparing existing VideoQA baselines. Moreover,
we explore various video representation strategies to improve
VideoQA performance, especially for long videos.

VideoQA model

A: black

Figure 1: A VideoQA example. To answer the question
correctly, one should fully understand the fine-grained
semantics of the questions (i.e., the underlined keywords)
and perform spatio-temporal reasoning on the visual
contents of the video (i.e., frames in red border and objects
in blue box).

Introduction
Recent developments in deep neural networks have significantly accelerated the performance of many computer vision and natural language processing tasks. These advances
stimulated research into bridging the semantic connections
between vision and language, such as in visual captioning
(Donahue et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2015), visual grounding
(Rohrbach et al. 2016; Chen, Kovvuri, and Nevatia 2017;
Yu et al. 2018b) and visual question answering (Malinowski,
Rohrbach, and Fritz 2015; Fukui et al. 2016).
Visual question answering (VQA) aims to generate natural language answers to free-form questions about a visual
object (e.g., an image or a video). Compared to visual captioning, VQA is interactive and provides fine-grained visual
understanding. Image question answering (ImageQA) in
particular has shown recent success, with many approaches
proposed to investigate the key components of this task,
e.g., discriminative feature representation (Anderson et al.
2018), multi-modal fusion (Kim et al. 2017a; Yu et al. 2017;
2018a) and visual reasoning (Nam, Ha, and Kim 2016;
Lu et al. 2016; Johnson et al. 2017b). This success has
been facilitated by large scale and well annotated training

datasets, such as Visual Genome (Krishna et al. 2016) and
VQA (Antol et al. 2015; Goyal et al. 2017).
Video question answering (VideoQA) can be seen as a
natural but more challenging extension of ImageQA, due
to the additional complexity of understanding of image
sequences and more diverse types of questions asked. Figure
1 shows an example of VideoQA. To accurately answer
the question, a VideoQA model requires simultaneous finegrained video content understanding and spatio-temporal
reasoning. Existing approaches mainly focus on the temporal attention mechanism (Jang et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2017)
or memory mechanism (Na et al. 2017; Kim et al. 2017b;
Zhao et al. 2018a). Na et al. introduced a read-write memory
network to fuse multi-modal features and store temporal
information using a multi-stage convolutional neural networks model (Na et al. 2017). Xu et al. represented a video
as appearance and motion stream features and introduced
a gradually refined attention model to fuse the two-stream
features together. (Xu et al. 2017). Gao et al. proposed a
co-memory network to jointly model and interact with the
motion and appearance information (Gao et al. 2018). Zhao
et al. introduced an adaptive hierarchical encoder to learn
the segment-level video representation with adaptive video
segmentation, and devised a reinforced decoder to generate

∗

Jun Yu is the corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9127

