The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Knowledge Transfer via Distillation of
Activation Boundaries Formed by Hidden Neurons
Byeongho Heo,1 Minsik Lee,2 Sangdoo Yun,3 Jin Young Choi1
{bhheo, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr, mleepaper@hanyang.ac.kr, sangdoo.yun@navercorp.com
1
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
2
Division of EE, Hanyang University, Korea
3
Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp, Korea
Abstract

Ecker, and Bethge 2016). The hidden layers of a neural network contains a lot of information and is suitable for knowledge transfer. However, due to the high dimensionality and
non-linearity of the hidden layer neurons, it is not easy to
achieve a perfect transfer.
The activation boundary is a separating hyperplane that
determines whether neurons are active or deactivated. In
neural networks, the activation of neurons has been considered to be important for a long time. Recently, regarding the activation boundary, Montufar et al. (2014) and Pascanu, Montúfar, and Bengio (2014) reported that a neural
network expresses a complex function with a combination
of activation boundaries. Pan and Srikumar (2016) provided
the fact that the decision boundary of a neural network is
composed of a combination of activation boundaries. These
studies give an insight that the transfer of activation boundary information in the teacher to the student could greatly
contribute to an improvement of knowledge transfer performance in classification problems, because a classification
problem highly depends on the formation of decision boundaries among classes.
Based on this inspiration, in this paper, we propose a
knowledge transfer method that focuses on the transfer of
activation boundaries. In contrast to the conventional methods focusing on the magnitudes of neuron responses, the
proposed method aims to transfer whether neurons are activated or not. First, we propose an activation transfer loss
that minimizes the difference of neuron activations between
the teacher and the student. The activation transfer loss does
not consider the magnitude of a neuron response but considers whether the neuron is activated or not. Because of
this characteristic, the activation transfer loss is suitable for
transferring the activation boundaries, but is not differentiable. Thus, it cannot be minimized by the gradient descent
method. To obtain a differentiable loss having the same goal,
we propose an alternative loss similar to the hinge loss of
SVM (Cortes and Vapnik 1995). The alternative loss is an
approximation of the activation transfer loss which can be
minimized with gradient descent. Through the alternative
loss, the student network can learn the activation boundaries.
The proposed method is verified through various experiments. First, the proposed method is compared with the
state-of-the-art algorithms in various aspects of knowledge
transfer. Second, we extend experiments to transfer learn-

An activation boundary for a neuron refers to a separating
hyperplane that determines whether the neuron is activated or
deactivated. It has been long considered in neural networks
that the activations of neurons, rather than their exact output
values, play the most important role in forming classificationfriendly partitions of the hidden feature space. However, as
far as we know, this aspect of neural networks has not been
considered in the literature of knowledge transfer. In this paper, we propose a knowledge transfer method via distillation
of activation boundaries formed by hidden neurons. For the
distillation, we propose an activation transfer loss that has the
minimum value when the boundaries generated by the student coincide with those by the teacher. Since the activation
transfer loss is not differentiable, we design a piecewise differentiable loss approximating the activation transfer loss. By
the proposed method, the student learns a separating boundary between activation region and deactivation region formed
by each neuron in the teacher. Through the experiments in
various aspects of knowledge transfer, it is verified that the
proposed method outperforms the current state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Learning deep neural networks requires much time and computational resource. Many studies have been conducted to
make the learning process lighter and faster, one of which is
to transfer knowledge. Knowledge transfer is to accelerate
and improve learning of a new network (student) by transferring knowledge from a previously learned network (teacher).
If the network architectures are identical, knowledge transfer can be simply conducted by copying the parameters from
teacher to student. However, in general, knowledge transfer
aim to improve the performance of a small network (student)
based on a large network (teacher). Knowledge transfer between different network architectures is a challenging problem and has not been completely solved.
The main direction of knowledge transfer is to transfer
neuron responses of hidden layers. Romero et al. (2015) proposed a knowledge transfer method based on hidden layer
responses. Zagoruyko and Komodakis (2017) changed the
form of hidden neuron responses to an attention map, while
Yim et al. (2017) used the form of Gram matrix (Gatys,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3779

