The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Active Mini-Batch Sampling Using Repulsive Point Processes
Cheng Zhang,1 Cengiz Öztireli,2 Stephan Mandt,3 Giampiero Salvi4
1. Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK, Cheng.Zhang@microsoft.com
2. Disney Research, Zurich, Switzerland, cengiz.oztireli@disneyresearch.com
3. University of California,Irvine,Los Angeles, USA, stephan.mandt@gmail.com
4. KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, giampi@kth.se

Abstract

points by sampling from different regions in feature space
de-correlates their gradient contributions, which leads to a
better gradient estimation.
Another benefit of actively biasing the mini-batch sampling procedure relates to better model performance (Chang
et al. 2017; Shrivastava et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2017b).
Zhang et al. (2017b) biased the data towards a more uniform
distribution, upsampling data-points in scarce regions and
downsampling data points in dense regions, leading to a better performance during test time. Chen and Gupta (2015)
showed that training on simple classification tasks first, and
later adding more difficult examples, leads to a clear performance gain compared to training on all examples simultaneously. We refer to such schemes which modify the marginal
probabilities of each selected data point as active bias. The
above results suggest that utilizing an active bias in minibatch sampling can result in improved performance without
additional computational cost.
In this work, we present a framework for active mini-batch
sampling based on repulsive point processes. The idea is
simple: we specify a data selection mechanism that actively
selects a mini-batch based on features of the data. This mechanism introduces repulsion between the data points, meaning
that it suppresses data points with similar features to co-occur
in the same mini-batch. We use repulsive point processes for
this task. Finally, the chosen mini-batch is used to perform
a stochastic gradient step, and this scheme is repeated until
convergence.
Our framework generalizes the recently proposed minibatch diversification based on determinantal point processes
(DPP) (Zhang et al. 2017b) to a much broader class of repulsive processes, and allows users to encode any preferred
active bias with efficient mini-batch sampling algorithms. In
more detail, our contributions are as follows:

The convergence speed of stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
can be improved by actively selecting mini-batches. We explore sampling schemes where similar data points are less
likely to be selected in the same mini-batch. In particular, we
prove that such repulsive sampling schemes lower the variance of the gradient estimator. This generalizes recent work
on using Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs) for mini-batch
diversification (Zhang et al., 2017) to the broader class of repulsive point processes. We first show that the phenomenon
of variance reduction by diversified sampling generalizes in
particular to non-stationary point processes. We then show
that other point processes may be computationally much more
efficient than DPPs. In particular, we propose and investigate
Poisson Disk sampling—frequently encountered in the computer graphics community—for this task. We show empirically
that our approach improves over standard SGD both in terms
of convergence speed as well as final model performance.

Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Bottou 2010) is key to
modern scalable machine learning. Combined with backpropagation, it forms the foundation to train deep neural networks (LeCun et al. 1998b). Applied to variational inference
(Hoffman et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2017a), it enables the use
of probabilistic graphical models on massive data. SGD training has contributed to breakthroughs in many applications
(Krizhevsky et al. 2012; Mikolov et al. 2013).
A key limitation for the speed of convergence of SGD
algorithms is the stochastic gradient noise. Smaller gradient
noise allows for larger learning rates and therefore faster
convergence. For this reason, variance reduction for SGD is
an active research topic.
Several recent works have shown that the variance of
SGD can be reduced when diversifying the data points in
a mini-batch based on their features (Zhao and Zhang 2014;
Fu and Zhang 2017; Zhang et al. 2017b). When data points
are coming from similar regions in feature space, their gradient contributions are positively correlated. Diversifying data

1. We propose to use point processes for active mini-batch
selection.
We provide a theoretical analysis which shows that minibatch selection with repulsive point processes may reduce
the variance of stochastic gradient descent. The proposed
approach can accommodate point processes with adaptive
densities and adaptive pair-wise correlations. Thus, we
can use it for data subsampling with an active bias.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This work was initialized when the first author was at Disney
Research, and was carried out when the author was at KTH and
Microsoft Research. This research was partly supported by the
CHIST-ERA project IGLU.

2. Going beyond DPPs, we propose a group of more efficient
5741

