The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Partially Observable Multi-Sensor Sequential Change
Detection: A Combinatorial Multi-Armed Bandit Approach
Chen Zhang

Steven C.H. Hoi

Department of Industrial Engineering
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China, 100084
zhangchen01@tsinghua.edu.cn

School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
Singapore 178902
chhoi@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

lifetime. Furthermore, when the number of variables is large
and their measurement streams are generated in high velocity, real-time analysis may be significantly hindered due to
the constraints of system memory, storage space, transmission bandwidth, computational power and processing speed.
Consequently, in many applications, even if all variables can
be measured, only partial observations of them can be transmitted back to the data fusion center for real-time analytics.
All the above constraints trigger the demand of new learning techniques to address the emerging challenge of Partially Observable Multi-sensor Sequential Change Detection
(POMSCD), where only a subset of sensors can be observed
at each epoch for change detection. Specifically, consider a
system characterized by a set of p variables (for example,
in a manufacturing system, each variable corresponds to a
fabrication characteristic). Signals of these variables at each
sensing epoch t are denoted as X(t) = [X1 (t), . . . , Xp (t)],
where each value Xi (t), i = 1, . . . , p is a scalar indicating
the state of the ith system characteristic at the current epoch
t. We are interested in detecting the distribution changes of
the p variables in a sequential manner. However, due to the
constraints of limited sensing resources, we can only choose
to observe m out of p variables (m < p) at each sensing
epoch. The goal of machine learning for POMSCD is to devise an online learning algorithm for sequential change detection which dynamically chooses a subset of variables to
observe at each sensing epoch such that the detection power
can be maximized without violating the sensing constraints.
Our key contributions of this paper are twofold: (i) we
propose a sequential change detection scheme based on confidence region of the system state which is estimated via
a Bayesian detection framework and can deal with missing
observations. The proposed confidence region takes correlations of different variables into account and hence increases
the detection power; (ii) As the detection power is closely
related to the sensing resource allocation strategy, we formulate the learning problem as an online Combinatorial Multiarmed Bandit (CMAB) task (Hoi et al. 2018), and solve it using an effective adaptive sampling strategy. In particular, at
each sensing epoch, the adaptive sampling strategy attempts
to choose a subset of sensors/variables that are most informative to observe for change detection at the next epoch;
(iii) Finally, we give theoretical analysis on the asymptotic
detection power of the proposed adaptive sampling scheme.

This paper explores machine learning to address a problem of
Partially Observable Multi-sensor Sequential Change Detection (POMSCD), where only a subset of sensors can be observed to monitor a target system for change-point detection
at each online learning round. In contrast to traditional Multisensor Sequential Change Detection tasks where all the sensors are observable, POMSCD is much more challenging because the learner not only needs to detect on-the-fly whether a
change occurs based on partially observed multi-sensor data
streams, but also needs to cleverly choose a subset of informative sensors to be observed in the next learning round, in order
to maximize the overall sequential change detection performance. In this paper, we present the first online learning study
to tackle POMSCD in a systemic and rigorous way. Our approach has twofold novelties: (i) we attempt to detect changepoints from partial observations effectively by exploiting potential correlations between sensors, and (ii) we formulate the
sensor subset selection task as a Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB)
problem and develop an effective adaptive sampling strategy
using MAB algorithms. We offer theoretical analysis for the
proposed online learning solution, and further validate its empirical performance via an extensive set of numerical studies
together with a case study on real-world data sets.

Introduction
Unsupervised learning for sequential monitoring of complex systems (a.k.a., sequential change detection) is ubiquitous in a wide range of applications, such as quality control
in manufacturing processes, logistic systems, transportation
networks, electrical grids, the internet of things (IoT) systems, etc. Typically, to capture information about the underlying system state in real time, a massive array of variables are measured continuously and sequentially for prompt
change detection and timely decision making. However, in
practice, the acquisition of continuously measurements of
such a large amount of variables may be infeasible due to
resource constraints. For example, the number of available
sensors may be less than the number of interested variables
to be monitored due to expensive cost of the sensors; or at
each sensing epoch only a limited number of sensors can be
set in the “ON” mode for measurement due to limited battery
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5733

