The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Bridge between Liquid and Social Welfare in
Combinatorial Auctions with Submodular Bidders
Dimitris Fotakis∗

Kyriakos Lotidis∗

National Technical University of Athens
Yahoo Research, NY, USA
Athens, Greece
National Technical University of Athens
klot@corelab.ntua.gr
Athens, Greece
dfotakis@oath.com
Abstract

Harvard University
Cambridge, USA
tpodimata@g.harvard.edu

auctions (Hershberger and Suri 2001), airport time-slot auctions (Rassenti, Smith, and Bulfin 1982), etc.) and have been
a central topic in the study of Multi-Agent Systems. They
have also experienced a recent interest in the AI community
with works employing ML algorithms to overcome standard complexity problems (e.g., (Brero and Lahaie 2018;
Brero, Lubin, and Seuken 2018)).
As if this problem was not hard enough to solve, imagine
that you find out two unfortunate events; the stadium is in
fact at a working-middle class neighborhood (i.e., people do
have budget constraints) and your boss is concerned about
the effect of these budget constraints on the potential revenue. Now, the objective function should balance between
the willingness and the ability of the people to pay for their
seats. Motivated by usual discrepancies between the auction
participants’ ability and willingness to pay, (Dobzinski and
Paes Leme 2014) introduced the notion of liquid welfare,
which is the minimum of an agent’s budget and valuation for
a bundle of goods. As such, maximizing the liquid welfare
achieves a reasonable compromise between social efficiency
and potential for revenue extraction (which is constrained by
the budgets).
Problem Definition. More formally, a Combinatorial Auction (CA) consists of a set U of m items to be allocated
to n bidders. Each bidder i has a valuation function vi :
2U → R≥0 . Valuation functions, v, are assumed to be nondecreasing, i.e., v(S) ≤ v(T ), for all S ⊆ T ⊆ U , and normalized v(∅) = 0. For the objective of social welfare (SW),
the goal is to compute a partitioning S = (S1P
, . . . , Sn ) of
n
the set of items, U , that maximizes v(S) =
i=1 vi (Si ).
For the objective of liquid welfare (LW), we assume that
each bidder i also has a budget Bi ∈ R≥0 and the liquid welfare that can be extracted from agent i for each set of items
S ⊆ U is v̄i (S) = min{vi (S), Bi }1 . Under this objective,
the goal is to compute a P
partitioning S = (S1 , . . . , Sn ) of U
n
that maximizes v̄(S) = i=1 v̄i (Si ).
We focus on CAs with submodular or XOS bidders. A
set function v : 2U → R≥0 is submodular if for every
S, T ⊆ U , v(S) + v(T ) ≥ v(S ∩ T ) + v(S ∪ T ) and subadditive if v(S) + v(T ) ≥ v(S ∪ T ). A set function v is XOS
(a.k.a. fractionally subadditive, see (Feige 2009)) if there ex-

We study incentive compatible mechanisms for Combinatorial Auctions where the bidders have submodular (or XOS)
valuations and are budget-constrained. Our objective is to
maximize the liquid welfare, a notion of efficiency for budgetconstrained bidders introduced by Dobzinski and Paes Leme
(2014). We show that some of the known truthful mechanisms that best-approximate the social welfare for Combinatorial Auctions with submodular bidders through demand
query oracles can be adapted, so that they retain truthfulness
and achieve asymptotically the same approximation guarantees for the liquid welfare. More specifically, for the problem
of optimizing the liquid welfare in Combinatorial Auctions
with submodular bidders, we obtain a universally truthful randomized O(log m)-approximate mechanism, where m is the
number of items, by adapting the mechanism of Krysta and
Vöcking (2012).
Additionally, motivated by large market assumptions often
used in mechanism design, we introduce a notion of competitive markets and show that in such markets, liquid welfare
can be approximated within a constant factor by a randomized universally truthful mechanism. Finally, in the Bayesian
setting, we obtain a truthful O(1)-approximate mechanism
for the case where bidder valuations are generated as independent samples from a known distribution, by adapting the
results of Feldman, Gravin and Lucier (2014).

1

Chara Podimata∗

Introduction

Imagine that you are a social planner wanting to auctionoff the seats of a local stadium at an extremely wealthy
neighborhood (i.e., people have no budget constraints for
the seats) for a big concert. As a social planner, your goal
is to allocate the seats in a way that maximizes (or, at least,
approximates as closely as possible) the happiness of the
people interested in these seats. However, different people
have different seat preferences; some people are happy with
two consecutive seats anywhere in the stadium, and some
might want a whole row. Phrased in mechanism design language, this is a Combinatorial Auction, where you seek to
optimize the social welfare by a truthful mechanism. Combinatorial Auctions, like the one above, appear in many AIcentric contexts (e.g., spectrum auctions, network routing
∗

The names of the authors are in alphabetical order.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Slightly abusing the terminology, we refer to v̄i (S) as agent
i’s liquid valuation.

1949

