The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Ranking-Based Deep Cross-Modal Hashing
Xuanwu Liu,1 Guoxian Yu,1,2∗ Carlotta Domeniconi,3 Jun Wang,1 Yazhou Ren,4 Maozu Guo5
1

College of Computer and Information Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing, China
Hubei Key Laboratory of Intelligent Geo-Information Processing, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China
3
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, USA
4
SMILE Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
5
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Beijing University of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Beijing, China
Email: {alxw1007,gxyu,kingjun}@swu.edu.cn, carlotta@cs.gmu.edu, yazhou.ren@uestc.edu.cn, guomaozu@bucea.edu.cn
2

Abstract

search. Hence, hashing has become more and more popular
for ANN search on large scale datasets.

Cross-modal hashing has been receiving increasing interests
for its low storage cost and fast query speed in multi-modal
data retrievals. However, most existing hashing methods are
based on hand-crafted or raw level features of objects, which
may not be optimally compatible with the coding process. Besides, these hashing methods are mainly designed to handle
simple pairwise similarity. The complex multilevel ranking
semantic structure of instances associated with multiple labels
has not been well explored yet. In this paper, we propose a
ranking-based deep cross-modal hashing approach (RDCMH).
RDCMH firstly uses the feature and label information of data
to derive a semi-supervised semantic ranking list. Next, to
expand the semantic representation power of hand-crafted
features, RDCMH integrates the semantic ranking information into deep cross-modal hashing and jointly optimizes the
compatible parameters of deep feature representations and of
hashing functions. Experiments on real multi-modal datasets
show that RDCMH outperforms other competitive baselines
and achieves the state-of-the-art performance in cross-modal
retrieval applications.

In many applications, the data can have multi-modalities.
For example, a web page can include not only a textual description but also images and videos to illustrate its contents.
These different types (views) of data are called multi-modal
data. With the rapid growth of multi-modal data in various
applications, multi-modal hashing has recently been widely
studied. Existing multi-modal hashing methods can be divided into two main categories: mutli-source hashing (MSH)
and cross-modal hashing (CMH)(Zhu et al. 2013). The goal
of MSH is to learn hash codes by utilizing all the information from multiple modalities. Hence, MSH requires all
the modalities observed for all data points, including query
points and those in the database. In practice, it is often difficult or even infeasible to acquire all data points across all the
modalities, as such the application of MSH is limited. On the
contrary, the application scenarios of CMH are more flexible
and practical. In CMH, the modality of a query point can be
different from the modality of the points in the database. In
addition, the query point typically has only one modality and
the points in the database can have one or more modalities.
For example, we can use text queries to retrieve images from
the database, and we can also use image queries to retrieve
texts from the database. Due to its wide application, CMH
has attracted increasing attention (Kumar and Udupa 2011;
Zhang and Li 2014).

Introduction
With the explosive growth of data, how to efficiently and accurately retrieve the required information from massive data
becomes a hot research topic and has various applications.
For example, in information retrieval, approximate nearest
neighbor (ANN) search (Andoni and Indyk 2006) plays a
fundamental role. Hashing has received increasing attention
due to its low storage cost and fast retrieval speed for ANN
search (Kulis and Grauman 2010). The main idea of hashing
is to convert the high-dimensional data in the ambient space
into binary codes in the low-dimensional Hamming space,
while the proximity between data in the original space is
preserved in the Hamming space(Wang et al. 2016; 2018;
Shao et al. 2016). By using binary hash codes to represent the
original data, the storage cost can be dramatically reduced.
In addition, we can use hash codes to construct an index and
achieve a constant or sub-linear time complexity for ANN

Many CMH methods have been proposed recently, existing
CMH methods can be roughly divided into two categories:
supervised and unsupervised. Unsupervised approaches seek
hash coding functions by taking into account underlying data
structures, distributions, or topological information. To name
a few, Canonical correlation analysis (Rasiwasia et al. 2010)
maps two modalities, such as visual and textual, into a common space by maximizing the correlation between the projections of the two modalities. Inter-media hashing (Song et al.
2013) maps view-specific features onto a common Hamming
space by learning linear hash functions with intra-modal
and inter-modal consistencies. Supervised approaches try
to leverage supervised information (i.e., semantic labels) to
improve the performance. Cross-modal similarity sensitive
hashing (CMSSH) (Bronstein et al. 2010) regards the hash

∗

Corresponding author: gxyu@swu.edu.cn(Guoxian Yu)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4400

