The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unbounded Orchestrations of Transducers for Manufacturing
Natasha Alechina

Tomáš Brázdil

Giuseppe De Giacomo

University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
nza@cs.nott.ac.uk

Mazaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
xbrazdil@fi.muni.cz

Sapienza Università di Roma
Roma, Italy
degiacomo@dis.uniroma1.it

Paolo Felli

Brian Logan

Moshe Y. Vardi

University of Bozen-Bolzano
Bolzano, Italy
pfelli@unibz.it

University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
bsl@cs.nott.ac.uk

Rice University
Houston, USA
vardi@cs.rice.edu

Abstract

Xu 2014)), where the products to be manufactured are not
known in advance and are often produced in small batches
to tight timescales, the manual production of process plans
is becoming increasingly uneconomic.
Previous work on the automated synthesis of process
plans has focussed on the ‘on-the-fly’ generation of process plan controllers. For example, in (de Silva et al. 2016;
Felli et al. 2017), techniques based on AI behavior composition (De Giacomo, Patrizi, and Sardiña 2013) are proposed
to determine whether a particular product is realizable (can
be manufactured by a particular set of manufacturing resources), and how the product should be manufactured using the resources. Their approach takes as inputs a process
recipe and a production topology specifying the available
manufacturing resources and their interconnection via conveyor belts, AGVs etc., and outputs a process plan controller
that specifies the tasks to be executed by each manufacturing
resource in the production line. Process recipes and manufacturing resources are represented using labelled transition
systems, and they define a special task simulation relation
that captures the notion of realizability. Controller synthesis is a byproduct of computing the simulation relation. In
(De Giacomo et al. 2018) process recipes and resources are
modelled as (multi)transducers (automata with output), and
the problem of whether a given process recipe can be realized by a given set of manufacturing resources is then stated
as an orchestration problem for transducers. They provide an
algorithm for synthesizing a controller that realizes a recipe
based on safety games.
In all of these approaches, the set of manufacturing resources in a manufacturing facility (or available in a manufacturing cloud) is assumed to be known and fixed in advance. In this paper, we consider the more general problem
of whether a product can be manufactured given sufficient
resources. In this setting, only the types of available manufacturing resources are given, and we want to know whether
it is possible to manufacture a product using only resources
of those type(s), and, if so, how many resources of each type
are needed. This question is of interest when considering the

There has recently been increasing interest in using reactive
synthesis techniques to automate the production of manufacturing process plans. Previous work has assumed that the set
of manufacturing resources is known and fixed in advance. In
this paper, we consider the more general problem of whether
a controller can be synthesized given sufficient resources. In
the unbounded setting, only the types of available manufacturing resources are given, and we want to know whether it
is possible to manufacture a product using only resources of
those type(s), and, if so, how many resources of each type
are needed. We model manufacturing processes and facilities
as transducers (automata with output), and show that the unbounded orchestration problem is decidable and the (Pareto)
optimal set of resources necessary to manufacture a product is computable for uni-transducers. However, for multitransducers, the problem is undecidable.

1

Introduction

There has recently been increasing interest in using reactive synthesis techniques to automate the synthesis of manufacturing process plans (de Silva et al. 2016; Felli, Logan,
and Sardina 2016; de Silva et al. 2017; Felli et al. 2017;
De Giacomo et al. 2018). A process plan matches the abstract manufacturing tasks in a process recipe specifying the
steps needed to manufacture a product, against manufacturing resources, e.g., computer/numerical-controlled machines, robots etc., to give an executable process plan that
realizes the process recipe. The process plan specifies the
specific manufacturing resources to be used for each manufacturing and assembly operation, and how materials and
parts move between the various manufacturing resources.
Process planning is traditionally carried out by manufacturing engineers who are experts in the particular processes
used in a specific factory, and is largely a manual process.
However, with the increasing servitization of manufacturing (sometimes called ‘cloud manufacturing’ (Lu, Xu, and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2646

