The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Interleave Variational Optimization with Monte
Carlo Sampling: A Tale of Two Approximate Inference Paradigms
Qi Lou

Rina Dechter

Alexander Ihler

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
qlou@ics.uci.edu

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
dechter@ics.uci.edu

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
ihler@ics.uci.edu

Abstract

are not anytime; their quality often depends critically on the
amount of memory available, and do not continue to improve
(approach the correct value) without additional memory.
Monte Carlo methods (Liu 2008), such as importance sampling (Dagum and Luby 1997; Liu, Fisher, and Ihler 2015)
gives probabilistic bounds that improve with more samples at
a predictable rate; in practice this means bounds that improve
rapidly at first, but can be slow to become very tight.
Search algorithms (Henrion 1991; Viricel et al. 2016; Lou,
Dechter, and Ihler 2017a) explicitly enumerate over the space
of configurations and eventually provide an exact answer;
however, while some problems are well-suited to search,
others only improve their quality very slowly with more
computation.
Several algorithms combine two or more strategies. Approximate hash-based counting combines sampling (of
hash functions) with CSP-based search (Chakraborty et al.
2014; Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2016) or other MAP
queries (Ermon et al. 2013; 2014), although these are not typically formulated to provide anytime behavior. Some recent
works combine importance sampling with (partially) exact
inference (Broka et al. 2018; Friedman and Van den Broeck
2018), though they do not have guarantees on their estimates.
A number of works use some form of approximate elimination or variational bounds as search heuristics, such as Lou,
Dechter, and Ihler (2017a), while Liu, Fisher, and Ihler (2015)
develops an importance sampling proposal from variational
bounds that provides strong probabilistic confidence intervals.
More recently, Lou, Dechter, and Ihler (2017b) unifies these
two works within the same framework.
However, a typical approach to incorporating variational
methods is to build and optimize the variational bound via
message passing first, waiting for this procedure to terminate before initiating search and/or sampling. While this
works well enough at longer time scales (minutes to hours),
it is undesirable if we want high-quality anytime bounds
on faster time scales. Failing to build a high-quality variational bound can dramatically slow down the subsequent
progress of search or sampling on more difficult problems,
but for easier problems that would be solvable with a less
optimized heuristic or proposal, solution time is dominated
by this initial build time; unfortunately it is difficult to know
beforehand into which regime a particular problem instance
will fall. Our framework fills this gap by interleaving opti-

Computing the partition function of a graphical model is
a fundamental task in probabilistic inference. Variational
bounds and Monte Carlo methods, two important approximate paradigms for this task, each has its respective strengths
for solving different types of problems, but it is often nontrivial to decide which one to apply to a particular problem
instance without significant prior knowledge and a high level
of expertise. In this paper, we propose a general framework
that interleaves optimization of variational bounds (via message passing) with Monte Carlo sampling. Our adaptive interleaving policy can automatically balance the computational
effort between these two schemes in an instance-dependent
way, which provides our framework with the strengths of both
schemes, leads to tighter anytime bounds and an unbiased
estimate of the partition function, and allows flexible tradeoffs between memory, time, and solution quality. We verify
our approach empirically on real-world problems taken from
recent UAI inference competitions.

Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models, including Bayesian networks
and Markov random fields, are a set of powerful frameworks for representing and reasoning with probabilistic and
deterministic information (Darwiche 2009; Dechter 2013;
Dechter, Geffner, and Halpern 2010). Reasoning in a graphical model often requires computing the partition function,
i.e., the normalizing constant of the underlying distribution.
Exact computation of the partition function is known to be
intractable (Valiant 1979) in general, leading to the development of many approximate schemes, the major categories
of which are variational methods, Monte Carlo sampling,
and search algorithms. Within these, techniques that provide
some guaranteed confidence intervals on the correct value,
and can be improved with additional computation, are valued
for providing users with concrete information or certificates
of accuracy within a reasonable amount of time, and allowing
the user to decide the desired balance of quality versus time.
Variational bounds (Wainwright and Jordan 2008) and
closely related approximate elimination methods (Dechter
and Rish 2003; Liu and Ihler 2011) provide deterministic
guarantees on the partition function. However, these bounds
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7900

