The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Convergence of Learning Dynamics in Information Retrieval Games
Omer Ben-Porat, Itay Rosenberg, Tennenholtz
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa 32000 Israel
{omerbp@campus, itayrose@campus, moshet@ie}.technion.ac.il

Abstract

suggest that authors should only invest a considerably limited amount of time altering their websites until their utility
cannot be further improved. An accompanying question is
whether such convergence occurs when state-of-the-art approaches to information retrieval, aiming at ranking documents in the corpus according to estimated relevance probabilities with respect to a given query, are used. The basis for
all such retrieval methods is the probability ranking principle (PRP) (Robertson 1977).
In this paper we introduce what is, to the best of our
knowledge, the first attempt to explore the learning dynamics of strategic behavior in information retrieval systems
such as the Web, through a formal theoretical model. Our
main result proves that under the PRP, any better-response
learning dynamics converges to a pure Nash equilibrium.
This result is obtained for the two prevalent utility schemes:
authors seeking content exposure (i.e., exposure-targeted),
and authors seeking to increase “clicks” in content selection (i.e., action-targeted). Interestingly, this learning dynamics convergence property, which rarely exists in games,
is obtained even though our class of games are not potential games (Monderer and Shapley 1996). We also show that
other plausible ranking methods may not induce such convergence, which further highlights the significance of our
results.

We consider a game-theoretic model of information retrieval
with strategic authors. We examine two different utility
schemes: authors who aim at maximizing exposure and authors who want to maximize active selection of their content
(i.e., the number of clicks). We introduce the study of author
learning dynamics in such contexts. We prove that under the
probability ranking principle (PRP), which forms the basis
of the current state-of-the-art ranking methods, any betterresponse learning dynamics converges to a pure Nash equilibrium. We also show that other ranking methods induce a
strategic environment under which such a convergence may
not occur.

1

Introduction

Information retrieval is probably the most central task carried out by consumers and users of on-line media. The basic information retrieval task involves ranking documents
in a corpus by their relevance to the information needs expressed in a query. In adversarial retrieval settings such as
the Web, information resources (contents) are owned by
strategic bodies - website owners (henceforth authors). Authors can strategically change their content in order to improve their rankings in response to a query in a practice
referred to as search engine optimization (SEO) (Gyöngyi
and Garcia-Molina 2005). Therefore, the authors are players in a game, altering their content to increase their utility:
increase exposure of their content (in a plain content setting) or to increase selection of their content (“clicks” in a
sponsored content setting). In this strategic game, the search
engine serves as a mediator between users and authors, and
attempts to match queries and websites.
Despite the tremendous amount of work on information
retrieval and SEO published during past decades, mathematical modeling of the aforementioned strategic behavior
has only been formally suggested and studied recently (BenBasat, Tennenholtz, and Kurland 2015; Ben-Basat, Tennenholtz, and Kurland 2017; Raifer et al. 2017). One central question in this regard is whether learning dynamics,
whereby at every step one author alters her content to increase her utility, is likely to converge. Convergence would

1.1

Related Work

The concept of mediators in strategic environments is widely
known to the game-theory community (Ashlagi, Monderer,
and Tennenholtz 2009; Aumann 1974; Monderer and Tennenholtz 2009), and the design of a mediator (or in a different terminology, a mechanism) is often called mechanism
design (Nisan and Ronen 1999). In the context of information retrieval, a search engine can be viewed as a mediator
between two parties: users and authors.
Considering strategic behavior in an information retrieval
context is the aim of Ben-Basat, Tennenholtz, and Kurland
(2017). The work of Ben-Basat, Tennenholtz, and Kurland
presents a game-theoretic approach to information retrieval,
and illustrates that the myopic static view falls short in dynamic and adversarial settings. Ben-Basat, Tennenholtz, and
Kurland explicitly assume that users will select the highest ranked result, a somewhat strong assumption but nevertheless justified by a large body of empirical work (But-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1780

