The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Distributed PageRank Computation: An Improved Theoretical Study
Siqiang Luo
The University of Hong Kong
Pokfulam, Hong Kong
sqluo@cs.hku.hk

Abstract

systems (Sarma et al. 2015; Florescu and Caragea 2017;
Fujiwara et al. 2013; Ahmadi, Kersting, and Sanner 2011;
Neumann, Ahmadi, and Kersting 2011; Ponzetto and Strube
2007).
There have been a number of works on distributed PageRank algorithms (Guo et al. 2017; Sarma et al. 2015; Zhu,
Ye, and Li 2005). Among them, the algorithm presented
in (Sarma et al. 2015) has the best complexity under a fullydistributed model which is a kind of congested clique model.
It models the graph G with n independent nodes such that
each node communicates with each other over a complete
network (i.e., the clique on the n nodes) in order to compute some function of their inputs. Each pair of nodes can
communicate at most b bits (which is also known as the
edge bandwidth). The computation is performed in synchronous rounds. The algorithm in (Sarma et al. 2015) finishes computing
PageRank of an undirected n-node graph
√
G in O( log n) rounds with a probability at least 1 − n1 ,
whereas the edge bandwidth is b = O(log3 n) bits.
The congested clique model (definitions may be slightly
different in different papers) has received tremendous interest in recently years, and has been studied extensively
on many important problems (e.g., (Jurdziński and Nowicki 2018; Drucker, Kuhn, and Oshman 2014; Hegeman et
al. 2015; Ghaffari and Parter 2016; Hegeman, Pemmaraju,
and Sardeshmukh 2014; Lenzen 2013)). One attractiveness
of the congested clique model is that the model is fundamental to other distributed models. In particular, an efficient algorithm based on the congested clique model can
be translated into an efficient algorithm on other distributed
models such as the k-machine model (Klauck et al. 2015;
Luo et al. 2014) and MapReduce model (Hegeman and Pemmaraju 2015; Dean and Ghemawat 2008; Luo et al. 2012).
Our Contributions. In this paper, we present improved
distributed PageRank algorithms based on the congested
clique model 1 . Particularly, given an undirected connected
graph G of n nodes, we show that with a probability at least
1− n1 , our algorithm finishes computing approximate PageRank vector in O(log log n) rounds and the edge bandwidth
is O(log2 n) bits (under a reasonable degree assumption).
This significantly improves over the algorithm presented

PageRank is a classic measure that effectively evaluates the
node importance in large graphs, and has been applied in
numerous applications ranging from data mining, Web algorithms, recommendation systems, load balancing, search,
and identifying connectivity structures. Computing PageRank for large graphs is challenging and this has motivated
the studies of distributed algorithms to compute PageRank.
Previously, little works have been spent on the distributed
PageRank algorithms with provably desired complexity and
accuracy. Given a graph with n nodes and if we model the
distributed computation model as the well-known congested
√
clique model, the state-of-the-art algorithm takes O( log n)
communication rounds to approximate the PageRank value
of each node in G, with a probability at least 1 − n1 . In
this paper, we present improved distributed algorithms for
computing PageRank. Particularly, our algorithm performs
O(log log
√n) rounds (a significant improvement compared
with O( log n) rounds) to approximate the PageRank values with a probability at least 1 − n1 . Moreover, under a
reasonable assumption, our algorithm also reduces the edge
bandwidth (i.e., the maximum communication message size
that can be exchanged through an edge during a communication round) by a O(log n) factor compared with the
state-of-the-art algorithm. Finally, we show that our algorithm can be adapted to efficiently compute another variant of
PageRank, i.e., the batch one-hop Personalized PageRanks, in
O(log log n) communication rounds.

Introduction
Given a graph G of n nodes, and a probability α ∈ (0, 1),
the PageRank vector of a graph is the stationary distribution
π of the following specific type of random walk (Sarma,
Gollapudi, and Panigrahy 2011): at each step, with probability α the walk restarts from a node chosen uniformly at
random; with the remaining probability 1 − α, the walker
jumps to a randomly chosen neighbor v of the current node.
PageRank has emerged as a very powerful measure of relative importance of nodes in a network. It was first proposed as the pioneering idea for Google’s search engine
for document ranking. Since then, PageRank has been applied in extensive applications, such as data mining, distributed networks, Web algorithms, and recommendation

1
In this paper we consider the model that allows each node v to
store O(d(v) · polylogn) bits, where d(v) is the degree of v.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4496

