The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Resource Allocation and
Pricing for Cloud Profit Maximization
Bingqian Du, Chuan Wu, Zhiyi Huang
The University of Hong Kong

Abstract

them to the users. For example, Microsoft Azure provides
Burstable VMs (1 CPU core and 1GB RAM), Compute optimized VMs (2 CPU cores and 4GB RAM), General Purpose
VMs (2 CPU cores and 8GB RAM), and a number of other
types of VMs (Azu ). Upon a user’s VM request, the cloud
provider should decide on which server to run the asked VM
and how to price it.
Most cloud providers post prices which do not change
in months, e.g., Microsoft Azure (Azu ) and Google Cloud
(Goo ) publish hourly pay-as-you-go prices for different
types of VMs, leaving users to decide whether to use the
cloud service, according to their budgets. Such static posted
pricing does not adapt well to demand and supply changes in
the cloud system, and may well jeopardize cloud provider’s
profit (Mazrekaj, Shabani, and Sejdiu 2016). We advocate
dynamic resource pricing according to demand and supply
in the cloud, which is closely related to VM placement in
the server cluster, to maximize cloud provider’s profit.
Dynamic resource allocation and pricing is challenging,
as users may submit their VM requests at any time, asking for different types of VMs for different durations. The
resource allocation problem is essentially an online, multidimensional packing problem, well known for its hardness,
not to mention that an associated pricing scheme is also in
need. There have been recent studies proposing online algorithms for dynamic resource pricing and allocation upon
user arrivals (Zhang et al. 2015; Shi et al. 2014). These
studies formulate resource allocation into detailed optimization problems, and compute allocation and pricing decisions
based on online optimization techniques. Due to the complexity of a cloud system, simplification assumptions often
have to be made, in order to convert the optimization problems to linear or convex problems, allowing efficient solutions.
Aiming to capture richer characteristics of the problem
and derive better resource allocation and pricing decisions,
we adopt a black-box approach and leverage deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to learn a better policy. DRL uses
neural networks (NNs) as function approximators to describe connections between complex system input and optimal decisions. The success of DRL in playing games such
as Go (Silver et al. 2016) and Atari (Mnih et al. 2015) shows
that combining deep learning with reinforcement learning
to directly learn Q-values for discrete actions from sampled

Cloud computing has been widely adopted to support various computation services. A fundamental problem faced by
cloud providers is how to efficiently allocate resources upon
user requests and price the resource usage, in order to maximize resource efficiency and hence provider profit. Existing studies establish detailed performance models of cloud
resource usage, and propose offline or online algorithms to
decide allocation and pricing. Differently, we adopt a blackbox approach, and leverage model-free Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) to capture dynamics of cloud users and better
characterize inherent connections between an optimal allocation/pricing policy and the states of the dynamic cloud system. The goal is to learn a policy that maximizes net profit of
the cloud provider through trial and error, which is better than
decisions made on explicit performance models. We combine
long short-term memory (LSTM) units with fully-connected
neural networks in our DRL to deal with online user arrivals,
and adjust the output and update methods of basic DRL algorithms to address both resource allocation and pricing. Evaluation based on real-world datasets shows that our DRL approach outperforms basic DRL algorithms and state-of-theart white-box online cloud resource allocation/pricing algorithms significantly, in terms of both profit and the number of
accepted users.

Introduction
Cloud computing has proliferated in recent years. Large
public cloud platforms are available for various users to
run computation jobs; enterprises are building on-premise
clouds for internal usage, where users from different departments submit and run their jobs. A fundamental problem
faced by the cloud provider/operator, no matter in public or
private clouds, is how to efficiently allocate and price cloud
resources, provisioned by physical servers in clusters, to the
requesting users, such that resource utilization is most efficient and profit of the provider is maximized. 1
The most common form of resource provisioning in today’s cloud platforms is to run virtual machines (VMs) (or
containers) with different resource configurations, and lease
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In case of a private cloud, the prices may serve as gauges of job
values to decide job admission, and the profit can be interpreted as
total value of executed jobs.

7570

