The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Complex Moment-Based Supervised Eigenmap for Dimensionality Reduction
Akira Imakura, Momo Matsuda, Xiucai Ye, Tetsuya Sakurai
University of Tsukuba
1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8573, Japan

Abstract

A family of discriminant analysis methods are proposed
for dimensionality reduction, including Fisher discriminant
analysis (FDA) (Fisher 1936; Fukunaga 2013), local FDA
(LFDA) (Sugiyama 2007), semi-supervised LFDA (SELF)
(Sugiyama et al. 2010) and locality adaptive discriminant
analysis (LADA) (Li et al. 2017).
However, most of the existing dimensionality reduction
methods use only ` eigenvectors to construct the lowdimensional space with ` dimensions, which may lead to
a loss of useful information for achieving successful classification. Herein, to overcome the deficiency of information loss, we propose a novel complex moment-based supervised eigenmap for dimensionality reduction. The proposed
method allows us to achieve better recognition performance
by using a complex moment-based subspace that includes
d > ` eigenvectors, where d can be set independently of `.
The proposed method is inspired by complex momentbased parallel eigensolvers (Sakurai and Sugiura 2003;
Imakura, Du, and Sakurai 2016) that are one of the hottest
parallel eigensolvers for computing multiple eigenpairs of
large and sparse eigenvalue problems. Since a subspace including a large number of eigenvectors is expected to have
rich information, the usage of complex moment-based subspace can help to achieve a good recognition performance.
Furthermore, we incorporate ridge regression (or called as
the Tikhonov regularization) (Saunders, Gammerman, and
Vovk 1998) to matrix trace optimization in the objective
function of the proposed method. Ridge regression aims to
find a linear function that models the dependencies between
covariate variables and univariate labels. By the corporation,
the proposed method can find the subspace that most compactly expresses the target and rejects other possible but less
compact candidates. As far as our knowledge, no existing
method combines a matrix trace and ridge regression.
The proposed method is flexible and extendable since
there are a lot of matrix trace optimization methods can
be incorporated, such as the methods mentioned above. We
use a specific parameter to control the trade-off between the
matrix trace optimization and ridge regression. In extreme
cases, the proposed method simplifies to the matrix trace
optimization methods and the ridge regression method. To
reduce the computational complexity, we also propose an efficient and parallel implementation of the proposed method
based on some techniques of the complex moment-based

Dimensionality reduction methods that project highdimensional data to a low-dimensional space by matrix trace
optimization are widely used for clustering and classification.
The matrix trace optimization problem leads to an eigenvalue
problem for a low-dimensional subspace construction,
preserving certain properties of the original data. However,
most of the existing methods use only a few eigenvectors
to construct the low-dimensional space, which may lead
to a loss of useful information for achieving successful
classification. Herein, to overcome the deficiency of the
information loss, we propose a novel complex moment-based
supervised eigenmap including multiple eigenvectors for
dimensionality reduction. Furthermore, the proposed method
provides a general formulation for matrix trace optimization
methods to incorporate with ridge regression, which models
the linear dependency between covariate variables and
univariate labels. To reduce the computational complexity,
we also propose an efficient and parallel implementation
of the proposed method. Numerical experiments indicate
that the proposed method is competitive compared with
the existing dimensionality reduction methods for the
recognition performance. Additionally, the proposed method
exhibits high parallel efficiency.

Introduction
Dimensionality reduction is an efficient technique for data
analysis which maps high-dimensional data to a low dimensional space. Dimensionality reduction methods that utilize
matrix trace optimization are widely used for clustering and
classification.
The matrix trace optimization problem leads to an eigenvalue problem for low-dimensional space construction, preserving certain properties of the original data. Principal
component analysis (PCA) (Pearson 1901; Jolliffe 1986)
and locality preserving projections (LPP) (He and Niyogi
2004) are two of the typical unsupervised dimensionality reduction methods. PCA aims to maximize the variance of
the projected vectors, while LPP devotes to preserve the
local similarity of the original data. Discriminant analysis is the typical supervised method which maximizes the
between-class scatter and reduce the within-class scatter.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3910

