The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Study of Educational Data Mining: Evidence from a Thai University
Ruangsak Trakunphutthirak, Yen Cheung, Vincent C. S. Lee, SMIEEE
Faculty of IT, Clayton Campus, Monash University
Melbourne, Australia
{ruangsak.trakunphutthirak, yen.cheung, vincent.cs.lee} @monash.edu

Abstract

(Shahiri, Husain, and Rashid 2015) reviewed important
factors on predicting student academic performance by
using data mining techniques. Amongst those psychometric factors such as students’ interest, study behavior, or
time management, problems with time management was
identified as one of the major issues affecting Thai students’ academic performance (Sittichai 2012).
To discover the factors related to students at-risk of failure, educational data mining can be used to predict students’ academic performance (Zhou et al. 2018; He et al.
2015). Those students at-risk of failure can potentially be
identified by using factors inherent in internal university
data sources (Amornsinlaphachai 2016; Vuttipittayamongkol 2016; Arsad, Buniyamin, and Manan 2012;
Senthil and Lin 2017). Usually, the main data sources are
from administering questionnaires and student data collected from learning management systems (LMS). Data collected from questionnaires and transactional data from
Learning Management System (LMS), such as ATutor,
Blackboard and Moodle can be used to analyse students’
behavior and subsequently predict their academic performance (Conijn et al. 2017). Nevertheless, both of the two
data sources have limitations. One major drawback of using questionnaires is that the active participation of students has been required. This incurs extra costs to manually collect the data. Although LMSs overcome these problems, its data is normally limited to a single unit of study
and overall academic performance cannot be generalised
from LMS data across all units of study (Zhou et al. 2018).
Hence, using data such as internet access log files offers a
promising alternative to explore the prediction of academic
performance of students.
Firewalls automatically keep an internet access log file
in a systematic way (Trakunphutthirak, Cheung, and Lee
2017). The log file is used to create a data model as a
schema on read (Dong and Srivastava 2013). With the
schema on read, any schema can be created to handle a
variety of queries. This log file contains useful information
in a semi-structured format and we can answer different
queries provided by the schema. To monitor the time man-

Educational data mining provides a way to predict student
academic performance. A psychometric factor like time
management is one of the major issues affecting Thai students’ academic performance. Current data sources used to
predict students’ performance are limited to the manual collection of data or data from a single unit of study which
cannot be generalised to indicate overall academic performance. This study uses an additional data source from a
university log file to predict academic performance. It investigates the browsing categories and the Internet access
activities of students with respect to their time management
during their studies. A single source of data is insufficient to
identify those students who are at-risk of failing in their academic studies. Furthermore, there is a paucity of recent
empirical studies in this area to provide insights into the relationship between students’ academic performance and
their Internet access activities. To contribute to this area of
research, we employed two datasets such as web-browsing
categories and Internet access activity types to select the
best outcomes, and compared different weights in the time
and frequency domains. We found that the random forest
technique provides the best outcome in these datasets to
identify those students who are at-risk of failure. We also
found that data from their Internet access activities reveals
more accurate outcomes than data from browsing categories
alone. The combination of two datasets reveals a better picture of students’ Internet usage and thus identifies students
who are academically at-risk of failure. Further work involves collecting more Internet access log file data,
analysing it over a longer period and relating the period of
data collection with events during the academic year.

Introduction
Students’ academic performance in assessments is a measure of their academic success and this is one of the KPIs of
the educational quality assurance in Thai universities
(Maneerat, Malaivongs, and Khlaisang 2015). This measurement of student success, influenced by many factors,
can be done in several ways. Shahiri, Husain, and Rashid
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

734

