The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Determinantal Reinforcement Learning
Takayuki Osogami, Rudy Raymond
IBM Research - Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

Volume2 = exp(Value of combination of actions)

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning for controlling multiple
agents in a collaborative manner. In some of those tasks, it
is insufficient for the individual agents to take relevant actions, but those actions should also have diversity. We propose
the approach of using the determinant of a positive semidefinite matrix to approximate the action-value function in reinforcement learning, where we learn the matrix in a way that
it represents the relevance and diversity of the actions. Experimental results show that the proposed approach allows
the agents to learn a nearly optimal policy approximately ten
times faster than baseline approaches in benchmark tasks of
multi-agent reinforcement learning. The proposed approach
is also shown to achieve the performance that cannot be
achieved with conventional approaches in partially observable environment with exponentially large action space.

Figure 1: The logarithm of the squared volume of the parallelepiped defined by the feature vectors of actions represents
the value of the combination of those actions.
feature vectors represents the similarity between two actions
at that state. The feature vector depends on the state. A set of
feature vectors then defines a parallelotope whose squared
volume is given by the determinant of the Gram matrix of
those feature vectors. More specifically, the value of a combination of actions at a state is given by the logarithm of
the determinant (log-determinant) of a principal submatrix
of a positive semidefinite matrix (kernel), where the principal submatrix is specified by the actions, and the kernel
depends on the state.
The proposed approach can deal with partial observability
by letting the kernel depend on the history of observations
(of non-Markovian states). The special case of a historydependent diagonal kernel reduces to the standard approach
of representing the action-value function with a time-series
model such as a recurrent neural network (Hausknecht
and Stone 2015), vector autoregressive models, and dynamic Boltzmann machines (Osogami and Otsuka 2015;
Osogami 2017). Our approach can thus be seen as adding
a differential “determinantal layer” to the output of a neural
network.
We derive specific learning rules of the SARSA (stateaction-reward-state-action) algorithm with log-determinant
as a functional approximator. We refer to the resulting algorithm as Determinantal SARSA. We apply Determinantal SARSA to blocker tasks (fully observable environment)
and stochastic policy tasks (partially observable environment). The experimental results suggest that Determinantal
SARSA can find nearly optimal policy for blocker tasks ap-

Introduction
We study the problem of learning to control multiple agents
in a collaborative manner. For example, players of a team
want to learn from their experience how to collaboratively
play to win a game, or one might want to learn to control
multiple robots to accomplish a task that cannot be handled
by a single robot. For some of those multi-agent tasks, it is
important for the agents to take not only individually relevant but also collectively diverse actions. For example, players of a defensive team should guard relevant and diverse
areas (i.e., zone defense) or relevant and diverse players of
the other team (i.e., man-to-man defense).
Even when we have central control, multi-agent reinforcement learning is hard due to exponentially many possible
combinations of actions. The simple approach of handling
the combination of actions as if it is an action of a hypothetical single agent (or a team) does not scale with increased
number of agents. It is also undesirable to let each agent
greedily take an action without consideration of others.
We propose to use the determinant of a matrix to approximate the action-value function in reinforcement learning
where the combination of relevant and diverse actions tends
to have high value (see Figure 1). Each action is characterized by a feature vector, whose length represents the relevance of that action at a state, and the angle between two
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4659

