The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

GaitSet: Regarding Gait as a Set for Cross-View Gait Recognition*
Hanqing Chao,1† Yiwei He,1† Junping Zhang,1‡ Jianfeng Feng2
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science
2
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-inspired Intelligence
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
{hqchao16, heyw15, jpzhang, jffeng}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
As a unique biometric feature that can be recognized at a distance, gait has broad applications in crime prevention, forensic
identification and social security. To portray a gait, existing
gait recognition methods utilize either a gait template, where
temporal information is hard to preserve, or a gait sequence,
which must keep unnecessary sequential constraints and thus
loses the flexibility of gait recognition. In this paper we present
a novel perspective, where a gait is regarded as a set consisting
of independent frames. We propose a new network named
GaitSet to learn identity information from the set. Based on
the set perspective, our method is immune to permutation
of frames, and can naturally integrate frames from different
videos which have been filmed under different scenarios, such
as diverse viewing angles, different clothes/carrying conditions. Experiments show that under normal walking conditions,
our single-model method achieves an average rank-1 accuracy
of 95.0% on the CASIA-B gait dataset and an 87.1% accuracy
on the OU-MVLP gait dataset. These results represent new
state-of-the-art recognition accuracy. On various complex scenarios, our model exhibits a significant level of robustness. It
achieves accuracies of 87.2% and 70.4% on CASIA-B under
bag-carrying and coat-wearing walking conditions, respectively. These outperform the existing best methods by a large
margin. The method presented can also achieve a satisfactory
accuracy with a small number of frames in a test sample, e.g.,
82.5% on CASIA-B with only 7 frames. The source code has
been released at https://github.com/AbnerHqC/GaitSet.

1

Figure 1: From top-left to bottom-right are silhouettes of a
completed period of a subject in CASIA-B gait dataset.
are two main ways to identify gait in literature, i.e., regarding
gait as an image and regarding gait as a video sequence.
The first category compresses all gait silhouettes into one
image, or gait template for gait recognition (He et al. 2019;
Takemura et al. 2018a; Wu et al. 2017; Hu et al. 2013).
Simple and easy to implement, gait template easily loses
temporal and fine-grained spatial information. Differently,
the second category extracts features directly from the original gait silhouette sequences in recent years (Liao et al. 2017;
Wolf, Babaee, and Rigoll 2016). However, these methods are
vulnerable to exterior factors. Further, deep neural networks
like 3D-CNN for extracting sequential information are harder
to train than those using a single template like Gait Energy
Image (GEI) (Han and Bhanu 2006).
To solve these problems, we present a novel perspective
which regards gait as a set of gait silhouettes. As a periodic
motion, gait can be represented by a single period. In a silhouette sequence containing one gait period, it was observed
that the silhouette in each position has unique appearance,
as shown in Fig. 1. Even if these silhouettes are shuffled,
it is not difficult to rearrange them into correct order only
by observing the appearance of them. Thus, we assume the
appearance of a silhouette has contained its position information. With this assumption, order information of gait sequence
is not necessary and we can directly regard gait as a set to
extract temporal information. We propose an end-to-end deep
learning model called GaitSet whose scheme is shown in
Fig. 2. The input of our model is a set of gait silhouettes.
First, a CNN is used to extract frame-level features from
each silhouette independently. Second, an operation called
Set Pooling is used to aggregate frame-level features into
a single set-level feature. Since this operation is applied on
high-level feature maps instead of the original silhouettes, it
can preserve spatial and temporal information better than gait

Introduction

Unlike other biometrics such as face, fingerprint and iris,
gait is a unique biometric feature that can be recognized at a
distance without the cooperation of subjects and intrusion to
them. Therefore, it has broad applications in crime prevention,
forensic identification and social security.
However, gait recognition suffers from exterior factors
such as the subject’s walking speed, dressing and carrying
condition, and the camera’s viewpoint and frame rate. There
* This work is supported in part by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant No. 61673118) and in part by
Shanghai Pujiang Program (Grant No. 16PJD009).
†
H.C. and Y.H. are co-first authors.
‡
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8126

