The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Regularizing Neural Machine Translation by Target-Bidirectional Agreement
Zhirui Zhang‡∗ , Shuangzhi Wu♮ , Shujie Liu§ , Mu Li§ , Ming Zhou§ , Tong Xu‡†
‡

♮

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China § Microsoft Research Asia
‡
zrustc11@gmail.com ‡ tongxu@ustc.edu.cn
♮§
{v-shuawu,shujliu,muli,mingzhou}@microsoft.com

Abstract

Input

Although Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has achieved
remarkable progress in the past several years, most NMT systems still suffer from a fundamental shortcoming as in other
sequence generation tasks: errors made early in generation
process are fed as inputs to the model and can be quickly amplified, harming subsequent sequence generation. To address
this issue, we propose a novel model regularization method
for NMT training, which aims to improve the agreement between translations generated by left-to-right (L2R) and rightto-left (R2L) NMT decoders. This goal is achieved by introducing two Kullback-Leibler divergence regularization terms
into the NMT training objective to reduce the mismatch between output probabilities of L2R and R2L models. In addition, we also employ a joint training strategy to allow L2R
and R2L models to improve each other in an interactive update process. Experimental results show that our proposed
method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines
on Chinese-English and English-German translation tasks.

Ref.

L2R

R2L

zhı̄chı́zhě mēn biǎoshı̀, zhè liǎngtiáo suı̀dào jiāng
shı̌ huánjı̀ng shòuyı̀ bı̀ng bāngzhù jiālı̀fúnı́yàzhōu
quèbǎo gòngshuı̌ gèngjiā ānquán.
Supporters say the two tunnels will benefit the
environment and help California ensure the water
supply is safer.
Supporters say these two tunnels will benefit the
environment and to
help a secure water supply
⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓
in California.
⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓
Supporter
say the tunnel will benefit the environ⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓⁓
ment and help California ensure the water supply
is more secure.

Table 1: Example of an unsatisfied translation generate by
a left-to-right (L2R) decoder and a right-to-left (R2L) decoder.
good prefixes but bad suffixes (shown in Table 1). Such an
issue can become severe as sequence length increases.
To address this problem, one line of research attempts to
reduce the inconsistency between training and inference so
as to improve the robustness when giving incorrect previous
predictions, such as designing sequence-level objectives or
adopting reinforcement learning approaches (Ranzato et al.
2015; Shen et al. 2016; Wiseman and Rush 2016). Another
line tries to leverage a complementary NMT model that generates target words from right to left (R2L) to distinguish
unsatisfied translation results from a n-best list generated by
the L2R model (Liu et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2017b).
In their work, the R2L NMT model is only used to re-rank
the translation candidates generated by L2R model, while
the candidates in the n-best list still suffer from the exposure
bias problem and limit the room for improvement. Another
problem is that, the complementary R2L model tends to generate translation results with good suffixes and bad prefixes,
due to the same exposure bias problem, as shown in Table
1. Similar with using the R2L model to augment the L2R
model, the L2R model can also be leveraged to improve the
R2L model.
Instead of re-ranking the n-best list, we try to take consideration of the agreement between the L2R and R2L models
into both of their training objectives, hoping that the agreement information can help to learn better models integrating
their advantages to generate translations with good prefixes

Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Cho et al. 2014;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) has seen the rapid development in the past several
years, from catching up with Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) (Koehn, Och, and Marcu 2003; Chiang 2007) to
outperforming it by significant margins on many languages
(Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016b; Wu et al. 2016;
Tu et al. 2016; Eriguchi, Hashimoto, and Tsuruoka 2016;
Wang et al. 2017a; Vaswani et al. 2017). In a conventional
NMT model, an encoder first transforms the source sequence
into a sequence of intermediate hidden vector representations, based on which, a decoder generates the target sequence word by word.
Due to the autoregressive structure, current NMT systems usually suffer from the so-called exposure bias problem (Bengio et al. 2015): during inference, true previous target tokens are unavailable and replaced by tokens generated
by the model itself, thus mistakes made early can mislead
subsequent translation, yielding unsatisfied translations with
∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft.
Corresponding Author.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

443

