The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Evolution of Collective Fairness in Hybrid Populations of Humans and Agents
Fernando P. Santos,1,2,4 Jorge M. Pacheco,3,4 Ana Paiva,1 Francisco C. Santos1,4
1

INESC-ID and Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, IST-Taguspark, 2744-016 Porto Salvo, Portugal
2
Princeton University, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, 08544 NJ, USA
3
CBMA and Departamento de Matemática e Aplicações, Universidade do Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal
4
ATP-group, P-2744-016 Porto Salvo, Portugal
fernando.pedro@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
Abstract

players interact in two distinct roles: Proposer and Responder. The Proposer is endowed with some resource and has
to propose a division to the second player, the Responder.
The Responder has to accept or reject. If the proposal is rejected, none of the players earns anything. If accepted, they
will divide the resource as it was proposed. A fair outcome
is usually defined as an egalitarian division, in which both
the Proposer and the Responder earn a similar reward.
The minimalism of the UG is convenient to attempt predicting, mathematically, how humans will play it. A first approach assumes that each agent is rational and seeks to maximize individual rewards. In this case, thinking in a backward fashion, one may realize that the Responder should always accept any offer; the Proposer should, thereafter, offer
the minimum possible amount. Indeed, this line of thought
gives an intuition for the sub-game perfect equilibrium of
the UG: low offers by Proposers and low acceptance thresholds by Responders (Osborne 2004). These predictions are,
however, misleading. A vast number of works report experiments in which people behave differently from the rational prediction. Humans tend to reject low proposals and to
make high offers (Güth, Schmittberger, and Schwarze 1982;
Fehr and Fischbacher 2003; Camerer 2003).
While the UG constitutes a quite general interaction
paradigm, there are several human and human-agent interactions not covered by such a pairwise interaction model.
Take the case of democratic institutions, economic and climate summits, collective bargaining, markets, auctions, or
the ancestral activities of proposing divisions regarding the
loot of group hunts and fisheries. All those examples go beyond a pairwise interaction. Indeed, there is a growing interest in analyzing multiplayer versions of the UG (Grimm et
al. 2017; Takesue, Ozawa, and Morikawa 2017). A simple
extension may turn the UG adequate to study a wide variety of ubiquitous formats of people encounters: in the Multiplayer UG (MUG) proposals are thereby made to groups
and the groups should decide, through suffrage, about its acceptance or rejection (Santos et al. 2015).
In AI, a multiplayer version of the UG can further constitute a convenient interaction model to test the emergence of
fairness in groups composed by humans and agents (Correia
et al. 2018), which can be of natural interest for areas such
as multiagent resource allocation (Chevaleyre et al. 2006)
or multilateral automated bargaining (Jennings et al. 2001).

Fairness plays a fundamental role in decision-making, which
is evidenced by the high incidence of human behaviors that
result in egalitarian outcomes. This is often shown in the context of dyadic interactions, resorting to the Ultimatum Game.
The peculiarities of group interactions – and the corresponding effect in eliciting fair actions – remain, however, astray.
Focusing on groups suggests several questions related with
the effect of group size, group decision rules and the interrelation of human and agents’ behaviors in hybrid groups. To
address these topics, here we test a Multiplayer version of the
Ultimatum Game (MUG): proposals are made to groups of
Responders that, collectively, accept or reject them. Firstly,
we run an online experiment to evaluate how humans react
to different group decision rules. We observe that people become increasingly fair if groups adopt stricter decision rules,
i.e., if more individuals are required to accept a proposal for it
to be accepted by the group. Secondly, we propose a new analytical model to shed light on how such behaviors may have
evolved. Thirdly, we adapt our model to include agents with
fixed behaviors. We show that including hardcoded Pro-social
agents favors the evolutionary stability of fair states, even for
soft group decision rules. This suggests that judiciously introducing agents with particular behaviors in a population may
leverage long-term social benefits.

Introduction
Contrarily to what mainstream economics postulates, individuals often act in favor of others and develop otherregarding preferences, seemingly deviating from stylized
models of rationality (Camerer 2003). In fact, individuals reveal a strong bias towards fairness, incurring sizable costs to
favor others or punishing those that behave unfairly (Fehr
and Fischbacher 2003). Unveiling the origin of those behaviors is a multidisciplinary challenge. Understanding how
such actions will be altered when interacting with artificial
agents – and knowing how to design multiagent systems accordingly – remains, today, a conundrum in Artificial Intelligence (AI) (Parkes and Wellman 2015).
In this context, the Ultimatum Game (UG) stands as a
simple interaction paradigm that is capable of capturing
the essential clash between rationality and fairness (Güth,
Schmittberger, and Schwarze 1982). In its original form, two
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6146

