The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Revisiting LSTM Networks for Semi-Supervised
Text Classification via Mixed Objective Function
Devendra Singh Sachan

Manzil Zaheer

Ruslan Salakhutdinov

Petuum Inc
sachan.devendra@gmail.com

Carnegie Mellon University
manzilz@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

son and Zhang 2015a) or one-hot bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) network with dynamic max-pooling (JZ16; Johnson
and Zhang 2016).
Current state-of-the-art approaches for text classification
involve using pretrained LSTMs (DL15; Dai and Le 2015)
or complex computationally intensive models (JZ17; Johnson and Zhang 2017). DL15 argued that randomly initialized LSTMs are difficult to optimize and can lead to worse
performance than linear models. Therefore, to improve the
performance, they proposed pretraining the LSTM with either a language model or a sequence auto-encoder. However, pretraining or using complicated models can be very
time consuming, which is a major disadvantage and may not
be always feasible. In this paper, we consider a BiLSTM
classifier model similar to the one proposed by DL15 for
text classification. For this simple BiLSTM model with pretrained embeddings, we propose a training strategy that can
achieve accuracy competitive with the previous purely supervised models, but without the extra pretraining step. We
also perform ablation studies to understand aspects of the
proposed training strategy that result in an improvement.
Pretraining approaches often use extra unlabeled data in
addition to the labeled data. We explore the applicability of
such semi-supervised learning (SSL) in our training framework, where there is no prior pretraining step. In this regard, we propose a mixed objective function for SSL that
can utilize both labeled and unlabeled data to obtain further
improvement in classification. To summarize, our contributions are as follows:

In this paper, we study bidirectional LSTM network for the
task of text classification using both supervised and semisupervised approaches. Several prior works have suggested
that either complex pretraining schemes using unsupervised
methods such as language modeling (Dai and Le 2015;
Miyato, Dai, and Goodfellow 2016) or complicated models (Johnson and Zhang 2017) are necessary to achieve a high
classification accuracy. However, we develop a training strategy that allows even a simple BiLSTM model, when trained
with cross-entropy loss, to achieve competitive results compared with more complex approaches. Furthermore, in addition to cross-entropy loss, by using a combination of entropy minimization, adversarial, and virtual adversarial losses
for both labeled and unlabeled data, we report state-of-theart results for text classification task on several benchmark
datasets. In particular, on the ACL-IMDB sentiment analysis
and AG-News topic classification datasets, our method outperforms current approaches by a substantial margin. We also
show the generality of the mixed objective function by improving the performance on relation extraction task.1

1

Introduction

Text classification is an important problem in natural language processing (NLP). The task is to assign a document
to one or more predefined categories. It has a wide range
of applications such as sentiment analysis (Pang and Lee
2008), topic categorization (Lewis et al. 2004), and email
filtering (Sahami et al. 1998). Early machine learning approaches for text classification were based on the extraction
of bag-of-words features followed by a supervised classifier
such as naı̈ve Bayes (McCallum and Nigam 1998) or a linear
SVM (Joachims 1998). Later, better word representations
were introduced, such as latent semantic analysis (Deerwester et al. 1990), skipgram (Mikolov et al. 2013), and
fastText (Joulin et al. 2017), which improved classification
accuracy. Recently, recurrent and convolutional neural network (Kim 2014) models were introduced to utilize the word
order and grammatical structure. Many complex variations
of these models have been proposed to improve the text classification accuracy, e.g. training one-hot CNN (JZ15a; John-

• We show that with proper model training, using a maximum likelihood objective with a simple one-layer BiLSTM model (§2) can produce competitive accuracies,
• We propose a mixed objective function that can be applied
to text classification tasks (§2),
• On seven benchmark text classification tasks, we achieve
new state-of-the-art results despite having a much simpler
model, minimal model tuning, and fewer parameters (§4),
• We extend our proposed mixed objective function to relation extraction task, where we achieve better F1 score on
SemEval-2010 and TACRED datasets, again with a simple model and minimal model tuning (§6).

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/DevSinghSachan/ssl text classification

6940

