The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Precision Quantized Neural
Networks via Encoding Decomposition of {-1,+1}
Qigong Sun, Fanhua Shang, Kang Yang, Xiufang Li, Yan Ren, Licheng Jiao
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
International Research Center for Intelligent Perception and Computation,
Joint International Research Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Computation,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi Province, 710071, China

Abstract

tion resources. Therefore, the compression and acceleration
of networks are especially important in future development
and commercial applications.

The training of deep neural networks (DNNs) requires intensive resources both for computation and for storage performance. Thus, DNNs cannot be efficiently applied to mobile
phones and embedded devices, which seriously limits their
applicability in industry applications. To address this issue,
we propose a novel encoding scheme of using {−1, +1} to
decompose quantized neural networks (QNNs) into multibranch binary networks, which can be efficiently implemented by bitwise operations (xnor and bitcount) to achieve
model compression, computational acceleration and resource
saving. Based on our method, users can easily achieve different encoding precisions arbitrarily according to their requirements and hardware resources. The proposed mechanism is
very suitable for the use of FPGA and ASIC in terms of data
storage and computation, which provides a feasible idea for
smart chips. We validate the effectiveness of our method on
both large-scale image classification tasks (e.g., ImageNet)
and object detection tasks. In particular, our method with lowbit encoding can still achieve almost the same performance as
its full-precision counterparts.

In recent years, many solutions have been proposed to
improve the energy efficiency of hardware, achieve model
compression or computational acceleration, such as network sparse and pruning (Hassibi and Stork 1993; Wen et
al. 2016; Han et al. 2015), low-rank approximation (Denton et al. 2014; Jaderberg, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014;
Tai et al. 2015), architecture design (Howard et al. 2017;
Sandler et al. 2018; Luo et al. 2018), model quantization
(Hubara et al. 2017; Rastegari et al. 2016; Lin, Zhao, and
Pan 2017), and so on. Network sparse and pruning can dramatically reduce the redundant connections, and thus reduce the computational load in the inference process without large accuracy drop. Tai et al. (2015) used low-rank
tensor decomposition to remove the redundancy in the kernels which can be as a generic tool for speeding up. Since
there is some redundant information in the networks, the
most direct approach of cutting down those information is
to optimize the structure and yield small networks (Ioffe and
Szegedy 2015; Iandola et al. 2016). For example, Howard
et al. (2017) proposed to use bitwise separable convolutions to build light networks for mobile applications. Most
of those networks still utilize floating-point number representations (i.e., full-precision values). However, Gupta
et al. (2015) discussed that the representation of the fullprecision weights and activations in networks is not necessary during the training of DNNs, and a nearly identical or
slightly better accuracy rate may be obtained under lowerprecision representation and calculation.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been successfully applied in many fields, especially in image classification, object detection and natural language processing. Because
of numerous parameters and complex model architectures,
huge storage space and considerable power consumption are
needed. Furthermore, with the rapid development of chip
technology, especially GPU and TPU, the computing power
has been greatly improved. In the rapid developing era of
deep learning, researchers use multiple GPUs or computer
clusters to contribute to the exploration of complex problems. Nevertheless, the energy consumption and limitation
of computing resources are still significant factors in industrial applications, which are generally ignored in scientific
research. In other words, breathtaking results of many DNNs
algorithms under the condition of applying GPUs lag behind
the demand of industry. DNNs can hardly be applied in mobile phones and embedded devices (as typical industrial applications) directly due to their limited memory and calcula-

Since non-differentiable discrete functions are applied in
QNNs generally, there obviously exists the gradient mismatch problem in training process. Therefore, the backpropagation algorithm cannot be directly used to train QNNs.
Many scholars (Mishra and Marr 2017; Polino, Pascanu,
and Alistarh 2018; Tang, Hua, and Wang 2017; Wang et al.
2018) are devoted themselves to improving the performance
(e.g., accuracy and compression ratio) of QNNs, but few researchers have studied their acceleration, which is an important reason for hindering industrial promotion. To the best
of our knowledge, the accelerated method used in binarized

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5024

