The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Incorporating Behavioral Constraints in Online AI Systems
Avinash Balakrishnan,§ Djallel Bouneffouf,§ Nicholas Mattei,† Francesca Rossi§
§

†

IBM Research

Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
{avinash.bala,djallel.bouneffouf,francesca.rossi2}@ibm.com
Abstract

guardian group may want a movie recommender system (the
agen)t to not recommend certain types of movies to children,
even if the recommendation of such movies could lead to a
high reward (Balakrishnan et al. 2018). In clinical settings, a
doctor may want its diagnosis support system to not recommend a drug that typically works because of considerations
related to the patients’ quality of life.
Many decision problems where an agent is responsive to
online feedback are modeled as a multi-armed bandit (MAB)
problem (Mary, Gaudel, and Preux 2015; Villar, Bowden,
and Wason 2015). In the MAB setting there are K arms,
each associated with a fixed but unknown reward probability distribution (Lai and Robbins 1985; Auer, Cesa-Bianchi,
and Fischer 2002). At each time step, an agent plays an arm,
i.e., recommends an item to a user, and receives a reward
that follows the selected arm’s probability distribution, independent of the previous actions. A popular generalization
of MAB is the contextual multi-armed bandit (CMAB) problem where the agent observes a d-dimensional feature vector, or context, to use along with the rewards of the arms
played in the past in order to choose an arm to play. Over
time, the agent learns the relationship between contexts and
rewards and select the best arm (Agrawal and Goyal 2013).
In giving the agent a set of behavioral constraints, we consider the case where only examples of the correct behaviors are given by a teacher agent, and our online agent must
learn and respect these constraints in the later phases of decision making: As an example, a parent may give examples
of movies that their children can watch (or that they cannot
watch) when setting up a new movie account for them.
The idea of teaching machines right from wrong has become an important research topic in both AI (Yu et al. 2018)
and in other disciplines (Wallach and Allen 2008). Much of
the research at the intersection of artificial intelligence and
ethics falls under the heading of machine ethics, i.e., adding
ethics and/or constraints to a particular system’s decision
making process (Anderson and Anderson 2011). One very
important task in machine ethics is value alignment, i.e., the
idea that an agent can only pursue goals that are aligned
to human values and are therefore beneficial to humans
(Russell, Dewey, and Tegmark 2015; Loreggia et al. 2018a;
Loreggia et al. 2018b). However, this still leaves open the
question of how to provide the values, or the behavioral
constraints derived from the values, to the agent. A popu-

AI systems that learn through reward feedback about the actions they take are increasingly deployed in domains that have
significant impact on our daily life. However, in many cases
the online rewards should not be the only guiding criteria,
as there are additional constraints and/or priorities imposed
by regulations, values, preferences, or ethical principles. We
detail a novel online agent that learns a set of behavioral constraints by observation and uses these learned constraints as
a guide when making decisions in an online setting while
still being reactive to reward feedback. To define this agent,
we propose to adopt a novel extension to the classical contextual multi-armed bandit setting and we provide a new algorithm called Behavior Constrained Thompson Sampling
(BCTS) that allows for online learning while obeying exogenous constraints. Our agent learns a constrained policy that
implements the observed behavioral constraints demonstrated
by a teacher agent, and then uses this constrained policy to
guide the reward-based online exploration and exploitation.
We characterize the upper bound on the expected regret of
the contextual bandit algorithm that underlies our agent and
provide a case study with real world data in two application
domains. Our experiments show that the designed agent is
able to act within the set of behavior constraints without significantly degrading its overall reward performance.

1

Tulane University

New Orleans, LA, USA
nsmattei@tulane.edu

Introduction

In online decision settings, an agent must select one out of
several possible actions, e.g., recommending a movie to a
particular user, or proposing a treatment to a patient in a clinical trial. Each of these actions is associated with a context,
e.g., a user profile, and a feedback signal, e.g., the reward or
rating, is only observed for the chosen option. In these online
decision settings the agent must learn the inherent trade-off
between exploration, which involves identifying and understanding the reward from an action, and exploitation, which
means gathering as much reward as possible from an action.
We consider cases where the behavior of the online agent
may need to be restricted in its choice of an action for a
given context by laws, values, preferences, or ethical principles (Russell, Dewey, and Tegmark 2015). More precisely,
we apply a set of behavioral constraints to the agent that are
independent of the reward function. For instance, a parent or
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3

