The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Structured Bayesian Networks: From Inference to Learning with Routes
Yujia Shen, Anchal Goyanka, Adnan Darwiche, Arthur Choi
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
{yujias,anchal,darwiche,aychoi}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

been learned from data. In this paper, we propose the first
exact inference algorithm for SBNs, which is based on compiling them to a Probabilistic Sentential Decision Diagram
(PSDD) (Kisa et al. 2014). Our algorithm is based on the
compilation algorithm of (Shen, Choi, and Darwiche 2016),
for compiling Bayesian networks into PSDDs.
In general, compiling an SBN to a PSDD is not always tractable. However, we identify a new sub-class of
SBNs that is guaranteed to have PSDDs of polynomial size.
These SBNs have applications in modeling distributions
over routes (Zheng 2015; Choi, Shen, and Darwiche 2017).
Next, we propose a new structure learning algorithm for this
tractable class of SBNs. On the inference side, we show our
algorithm can be an order-of-magnitude more efficient than
more traditional approaches to exact inference. On the learning side, we show that we can learn more effective models
for the tasks of route prediction and route classification.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we review SBNs and PSDDs. Next, in Section 3, we propose
our algorithm for compiling SBNs to PSDDs. We identify
a tractable sub-class of SBNs in Section 4, whose PSDDs
have polynomial size. We propose our learning algorithm in
Section 5. Finally, we provide an empirical analysis in Section 6 and conclude in Section 7.

Structured Bayesian networks (SBNs) are a recently proposed
class of probabilistic graphical models which integrate background knowledge in two forms: conditional independence
constraints and Boolean domain constraints. In this paper, we
propose the first exact inference algorithm for SBNs, based
on compiling a given SBN to a Probabilistic Sentential Decision Diagram (PSDD). We further identify a tractable subclass of SBNs, which have PSDDs of polynomial size. These
SBNs yield a tractable model of route distributions, whose
structure can be learned from GPS data, using a simple algorithm that we propose. Empirically, we demonstrate the utility
of our inference algorithm, showing that it can be an order-ofmagnitude more efficient than more traditional approaches to
exact inference. We demonstrate the utility of our learning algorithm, showing that it can learn more accurate models and
classifiers from GPS data.

1

Introduction

Structured Bayesian Networks (SBNs) were recently proposed by (Shen, Choi, and Darwiche 2018) for representing
and learning distributions over highly complex spaces, such
as routes on a map. Like a Bayesian network (BN), an SBN
is defined by a directed acyclic graph (DAG) and a set of
conditional distributions. In contrast to a BN, each node of
an SBN represents a cluster of variables (not just a single
variable). This cluster DAG specifies conditional independencies between sets of variables, but makes no claims about
the independencies between variables in the same cluster.
Also in contrast to a BN, which uses tabular CPTs to represent conditional distributions, an SBN uses a conditional
Probabilistic Sentential Decision Diagram, or conditional
PSDD, to compactly represent the distribution over a cluster,
conditioned on its parent clusters (Shen, Choi, and Darwiche
2018). SBNs can hence accommodate background knowledge in the form of conditional independence constraints
(via the cluster DAG), as well as knowledge in the form of
Boolean domain constraints (via the conditional PSDD).
Initially, (Shen, Choi, and Darwiche 2018) proposed an
efficient, closed-form algorithm for estimating the parameters of an SBN from complete data. However, they left open
the problem of performing inference in an SBN, once it has

2

Structured Bayesian Networks

The Structured Bayesian network (SBN) is a recently proposed class of probabilistic graphical model which is capable of integrating background knowledge in the form of both
conditional independence constraints and Boolean domain
constraints (Shen, Choi, and Darwiche 2018).
To specify an SBN, one first defines a cluster DAG. As a
Bayesian network’s structure is defined by a DAG, a Structured Bayesian network’s structure is defined by its cluster
DAG, where each node represents a set of random variables
(a cluster). The cluster DAG represents conditional independencies between these sets of variables: a cluster is independent of its non-descendant clusters given its parent clusters.
Importantly, nothing is said in terms of independence between variables of the same cluster, which is less committing than the DAG of a Bayesian network. In a cluster DAG,
we refer to a cluster X and its parents P as a family X | P.
To specify an SBN, one next annotates the cluster DAG
with conditional distributions, typically using a conditional

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7957

