The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Fluid Machine
Intelligence: Can We Make a Gifted AI?
Ian Davidson,1 Peter B. Walker2
1

University of California, Davis
2
Office of Naval Research
davidson@cs.ucdavis.edu, peter.b.walker1@navy.mil

Abstract

use fluid intelligence extensively, so that, unlike machines,
they do not need large training sets dedicated to each and
every new problem they encounter. Instead, we use problem
independent knowledge. However, to date, the AI community
has not sought to develop machines with fluid intelligence
which would require identifying and using complex patterns
beyond those found in any one specific problem. This is not
doubt partially due to most work optimizing performance on
a specific task.
A number of tests have been developed to assess fluid
intelligence in children and adults including the Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM) and Naglieri Nonverbal Ability
Test (NNAT). The latter is given to elementary school-age
children in a number of different states to determine their eligibility to enter various gifted and talented education (GATE)
programs (see https://www.cde.ca.gov/sp/gt/ for the state of
California’s program). Though there are variations in these
different non-verbal assessments, they all have a similar mode
of presentation. For example, in Figure 1 we see examples of
the NNAT-like questions with three rows and three columns
of tiles with one tile been with-held. The testee is asked to
choose which of a list of given tiles best completes the pattern. Consider the left most question, which is an example
of reasoning by analogy. Here, we see there is a horizontal
pattern (the common color of the back-most tile) which restricts the answer set to be the first, second, or third option.
Similarly, a vertical pattern (the common color of the front
tile) can be applied also which allows the testee to arrive at
the second option. For the purposes of the discussion here,
it should be pointed out that the puzzle was solved using
knowledge beyond the puzzle itself.
In this paper, we pose several challenges to the AI community to have a machine demonstrate fluid intelligence. Specifically, we focus on non-verbal tests of intelligence such as
the RPM and NNAT.

Most applications of machine intelligence have focused on
demonstrating crystallized intelligence. Crystallized intelligence relies on accessing problem-specific knowledge, skills
and experience stored in long term memory. In this paper, we
challenge the AI community to design AIs to completely take
tests of fluid intelligence which assess the ability to solve novel
problems using problem-independent solving skills. Tests of
fluid intelligence such as the NNAT are used extensively by
schools to determine entry into gifted education programs. We
explain the differences between crystallized and fluid intelligence, the importance and capabilities of machines demonstrating fluid intelligence and pose several challenges to the AI
community, including that a machine taking such a test would
be considered gifted by school districts in the state of California. Importantly, we show existing work on seemingly related
fields such as transfer, zero-shot, life-long and meta learning
(in their current form) are not directly capable of demonstrating fluid intelligence but instead are task-transductive mechanisms.

Introduction, Motivation and Significance
The long term aim of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is for a
machine to exhibit levels of intelligence similar to those possessed by humans. Over the years, this has been seemingly
achieved in a plethora of different and more challenging circumstances: digit recognition (1980s) (LeCun et al. 1990),
3D object recognition (1990s) (Murase and Nayar 1995),
achieving a level of play equivalent to the world champion
of checkers (2000s) (Schaeffer et al. 2007), beating a champion at Jeopardy (2010s) (Ferrucci et al. 2013), and more
recently beating a world champion at the game of GO (Silver et al. 2016). However, these previous demonstrations of
machine intelligence have effectively focused on crystallized
intelligence which is the ability to use application specific
previously learnt knowledge, skills and/or experience. For
example, despite AlphaGo’s resounding success, none of
the knowledge it has demonstrated can be applied to other
situations.
The field of cognitive psychology defines fluid intelligence
as reasoning and/or problem solving that can be applied in a
variety of situations including those not seen as yet. Humans

• Two Year Challenge. Our short term challenge is for the
machine to score 95% accuracy on a forty TRUE/FALSE
question version of the NNAT Level D. That is, rather than
choose amongst several options, answer TRUE/FALSE
to a given tile being a continuation of the patterns in the
question. This is a test of verification ability. That is, the
AI need only verify if a given response provides a correct
answer.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9760

