The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

TableSense: Spreadsheet Table Detection with Convolutional Neural Networks
Haoyu Dong,1 Shijie Liu,2 Shi Han,1 Zhouyu Fu,1 Dongmei Zhang1
1

Microsoft Research, Beijing 100080, China.
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
{hadong, shihan, zhofu, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com, shijie liu@buaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract

decades in both the research community and industry. Previous research on table detection has mainly targeted other
medias, e.g. HTML (Wang et al. 2012; Zhai and Liu 2005;
Wang and Hu 2002), images (Gatos et al. 2005; Zuyev 1997;
Hu et al. 1999; Liu, Mitra, and Giles 2008; Shafait and Smith
2010) and PDFs (Fang et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2007). The aim
is to retrieve (mostly likely single) table regions from ambient text. The major challenge for these techniques is the
understanding of binary files based on meta data analysis
and image processing, but the table boundaries are clear. The
scenario with spreadsheet table detection is fundamentally
different. As demonstrated in Figure 1, a single sheet can
have multiple tables cluttered around with potentially different structures for each table. The diversity in multi-table layout and structure significantly confounds the problem with
obfuscated table boundaries. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no prior research effort on this problem in academia,
while region-growth techniques are commonly used in commodity spreadsheet tools. However, region-growth is quite
fragile with the presence of complicated table structures and
layouts on the sheet. For example, it fails on the sample sheet
shown in Figure 1.
A key insight from inspecting our spreadsheet corpus is
that the vast majority of tables are “human-friendly” but not
“machine-friendly”. Only less than 3% of the tables in our
corpus have a pre-defined data model or are properly normalized for automated analysis. Most tables are designed
and crafted for summarization or reporting purposes, with
customized table designs by end users to fit their specific
goals. This often leads to considerable diversity in such tables and their layouts on a sheet, with artifacts to improve
clarity and visual quality. Some of these artifacts are shown
in Figure1. For the table at range B4:K371 , range B31:G33
is embedded in the larger homogeneous range of the table,
aligning to the same shared header but cutting the homogeneous range into two sections. It is not uncommon for heterogeneous data fields to be inserted into a homogeneous
range intentionally to improve summary. It is also typical
for users to intentionally insert blank rows or columns inside a table to improve alignment and clarity. Furthermore,

Spreadsheet table detection is the task of detecting all tables
on a given sheet and locating their respective ranges. Automatic table detection is a key enabling technique and an initial step in spreadsheet data intelligence. However, the detection task is challenged by the diversity of table structures
and table layouts on the spreadsheet. Considering the analogy between a cell matrix as spreadsheet and a pixel matrix
as image, and encouraged by the successful application of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) in computer vision,
we have developed TableSense, a novel end-to-end framework for spreadsheet table detection. First, we devise an effective cell featurization scheme to better leverage the rich information in each cell; second, we develop an enhanced convolutional neural network model for table detection to meet
the domain-specific requirement on precise table boundary
detection; third, we propose an effective uncertainty metric
to guide an active learning based smart sampling algorithm,
which enables the efficient build-up of a training dataset with
22,176 tables on 10,220 sheets with broad coverage of diverse table structures and layouts. Our evaluation shows that
TableSense is highly effective with 91.3% recall and 86.5%
precision in EoB-2 metric, a significant improvement over
both the current detection algorithm that are used in commodity spreadsheet tools and state-of-the-art convolutional neural
networks in computer vision.

Introduction
Spreadsheets are a critical end-user development tool for
data management and analysis. In spreadsheet data, the table is a key structure for data processing and information
presentation. Automatic table detection is an important initial step for one-click intelligence features such as Ideas in
Excel or Explore in Google Sheets, where insights can be
recommended from the detected tables with an automated
end-to-end experience. It is also a key enabling technique
for spreadsheet intelligence on the cloud or mobile devices.
On the cloud, a vast variety of data are available for batch
processing while there is no user interface to specify table
ranges. On mobile devices, user navigations and interactions
for specifying table ranges are restricted to a small screen.
Despite the importance of automatic table detection for
spreadsheets, this problem has largely been overlooked for

1

By convention, a contiguous cell range is identified by addresses of the cells in the top-left and bottom-right corners separated by ‘:’. Cells are referenced by the column and row indices.

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

69

