The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Tied Transformers: Neural Machine
Translation with Shared Encoder and Decoder
Yingce Xia,1 Tianyu He,2 Xu Tan,1 Fei Tian,1 Di He,3 Tao Qin1
1
Microsoft Research, 2 University of Science and Technology of China
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
{yinxia,xuta,fetia,taoqin}@microsoft.com, hetianyu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, di he@pku.edu.cn
3

Abstract

et al. 2018), etc. Parameter sharing means that multiple models are bridged by tying parts of or all the model parameters.
It has multiple potential benefits, such as reducing the number of model parameters so as to control model complexity (Firat et al. 2016), introducing prior knowledge to regularize models (Xia et al. 2018), and saving the storage space
or memory size (Johnson et al. 2017). Parameter sharing
is also adopted within network structure, including spatial
sharing for the convolutional kernels in convolutional neural
networks and temporal sharing for the transition functions in
recurrent neural networks (Goodfellow et al. 2016). Inspired
by the success of sharing vocabularies (and so word embeddings) of source and target languages, a question naturally
comes out: Can we go one step forward to further share the
whole parts of the encoder and decoder of an NMT model?
We make an initial attempt to answer this question and
then propose tied transformer. We cast the typical encoderdecoder based sequence-to-sequence model into a more
compact one in that there is only one copy of parameter set,
which is applicable to both the encoder and decoder. In that
way we force the sharing among the weights of the encoder
and the decoder, rather than only among the source-side and
target-side word embeddings.
We conduct extensive experiments to test the effectiveness of our proposed model. (1) For the translation between
similar languages (i.e., languages within the similar language family), like {German, Spanish, Romanian}-from/toEnglish, our model achieves promising even state-of-the-art
results: We achieve 35.52 for IWSLT German to English
translation (see Figure 2), 28.98/29.89 for WMT 2014 English to German translation without/with monolingual data
(see Table 4), and 34.67 for WMT 2016 English to Romanian translation (see Table 5). (2) For the translation of
dissimilar languages (e.g., languages in different language
families that cannot share vocabularies such as {Russian,
Hebrew, Chinese}-from/to-English), our model also obtains
good improvements (See Table 7&8). (3) For unsupervised
NMT where no bilingual data is available, on WMT 2016
German→English translation, we improve the BLEU score
from 21.0 to 22.05 (see Table 9).

Sharing source and target side vocabularies and word embeddings has been a popular practice in neural machine translation (briefly, NMT) for similar languages (e.g., English to
French or German translation). The success of such wordlevel sharing motivates us to move one step further: we consider model-level sharing and tie the whole parts of the encoder and decoder of an NMT model. We share the encoder
and decoder of Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), the stateof-the-art NMT model, and obtain a compact model named
Tied Transformer. Experimental results demonstrate that such
a simple method works well for both similar and dissimilar
language pairs. We empirically verify our framework for both
supervised NMT and unsupervised NMT: we achieve a 35.52
BLEU score on IWSLT 2014 German to English translation,
28.98/29.89 BLEU scores on WMT 2014 English to German translation without/with monolingual data, and a 22.05
BLEU score on WMT 2016 unsupervised German to English
translation.

1

Introduction

Neural machine translation (briefly, NMT), based on the
encoder-decoder framework with an attention module, has
made significant progress in recent years (Vaswani et al.
2017; Hassan et al. 2018; He et al. 2016; Xia et al. 2017b).
A common practice for training an NMT system is to share
source and target side vocabularies, especially when the
two languages are similar or in the same language family, like English↔French translation (Gehring et al. 2017;
Vaswani et al. 2017). Such a shared vocabulary is built
upon subword units like BPE (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch
2016b) or word pieces (Wu et al. 2016), and both source
and target words are split into smaller segmentations in this
shared vocabulary. Acting in this way, the words in source
sentences and target sentences are mapped to the same embedding space, which strengthens the semantic correlation
between the two languages, and regularizes a neural network
model with high capacity.
Parameter sharing has a long history in machine learning and has been applied in different learning settings such
as multi-task learning (Ruder 2017; Zhang and Yang 2017),
transfer learning (Pan and Yang 2010), meta-learning (Pham

2

Background

In this section, we introduce the background of a general
NMT model and the basic structure of Transformer.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5466

