The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Deep Neural Network for Unsupervised Anomaly
Detection and Diagnosis in Multivariate Time Series Data
Chuxu Zhang,§∗ Dongjin Song,†∗ Yuncong Chen,† Xinyang Feng,‡∗ Cristian Lumezanu,†
Wei Cheng,† Jingchao Ni,† Bo Zong,† Haifeng Chen,† Nitesh V. Chawla§
§

University of Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
NEC Laboratories America, Inc., NJ 08540, USA
‡
Columbia University, NY 10027, USA
§
†
{czhang11,nchawla}@nd.edu, {dsong,yuncong,lume,weicheng,jni,bzong,haifeng}@nec-labs.com, ‡ xf2143@columbia.edu
†

(b)

Abstract
Mnormal

Nowadays, multivariate time series data are increasingly collected in various real world systems, e.g., power plants, wearable devices, etc. Anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series refer to identifying abnormal status in certain time steps and pinpointing the root causes. Building such
a system, however, is challenging since it not only requires to
capture the temporal dependency in each time series, but also
need encode the inter-correlations between different pairs of
time series. In addition, the system should be robust to noise
and provide operators with different levels of anomaly scores
based upon the severity of different incidents. Despite the fact
that a number of unsupervised anomaly detection algorithms
have been developed, few of them can jointly address these
challenges. In this paper, we propose a Multi-Scale Convolutional Recurrent Encoder-Decoder (MSCRED), to perform anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data. Specifically, MSCRED first constructs multi-scale
(resolution) signature matrices to characterize multiple levels
of the system statuses in different time steps. Subsequently,
given the signature matrices, a convolutional encoder is employed to encode the inter-sensor (time series) correlations
and an attention based Convolutional Long-Short Term Memory (ConvLSTM) network is developed to capture the temporal patterns. Finally, based upon the feature maps which encode the inter-sensor correlations and temporal information,
a convolutional decoder is used to reconstruct the input signature matrices and the residual signature matrices are further
utilized to detect and diagnose anomalies. Extensive empirical studies based on a synthetic dataset and a real power plant
dataset demonstrate that MSCRED can outperform state-ofthe-art baseline methods.

Mabnormal

Power Plants

A2
…

IT Systems

no label during
normal period

A1

(a)
multivariate
time series

multi-scale (duration) anomalies
during abnormal period

Figure 1: (a) Unsupervised anomaly detection and diagnosis
in multivariate time series data. (b) Different system signature matrices between normal and abnormal periods.

A critical task in managing these systems is to detect anomalies in certain time steps such that the operators can take further actions to resolve underlying issues. For instance, an
anomaly score can be produced based on the sensor data
and it can be used as an indicator of power plant failure
(Len, Vittal, and Manimaran 2007). An accurate detection
is crucial to avoid serious financial and business losses as
it has been reported that 1 minute downtime of an automotive manufacturing plant may cost up to 20, 000 US dollars
(Djurdjanovic, Lee, and Ni 2003). In addition, pinpointing
the root causes, i.e., identifying which sensors (system components) are causes to an anomaly, can help the system operator perform system diagnosis and repair in a timely manner. In real world applications, it is common that a short
term anomaly caused by temporal turbulence or system status switch may not eventually lead to a true system failure
due to the auto-recovery capability and robustness of modern systems. Therefore, it would be ideal if an anomaly detection algorithm can provide operators with different levels
of anomaly scores based upon the severity of various incidents. For simplicity, we assume that the severity of an incident is proportional to the duration of an anomaly in this
work. Figure 1(a) illustrates two anomalies, i.e., A1 and A2
marked by red dash circle, in multivariate time series data.
The root causes are yellow and black time series, respectively. The duration (severity level) of A2 is larger than A1 .
To build a system which can automatically detect and di-

Introduction
Complex systems are ubiquitous in modern manufacturing
industry and information services. Monitoring the behaviors of these systems generates a substantial amount of multivariate time series data, such as the readings of the networked sensors (e.g., temperature and pressure) distributed
in a power plant or the connected components (e.g., CPU usage and disk I/O) in an Information Technology (IT) system.
∗

This work was done when the first and fourth authors were
summer interns at NEC Laboratories America. Dongjin Song is the
corresponding author.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1409

