The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Identifying Bottlenecks in Practical SAT-Based Model
Finding for First-Order Logic Ontologies with Datasets
Shirly Stephen, Torsten Hahmann
School of Computing and Information Science,
University of Maine, Orono, Maine 04473
{shirly.stephen, torsten.hahmann}@maine.edu

Preliminaries

Abstract
Satisfiability of first-order logic (FOL) ontologies is typically
verified by translation to propositional satisfiability (SAT)
problems, which is then tackled by a SAT solver. Unfortunately, SAT solvers often experience scalability issues when
reasoning with FOL ontologies and even moderately sized
datasets. While SAT solvers have been found to capably handle complex axiomatizations, finding models of datasets gets
considerably more complex and time-intensive as the number
of clause exponentially increases with increase in individuals and axiomatic complexity. We identify FOL definitions
as a specific bottleneck and demonstrate via experiments that
the presence of many defined terms of the highest arity significantly slows down model finding. We also show that removing optional definitions and substituting these terms by
their definiens leads to a reduction in the number of clauses,
which makes SAT-based model finding practical for over 100
individuals in a FOL theory.

Introduction
First-order logic is one of the standards for describing formal ontologies in many domains. However, an ontology can
only serve its purpose if we can verify its logical consistency in two forms: (1) check its internal consistency to rule
out contradictions by generating some model, and (2) check
its external consistency with datasets that are representative
of the ontology’s intended purpose. Existing work in FOL
ontology consistency checking is limited to satisfiability verification of terminological axioms (TBox), and they rarely
contain facts/assertions about individuals (i.e., they typically
lack an ABox). Model finding for FOL ontologies is not only
theoretically incomplete but has not been very successful
in practice either except for tiny, often trivial models with
less than 20 individuals. In this work we identify a specific
bottleneck that can be remedied for model finding to scale
better in practice despite its theoretical undecidability and
intractability. Our experiments are specifically designed to
test the hypothesis that: ”Additional defined terms negatively
impact model finding time, and rewriting ABox facts that use
optional definitions with their definiens can speed and scale
up model finding in practice”.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10039

A FOL ontology T is a set of FOL sentences. All nonlogical symbols in T , i.e., constants, functions, and predicates,
form its signature, denoted by λ(T ). Each T admits a set
of interpretations over a nonempty domain D of individuals. Any interpretation assigns each constant in λ(T ) an
individual in D and each n-ary predicate Ω in λ(T ) a relation Ψ(Ω) : Dn → {True, False}. An interpretation I for
which all sentences in T are true is called a model. To facilitate model finding using SAT solvers, a FOL ontology
is typically converted to an equisatisfiable clausal normal
form (FOL-CNF), where each FOL sentence is represented
as a universally quantified conjunction of disjunctions of
atoms. A SAT-based model finder then propositionalizes all
FOL-CNF clauses by instantiating them, for a fixed domain
size, d. Then each FOL-CNF clause leads to an exponentially growing number dv of propositional clauses, where
v is the number of variables in the FOL-CNF clause. The
number of propositional variables in the SAT representation
is highly influenced by the number and arity of predicates:
each predicate of arity n results in dn propositional variables.
The number of propositional variables determines the search
space, which consists of 2VP possible interpretations. However, the search space can, be greatly reduced if the number of
predicates of highest arity is kept low. This is the idea tested
here experimentally, leveraging the fact that many ontologies
have lots of defined predicates, which we can easily dispense
off during model finding while still keeping the semantics of
the ontology intact.

Formalization
Knowledge in a FOL ontology can be divided into an ABox,
and TBox. The ABox contains class and relational assertions
about individuals, and is a set of ground clauses. The TBox
contains terminological axioms that describe the concepts and
their roles within a domain of interest. We adapt a distinction
of three types of sentences in a FOL ontology to formalize
the ideas central to our experiments.
• An explicit definition is a special type of TBox sentence of
the form ∀x1 , . . . , xn [Ω(x1 , . . . , xn ) ↔ α(x1 , . . . , xn )],
where Ω is the defined n-ary predicate, and α is a formula
with x1 to xn as free variables and λ(T ) \ Ω as the only
nonlogical symbols.

