The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Weighted Oblique Decision Trees∗
Bin-Bin Yang, Song-Qing Shen, Wei Gao
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
{yangbb, shensq, gaow}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

an axis-parallel hyperplane in the feature space, and these
trees have made successful applications (Cicalese, Laber, and
Saettler 2014; Shotton et al. 2013a).
The axis-parallel decision trees may yield complex tree
structure and increase computational cost, when decision
boundaries are not parallel to axes. Hence, an oblique
split is introduced to make a multivariate linear combination of features followed by binary quantization. Generally,
oblique decision trees simplify tree structure and achieve
better performance (Breiman et al. 1984; Heath, Kasif, and
Salzberg 1993; Brodley and Utgoff 1995; Loh and Shih 1997;
Amasyali and Ersoy 2008; Robertson, Price, and Reale 2013;
Kontschieder et al. 2015). While training oblique decision
trees is always followed with high running-time cost, as well
as the initialization with best axis-parallel splits (Murthy,
Kasif, and Salzberg 1994; Norouzi et al. 2015).
This work introduces another oblique decision tree based
on continuous optimization with random initialization. The
main contributions can be summarized as follows:

Decision trees have attracted much attention during the past
decades. Previous decision trees include axis-parallel and
oblique decision trees; both of them try to find the best splits
via exhaustive search or heuristic algorithms in each iteration.
Oblique decision trees generally simplify tree structure and
take better performance, but are always accompanied with
higher computation, as well as the initialization with the best
axis-parallel splits. This work presents the Weighted Oblique
Decision Tree (WODT) based on continuous optimization
with random initialization. We consider different weights of
each instance for child nodes at all internal nodes, and then
obtain a split by optimizing the continuous and differentiable
objective function of weighted information entropy. Extensive
experiments show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

Introduction
Decision trees have attracted much attention in many real
applications such as computer vision (Bosch, Zisserman,
and Munoz 2007) and information retrieval (Fuhr and
Pfeifer 1994). The classical decision trees include CART
(Breiman et al. 1984), ID3 (Quinlan 1986), C4.5 (Quinlan 1993), etc. This motivates a series of studies (Murthy,
Kasif, and Salzberg 1994; Loh and Shih 1997; Breiman 2001;
Geurts, Ernst, and Wehenkel 2006; Shotton et al. 2013b;
Fan 2016; Abuzaid et al. 2016; Zhou and Feng 2017). Recent
years have witnessed an increasing popularity on decision
trees, for example, Microsoft Kinect makes real time human
pose estimation from single depth images by decision trees
trained on millions of examples (Shotton et al. 2013a).
The basic idea of decision trees is to seperate data with
some certain splitting criterion, recursively. This procedure
requires an optimization at each internal node of the tree,
which partitions the training data in the node into subsets
according to some splitting criteria, such as information gain
(Quinlan 1993) or Gini impurity index (Breiman et al. 1984).
A large number of decision trees have been developed to
exploit univariate split functions, according to the feature
value below some threshold or not. We call it axis-parallel
decision tree since the split at each node can be viewed as

• Motivated from weighted information entropy, we consider
different weights of each instance for child nodes at all
internal nodes, and then obtain a split by optimizing a
continuous and differentiable objective function. Here we
introduce the ‘soft’ splitting instead of ‘hard’ splitting
to tackle the intractability for continuous optimization.
Our method proceeds with random initialization, whereas
previous oblique decision trees require initialization with
the best axis-parallel splits.
• Extensive experiments show that our method simplifies
tree structure, and achieves significantly better performance than state-of-the-art algorithms of decision trees.
Our experiments also show that previous oblique decision
trees can not obtain small-size trees without the best axisparallel splitting initialization. Moreover, our method takes
relatively less running-time cost, especially for datasets of
dimensionality larger than 200, such as usps, protein and
mnist. We finally analyze the tree depths of the proposed
WODT method.
The rest of this work is organized as follows: we begin with
relevant work and some preliminaries, and then propose our
WODT method with empirical supports, and finally conclude
with future work.

∗
Supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
(2017YFB1001903), NSFC(61751306, 61876078).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5621

