The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Simulation-Based Approach to Efficient Commonsense Reasoning in
Very Large Knowledge Bases
Abhishek Sharma, Keith M. Goolsbey
Cycorp Inc., 7718 Wood Hollow Drive, Suite 250, Austin, TX 78731
abhishek@cyc.com, goolsbey@cyc.com

Abstract

paths. Therefore, to make the search more efficient in such
a KBS, an inference engine is expected to assess the utility
of further expanding each incomplete path. A naïve ordering algorithm can cause unproductive backtracking. To
solve this problem, researchers have used two types of
search control knowledge: (i) Axiom/premise selection
heuristics: These heuristics attempt to find the small number of axioms that are the most relevant for answering a set
of queries, and (ii) Certain researchers have worked on
ordering heuristics for improving the order of rule and
node expansions.
In the current work, we describe a simulation-based approach for learning an ordering heuristic for controlling
search in large knowledge-based systems (KBS). The key
idea is to simulate several thousand paths from a node.
New nodes are added to a search tree, and each node contains a value that predicts the expected number of answers
from expanding the tree from that node. The search tree
expansion guides simulations along promising paths, by
selecting the nodes that have the highest potential values.
The algorithm produces a highly selective and asymmetric
search tree that quickly identifies good axiom sequences
for queries. Moreover, the evaluation function is not handcrafted: It depends solely on the outcomes of the simulated
paths. This approach has the characteristics of a statistical
anytime algorithm: The quality of evaluation function improves with additional simulations. The evaluation function is used to order nodes in a search. Experimental results
show that: (i) this approach helps in significantly reducing
inference time and, (ii) by guiding the search towards more
promising parts of the tree, this approach improves the
question-answering performance in time-constrained cognitive systems.
This paper is organized as follows: We start by discussing relevant previous work. Our approach to using simulations to learn a search heuristic is explained next. We conclude after analyzing the experimental results.

Cognitive systems must reason with large bodies of general
knowledge to perform complex tasks in the real world.
However, due to the intractability of reasoning in large, expressive knowledge bases (KBs), many AI systems have
limited reasoning capabilities. Successful cognitive systems
have used a variety of machine learning and axiom selection
methods to improve inference. In this paper, we describe a
search heuristic that uses a Monte-Carlo simulation technique to choose inference steps. We test the efficacy of this
approach on a very large and expressive KB, Cyc. Experimental results on hundreds of queries show that this method
is highly effective in reducing inference time and improving
question-answering (Q/A) performance.

Introduction
Deductive reasoning is an important component of many
cognitive systems. Modern cognitive systems need large
bodies of general knowledge to perform complex tasks
(Lenat & Feigenbaum 1991, Forbus et al 2007). However,
efficient reasoning systems can be built only for small-tomedium sized knowledge bases (KBs). Very large
knowledge bases contain millions of rules and facts about
the world in highly expressive languages. Due to the intractability of reasoning in such systems, even simple queries are timed-out after several minutes. Therefore, researchers believe that resolution-based theorem provers are
overwhelmed when they are expected to work on large
expressive KBs (Hoder & Voronkov 2011).
The goal query in knowledge-based systems (KBS) is
typically provable from a small number of ground atomic
formulas (GAFs) and rules. However, unoptimized inference engines can find it difficult to distinguish between a
small set of relevant rules and the millions of irrelevant
ones. Hundreds of thousands of axioms that are irrelevant
for the query can inundate the reasoner with millions of
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1360

