The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Distributionally Adversarial Attack
Tianhang Zheng,1 Changyou Chen,1 Kui Ren1,2
1

State University of New York at Buffalo
2
Zhejiang University
{tzheng4, changyou, kuiren}@buffalo.edu

Abstract

been proposed to generate adversarial samples, such as Fast
Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) (Szegedy et al. 2013), Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and
Bengio 2016b), and Carlini & Wagner Attacks (CW) (Carlini and Wagner 2017).
Among all those first-order attacks, Madry et al. (2017)
suggest that PGD is a universal attack algorithm, and the
classifier adversarially trained by PGD is robust against
a wide range of first-order attacks. Carlini et al. (2017)
strengthen the hypothesis by demonstrating that PGDadversarial training provably succeeds at increasing the distortion required to construct adversarial examples by a factor of 4.2. Moreover, among all the white-box defenses that
appeared in ICLR-2018 and CVPR-2018, PGD-adversarial
training is the only empirical defense that has not been further attacked (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018; Athalye
and Carlini 2018).
Despite the success of PGD, one notable limitation is
that the adversarial samples are not globally optimal, in the
sense that adversarial samples are generated independently
for each data sample. From a machine-learning perspective,
this lacks a statistical interpretation in terms of risk maximization, i.e., PGD is not a training procedure, thus the underlying optimization problem is not mathematically clear.
In this paper, we provide a distribution-optimization view of
PGD, and propose distributionally adversarial attack (DAA),
a new concept of adversarial attack that is performed on
the space of probability measures (e.g., unknown data distributions). In DAA, the problem is formulated as optimizing an adversarial data distribution (from which adversarial
samples are drawn from) such that the generalization risk
increases maximumly. This generalizes PGD by lifting the
optimization onto the space of probability measures, and
can be interpreted as Wasserstein gradient flows (WGFs),
a framework for distribution optimization which always decreases an “energy functional” over time. The energy functional reflexes the data manifold in adversarial attack, and is
designed in correspondence with the original objective of a
DNN. When using testing data to approximate the unknown
data manifold, DAA leads to a variant of the standard PGD
where all adversarial samples are explicitly dependent.
DAA is extensively evaluated on four datasets, including
MNIST, Fashion MNIST (FMNIST), CIFAR10, and Imagenet, by attacking their state-of-the-art defense models. We

Recent work on adversarial attack has shown that Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD) Adversary is a universal first-order
adversary, and the classifier adversarially trained by PGD is
robust against a wide range of first-order attacks. It is worth
noting that the original objective of an attack/defense model
relies on a data distribution p(x), typically in the form of risk
maximization/minimization, e.g., max/min Ep(x) L(x) with
p(x) some unknown data distribution and L(·) a loss function. However, since PGD generates attack samples independently for each data sample based on L(·), the procedure does
not necessarily lead to good generalization in terms of risk
optimization. In this paper, we achieve the goal by proposing distributionally adversarial attack (DAA), a framework to
solve an optimal adversarial-data distribution, a perturbed
distribution that satisfies the L∞ constraint but deviates from
the original data distribution to increase the generalization
risk maximally. Algorithmically, DAA performs optimization
on the space of potential data distributions, which introduces
direct dependency between all data points when generating
adversarial samples. DAA is evaluated by attacking stateof-the-art defense models, including the adversarially-trained
models provided by MIT MadryLab. Notably, DAA ranks the
first place on MadryLab’s white-box leaderboards, reducing
the accuracy of their secret MNIST model to 88.56% (with
l∞ perturbations of  = 0.3) and the accuracy of their secret
CIFAR model to 44.71% (with l∞ perturbations of  = 8.0).
Code for the experiments is released on https://github.com/
tianzheng4/Distributionally-Adversarial-Attack.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed widespread use of deep neural networks (DNNs), achieving remarkable performance on
different machine-learning tasks, such as object detection
and recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012),
strategy optimization (Silver et al. 2016), and natural language processing (Cho et al. 2014). At the same time, DNNs
also have been proved to be vulnerable to adversarial samples – data that are indistinguishable from natural samples
by human but endow additional maliciously-embedded perturbations. Those maliciously perturbed samples can cause
DNNs to make predictions different from the ground truth
with high confidence. Various first-order algorithms have
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2253

