The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Variance Reduction in Monte Carlo Counterfactual Regret
Minimization (VR-MCCFR) for Extensive Form Games Using Baselines
Martin Schmid,1 Neil Burch,1 Marc Lanctot,1 Matej Moravcik,1 Rudolf Kadlec,1 Michael Bowling1,2
DeepMind1
University of Alberta2
{mschmid,burchn,lanctot,moravcik,rudolfkadlec,bowlingm}@google.com

Abstract

a) CFR

Learning strategies for imperfect information games from
samples of interaction is a challenging problem. A common
method for this setting, Monte Carlo Counterfactual Regret
Minimization (MCCFR), can have slow long-term convergence rates due to high variance. In this paper, we introduce
a variance reduction technique (VR-MCCFR) that applies to
any sampling variant of MCCFR. Using this technique, periteration estimated values and updates are reformulated as a
function of sampled values and state-action baselines, similar to their use in policy gradient reinforcement learning. The
new formulation allows estimates to be bootstrapped from
other estimates within the same episode, propagating the benefits of baselines along the sampled trajectory; the estimates
remain unbiased even when bootstrapping from other estimates. Finally, we show that given a perfect baseline, the variance of the value estimates can be reduced to zero. Experimental evaluation shows that VR-MCCFR brings an order of
magnitude speedup, while the empirical variance decreases
by three orders of magnitude. The decreased variance allows
for the first time CFR+ to be used with sampling, increasing
the speedup to two orders of magnitude.

b) MCCFR

c) VR-MCCFR

Figure 1: High-level overview of Variance Reduction MCCFR (VR-MCCFR) and related methods. a) CFR traverses
the entire tree on every iteration. b) MCCFR samples trajectories and computes the values only for the sampled actions, while the off-trajectory actions are treated as zerovalued. While MCCFR uses importance sampling weight to
ensure the values are unbiased, the sampling introduces high
variance. c) VR-MCCFR follows the same sampling framework as MCCFR, but uses baseline values for both sampled actions (in blue) as well as the off-trajectory actions
(in red). These baselines use control variates and send up
bootstrapped estimates to decrease the per-iteration variance
thus speeding up the convergence.
The two fields of RL and computational game theory have
largely grown independently. However, there has been recent work that relates approaches within these two communities. Fictitious self-play uses RL to compute approximate best responses and supervised learning to combine
responses (Heinrich, Lanctot, and Silver 2015). This idea
is extended to a unified training framework that can produce more general policies by regularizing over generated response oracles (Lanctot et al. 2017). RL-style regressors were first used to compress regrets in game theorietic algorithms (Waugh et al. 2015). DeepStack introduced deep neural networks as generalized value-function
approximators for online planning in imperfect information
games (Moravčı́k et al. 2017). These value functions operate
on a belief-space over all possible states consistent with the
players’ observations.
This paper similarly unites concepts from both fields,
proposing an unbiased variance reduction technique for
Monte Carlo counterfactual regret minimization using an
analog of state-action baselines from actor-critic RL methods. While policy gradient methods typically involve Monte
Carlo estimates, the analog in imperfect information settings
is Monte Carlo Counterfactual Regret Minimization (MC-

Introduction
Policy gradient algorithms have shown remarkable success
in single-agent reinforcement learning (RL) (Mnih et al.
2016; Schulman et al. 2017). While there has been evidence of empirical success in multiagent problems (Foerster
et al. 2017; Bansal et al. 2018), the assumptions made by
RL methods generally do not hold in multiagent partiallyobservable environments. Hence, they are not guaranteed to
find an optimal policy, even with tabular representations in
two-player zero-sum (competitive) games (Littman 1994).
As a result, policy iteration algorithms based on computational game theory and regret minimization have been the
preferred formalism in this setting. Counterfactual regret
minimization (Zinkevich et al. 2008) has been a core component of this progress in Poker AI, leading to solving HeadsUp Limit Texas Hold’em (Bowling et al. 2015) and defeating professional poker players in No-Limit (Moravčı́k et al.
2017; Brown and Sandholm 2017).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2157

