The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

RGBD Based Gaze Estimation via Multi-Task CNN
Dongze Lian,1∗ Ziheng Zhang,1∗ Weixin Luo,1 Lina Hu,1 Minye Wu,1
Zechao Li,2 Jingyi Yu,1 Shenghua Gao1†
1

ShanghaiTech University, 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{liandz, zhangzh, luowx, huln, wumy}@shanghaitech.edu.cn,
{zechao.li}@njust.edu.cn, {yujingyi, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

image quality, etc. In particular, accuracy in gaze estimation
still varies significantly across subjects.
In light of the recent success of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) in various computer vision tasks, a number of approaches have been proposed to leverage CNNs
for appearance-based gaze estimation (Krafka et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2017). They observe that the gaze point of a person depends on 3D eye position centered at the camera and
gaze direction whereas the gaze direction further depends on
the head and eyeball poses (Zhang et al. 2017) 1 . The 3D eye
position imposes significance because even with the same
gaze direction, a change of distance between the eye and the
screen would change the gaze point on the screen target, as
shown in Figure 1. To obtain 3D eye positions, (Krafka et al.
2016; Zhang et al. 2017) employed face grid to indicate the
face region in the image. In reality, faces of different subjects can vary greatly in size and shape that a uniform grid
is insufficient to describe.
Another challenge lies in head pose representations. A
number of previous approaches (Krafka et al. 2016; Zhu and
Deng 2017; Ranjan, De Mello, and Kautz 2018) attempt to
encode head pose information by analyzing the RGB color
image, e.g., to introduce gaze transform layers or to use
branched head pose models. Improvements brought by these
approaches are still limited due to the lack of depth information. In this paper, we introduce depth-based approach to
simultaneously address the 3D eye positions and head pose
representation problems.
Using RGBD images for gaze tracking is not completely
new (Mora and Odobez 2013; Xiong et al. 2014). However,
the latest approaches only use a sparse set of points with
depth information due to the limitations of the depth sensor.
These points, although useful, are not sufficiently robust to
reconstruct the head pose. Ideally, data-driven methods can
more robustly infer the pose by leveraging learning-based
approaches. However, so far only a single RGBD dataset is
readily available to the public and the dataset itself only contains a very small number of participants - 16 with 12 males
and 4 females. The study by Krafka et al. shows that more
participants can clearly improve gaze tracking performance
(Krafka et al. 2016). On the dataset front, we first present a

This paper tackles RGBD based gaze estimation with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Specifically, we propose
to decompose gaze point estimation into eyeball pose, head
pose, and 3D eye position estimation. Compared with RGB
image-based gaze tracking, having depth modality helps to
facilitate head pose estimation and 3D eye position estimation. The captured depth image, however, usually contains
noise and black holes which noticeably hamper gaze tracking.
Thus we propose a CNN-based multi-task learning framework to simultaneously refine depth images and predict gaze
points. We utilize a generator network for depth image generation with a Generative Neural Network (GAN), where the
generator network is partially shared by both the gaze tracking network and GAN-based depth synthesizing. By optimizing the whole network simultaneously, depth image synthesis
improves gaze point estimation and vice versa. Since the only
existing RGBD dataset (EYEDIAP) is too small, we build
a large-scale RGBD gaze tracking dataset for performance
evaluation. As far as we know, it is the largest RGBD gaze
dataset in terms of the number of participants. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms
existing methods by a large margin on both our dataset and
the EYEDIAP dataset.

Introduction
Gaze estimation is an important task and has wide applications in human-computer interaction (Majaranta and Bulling
2014), visual behavior analysis (Morimoto and Mimica
2005) and psychological studies (Rayner 1998). More recent studies have focused on appearance-based estimation
(Zhang et al. 2015; Krafka et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2017;
Zhu and Deng 2017) as a vehicle for general gaze estimation. Unlike model-based methods, appearance-based methods achieve satisfactory performance and at the same time
maintain a user-friendly data acquisition procedure, i.e.,
without imposing additional priors on face poses or conducting elaborate system calibrations. Despite being a desirable gaze estimator, existing solutions are still sensitive
to head pose, illumination inconsistencies, occlusions, low
∗

The authors contribute equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1
The eyeball pose has also been denoted as the eyeball movement (Zhu and Deng 2017).

2488

