The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

VistaNet: Visual Aspect Attention Network for Multimodal Sentiment Analysis
Quoc-Tuan Truong, Hady W. Lauw
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
qttruong.2017@smu.edu.sg hadywlauw@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Detecting the sentiment expressed by a document is a key task
for many applications, e.g., modeling user preferences, monitoring consumer behaviors, assessing product quality. Traditionally, the sentiment analysis task primarily relies on textual content. Fueled by the rise of mobile phones that are often the only cameras on hand, documents on the Web (e.g.,
reviews, blog posts, tweets) are increasingly multimodal in
nature, with photos in addition to textual content. A question
arises whether the visual component could be useful for sentiment analysis as well. In this work, we propose Visual Aspect
Attention Network or VistaNet, leveraging both textual and visual components. We observe that in many cases, with respect
to sentiment detection, images play a supporting role to text,
highlighting the salient aspects of an entity, rather than expressing sentiments independently of the text. Therefore, instead of using visual information as features, VistaNet relies
on visual information as alignment for pointing out the important sentences of a document using attention. Experiments on
restaurant reviews showcase the effectiveness of visual aspect
attention, vis-à-vis visual features or textual attention.

Figure 1: Example of Yelp review for Bottega Louie

An emerging concept in sentiment analysis is how different parts of a document are differentially informative. A
sentence that expresses sentimentality (e.g., “The salad was
fresh and delicious and the soufle was pure perfection.”) is
likely more important than a neutral sentence (e.g., “I had
the Cobb Salad and Chocolate Soufle for lunch.”). Correspondingly, some words (e.g., “delicious”) are more influential. These differences in level of informativeness could
be captured via attention (Yang et al. 2016), which assigns
more consequential sentences (or words) higher weights.
Problem. Today’s documents contain more than text.
With smartphones and tablets, it is very convenient to take
pictures anytime, anywhere. As a result, many documents
are now multimodal. While “multimodal” could refer to image, audio, or video, here we focus on images. Blog posts
and reviews often include photos to achieve more vivid descriptions of the authors’ experiences. For instance, Bottega
Louie2 , the most reviewed restaurant in Los Angeles on Yelp
has 15 thousand reviews (as of the time of writing), with 26
thousand images within. Beyond reviews, it has also been
reported3 that 42% of tweets include an image.
There are synergies between the visual and textual components of reviews. Figure 1 shows a Yelp review about
Bottega Louie, with two images and several sentences describing cakes. We make a couple of observations. First,
a sentence within a review tends to focus on one thing

Introduction
In this age of the participative Web, user-generated content
(e.g., reviews) forms a greater part of the Web. It was reported1 that 90% of consumers would read reviews before
visiting a business, and 88% trust those reviews as much
as recommendations from acquaintances. Businesses want
to learn user preferences for recommendations, or monitor
consumer perceptions for marketing and product design.
Key to feeling the pulse of user-generated content is sentiment analysis. The common formulation is text classification (Pang and Lee 2007). Given a document (e.g., review,
blog post, tweet), we classify it into sentiment classes, which
could be binary (positive vs. negative) or ordinal along some
rating scale (e.g., 1 to 5). Various textual features and supervised learning techniques have been proposed (Liu and
Zhang 2012). More current methods based on deep neural networks (Kim 2014; Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015;
Tang, Qin, and Liu 2015) are especially effective.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.invespcro.com/blog/
the-importance-of-online-customer-reviews-infographic

2

https://www.yelp.com/biz/bottega-louie-los-angeles
https://thenextweb.com/socialmedia/2015/11/03/
what-analyzing-1-million-tweets-taught-us/
3

305

