The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Efficient Compressive Convolutional Network
for Unified Object Detection and Image Compression
Xichuan Zhou,∗1 Lang Xu,1 Shujun Liu,1 Yingcheng Lin,1 Lei Zhang,1 Cheng Zhuo2
1

2

College of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China, 400044
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China, 310058
*Indicates the corresponding author, Email: zxc@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract

for efficient object detection. Thanks to these inspiring
works, the complexity of the CNN based object detection
has been significantly reduced, which makes it possible
to implement CNN-based computer vision applications on
wireless embedded devices.
Besides high computational complexity, another challenge of designing embedded computer vision systems is
limited power budget. Since a major proportion of the
energy is consumed by wireless communication (SanMiguel
and Cavallaro 2016), it is desired that data should be compressed before wireless transmission. One conventional way
to achieve that is to use an extra device for image compression, which will potentially increase the cost and energy
consumption on the system level. To address that challenge,
this paper proposes an efficient method for unified object
detection and image compression. The basic idea is to
optimize and reuse the CNN convolution operation for both
feature extraction and image compression; therefore, no
extra computational overhead is required compared to the
original neural network built for object detection.
The proposed method is based on the modern compressive
sensing technique. It has been proven that, due to the
sparse nature of the image signal, one may recover it
from far fewer samples by solving undetermined linear
systems (Candès, Romberg, and Tao 2006). To recover a
compressed image, the compressive sensing theory requires
the sufficient condition of incoherence, which is applied
through the isometric property (Donoho 2006; Candès and
Wakin 2008). At the front end, the conventional compressive
sensing approach uses random matrices for data embedding,
which has been proven to satisfy the incoherence condition
with high probability (Candes and Tao 2006). It is worth
noting that, since the convolution operation is also linear,
it can be used for data embedding. Romberg found that,
the convolution between the data and a random embedding
matrix is an efficient compressive sensing strategy, and the
image compressed by random convolution can be recovered
via L1-norm optimization (Romberg 2009).
As the pioneering work to use the convolution operation for compressive sensing, research (Romberg 2009)
still adopted random embedding matrices to ensure the
incoherence condition. Recently, a group of learning based
approaches were proposed to estimate deterministic embedding matrices using a set of training samples. As an

This paper addresses the challenge of designing efficient
framework for real-time object detection and image compression. The proposed Compressive Convolutional Network
(CCN) is basically a compressive-sensing-enabled convolutional neural network. Instead of designing different components for compressive sensing and object detection, the CCN
optimizes and reuses the convolution operation for recoverable data embedding and image compression. Technically,
the incoherence condition, which is the sufficient condition
for recoverable data embedding, is incorporated in the first
convolutional layer of the CCN model as regularization;
Therefore, the CCN convolution kernels learned by training
over the VOC and COCO image set can be used for data embedding and image compression. By reusing the convolution
operation, no extra computational overhead is required for
image compression. As a result, the CCN is 3.1 to 5.0 fold
more efficient than the conventional approaches. In our experiments, the CCN achieved 78.1 mAP for object detection
and 3.0 dB to 5.2 dB higher PSNR for image compression
than the examined compressive sensing approaches.

Introduction
Since the last a few years, the approach of convolutional
neural network (CNN) has been proven to be successful
for various computer vision applications (Sun et al. 2014;
Amato et al. 2016; Loquercio et al. 2018). For example,
one application scenario is the smart wireless surveillance
camera, which is a new type of device that performs object
detection using embedded system. However, due to the constraints of computation resource and power budget, it is still
a challenge to implement real-time CNN-based computer
vision using wireless embedded systems (Sze et al. 2017).
Early CNN based object detection approaches, such as the
well-known Regional CNN (R-CNN) (Girshick et al. 2014),
consisted of a region-proposal stage to select thousands of
regions from the target image for object recognition, which
resulted in high computational overhead. Recently, a group
of more efficient CNN frameworks, including the Fast RCNN (Girshick 2015) , Faster R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015),
the Single Short Detection (SSD) (Liu et al. 2016) and the
YOLO models (Redmon and Farhadi 2017) were proposed
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5949

