The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hierarchical Encoder with Auxiliary Supervision for
Neural Table-to-Text Generation: Learning Better Representation for Tables
Tianyu Liu, Fuli Luo, Qiaolin Xia, Shuming Ma, Baobao Chang, Zhifang Sui
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Ministry of Education,
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
{tianyu0421, luofuli, xql, shumingma, chbb, szf}@pku.edu.cn
Infobox:
Attribute
Name
Birthdate
Birthplace
Deathdate
Deathplace
Nationality
Known for
Occupation
Alma Mater
Residence
Article title

Abstract
Generating natural language descriptions for the structured
tables which consist of multiple attribute-value tuples is a
convenient way to help people to understand the tables. Most
neural table-to-text models are based on the encoder-decoder
framework. However, it is hard for a vanilla encoder to learn
the accurate semantic representation of a complex table. The
challenges are two-fold: firstly, the table-to-text datasets often contain large number of attributes across different domains, thus it is hard for the encoder to incorporate these heterogeneous resources. Secondly, the single encoder also has
difficulties in modeling the complex attribute-value structure
of the tables. To this end, we first propose a two-level hierarchical encoder with coarse-to-fine attention to handle the
attribute-value structure of the tables. Furthermore, to capture the accurate semantic representations of the tables, we
propose 3 joint tasks apart from the prime encoder-decoder
learning, namely auxiliary sequence labeling task, text autoencoder and multi-labeling classification, as the auxiliary supervisions for the table encoder. We test our models on the
widely used dataset W IKIBIO which contains Wikipedia infoboxes and related descriptions. The dataset contains complex tables as well as large number of attributes across different domains. We achieve the state-of-the-art performance on
both automatic and human evaluation metrics.

Content
Edward Merrill Root
04 January 1895
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
26 October 1973
Kennebunkport, Maine
American
anti-communist activities
educator and poet
Amherst College
Richmond, Indiana
E. Merrill Root

Description: Edward Merrill Root , known as e. Merrill
Root ( January 4 , 1895 - October 26 , 1973 ) , was an American educator and poet devoted to anti-communist causes .
Table 1: Example of a Wikipedia infobox for ‘Edward Merrill Root’ and the associated description.
2018), most of them are dedicated to improving the decoding phase while generating (Sha et al. 2017; Wiseman,
Shieber, and Rush 2017; Perez-Beltrachini and Lapata 2018;
Bao et al. 2018). We argue that a single encoder without any
auxiliary assistant may not be effective to capture the accurate semantic representation due to the hierarchical structure
and vast heterogeneous attributes of the tables.
To this end, we first propose a two-level hierarchical table
encoder, which encodes both the word-level and attributelevel semantics. The coarse-to-fine attention is proposed to
cooperate with the two-level hierarchical table encoder.
Although the hierarchical table encoder has greatly improved the table-to-text generation, we believe the performance can be further enhanced by the external assistance to
the table encoder as a complex table may not be well represented by a single encoder. So we also propose 3 auxiliary
tasks: including auxiliary sequence labeling task, text autoencoder and multi-labeling classification, to help the table
encoder to better represent the source tables and then improve the encoder-decoder style table-to-text generation.
Auxiliary sequence labeling task is a new approach to incorporate the attribute information into the table encoder.
We view the attribute names (such as ‘Name’, ‘Birthdate’
in Table 1) as the labels for the related table content and use

Introduction
Data-to-text generation produces understandable texts from
some underlying non-linguistic representation of information (Reiter and Dale 1997; 2000). Table-to-text generation,
which belongs to the data-to-text generation, aims at generating natural language descriptions for the structured tables
to help people to get the key points of the tables.
Different from text-to-text generation tasks like machine
translation or abstractive summarization, the sources for
table-to-text generation are the tables with hierarchical
attribute-value structure. Open-domain tables like Wikipedia
infoboxes (Table 1) often have large number of attributes
across different domains.
Although previous researchers proposed some taskspecific encoder-decoder models for table-to-text generation
(Liu et al. 2017a; Sha et al. 2017; Wiseman, Shieber, and
Rush 2017; Perez-Beltrachini and Lapata 2018; Bao et al.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6786

