The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Depth Prediction without the Sensors: Leveraging
Structure for Unsupervised Learning from Monocular Videos
Vincent Casser,∗1 Soeren Pirk, Reza Mahjourian,2 Anelia Angelova
1

Google Brain
Institute for Applied Computational Science, Harvard University; Google Brain
2
University of Texas at Austin; Google Brain
vcasser@g.harvard.edu, {pirk, rezama, anelia}@google.com
Abstract

Learning to predict scene depth from RGB inputs is a challenging task both for indoor and outdoor robot navigation.
In this work we address unsupervised learning of scene
depth and robot ego-motion where supervision is provided
by monocular videos, as cameras are the cheapest, least restrictive and most ubiquitous sensor for robotics.
Previous work in unsupervised image-to-depth learning has
established strong baselines in the domain. We propose a
novel approach which produces higher quality results, is able
to model moving objects and is shown to transfer across data
domains, e.g. from outdoors to indoor scenes. The main idea
is to introduce geometric structure in the learning process,
by modeling the scene and the individual objects; camera
ego-motion and object motions are learned from monocular
videos as input. Furthermore an online refinement method is
introduced to adapt learning on the fly to unknown domains.
The proposed approach outperforms all state-of-the-art approaches, including those that handle motion e.g. through
learned flow. Our results are comparable in quality to the
ones which used stereo as supervision and significantly improve depth prediction on scenes and datasets which contain a lot of object motion. The approach is of practical relevance, as it allows transfer across environments, by transferring models trained on data collected for robot navigation in
urban scenes to indoor navigation settings. The code associated with this paper can be found at https://sites.google.com/
view/struct2depth.

Figure 1: Problem setup: Obtaining scene depth prediction
from RGB image input. Training is unsupervised and from
monocular videos only. No depth sensor supervision is used.

accurate than sensor-supervised ones (Zhou et al. 2017;
Garg, Carneiro, and Reid 2016), predominantly due to issues
with sensor readings, e.g. missing or noisy sensor values.
This research led to a number of improvements in which unsupervised methods have decreased prediction errors significantly, including methods that use stereo (Godard, Aodha,
and Brostow 2017), or independently trained optical flow
models during learning (Wang et al. 2018).
We propose a novel approach that explicitly models
3D motions of moving objects, together with camera egomotion, and adapts to new environments by learning with
an online refinement of multiple frames. With a principled
way of handling motion and a newly introduced object size
constraint, we are the first to effectively learn from highly
dynamic scenes in a monocular setting. Our approach introduces structure in the learning process by representing objects in 3D and modeling motion as SE3 transforms; this is
done by fully differentiable operations and is trained from
uncalibrated monocular videos. Extensive experiments are
conducted on two publicly available datasets. Our algorithm
yields significant improvements on both datasets and on both
depth and ego-motion estimation, compared to the state-ofthe-art; our method is also competitive to models trained
with stereo. Furthermore, we evaluate direct domain transfer, by training on one dataset and testing on another, without fine-tuning. We present transfer results across KITTI and
Cityscapes, as well as, training on Cityscapes and testing
on an indoor Robot Navigation dataset. This demonstrates
the method is applicable across domains and that exhaustive data-collection for training may not be needed. The

Predicting scene depth from input imagery is important for
robot navigation, both for indoors and outdoors settings. Supervised dense depth prediction per single image has been
very successful with deep neural networks (Eigen, Puhrsch,
and Fergus 2014; Laina et al. 2016; Wang, Fouhey, and
Gupta 2015; Li, Klein, and Yao 2017), where learned models convincingly outperform those with hand-crafted features (Ladicky, Zeisl, and Pollefeys 2014; Karsch, Liu, and
Kang 2014a). However, supervised learning of scene depth
requires expensive depth sensors which may not be readily available in most robotics scenarios and may introduce
their own sensor noise. To that end a number of unsupervised
image-to-depth methods have been proposed, which demonstrate that unsupervised depth prediction models are more
∗

Work done while at Google Brain.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8001

