The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Random Walk Decay Centrality
Tomasz W ˛as,1 Talal Rahwan,2 Oskar Skibski1
1

2

Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland
Computer Science, New York University, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{t.was, o.skibski}@mimuw.edu.pl, talal.rahwan@nyu.edu

Abstract

they assume that information always travels in a network
through the fastest route(s)—an assumption that requires all
nodes to know the entire topology of the network, which is
rarely the case in real-world networks. In fact, whether one
is modeling the spread of gossip through a social group, the
propagation of viruses through a computer network, or the
way users surf the Internet, such processes tend to spread
more chaotically in practice, e.g., through somewhat random
paths as opposed to shortest paths (Lerman and Ghosh 2010;
Borgatti 2005; Huberman et al. 1998).
To address these limitations, a number of centrality measures have been developed based on random walks in the
graph. According to this approach, the source of information is a node chosen randomly according to a given distribution of node weights, and the information then propagates through the network by moving along random outgoing edges (Lovász 1993). Perhaps the first and most influential such centrality measure is PageRank (Page et al. 1999).
Its success has lead to the development of random-walk versions of various centrality measures, such as Random Walk
Closeness centrality (White and Smyth 2003) and Random
Walk Betweenness centrality (Newman 2005).
Against this background, in this paper we propose a new
centrality measure, called Random Walk Decay, which is a
random-walk version of Decay centrality. To highlight the
similarities and differences between both centralities, we use
an axiomatic approach. Specifically, we show that Random
Walk Decay centrality and Decay centrality both satisfy five
basic properties (called axioms): Locality, Sink Merging, Directed Leaf Proportionality, One-Node Graph and Lack of
Self-Impact. In addition to those five axioms, if the centrality
measure is based on shortest paths (i.e., satisfies the Shortest Paths Property), we obtain Decay centrality; on the other
hand, if it is based on random walks (i.e., satisfies the Random Walk Property), we obtain Random Walk Decay.
Furthermore, using the axiomatic approach, we compare
the Random Walk Decay centrality to PageRank. We show
that replacing only one axiom (Lack of Self-Impact) with
another one (Edge Swap) gives us a new axiomatization of
PageRank. The former axiom, Lack of Self-Impact, states
that “removing your own outgoing edges does not affect
your centrality”; thus, it corresponds to a certain strategyproof property satisfied by Random Walk Decay centrality. The latter axiom, Edge Swap, states that “if two nodes

We propose a new centrality measure, called the Random
Walk Decay centrality. While most centralities in the literature are based on the notion of shortest paths, this new centrality measure stems from the random walk on the network.
We provide an axiomatic characterization and show that the
new centrality is closely related to PageRank. More in detail,
we show that replacing only one axiom, called Lack of SelfImpact, with another one, called Edge Swap, results in the
new axiomatization of PageRank. Finally, we argue that Lack
of Self-Impact is desirable in various settings and explain why
violating Edge Swap may be beneficial and may contribute to
promoting diversity in the centrality measure.

Introduction
Centrality measures—methods for identifying the most important nodes in a network based solely on its topology—
have been extensively studied in the literature on graph theory and network analysis for over 50 years (Newman 2010).
Fueled by the ever-growing availability of relational data, as
well as the access to unprecedented computational power,
centrality measures have become an essential part of every
network analysis toolkit over the past two decades (Freeman 2008). These measures are increasingly being applied
in numerous subareas of computer science, including the
world-wide web (Page et al. 1999), viral marketing (Hinz
et al. 2011), and energy saving in communication networks (Bianzino et al. 2011), just to name a few.
Most standard centrality measures are based on the notion of shortest paths (Freeman 1979). One of the most fundamental such measures is Closeness centrality, whereby
the importance of a node is determined based on the inverse of the sum of distances from all other nodes in
the graph (Sabidussi 1966). Since this centrality measure
is well-defined only for strongly connected graphs, Jackson (2008) proposed an alternative, named Decay centrality,
which works also for disconnected graphs.
These standard centrality measures are based on two simplifying assumptions. Firstly, they assume that the nodes of
the network do not have any weights—an assumption that
does not always hold in practical applications. Secondly,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2197

