The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Online Multi-Agent Pathfinding
Jiřı́ Švancara,1 Marek Vlk,1,2 Roni Stern,3 Dor Atzmon,3 Roman Barták1
2

1
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Prague, The Czech Republic
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague, The Czech Republic
3
Information Systems Engineering, Ben Gurion University, Be’er Sheba, Israel
{svancara, vlk, bartak}@ktiml.mff.cuni.cz, {sternron, dorat}@post.bgu.ac.il

Abstract

Online MAPF is related to the lifelong MAPF setting
studied by Ma et al. (2017). In lifelong MAPF the set of
agents do not change, but over time the problem solver receives a sequence of navigation tasks that they need to perform (e.g., get from one location to another). Thus, task assignment plays an important role in lifelong MAPF. In our
setting, we focus on the intersection problem, where new
agents can appear, and there is no need for task assignment
as every new agent is associated with a specific start and
goal.
The first contribution of this work is in a formal definition and analysis of the online MAPF problem. We discuss
several possible objective functions and show equivalences
between them. Several variants of online MAPF are defined
and analyzed, showing which variants allow creating complete and optimal solvers and which do not.
Our second contribution is several practical solvers for
online MAPF and the discussion on their properties. In
particular, we propose a SAT-based solver using the Picat
language and a solver based on the Conflict-Based Search
(CBS) (Sharon et al. 2015). To minimize the number of
times agents change their routes, we introduce the Online
Independence Detection algorithm that biases the resulting
plan to cause fewer disruptions to the currently executed
plans, while still guaranteeing a high quality solution.
The third contribution of this work is an online MAPF
algorithm that allows trading off solution quality for the
amount of disruptions to other agents. We evaluate all the
proposed algorithms on grids of different size and with a
varying number of agents and obstacles. The results show
the trade-offs for the different solvers and problem parameters.

Multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) is the problem of moving a
group of agents to a set of target destinations while avoiding
collisions. In this work, we study the online version of MAPF
where new agents appear over time. Several variants of online
MAPF are defined and analyzed theoretically, showing that
it is not possible to create an optimal online MAPF solver.
Nevertheless, we propose effective online MAPF algorithms
that balance solution quality, runtime, and the number of plan
changes an agent makes during execution.

Introduction
Multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) is the problem of moving a group of agents to a set of target destinations while
avoiding collisions (Silver 2005). MAPF has applications
in robotics, avionics, digital entertainment, and more, and
it has attracted significant research focus from various research communities in recent years (Pallottino et al. 2007;
Erdem et al. 2013; Surynek et al. 2016; Standley 2010;
Sharon et al. 2015).
Most work on MAPF has focused on finding a plan for
all the agents before the agents start to move (Felner et al.
2017; Surynek et al. 2016; Yu and LaValle 2012). The agents
are then expected to follow that plan until eventually each
agent reaches its designated goal. We refer to this a priori
planning problem as offline MAPF. In this work, we consider
an online version of MAPF, where new agents may appear
while the other agents are following a previously generated
plan.
Online MAPF is a natural generalization of offline MAPF
with applications in controlling fleets of vehicles or teams
of robots. For example, consider the autonomous intersection management (AIM) project by Dresner et al. (2008).
An autonomous agent controls an intersection, and driver
agents that wish to pass through the intersection must follow
the intersection manager’s directions. Once an agent passes
the intersection, it leaves the system, while new agents may
enter the intersection. The intersection manager, thus, is actually solving an online MAPF problem. The general approach they used is a first-come first-serve approach, which
is clearly not optimal.

Background: Offline MAPF
An offline MAPF problem accepts as an input a graph G =
(V, E) and a set of agents a1 , . . . an , such that each agent
ai is associated with an initial location si and goal location
gi . Time is discretized, and in every time step each agent
can either move from its location to an adjacent location, or
wait in its current location. A solution to offline MAPF is a
plan π that consists of a sequence of wait/move actions for
each agent. Let πi [j] denote the location agent i will reach
after performing the first j actions in the plan π, ignoring
all other agents. The main constraint in offline MAPF is that

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7732

