The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Reinforcement Learning under Threats
Victor Gallego

Roi Naveiro

David Rios Insua

ICMAT-CSIC
victor.gallego@icmat.es

ICMAT-CSIC
roi.naveiro@icmat.es

ICMAT-CSIC
david.rios@icmat.es

1.1

Abstract
In several reinforcement learning (RL) scenarios, mainly in security settings, there may be adversaries trying to interfere with
the reward generating process. However, when non-stationary
environments as such are considered, Q-learning leads to suboptimal results (Busoniu, Babuska, and De Schutter 2010).
Previous game-theoretical approaches to this problem have
focused on modeling the whole multi-agent system as a game.
Instead, we shall face the problem of prescribing decisions to
a single agent (the supported decision maker, DM) against a
potential threat model (the adversary). We augment the MDP
to account for this threat, introducing Threatened Markov Decision Processes (TMDPs). Furthermore, we propose a level-k
thinking scheme resulting in a new learning framework to deal
with TMDPs. We empirically test our framework, showing the
benefits of opponent modeling.

1

Non-strategic opponent

We assume that the supported DM is a joint action learner
(i.e., she observes her opponent’s actions after he has committed them). At every iteration, the DM shall choose her
action using the Q-function from Eq. (2). However, she needs
to predict the action b chosen by her opponent. A typical
option is to model her adversary using fictitious play (FP),
i.e., pA pb|sq is computed using the empirical frequencies of
the opponent past plays.
Algorithm 1 Level-2 thinking update rule
Require: QA , QB , αA , αB (DM and opponent Q-functions
and learning rates, respectively).
Observe transition ps, a, b, rA , rB , s1 q from the TMDP environment
QB ps, b, aq :“ p1 ´ αB qQB ps, b, aq ` αB prB `
γ maxb1 EpB pa1 |s1 q rQB ps1 , b1 , a1 qsq
Ź Level-1
Compute B’s estimated ´greedy policy pA pb|s1 q from
QB ps, b, aq
QA ps, a, bq :“ p1 ´ αA qQA ps, a, bq ` αA prA `
Ź Level-2
γ maxa1 EpA pb1 |s1 q rQA ps1 , a1 , b1 qqs

Threatened MDPs

A Threatened Markov Decision Process (TMDP) is a tuple
pS, A, B, T , r, pA q in which S is the state space; A denotes
the set of actions available to the supported agent; B designates the set of threat actions, or actions available to the
adversary; T : S ˆ A ˆ B Ñ ∆pSq is the transition distribution; r : S ˆ A ˆ B Ñ ∆pRq is the reward distribution; and
pA pb|sq models the beliefs that the DM has about his opponent move, i.e., a distribution over B for each state s P S.
We propose to replace the standard Q-learning rule by
Qps, a, bq :“ p1 ´ αqQps, a, bq`
´
“
‰¯
1 1
1 q Qps , a , bq
` α rps, a, bq ` γ max
E
p
pb|s
A
1

1.2

Level-k thinking

Now a level-k scheme (Stahl and Wilson 1994) will be introduced. The previous section described how to model a
level-0 opponent, i.e. a non strategic opponent, which can
be practical in several scenarios. However, if the opponent
is strategic, he may model the supported DM as a level-0
thinker, thus making the adversary a level-1 thinker. This
chain can go up to infinity, so we will have to deal with modeling the opponent as a level-k thinker, with k bounded by
the computational or cognitive resources of the DM.
To deal with it, we introduce a hierarchy of TMDPs in
which TMDPki refers to the TMDP that agent i needs to
optimize, while considering its rival as a level-pk ´ 1q thinker.
Thus, we have the following process:

a

(1)
and compute its expectation over the opponent’s action argument
Qps, aq :“ EpA pb|sq rQps, a, bqs .
(2)
This may be used to compute an ´greedy policy for the
DM, i.e., choosing with probability p1 ´ q the action a “
arg maxa Qps, aq or a uniformly random action with probability  when the DM is at state s.
In general, we will consider both the DM and the adversary as rational agents that aim to maximize their respective
expected cumulative rewards.

• If the supported DM is a level-2 thinker, she may optimize
for TMDP2A . She models B as a level-1 thinker. Consequently, this “modeled” B optimizes TMDP1B , and while
doing so, he models the DM as level-0 (using Section 1.1).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9939

