The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Expressive Real-Time Intersection Scheduling
Rick Goldstein
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
rgoldste@cs.cmu.edu

Introduction

for average expected flows, yet realized flows across a few
seconds are often quite variable from the averages. When realized flows on any side are much lower than expected, these
methods provide unnecessary green time that could be better
allocated to busier sides.
Real-time intersection scheduling methods improve upon
high-level strategies by making decisions on real-time data.
Real-time methods are not constrained by fixed timing requirements and can immediately adapt when one side of the
intersection is unexpectedly much busier. The majority of
these methods (including ERIS) are schedule-driven methods. They use real-time vehicle information to generate a
schedule of phases to minimize a cost function. The first step
of this schedule is then sent to the traffic controller and executed. This process repeats every time-step.
Our work most closely resembles SURTRAC, which is
a decentralized schedule-driven method which runs a forward dynamic program to calculate an optimal schedule for
known vehicle clusters in real-time by treating each intersection as a single-machine scheduling problem (Xie et al.
2012). SURTRAC makes several modelling simplifications
to ensure that the forward dynamic program can run in real
time, such as simpler traffic light patterns and combining
compatible flows. ERIS does not make these simplifications
and thus maintains a more accurate representation of the underlying traffic model.

Traffic congestion is a widespread annoyance throughout
global metropolitan areas. It causes increases in travel
time, increases in emissions, inefficient usage of gasoline,
and driver frustration. Inefficient signal patterns at traffic
lights are one major cause of such congestion. Intersection
scheduling strategies that make real-time decisions to extend
or end a green signal based on real-time traffic data offer one
opportunity reduce congestion and its negative impacts.
My research proposes Expressive Real-time Intersection
Scheduling (ERIS). ERIS is a decentralized, schedule-driven
control method which makes a decision every second based
on current traffic conditions to reduce congestion.

Problem Overview
In the intersection control problem, we consider an intersection (or network of intersections), such as the one presented
in Figure 1 where traffic lights have been installed to improve mobility or increase safety. The intersection has inbound lanes from various directions. The intersection may
associate a subset of lanes, referred to as movements, with
a green signal to indicate to vehicles in the respective lanes
that it is safe to traverse the intersection. Movements must
satisfy pre-specified minimum and maximum timing limits and we require yellow and all-red clearances with fixed
lengths to occur between conflicting green movements for
safety. In the intersection control problem, we are interested
in implementing a legal control strategy that will minimize
a measure of dis-utility such as average vehicle delay.

Expressive Real-time Intersection Scheduling
Expressive Real-time Intersection Scheduling (ERIS) is my
overall framework that performs all necessary steps to make
a scheduling decision for the intersection during every timestep. ERIS’ Executor first calculates a prediction of vehicle clusters in each lane using nearby vehicle broadcasts of
position, speed, and heading as well as information shared
from neighboring intersections about predicted future out-

Related Work
High-level scheduling strategies were first applied to intersection scheduling. These strategies set timing parameters,
typically cycle length for an entire network of intersections,
splits between green time for each intersection within a network, and offsets which specify how to stagger the start
times of green phases across a network. TRANSYT computed these parameters offline, while more recent methods such as SCATS and SCOOT update such parameters
on-line (every 10 minutes) (Robertson 1969; Lowrie 1990;
Robertson and Bretherton 1991). These methods optimize
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1: Intersection
9882

