The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Global Remote Operation of Intelligent Space Robot Assistants
Daniel Leidner,1 Peter Schmaus,1 Florian Schmidt,1 Benedikt Pleintinger,1
Ralph Bayer,1 Adrian S. Bauer,1 Thomas Krueger,2 Neal Y. Lii1
1

Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Wessling, Germany, {first.last}@dlr.de
Human Robot Interaction Lab, European Space Agency (ESA), Noordwijk, The Netherlands, {first.last}@esa.int

2

Abstract
Intelligent robotic coworkers are considered a valuable addition in many application areas. This applies not only to terrestrial domains, but also to the exploration of our solar system.
As humankind moves toward an ever increasing presence in
space, infrastructure has to be constructed and maintained
on distant planets such as Mars. AI-enabled robots will play
a major role in this scenario. The space agencies envisage
robotic co-workers to be deployed to set-up habitats, energy,
and return vessels for future human scientists. By leveraging AI planning methods, this vision has already become one
step closer to reality. In the METERON SUPVIS Justin experiment, the intelligent robotic coworker Rollin’ Justin was
controlled from Astronauts aboard the International Space
Station (ISS) in order to maintain a Martian mock-up solar
panel farm located on Earth to demonstrate the technology
readiness of the developed methods. For this work, the system is demonstrated at AAAI 2019, controlling Rollin’ Justin
located in Munich, Germany from Honolulu, Hawaii.

Figure 1: Rollin’ Justin autonomously installing an antenna
as response to the astronauts command during the final METERON SUPVIS Justin crew session on August 17, 2018.

In the near future, the major space agencies plan to revisit
Moon and start the manned exploration of Mars. These ambitious goals are facing hazardous environments on the surface of the celestial bodies, which makes it difficult for humans to install a permanent base on-site. A possible solution
to provide habitats, energy, breathable air and a return vehicle beforehand is given with the deployment of intelligent
service robots that are controlled from a spacecraft in orbit.
A prototype for such an agent is the humanoid robot Rollin’
Justin (Borst et al. 2009). Dexterous manipulation capabilities paired with advanced reasoning mechanisms make it
capable of setting up the required infrastructure in order to
pave the way for human scientists. At its core, AI based
planning methods enable it to serve as a coworker for astronauts, rather than a tool. While the robot performs the
commanded tasks autonomously, the astronauts orbiting the
target planet or moon can focus on scientific work. Intervening in robotic operation is only necessary to provide new objectives. This paper presents the methods developed during
the METERON SUPVIS Justin space robotics experiments,
which was conducted by astronauts on board the International Space Station (ISS), commanding a robot coworker
on Earth as an analog celestial site.

METERON SUPVIS Justin
The SUPVIS Justin experiments explore teleoperation of extraterrestrial service robots with supervised autonomy (Lii et
al. 2017) within the Multi-Purpose End-To-End Robotic Operation Network (METERON) project. Here, the robot serves
as a coworker on the planetary surface for the astronaut in
orbit (see Figure 1), who communicates via abstract commands and replies, rather than through detailed robot trajectories. The robot’s local intelligence enables it to perform
partially autonomous reasoning and execution. This relieves
the astronaut of significant mental and physical workload.
Three crew sessions were carried out between 2017 and
2018. Ten experiment protocols have been conducted by a
total of five NASA and ESA astronauts, of whom only two
were fully trained prior to mission. Two astronauts were introduced to the systems by their crew mate interactively during the experiment. One astronaut, with no experience using
the telerobotic system, was able to effectively command the
robot thanks to the intuitive UI, and limited guidance from
ground in a starting protocol. He was subsequently able to
solve the most complex task in the mission. This proves that
the proposed approach is suitable to create an intuitive user
experience by exploiting the local intelligence of the robot.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9863

