The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CSEye: A Proposed Solution for Accurate
and Accessible One-to-Many Face Verification
Ameer Dharamshi,* Rosie Yuyan Zou*
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
{adharams, y53zou}@edu.uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Facial verification is a core problem studied by researchers
in computer vision. Recently published one-to-one comparison models have successfully achieved accuracy results that
surpass the abilities of humans. A natural extension to the
one-to-one facial verification problem is a one-to-many
classification. In this abstract, we present our exploration of
different methods of performing one-to-many facial verification using low-resolution images. The CSEye model introduces a direct comparison between the features extracted
from each of the candidate images and the suspect before
performing the classification task. Initial experiments using
10-to-1 comparisons of faces from the Labelled Faces of the
Wild dataset yield promising results.

Model Architecture
To answer the one-to-many facial verification problem, we
propose a three-stage model: feature extraction, comparison and classification. To maintain the integrity of the
comparisons, the model employs a weight-sharing paradigm. This ensures that each candidate image receives
identical mapping and has the added benefit of drastically
reducing the number of trainable parameters and facilitates
scaling the model to a larger number of candidates.

Introduction
The CSEye face verification model was conceptualized
based on three eventual objectives: the model is easily
trainable with limited computing power and data, it retains
a threshold value of accuracy for it to be functional, and it
is small enough to be stored on mobile devices. These objectives were set because while recent developments in
one-to-one facial verification models have demonstrated
stunning performance, model portability and practicality
are still hurdles preventing broader usage. For instance, the
Transferred Deep Feature Fusion model produced a 97.9%
true accept rate and 0.001 false positive rate on the IJB-A
dataset (Xiong et al. 2018). However, a model of that caliber is unlikely to be practical on mobile devices, or for
applications such as 1-to-N face verification using blurry
security footage, due to the computing power required, and
the large quantity of quality training images needed. Hence
CSEye was designed to address the tradeoff between accuracy and practicality. We can describe the face verification
problem as follows: given a suspect facial image and N
candidate images, determine which image is the match.

Figure 1: CSEye Model Architecture

The initial stage, feature extraction, is based off a modified VGG19 architecture (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015).
To accommodate the lower resolution images, the initial
input to the neural network is reduced from the standard
(224,224,3) to (100,100,3). Each of the following layers is
reduced in dimensions by the appropriate quantity. The
second major modification is that the network is abruptly
halted after the final convolution layer. The purpose of this
stage is simply to extract the same features from each image. In an N-to-1 comparison, each of the N+1 images has
its features extracted by the modified VGG19 network,
generating N+1 sets of 512 6x6 matrices.

* These authors contribute equally to this abstract
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9933

