The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Partial Verification as a Substitute for Money
Sofia Ceppi,1 Ian Kash,2 Rafael Frongillo3
1

PROWLER.io, 2 University of Illinois at Chicago
3
University of Colorado Boulder
sofia@prowler.io, iankash@uic.edu, raf@colorado.edu

Abstract

result, they showed that this verification suffices to implement all allocation rules that are implementable with money
in single-minded combinatorial auctions. (In fact they show
that a weaker verification, where the agent cannot overbid
only on the bundle received, suffices.) Interestingly, this verification no longer suffices for agents who are k-minded,
k ≥ 2. Other work in the literature (see Related Work) has
focused on specific scenarios like facility location and combinatorial auctions, and identifies the sets of verification assumptions that guarantee incentive compatibility of mechanisms.
Our work takes a different approach, in that we build tools
to understand the power of verification independent of a specific scenario. In particular, we answer the following question: given an allocation rule that can be made truthful with
payments, what is the minimal verification needed to make
it truthful without them? Essentially, similar to (Ferraioli,
Serafino, and Ventre 2016), we aim to inform the designer
of the resources needed for verification. In contrast to this
work, which focuses on facility location, we propose a geometric characterization of the verification needed to use any
implementable-with-payment allocation rule in a scenario
without transfers, while guaranteeing strategyproofness.
We introduce the concept of the harmless set of types as
those which do not need to be verified for a given set of
single-agent allocation rules. Our basic building block is a
characterization of the structure of harmless sets for allocation rules which only assign two possible allocations and
are implementable with payments. We then show how this
can be extended to characterize harmless sets for more general sets of single-agent implementable-with-payments allocation rules. Our focus on sets of rules derives from the
observation that multiagent allocation rules are, from the
perspective of a single agent, just a set of allocation rules
parameterized by the types of the other agents.
Our characterization highlights a split in the nature of
harmless sets of types for deterministic and randomized
mechanisms. Deterministic and universally truthful mechanisms both have large harmless sets of types, while in contrast the harmless set for truthful-in-expectation mechanisms
is quite restricted. Our results are constructive and provide
geometric insights for these findings.
The central contribution of our approach is its generality:
our analysis could in principle be applied to any mechanism

Recent work shows that we can use partial verification instead
of money to implement truthful mechanisms. In this paper we
develop tools to answer the following question. Given an allocation rule that can be made truthful with payments, what
is the minimal verification needed to make it truthful without
them? Our techniques leverage the geometric relationship between the type space and the set of possible allocations.

Introduction
Mechanism design studies how to realize desirable outcomes to optimization problems in settings with selfinterested agents. The most common tool to achieve desirable outcomes is the use of payments, and there is a large
literature focusing on the following question. Given an allocation rule, which specifies the outcome that should be selected given the types of the agents, do there exist payments
to turn it into an incentive compatible mechanism (to implement it) (Guesnerie and Laffont 1984; Saks and Yu 2005;
Ashlagi et al. 2010; Frongillo and Kash 2014)?
Recent work has identified partial verification as a useful alternative to money to implement incentive compatible
mechanisms. The idea is that the mechanism designer can
detect some possible agent misreports, either by preventing
them outright, or by penalizing the agent (e.g., by excluding her from the market). The power of partial verification is
that the mechanism designer need not provide agents with
incentives for a subset of the possible types they can report if verification of these types is in place. An example
of such a partial verification is agents not being able to report a higher valuation for any assignment than is true. They
are free, however, to report a lower value.
This specific type of verification has been adopted by Fotakis, Krysta and Ventre (2014). They consider the case in
which a government is auctioning business licenses for cities
under its administration, and companies want to get a license for some subset of cities to sell their stock of goods to
the market. The verification assumption is that the government, that acts as auctioneer, can verify if the winner actually has sufficient goods in stock. In a particularly suggestive
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1837

