The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Allocating Interventions Based on Predicted Outcomes: A Case Study on
Homelessness Services
Amanda Kube, Sanmay Das

Patrick J. Fowler

Computer Science & Engineering and
Division of Computational and Data Sciences
Washington University in St. Louis
{amanda.kube,sanmay}@wustl.edu

Brown School and
Division of Computational and Data Sciences
Washington University in St. Louis
pjfowler@wustl.edu

Abstract

Ethics and fairness: Since we are considering a problem of allocating scarce, shared societal resources using algorithmic approaches, it is important to foreground the discussion of ethical issues and fairness concerns. The use of
techniques from artificial intelligence and machine learning (and more broadly, algorithmic approaches) in different societal contexts have increasingly raised concerns regarding fairness, accountability, and transparency (O’Neil
2016). In a number of situations, data-driven allocations
have unintentionally introduced systematic biases that perpetuate inequities, such as racial disparities in credit lending,
hotspot policing, and crime sentencing (Ensign et al. 2017;
Pleiss et al. 2017; Corbett-Davies et al. 2017). The complexity involved in the development of decision algorithms has
called into question the ability to design adequate protections against systematic misuses. In response to these types
of concerns, the European Union recently issued the “General Data Protection Regulation” (GDPR), which imposes
restrictions on how individual data can be used for algorithmic decision making in ways that “significantly affect”
users. The GDPR coincides with a broader argument for
not just full transparency, but rather human interpretability
regarding how decisions are derived from algorithmic approaches to ensure adequate assessment of fairness.

Modern statistical and machine learning methods are increasingly capable of modeling individual or personalized treatment effects. These predictions could be used to allocate different interventions across populations based on individual
characteristics. In many domains, like social services, the
availability of different possible interventions can be severely
resource limited. This paper considers possible improvements
to the allocation of such services in the context of homelessness service provision in a major metropolitan area. Using data from the homeless system, we use a counterfactual
approach to show potential for substantial benefits in terms
of reducing the number of families who experience repeat
episodes of homelessness by choosing optimal allocations
(based on predicted outcomes) to a fixed number of beds
in different types of homelessness service facilities. Such
changes in the allocation mechanism would not be without
tradeoffs, however; a significant fraction of households are
predicted to have a higher probability of re-entry in the optimal allocation than in the original one. We discuss the efficiency, equity and fairness issues that arise and consider potential implications for policy.

Introduction
Homelessness represents a long-standing problem with considerable individual and social costs. Homeless services coordinated at the community level (i.e, homeless system)
struggle to keep up with demand for housing assistance,
and little evidence supports the accuracy of current decision making in the allocation of limited homeless services
(Brown et al. 2018; Fowler et al. 2017; Shinn et al. 2013).
Advances in machine learning and AI techniques have made
it possible to apply learning algorithms to social problems
ranging from police patrol to poaching. Many of these solutions have had success in mitigating the problem to which
they were applied (McCarthy, Vayanos, and Tambe 2017;
Mukhopadhyay et al. 2016, e.g.). In this paper, we test the
feasibility of data-driven approaches to inform policies that
guide homeless service delivery. Specifically we ask the
question of whether one can use individual predictions of
success for certain types of homeless services to improve
outcomes across the population.

However, requirements for human interpretability could
also diminish the potential of AI to solve societal problems.
Algorithmic approaches generate novel solutions that may
not correspond to human intuition; requirements for full explainability of these complex processes limits the inherent
value of applications to thorny social problems. In a recent
Wired op-ed, David Weinberger raises a compelling example
related to autonomous vehicles. If they were able to lower
the number of fatalities in US vehicle crashes by 90%, would
it really be worth losing that benefit because of the difficulty of explaining (or legal liabilities that may be associated
with) the remaining crashes? Certainly, the answer to this
partly depends on whether the remaining crashes disproportionately affect some portion of the population, and perhaps
other considerations. Weinberger goes on to argue that while
the governance of AI applied to social problems is critical,
it can be achieved through existing processes for resolving
policy issues (Weinberger 2018). The right approach is then
to specify appropriate optimization goals, arrived at through
the social processes of policy-making, which could be based

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

622

