The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exploiting Sentence Embedding for Medical Question Answering
Yu Hao,1∗ Xien Liu,1∗ Ji Wu,1 Ping Lv2
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
haoy15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xeliu, wuji ee }@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2
Tsinghua-iFlytek Joint Laboratory, iFlytek Research, Beijing, China
luping ts@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

semantic/linguistic properties (Zhu, Li, and Melo 2018;
Baroni et al. 2018) obtained within sentence embeddings,
and 2) designing learning methods to produce effective sentence embeddings. All of the learning methods can be generally categorized into two groups: 1) obtaining universal sentence embeddings with an unsupervised learning framework
(Hill, Cho, and Korhonen 2016; Kiros et al. 2015; Le and
Mikolov 2014), and 2) producing task-dependent sentence
embeddings with a supervised learning framework (Palangi
et al. 2016; Tan et al. 2016; Cheng, Dong, and Lapata 2016;
Lin et al. 2017).
Though plenty of successful deep learning models are
built at word level (word embedding), there are still some
different and valuable merits obtained within sentence embedding. For example, most reading comprehension models calculate a pairwise similarity at word level to extract
keywords in the answer. However, these fine-grained models maybe misled under certain circumstances, such as long
paragraph with lots of single noisy words which are similar
to those words that appear in the question but unrelated to
the question answering. Furthermore, models built on sentence embeddings sometimes can be more interpretable. For
example, we can encode a sentence into several embeddings
to capture different semantic aspects of the sentence. As we
known, sometimes interpretability becomes more crucial for
certain real applications, such as tasks from the medical domain.
In this paper, we focus on developing supervised sentence
embedding learning framework for solving medical question
answering problems. To maintain model interpretation, we
also adopt the self-attention structure proposed by (Lin et
al. 2017) to produce sentence embeddings. The only difference is that a contextual layer is used in conjunction with the
self-attention. Under certain circumstances, the valuable information resides in a unit whose size is between word and
sentence. Take medical text for an instance, a large amount
of the medical terminologies are entities consist of several
sequential words like Acute Upper Respiratory Infection. It
requires a flexible scale between word and sentence-level
to encode such sequential words as a single unit and assign words in the unit with similar attention, instead of treating them like a bag of unrelated words, which can be misled easily by noisy words in long paragraphs when computing pairwise word similarities. For example, sentences

Despite the great success of word embedding, sentence embedding remains a not-well-solved problem. In this paper,
we present a supervised learning framework to exploit sentence embedding for the medical question answering task.
The learning framework consists of two main parts: 1) a sentence embedding producing module, and 2) a scoring module. The former is developed with contextual self-attention
and multi-scale techniques to encode a sentence into an embedding tensor. This module is shortly called Contextual
self-Attention Multi-scale Sentence Embedding (CAMSE).
The latter employs two scoring strategies: Semantic Matching Scoring (SMS) and Semantic Association Scoring (SAS).
SMS measures similarity while SAS captures association between sentence pairs: a medical question concatenated with
a candidate choice, and a piece of corresponding supportive
evidence. The proposed framework is examined by two Medical Question Answering(MedicalQA) datasets which are collected from real-world applications: medical exam and clinical diagnosis based on electronic medical records (EMR).
The comparison results show that our proposed framework
achieved significant improvements compared to competitive
baseline approaches. Additionally, a series of controlled experiments are also conducted to illustrate that the multi-scale
strategy and the contextual self-attention layer play important roles for producing effective sentence embedding, and
the two kinds of scoring strategies are highly complementary
to each other for question answering problems.

Introduction
Embedding learning in word-level has achieved much
progress(Bengio et al. 2003; Mikolov et al. 2013b; Mikolov
et al. 2013a; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) and
the pre-trained word embeddings have been almost a standard input to a certain deep learning framework for solving upstream applications, such as reading comprehension
tasks (Raison et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018; Zhang et al.
2018; Chen et al. 2017; Cheng, Dong, and Lapata 2016;
Dhingra et al. 2016; Seo et al. 2016). However, learning
embeddings at sentence/document level is still a very difficult task, not well solved at present. The study of sentence embedding runs along the two lines: 1) exploiting
∗

These two authors contribute equally to this work.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

938

