The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Querying Attributed DL-Lite Ontologies Using Provenance Semirings
Camille Bourgaux

Ana Ozaki

Télécom ParisTech & DI ENS, CNRS, ENS,
PSL University & Inria, France

KRDB Research Centre,
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy

Abstract

While the work by Krötzsch et al. studied the complexity of
the satisfiability problem for several attributed DL languages,
our focus in this paper is on query answering in attributed DL.
The problem of querying DL ontologies using database-style
queries (in particular, conjunctive queries) is an important
research topic for which tractable DL languages have been
tailored (Bienvenu and Ortiz 2015). We consider here the DLLiteR dialect of the DL-Lite family (Calvanese et al. 2007),
which underlies the OWL 2 QL profile (Motik et al. 2009),
and investigate attributed DL-LiteR .
One of the main motivations of attributed DLs is to integrate annotations carrying provenance information, which
are very frequent in knowledge graphs1 . Recording and tracking provenance information is an important topic in database
theory, where provenance semirings (Green, Karvounarakis,
and Tannen 2007) were introduced as an abstract tool to relate the result of a query with information about the original
sources of the data and the ways in which the query was
obtained. Such information comes in the form of a provenance polynomial. It has been useful for many applications,
such as query answer explanation or querying of probabilistic
databases (Senellart 2017; Cheney, Chiticariu, and Tan 2009;
Suciu et al. 2011). Bienvenu, Deutch, and Suchanek (2012)
argued that provenance would be useful for Web data, e.g.,
to establish the authorship or determine the trust in a given
piece of data, or to help to guarantee the privacy of information. Provenance has also been investigated for non-relational
databases and Semantic Web (see Conclusion for discussion
of related work). In this work, we propose a new semantics for the attributed DL annotations, based on provenance
semirings, so that queries can be annotated with provenance
polynomials. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work where provenance polynomials are embedded into both
the syntax and the semantics of the query.
The first section introduces attributed DL-LiteR , following
the formalism given by Krötzsch et al. (2017; 2018). We then
define attributed conjunctive queries and study the complexity
of satisfiability and query answering in attributed DL-LiteR .
We next present our new semantics for the annotations to
model provenance and analyse the complexity of satisfiability and query answering with this new model, considering

Attributed description logic is a recently proposed formalism, targeted for graph-based representation formats, which
enriches description logic concepts and roles with finite sets
of attribute-value pairs, called annotations. One of the most
important uses of annotations is to record provenance information. In this work, we first investigate the complexity of
satisfiability and query answering for attributed DL-LiteR
ontologies. We then propose a new semantics, based on provenance semirings, for integrating provenance information with
query answering. Finally, we establish complexity results for
satisfiability and query answering under this semantics.

Introduction
Description logic (DL) (Baader et al. 2007) ontologies allow
to express complex relationships between concepts and roles,
but they are ill-equipped to represent and reason about multiple and heterogeneous types of meta-knowledge, such as
the temporal validity of a fact, or its source. For instance, the
YAGO ontology (Hoffart et al. 2013) attaches provenance
metadata to its facts (e.g., source and confidence of the extraction) as well as temporal and geospatial information. Many
practical applications therefore use knowledge graphs, which
consist, like DL assertions, of directed labelled graphs but
that also allow, unlike DLs, to add annotations to vertices
and edges. Property Graph, the data model used in many
graph databases (Rodriguez and Neubauer 2010), and Wikidata, the knowledge graph used by Wikipedia (Vrandečić
and Krötzsch 2014), are prominent examples of such labelled graphs. To bridge the gap between DL and knowledge
graphs, attributed description logics (Krötzsch et al. 2017;
Krötzsch et al. 2018) have been recently introduced. They enrich DL concepts and roles with finite sets of attribute-value
pairs, called annotations, and allow to express constraints on
these annotations in the ontology inclusions. For example,
the attributed DL assertion spouse(taylor, burton)@[start :
1975, end : 1976] states that Liz Taylor was married to
Richard Burton from 1975 to 1976, and the following role inclusion expresses that spouse is a symmetric relation, where
the inverse statement has the same start and end dates:
spouse@X v spouse− @[start : X.start, end : X.end].

1
E.g., in Wikidata reference (provenance) is one the most frequent types of annotations https://www.wikidata.org.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2719

