The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Attentive Temporal Pyramid Network for Dynamic Scene Classification
Yuanjun Huang,1,2,3,4 Xianbin Cao,1,3,4 Xiantong Zhen,1,3,4 Jungong Han2
1

School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China
2
Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YW, UK
3
Key Laboratory of Advanced technology of Near Space Information System (Beihang University),
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of China
4
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine
Abstract

Recently, scene classification methods mostly adopt
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Zhou et al.
2016)(Huang et al. 2017b) that have proved to be very powerful of learning strong representations in wide range of visual tasks. CNNs such as VGGnet (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014b), Resnet (He et al. 2016), Densenet (Huang et al.
2017a) etc., are regarded as the feature extractors for obtaining local representations from different regions of images.
However, these CNNs are designed to work with still image only and it is non-trivial, if not impossible, to extend
these models to videos containing complex temporal clues.
A straightforward way to deal with this problem is to use
the average pooling strategy which simply takes the average
of features along temporal frames. However, average pooling inevitably discards the temporal sequential information
and introduces negative effects of irrelevant frames on the
overall representations of scenes.
To achieve more accurate recognition of dynamic scene,
it would be beneficial to fully explore the temporal dynamic
information. There are basically two pathways to model
temporal clues within CNNs. One way is to explicitly model
the video as an ordered sequence of frames based on long
short-term memory (LSTM) (Donahue et al. 2015) or gated
recurrent unit (GRU) (Chung et al. 2014). These models usually adopt memory cells to store, modify and access internal
state so as to discover the long-range sequential information. Alternatively, another way of capturing the temporal
information in CNNs resorts to the two-stream architecture
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2014a) which uses both RGB and
dense optical flows as the inputs for CNNs. By incorporating
these two sources of information, the model encodes both
spatial and temporal clues in the two-stream network. Despite the success of these methods, the computational cost
tends to be high, and in addition, indiscriminately using entire video frames for modeling will introduce negative effects of irrelevant and noisy frames, thereby compromising
the classification performance.
Meanwhile, attention mechanism has recently become increasingly popular (Ba, Mnih, and Kavukcuoglu
2014)(Mnih et al. 2014)(Vaswani et al. 2017)(Wang et al.
2017). Typically, attention modules are injected into the existing CNN architectures and guide the network to focus
more on the regions of interest. By training the attention
network in an end-to-end manner, it can generate attention-

Dynamic scene classification is an important yet challenging
problem especially with the presence of defected or irrelevant
frames due to unconstrained imaging conditions such as illumination, camera motion and irrelevant background. In this
paper, we propose the attentive temporal pyramid network
(ATP-Net) to establish effective representations of dynamic
scenes by extracting and aggregating the most informative
and discriminative features. The proposed ATP-Net detects
informative features of frames that contain the most relevant
information to scenes by a temporal pyramid structure with
the incorporated attention mechanism. These frame features
are effectively fused by a newly designed kernel aggregation layer based on kernel approximation into a discriminative holistic representations of dynamic scenes. The proposed
ATP-Net leverages the strength of attention mechanism to select the most relevant frame features and the ability of kernels
to achieve optimal feature fusion for discriminative representations of dynamic scenes. Extensive experiments and comparisons are conducted on three benchmark datasets and the
results show our superiority over the state-of-the-art methods
on all these three benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Dynamic scene classification has been extensively studied
in the computer vision community in recent years (Feichtenhofer, Pinz, and Wildes 2016) (Huang et al. 2018)(Vasudevan et al. 2013), owing to its wide applications in
video searching, autonomous driving (Yan et al. 2018b)
and surveillance (Yan et al. 2018a). However, dynamic
scene classification is still an unsolved problem, due to unconstrained imaging conditions such as poor illumination,
abrupt camera motion, unfavorable viewpoints and irrelevant background.
In comparison to static scenes, recognition of dynamic
scenes in videos captured by moving cameras is more challenging attributable to the introduced much more blurred
and irrelevant video frames. In these videos, most video
frames only contain background instead of meaningful
label-related contents that are distractions for classification.
Thus, exploiting what truly matters and selecting significant
contents from video frames is the key component for dynamic scene classification.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8497

