The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Classification with Costly Features Using Deep Reinforcement Learning
Jaromı́r Janisch, Tomáš Pevný, Viliam Lisý
Artificial Intelligence Center, Department of Computer Science
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
{jaromir.janisch, tomas.pevny, viliam.lisy}@fel.cvut.cz

Abstract
We study a classification problem where each feature can be
acquired for a cost and the goal is to optimize a trade-off between the expected classification error and the feature cost. We
revisit a former approach that has framed the problem as a sequential decision-making problem and solved it by Q-learning
with a linear approximation, where individual actions are either requests for feature values or terminate the episode by
providing a classification decision. On a set of eight problems,
we demonstrate that by replacing the linear approximation
with neural networks the approach becomes comparable to the
state-of-the-art algorithms developed specifically for this problem. The approach is flexible, as it can be improved with any
new reinforcement learning enhancement, it allows inclusion
of pre-trained high-performance classifier, and unlike prior art,
its performance is robust across all evaluated datasets.

af3

af5

af1

···

ac


y1





y2
y3





..
.

Figure 1: Illustrative sequential process of classification. The
agent sequentially asks for different features (actions af ) and
finally performs a classification (ac ). The particular decisions
are influenced by the observed values.

a different subset of features can be selected for different
samples. The goal is to minimize the expected classification
error, while also minimizing the expected incurred cost.
In this paper, we extend the approach taken by DulacArnold et al. (2011), which proposed to formalize the problem as an Markov decision process (MDP) and solve it with
linearly approximated Q-learning. In this formalization, each
sample corresponds to an episode, where an agent sequentially decides whether to acquire another feature and which,
or whether to already classify the sample (see Figure 1). At
each step, the agent can base its decision on the values of the
features acquired so far. For the actions requesting a feature,
the agent receives a negative reward, equal to the feature cost.
For the classification actions, the reward is based on whether
the prediction is correct. Dulac-Arnold et al. prove in their
paper that the optimal solution to this MDP corresponds to
the optimal solution of the original CwCF problem.
Since 2011, we are not aware of any work improving upon
the method of Dulac-Arnold et al. In this paper, we take a
fresh look at the method and show that simple replacement
of the linear approximation with neural networks can outperform the most recent methods specifically designed for the
CwCF problem. We take this approach further and implement
several state-of-the-art techniques from Deep Reinforcement
Learning (Deep RL), where we show that they improve performance, convergence speed and stability. We argue that
our method is extensible in various ways and we implement
two extensions: First we identify parts of the model that can
be pre-trained in a fast and supervised way, which improves

Introduction
In real-world classification problems, one often has to deal
with limited resources - time, money, computational power
and many other. Medical practitioners strive to make a diagnosis for their patients with high accuracy. Yet at the same
time, they want to minimize the amount of money spent on
examinations, or the amount of time that all the procedures
take. In the domain of computer security, network traffic is
often analyzed by a human operator who queries different expensive data sources or cloud services and eventually decides
whether the currently examined traffic is malicious or benign.
In robotics, the agent may utilize several measurement devices to decide its current position. Here, each measurement
has an associated cost in terms of the energy consumption.
In all of these cases, the agent gathers a set of features, but
it is not desirable to have a static set that works on average.
Instead, we want to optimize for a specific sample - the current patient, certain computer on a network or the immediate
robot’s location.
These real-world problems give rise to the problem of
Classification with Costly Features (CwCF). In this setting,
an algorithm has to classify a sample, but can only reveal its
features at a defined cost. Each sample is treated independently, and for each sample the algorithm sequentially selects
features conditioning on values already revealed. Inherently,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3959

