The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Long Short-Term Memory with Dynamic Skip Connections
Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Lujun Zhao, Yaosong Lin, Minlong Peng, Jingjing Gong, Xuanjing Huang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Insitute of Intelligent Electroics & Systems
825 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, China
{tgui16, qz, ljzhao16, mlpeng16, yslin18, jjgong, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

You may depend on the accuracy of the report.

In recent years, long short-term memory (LSTM) has been
successfully used to model sequential data of variable length.
However, LSTM can still experience difficulty in capturing
long-term dependencies. In this work, we tried to alleviate this problem by introducing a dynamic skip connection,
which can learn to directly connect two dependent words.
Since there is no dependency information in the training data,
we propose a novel reinforcement learning-based method to
model the dependency relationship and connect dependent
words. The proposed model computes the recurrent transition functions based on the skip connections, which provides a dynamic skipping advantage over RNNs that always
tackle entire sentences sequentially. Our experimental results
on three natural language processing tasks demonstrate that
the proposed method can achieve better performance than existing methods. In the number prediction experiment, the proposed model outperformed LSTM with respect to accuracy
by nearly 20%.

The exact amounts spent depend to some extent on
appropriations legislation.
The man who wore a Stetson on his head went inside.

Figure 1: Examples of dependencies with variable length in
the language. The same phrase “depend on” in different sentences would have dependencies with different lengths. The
use of clauses also makes the dependency length uncertain.
Therefore, the models using a plain LSTM or an LSTM with
fixed skip connections would be difficult to capture such information.
for RNN architectures and proposed three architectural
complexity measures: recurrent skip coefficients, recurrent
depth, and feedforward depth. In addition, the skip coefficient is defined as a function of the “shortest path” from one
time to another. In particular, they found empirical evidence
that increasing the feedforward depth might not help with
long-term dependency tasks, while increasing the recurrent
skip coefficient could significantly improve the performance
on long-term dependency tasks.
However, these works on recurrent skip coefficients
adopted fixed skip lengths (Zhang et al. 2016; Chang et al.
2017). Although quite powerful given their simplicity, the
fixed skip length is constrained by its inability to take advantage of the dependencies with variable lengths in the
language, as shown in Figure 1. From this figure, we can
see that the same phrase “depend on” in different sentences
would have dependencies with different lengths. The use of
clauses also makes the dependency length uncertain. In addition, the meaning of a sentence is often determined by words
that are not very close. For example, consider the sentence
“The man who wore a Stetson on his head went inside.” This
sentence is really about a man going inside, not about the
Stetson. Hence, the models using a plain LSTM or an LSTM
with a fixed skip would be difficult to capture such information and insufficient to fully capture the semantics of the
natural language.

Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have achieved significant success for many difficult natural language processing
tasks, e.g., neural machine translation (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014), conversational/dialogue modeling (Serban et
al. 2016), document summarization (Nallapati et al. 2016),
sequence tagging (Santos and Zadrozny 2014), and document classification (Dai and Le 2015). Because of the need
to model long sentences, an important challenge encountered by all these models is the difficulty of capturing longterm dependencies. In addition, training RNNs using the
“Back-Propagation Through Time” (BPTT) method is vulnerable to vanishing and exploding gradients.
To tackle the above challenges, several variations of
RNNs have been proposed using new RNN transition functional units and optimization techniques, such as gated recurrent unit (GRU) (Chung et al. 2014) and long short-term
memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). Recently, many of the existing methods have focused on the
connection architecture, including “stacked RNNs” (El Hihi
and Bengio 1996) and “skip RNNs” (Chang et al. 2017).
Zhang et al. (2016) introduced a general formulation
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6481

