The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bi-Kronecker Functional Decision Diagrams:
A Novel Canonical Representation of Boolean Functions
Xuanxiang Huang, Kehang Fang, Liangda Fang,* Qingliang Chen, Zhao-Rong Lai, Linfeng Wei
Department of Computer Science, Jinan University
Guangzhou 510632, China
cshxx@stu2016.jnu.edu.cn; fkh@stu2014.jnu.edu.cn; {fangld,tpchen,laizhr,twei}@jnu.edu.cn

Abstract

aforementioned three expansions. In both theory and practices, KFDDs turns out to be more compact than BDDs and
FDDs.
The notion of expansions is the theoretical foundation of
decision diagrams. A generalization to the Shannon expansion (Kerntopf 2001) has been proposed for a long time.
This generalization decomposes a function into two cofactors w.r.t. an auxiliary function g and its negation ḡ. However, identifying a suitable auxiliary function for the generalized Shannon expansion is hard, which hinders it serving
as the core theory of decision diagrams that enjoys effective operations. Recently, a simple fragment, called the biShannon expansion, restricting the auxiliary function to be
a single variable, has been proposed in (Amarú, Gaillardon,
and Micheli 2014). Based on the above expansion, Biconditional Binary Decision Diagrams (BBDDs) are developed
accordingly. Thanks to the simplicity of the bi-Shannon expansion, Boolean manipulations on BBDDs are efficient.
It can be observed that (1) the more expansions the decision diagram is empowered by, the more compact it is, and
(2) the simpler expansions the decision diagram uses, the
more effective it is. In this paper, we thus aim to design a
decision diagram that fuses as many expansions as possible
under the principle of adopting simple ones.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

In this paper, we present a novel data structure for compact
representation and effective manipulations of Boolean functions, called Bi-Kronecker Functional Decision Diagrams
(BKFDDs). BKFDDs integrate the classical expansions (the
Shannon and Davio expansions) and their bi-versions. Thus,
BKFDDs are the generalizations of existing decision diagrams: BDDs, FDDs, KFDDs and BBDDs. Interestingly, under certain conditions, it is sufficient to consider the above expansions (the classical expansions and their bi-versions). By
imposing reduction and ordering rules, BKFDDs are compact
and canonical forms of Boolean functions. The experimental
results demonstrate that BKFDDs outperform other existing
decision diagrams in terms of sizes.

Introduction
A representation of Boolean functions, which has a compact size and supports effective manipulations, plays a dominant role in the area of artificial intelligence, e.g., planning
(Palacios et al. 2005; Huang 2006), diagnosis (Huang and
Darwiche 2005; Siddiqi and Huang 2007), and probabilistic inference (Chavira and Darwiche 2008; Fierens et al.
2015). The most notable representation is Binary Decision
Diagrams (BDDs) (Bryant 1986) that are based on the Shannon expansion (Boole 1854; Shannon 1938). The Shannon
expansion splits a function into two cofactors w.r.t. the variable x and its complement x̄. Moreover, the (positive and
negative) Davio expansions1 are more suitable to serve as
the basis of decomposing XOR-intensive functions than the
Shannon one (Kebschull, Schubert, and Rosenstiel 1992).
Based on the Davio expansion, Functional Decision Diagrams (FDDs) are proposed in (Kebschull, Schubert, and
Rosenstiel 1992; 1993; Drechsler, Theobald, and Becker
1996). However, it is shown that either of BDDs or FDDs
alone is inefficient for representing some classes of Boolean
functions (Becker and Drechsler 1995b). To address this
deficit, Drechsler and Becker (1998) proposed Kronecker
Functional Decision Diagrams (KFDDs) that integrate the

1. Inspired by the idea of the bi-Shannon expansion, we
propose two invariants of Davio expansion, called the
bi-positive and bi-negative Davio expansions.
2. By combining the above two expansions together with
the existing ones (Shannon, bi-Shannon, and positive
and negative Davio), we develop a novel representation of Boolean functions, called bi-Kronecker Functional Decision Diagrams (BKFDDs). Due to the diversity of the expansions, BKFDDs are generalizations of
the existing decision diagrams: BDDs, FDDs, KFDDs
and BBDDs. Interestingly, we show that, under certain
conditions, only some essential expansions are necessary, i.e., the other ones can indeed be reduced to one of
them.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The Davio expansion is also called the Reed-Muller expansion
(Reed 1954; Muller 1954).

3. We prove that BKFDDs are the canonical form of
Boolean functions via enforcing the ordering and reduction rules. In order to further reduce the size of
BKFDDs, we provide an additional reduction rule that
2867

