The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

One-Pass Incomplete Multi-View Clustering
Menglei Hu, Songcan Chen∗
1

College of Computer Science & Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics & Astronautics
2
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
{ml.hu, s.chen}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

data to get a better clustering result. To date, a variety of
related methods have been proposed and these can roughly
be divided into two main categories: subspace approaches
(Ding and Fu 2014; Cao et al. 2015; Li 2016) and spectral approaches (Kumar and Daumé 2011; Tao et al. 2017;
Ren et al. 2018). The former try to learn a shared latent subspace such that different dimensionality views are comparable in this space. Whereas the latter aim to learn a unified similarity matrix among multi-view data by extending
single-view spectral clustering approaches.
A normal assumption for most of above methods is that all
the views are complete, meaning that all the instances appear
in individual views and correspond to each other. However,
in real-world applications, some views often suffer from instances missing which makes some instances in one view
unnecessarily have corresponding instances. Such incompleteness will bring a great difficulty for MVC. Clustering
on such incomplete multi-view dataset is called incomplete
multi-view clustering (IMC). So far, many approaches have
also been developed (Li, Jiang, and Zhou 2014; Shao, He,
and Philip 2015; Zhao, Liu, and Fu 2016; Liu et al. 2017;
Wen et al. 2018; Hu and Chen 2018). Nevertheless, almost
all these approaches are offline and can hardly handle large
scale datasets because of their high time and space complexities.
In data explosion age, the size of individual views data is
often huge. For example, video of hundreds of hours is uploaded to YouTube every minute, which appears in multiple
modalities or views, namely audio, text and visual views.
Another example is in Web scale data mining, one may encounter billions of Web pages and the dimension of the features may be as large as O(106 ). Data in such scale is hard to
store in the memory and process in offline way. To our best
knowledge, to date, only one method OMVC is proposed for
the large scale IMC problem (Shao et al. 2016). However,
OMVC still suffers from some problems in such aspects
as normalizing data matrix, handling missing instances, determining convergence and so on. Therefore, solving large
scale IMC problem is still very urgent.
In this paper, we propose an One-Pass Incomplete Multiview Clustering framework (OPIMC) for large scale multiview datasets based on subspace learning. OPIMC can easily
address IMC problem with the help of Regularized Matrix
Factorization (RMF) (Gunasekar et al. 2017; Qi et al. 2017)

Real data are often with multiple modalities or from multiple heterogeneous sources, thus forming so-called multi-view
data, which receives more and more attentions in machine
learning. Multi-view clustering (MVC) becomes its important paradigm. In real-world applications, some views often
suffer from instances missing. Clustering on such multi-view
datasets is called incomplete multi-view clustering (IMC) and
quite challenging. To date, though many approaches have
been developed, most of them are offline and have high
computational and memory costs especially for large scale
datasets. To address this problem, in this paper, we propose
an One-Pass Incomplete Multi-view Clustering framework
(OPIMC). With the help of regularized matrix factorization
and weighted matrix factorization, OPIMC can relatively easily deal with such problem. Different from the existing and
sole online IMC method, OPIMC can directly get clustering
results and effectively determine the termination of iteration
process by introducing two global statistics. Finally, extensive
experiments conducted on four real datasets demonstrate the
efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed OPIMC method.

Introduction
With the increase of diverse data acquisition devices, real
data are often with multiple modalities or from multiple heterogeneous sources (Blum and Mitchell 1998), forming socalled multi-view data (Son et al. 2017). For example, a web
document can be represented by its url and words on the
page; images of a 3D object are taken from different viewpoints (Sun 2013). In multi-view datasets, the consistency
and complementary information among different views need
to be exploited for learning task at hand such as classification and clustering (Zhao, Ding, and Fu 2017). Nowadays, multi-view learning has been widely studied in different areas such as machine learning, data mining and artificial intelligence (Xing et al. 2017; Tulsiani et al. 2017;
Nie et al. 2018).
Multi-view Clustering (MVC), as one of the most important tasks of multi-view learning, has attracted unimaginable attention due to preventing the expensive requirement
of data labeling (Bickel and Scheffer 2004; Fan et al. 2017).
The pursuit of MVC is how to make full use of both consistency and complementary information among multi-view
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3838

