The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fuzzy-Classification Assisted Solution Preselection in Evolutionary Optimization
Aimin Zhou,1 Jinyuan Zhang,1∗ Jianyong Sun,2 Guixu Zhang1
1
2

East China Normal University, 3663 North Zhongshan Road, Shanghai, 200062, China
Xi’an Jiaotong University, No.28, Xianning West Road, Xi’an, Shaanxi, 710049, China
{amzhou, gxzhang}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, jyzhang@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, jy.sun@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

attracted much attention (Wang et al. 2013; Mallipeddi
and Suganthan 2014; Qian, Yu, and Zhou 2015). Among
them, the evolutionary algorithms (EAs) (Back, Fogel, and
Michalewicz 1997) is a kind of promising one, which includes genetic algorithms (GAs), particle swarm optimization (PSO), differential evolution (DE) (Das and Suganthan
2011), estimation of distribution algorithms (EDAs) (Larraaga and Lozano 2001), to name a few. Evolutionary optimization method is a kind of population based iterative
heuristic optimization paradigm that uses a population of solutions to approximate the optimum of (1).
As a kind of fitness value driven method, EAs do not
use the (approximated) derivatives to generate candidate solutions. Instead, they sample candidate solutions by using
the current solutions, evaluate the candidate solutions, and
select promising ones into the next generation. Therefore,
the selection operations play an vital role in EAs. Generally, there are three types of selection, i.e. the mating selection, the preselection, and the environmental selection. The
mating selection chooses parent solutions for sampling candidate solutions. The environmental selection chooses the
promising solutions to the next generation. Preselection may
have different meanings (Mahfoud 1992), and it refers to select promising ones from a set of candidate solutions in this
paper.
In evolutionary optimization, the preselection operator
can help to improve algorithm performance significantly if
it is correctly used (Emmerich et al. 2002; Jin 2011), in
which case the unpromising candidate solutions can be discarded before the fitness evaluations and thus the computational resources can be saved. A key issue with preselection is on how to measure qualities of candidate solutions,
i.e., to judge whether a candidate solution is promising or
not. According to the quality measurement, the preselection operators can be roughly classified into three categories:
(1) fitness based approaches (Wang, Cai, and Zhang 2011;
Li, Zhou, and Zhang 2014), (2) surrogate model based approaches (Jin 2003; 2011; Chen, Xie, and Zou 2013), and
(3) classification based approaches (Lu, Tang, and Yao 2011;
Lu and Tang 2012; Yu, Qian, and Hu 2016; Hu, Qian, and
Yu. 2017; Zhang, Zhou, and Zhang 2018; Wang, Qian, and
Yu 2018).
Classification based preselection (CPS) (Zhang, Zhou,
and Zhang 2018) regards the selection as a classification

In evolutionary optimization, the preselection is an efficient
operator to improve the search efficiency, which aims to filter unpromising candidate solutions before fitness evaluation. Most existing preselection operators rely on fitness values, surrogate models, or classification models. Basically,
the classification based preselection regards the preselection
as a classification procedure, i.e., differentiating promising
and unpromising candidate solutions. However, the difference between promising and unpromising classes becomes
fuzzy as the running process goes on, as all the left solutions are likely to be promising ones. Facing this challenge,
this paper proposes a fuzzy classification based preselection
(FCPS) scheme, which utilizes the membership function to
measure the quality of candidate solutions. The proposed
FCPS scheme is applied to two state-of-the-art evolutionary
algorithms on a test suite. The experimental results show the
potential of FCPS on improving algorithm performance.

Introduction
Sophisticated optimization problems are faced in a variety
of real-world applications, and are arisen from scientific to
engineering areas (Polak 1997). Generally, an optimization
problem can be formulated as:
min f (x)
x∈Ω

(1)

|
where
Qn x = (x1 , · · · , xn ) is a decision variable vector, Ω =
i=1 [ai , bi ] defines the feasible region of the search space,
and f : Rn → R denotes the objective function.
When optimization problems are friendly, i.e., the objective and/or constraints are linear or convex, the linear programming or convex optimization methods are of great interests (Polak 1997). However real-world applications are
usually more complicated where the objective and/or constraints might be nonlinear, non-convex or even without
closed forms (Szu 1986; Yuille and Rangarajan 2002). For
these problems, traditional optimization methods may become inefficient, or even fail to work. To this end, derivativefree or heuristic optimization methods, which do not make
strong assumptions about the problems to optimize, have
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2403

