The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Variational BEJG Solvers for Marginal-MAP Inference
with Accurate Approximation of B-Conditional Entropy
Igor Kiselev

University of Waterloo
200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada
ipkiselev@cs.uwaterloo.ca
property that after a finite number of iterations the sequence
of associated solutions is converging to the MMAP solution.
(4) Additionally, we scale our variational approach to solve
POMDP problems and show that we can find the optimal
controller by MMAP inference in a single-DBN generative
model of a special cascading structure. We are the first to
our knowledge who proposed BEJG variational algorithms
and proximal algorithms to solve MMAP on the models with
high-order interactions.

Introduction
We developed novel variational MMAP inference algorithms
and proximal convergent solvers, where we can improve the
approximation accuracy while better preserving the original
MMAP query by designing such a dual variational objective function that an upper bound approximation is applied
only to the entropy of decision variables. A task of marginalMAP (MMAP) inference is a “mixed” problem, where “max”
or B-variables are decision variables to be optimized while
all other variables are “sum” variables to be marginalized
out. Since MMAP inference is computationally intractable
(NPPP -complete), approximate variational inference techniques such as upper bounding or convex relaxations methods are of particular interest. To address the scalability issues of solving MMAP problems on complex loopy graphs
with multi-variable factors, the community has been making
significant progress in developing approximate variational
algorithms. Unfortunately, most current approximation approaches for MMAP have focused on pair-wise models and
their extensions to the models with high-order interactions
often result in simplification of the original MMAP query
and greater approximation errors.
We propose four novel contributions. (1) Our novel BEJG
objective function for models with high-order interactions
decomposes the intractable MMAP problem into a linear
combination of tractable sub-problems and ensures that Bvariables are maximized jointly within each sub-problem.
This design ensures that all and only B-variables remain in
our upper bound of the intractable entropy of B-variables (Bentropy), which is completely removed now from the joint
entropy as required by the original MMAP query. (2) Our
novel BEJG variational algorithms (generalized and zerotemperature) solve MMAP exactly on any junction graph of
a special AB-tree structure and provide accurate approximate
results on general graphs with high-order interactions. (3)
Our novel proximal solvers (BEJG and Generalized Bethe)
for MMAP on models with multi-variable factors demonstrate improved convergence properties and are based on the
proximal point approach, where we convert the direct optimization of the MMAP variational objective function into
the sequence of proximal minimization problems with the

BEJG Variational Approach for MMAP
Consider an equivalent junction graph (JG) representation of
a Bayesian Network G = (C, S, E) with clusters C, separators S (Skl ⊆ {Ck ∩Cl }) and edges E. We ensure that this JG
satisfies the running intersection property and family preservation property. We introduce types of clusters and separators
by the type of variables in their scope (A and/or B-variables):
(C = {C A ∪ C B ∪ C AB } and E = {E A ∪ E B ∪ E AB }).
Each cluster potential ψCk (x) equals to the product of factors associated with this cluster. We use the form of the
original joint distribution factorized via cluster potentials
ψCk (x), which we generalize by including “dummy” separator functions bSkl = 1, ∀kl ∈ E. We also introduce parameters θCk (x) = ln ψCk (x), θSkl (x) = ln bSkl (x) to obtain the
convex exponential
P form:
P
p(x) = exp[ k∈C θCk (x) − kl∈E θSkl (x)] .
We derive our novel BEJG variational approximation for
MMAP by (1) representing the MMAP problem with its
exact dual variational form (Liu and Ihler 2013), and (2)
designing a tractable BEJG objective function with a special
upper bound approximation for B-entropy, which is a linear
combination of all AB, B cluster and separator entropies with
B-variables only.
M M AP
Theorem 1 The optimization of BEJG free energy FBEJG
over the marginals from a convex set L provides an accurate
MMAP estimate on general junction graphs with high-order
interactions:
X
M M AP
max FBEJG
= E τ [θ(x)] +
HSkl (xB ; τ )+
τ ∈L

X
k∈C\C B

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

kl∈E AB

HCk (τ ) −

X
kl∈E\E B

HSkl (τ ) −

X

HCk (xB ; τ )

k∈C AB

(1)
9957

