The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Triggers for Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
Christopher Tran, Elena Zheleva
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
{ctran29, ezheleva}@uic.edu

Abstract

2018) and the closely related problem of finding individualized treatment regimes which aims to find the best individual treatment assignment (Almardini et al. 2015; Laber
and Zhao 2015; Lakkaraju and Rudin 2017; Kallus 2017;
Kallus and Zhou 2018). Most of them rely on recursive partitioning using interpretable tree-based methods, such as decision lists (Lakkaraju and Rudin 2017), decision trees (Athey
and Imbens 2016; Breiman 2017; Laber and Zhao 2015;
Su et al. 2009; Zeileis, Hothorn, and Hornik 2008) and random forests (Foster, Taylor, and Ruberg 2011; Wager and
Athey 2017; Athey, Tibshirani, and Wager 2016). Some of
the splitting criteria include highest parameter instability
(Zeileis, Hothorn, and Hornik 2008), t-statistic for the test
of no difference between splits (Su et al. 2009) and penalizing splits with high variance (Athey and Imbens 2016). In
(Kallus 2017), an impurity measure is developed to measure
risk of treatments in a partition. There are also other methods
that rely on clustering (Almardini et al. 2015) or propensity
scores (Xie, Brand, and Jann 2012).
In many realistic scenarios, the treatment is an ordinal (or
monotonously increasing continuous) variable, rather than a
binary one, and the effect depends on the amount of treatment. For example, a clinician might be interested to understand the minimum number of days (the trigger) that patients
with certain characteristics need to take a medication, in order to be cured (the effect). Or, a company might be interested in offering a personalized discount where the threshold is the minimum discount needed to trigger a customer
with given characteristics to buy a product. Then, the goal
becomes finding the threshold that maximizes the expected
outcome for each discovered subpopulation where the subpopulation is characterized by its set of equal or similar attributes. To the best of our knowledge, none of the existing
work addresses this problem which is the focus of our work.
We formalize this problem under the name trigger-based
HTE estimation and develop a learning procedure that enables the discovery of individual-level thresholds for triggering an effect. In essence, we turn an ordinal treatment problem into a binary treatment one where the treatment threshold is learned. For each subpopulation, the treatment effect
refers to the average difference between the outcomes for the
individuals in the subpopulation whose treatment is below
the threshold and those who are above the threshold. A key
assumption here is that the subpopulation that has received

The causal effect of a treatment can vary from person to person based on their individual characteristics and predispositions. Mining for patterns of individual-level effect differences, a problem known as heterogeneous treatment effect
estimation, has many important applications, from precision
medicine to recommender systems. In this paper we define
and study a variant of this problem in which an individuallevel threshold in treatment needs to be reached, in order to
trigger an effect. One of the main contributions of our work
is that we do not only estimate heterogeneous treatment effects with fixed treatments but can also prescribe individualized treatments. We propose a tree-based learning method
to find the heterogeneity in the treatment effects. Our experimental results on multiple datasets show that our approach
can learn the triggers better than existing approaches.

Introduction
Developing optimal precision treatments for diverse populations of interest can lead to more effective public policies (Grimmer, Messing, and Westwood 2017), medical decisions (Laber and Zhao 2015; Lakkaraju and Rudin 2017),
recommender systems (Li et al. 2010), and more (Ascarza
2018). Treatment effects, also known as causal effects, assess the outcome response difference between applying a
treatment to a unit and not applying one. Heterogeneous
treatment effect (HTE) estimation refers to finding subsets in
a population of interest for which the causal effects are different from the effects of the population as a whole (Athey
and Imbens 2016). For example, if the treatment is a drug
with potential adverse reactions, doctors may want to prescribe it only to those people who would benefit from it the
most. Additionally, HTE analysis allows the discovery of
subpopulations that can react adversely to a treatment and
should avoid the treatment altogether. HTE can be studied
as part of the post-analysis of running a controlled experiment or through observational data.
Supervised machine learning techniques have been
adapted to the problem of HTE estimation (Imai and
Ratkovic 2013; Tian et al. 2014; Xu et al. 2015; Grimmer, Messing, and Westwood 2017; Xie, Chen, and Shi
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5183

