The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Structured Argumentation with Conditional Preferences
Phan Minh Dung∗

Phan Minh Thang

Tran Cao Son

Department of Computer Science
Asian Institute of Technology
Thailand

BUUIC College of Burapha University
Thailand

Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces, NM, USA

Abstract

guments and then using this preference order to remove undesired attacks. Amgoud and Cayrol (2002) has studied different ways to define preference order between arguments.
Prakken (2010) and Modgil and Prakken (2013; 2014) have
proposed ASPIC+, a rich framework for structured argumentation with prioritized rules with several distinct systems
of preference orders between arguments.
The rich diversity of proposed attack relations poses a serious challenge for any potential user of structured argumentation as such a user would have to decide which attack relation should be selected and implemented for her/his domain.
To address this problem, general principles for the characterization and evaluation of alternative attack relations for rulebased systems are needed. Caminada and Amgoud (2007)
have introduced the postulates of consistency and closure for
argument-based systems. A subargument closure postulate
stating that any extension should contain all subarguments
of its arguments has been studied by Martinez, Garcia, and
Simari (2006), Amgoud (2014), Modgil and Prakken (2013).
The three proposed postulates give important insights into
the characteristics of attack relations in structured argumentation. But they are not sufficient to guarantee intuitive semantics, as they do not take into account the preferences
among defeasible rules. Dung (2016) has proposed a set of
simple and intuitive properties, referred to as regular properties, to study the attack relations. Dung and Thang (2018)
have showed that these properties coupled with the minimal
removal principle stating that the removal of attacks should
be kept to a minimum, uniquely identify the canonical attack
relations that could be viewed as representing the intended
attack relations for structured argumentation with prioritized
rules.
Until now, axiomatic analysis of attack relations has been
carried out mostly for systems with unconditional preferences. In the next example, an extended version of the Sherlock Holmes example from Dung (2016); Dung and Thang
(2018), we can see that conditional preferences could be a
natural part of many defeasible knowledge bases.

We study defeasible knowledge bases with conditional preferences (DKB). A DKB consists of a set of undisputed facts
and a rule-based system that contains different types of rules:
strict, defeasible, and preference. A major challenge in defining the semantics of DKB lies in determining how conditional
preferences interact with the attack relations represented by
rebuts and undercuts, between arguments.
We introduce the notions of preference attack relations as sets
of attacks between preference arguments and the rebuts or
undercuts among arguments as well as of preference attack
relation assignments which map knowledge bases to preference attack relations. We present five rational properties (referred to as regular properties), the inconsistency-resolving,
effective rebuts, context-independence, attack monotonicity
and link-orientation properties generalizing the properties of
the same names for the case of unconditional preferences.
Preference attack relation assignment are defined as regular
if they satisfy all regular properties. We show that the set
of regular assignments forms a complete lower semilattice
whose least element is referred to as the canonical preference
attack relation assignment. Canonical attack relation assignment represents the semantics of preferences in defeasible
knowledge bases as intuitively, it could be viewed as being
uniquely identified by the regular properties together with the
principle of minimal removal of undesired attacks. We also
present the normal preference attack relation assignment as
an approximation of the canonical attack relation assignment.

Keywords: Conditional preferences, regular properties,
minimal removal principle, preference attack relation assignments, canonical and normal preference attack relation
assignments.

Introduction
There are extensive research on rule-based systems with
prioritized rules (see, e.g., Modgil and Prakken (2014);
Amgoud and Cayrol (2002); Brewka (1989); Delgrande,
Schaub, and Tompits (2003); Schaub and Wang (2001);
Brewka and Eiter (1999)). Prakken and Sartor (1997) is arguably the first attempt to study the application of priorities
of defeasible rules to define a preference order between ar-

Example 1 (Adapted from Dung (2016)). Sherlock Holmes
is investigating a case involving three persons P1 , P2 and S
together with the dead body of a big man. Furthermore S is a
small child who cannot kill a big man and P1 is a beneficiary
from the dead of the big man.
The case could be represented by the following knowledge

∗

The lead and corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2792

