The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Incomplete Label Multi-Task Deep Learning
for Spatio-Temporal Event Subtype Forecasting
Yuyang Gao

Liang Zhao

Lingfei Wu

George Mason University
ygao13@gmu.edu

George Mason University
lzhao9@gmu.edu

IBM Research
wuli@us.ibm.com

Yanfang Ye

Hui Xiong

Chaowei Yang

West Virginia University
yanfang.ye@mail.wvu.edu

Rutgers University
hxiong@rutgers.edu

George Mason University
cyang3@gmu.edu

Abstract
Due to the potentially significant benefits for society, forecasting spatio-temporal societal events is currently attracting considerable attention from researchers. Beyond merely
predicting the occurrence of future events, practitioners are
now looking for information about specific subtypes of future events in order to allocate appropriate amounts and types
of resources to manage such events and any associated social risks. However, forecasting event subtypes is far more
complex than merely extending binary prediction to cover
multiple classes, as 1) different locations require different
models to handle their characteristic event subtype patterns
due to spatial heterogeneity; 2) historically, many locations
have only experienced a incomplete set of event subtypes,
thus limiting the local model’s ability to predict previously
“unseen” subtypes; and 3) the subtle discrepancy among different event subtypes requires more discriminative and profound representations of societal events. In order to address
all these challenges concurrently, we propose a Spatial Incomplete Multi-task Deep leArning (SIMDA) framework that
is capable of effectively forecasting the subtypes of future
events. The new framework formulates spatial locations into
tasks to handle spatial heterogeneity in event subtypes, and
learns a joint deep representation of subtypes across tasks.
Furthermore, based on the “first law of geography”, spatiallyclosed tasks share similar event subtype patterns such that
adjacent tasks can share knowledge with each other effectively. Optimizing the proposed model amounts to a new nonconvex and strongly-coupled problem, we propose a new algorithm based on Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) that can decompose the complex problem into
subproblems that can be solved efficiently. Extensive experiments on six real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed model.

Guangning
Longgang
Pingshan

Longhua
Baoan
Nanshan Futian

CO
PM₁₀

Luohu

Yantian
Dapeng

NO₂
PM₂.₅

O₃ 8h
SO₂

Figure 1: Relative amounts of six air pollutant subtypes in
10 districts in Shenzhen, China, 2013 (Xia et al. 2016).

a fast-growing research area that typically forecasts the occurrence of future spatial events, namely whether or not a
particular spatial event will happen. However, in many applications simply forecasting the occurrence of an event is
not enough. Knowledge regarding the subtype or category
of a future event is vital if decision makers are to achieve accurate and optimal resource allocation. For example, Figure
1 shows the percentage of six pollutant subtypes that feature
in air pollution events based on the most frequently detected
primary pollutants in Shenzhen, China in Summer 2013 (Xia
et al. 2016). Local Environmental Monitoring Centers try
to identify which pollutant source causing the most harm
to public health and take appropriate action. For instance,
when the pollutant subtype is P M 2.5 (atmospheric particulate matter with a diameter less than 2.5 micrometers), the
government can suggest that people who are sensitive to
small particles wear gauze masks to protect themselves. On
the other hand, when the subtype is O3 (trioxygen), government agencies need to alert people to avoid going outside when the O3 concentration is highest. Thus, successful
forecasting of the pollutant subtypes provides more specific
information that enables practitioners to allocate resources
that will address public health issues with the specific primary pollutant source most effectively.
Most of the existing work in this area such as (Zhao et
al. 2015a; Wang et al. 2018) has focused primarily on the
event occurrence rather than engaging in the study of the various event subtypes, more detailed literature survey is pro-

Introduction
Spatio-temporal societal events such as disease outbreaks
and organized crime have a significant impact on society.
The ability to successfully forecast future spatial events of
this nature would thus be extremely beneficial for decision
makers seeking to avoid, control, or alleviate the associated
social upheaval and risks. Spatial social event forecasting is
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3638

