The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

State Abstraction as Compression in Apprenticeship Learning
David Abel,1 Dilip Arumugam,2 Kavosh Asadi,1
Yuu Jinnai,1 Michael L. Littman,1 Lawson L.S. Wong3
1

Department of Computer Science, Brown University
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
3
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University
2

Abstract

ory clarifies how to communicate in the presence of noise,
culminating in seminal results about the nature of communication and compression that helped establish the science
and engineering practices of computation. Of particular relevance to our agenda is Rate-Distortion theory, which studies the trade-off between a code’s ability to compress (rate)
and represent the original signal (distortion) (Shannon 1948;
Berger 1971). Cognitive neuroscience has suggested that
perception and generalization are tied to efficient compression (Attneave 1954; Sims 2016; 2018), termed the “efficient
coding hypothesis” by Barlow (1961).
The goal of this work is to understand the role of
information-theoretic compression in state abstraction for
sequential decision making. We draw a parallel between
state abstraction as used in reinforcement learning and compression as understood in information theory. We build on
the seminal work of Shannon (1948), Blahut (1972), Arimoto (1972) and Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek (1999), and
draw inspiration from related work on understanding the relationship between abstraction and compression (Botvinick
et al. 2015; Solway et al. 2014). While the perspective we
introduce is intended to be general, we focus our study in
two ways. First, we investigate only state abstraction, deferring discussion of temporal (Sutton, Precup, and Singh
1999), action (Hauskrecht et al. 1998), and hierarchical abstraction (Dayan and Hinton 1993; Dietterich 2000a) to future work. Second, we address the learning problem when
a demonstrator is available, as in Apprenticeship Learning (Atkeson and Schaal 1997; Abbeel and Ng 2004; Argall
et al. 2009), which simplifies aspects of our model.
Concretely, we introduce a new objective function that
explicitly balances state-compression and performance. Our
main result proves this objective is upper bounded by a variant of the Information Bottleneck objective adapted to sequential decision making. We introduce Deterministic Information Bottleneck for State abstraction (D IBS), an algorithm that outputs a lossy state abstraction optimizing the
trade-off between compressing the state space and preserving the capacity for performance in that compressed state
space. We conduct experiments to showcase the relationship
between compression and performance captured by the algorithm in a traditional grid world and present an extension
to high-dimensional observations via experiments with the
Atari game Breakout.

State abstraction can give rise to models of environments that
are both compressed and useful, thereby enabling efficient
sequential decision making. In this work, we offer the first
formalism and analysis of the trade-off between compression
and performance made in the context of state abstraction for
Apprenticeship Learning. We build on Rate-Distortion theory, the classic Blahut-Arimoto algorithm, and the Information Bottleneck method to develop an algorithm for computing state abstractions that approximate the optimal tradeoff between compression and performance. We illustrate the
power of this algorithmic structure to offer insights into effective abstraction, compression, and reinforcement learning
through a mixture of analysis, visuals, and experimentation.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) poses a challenging problem.
Agents must learn about their environment through highdimensional and often noisy observations while receiving
sparse and delayed evaluative feedback. The ability to understand one’s surroundings well enough to support effective decision making under these conditions is a remarkable
feat, and arguably a hallmark of intelligent behavior. To this
end, a long-standing goal of RL is to endow decision-making
agents with the ability to acquire and exploit abstract models
for use in decision making, drawing inspiration from human
cognition (Tenenbaum et al. 2011).
One path toward realizing this goal is to make use of state
abstraction, which describes methods for compressing the
environment’s state space to distill complex problems into
simpler forms (Dietterich 2000b; Andre and Russell 2002;
Li, Walsh, and Littman 2006). Critically, the degree of compression induced by an abstraction trades off directly with
its capacity to represent good behavior. If the abstraction
throws away too much information, the resulting abstract
model will fail to preserve essential characteristics of the
original task (Abel, Hershkowitz, and Littman 2016). Thus,
care must be taken to identify state abstractions that balance
between an appropriate degree of compression and adequate
representational power.
Information Theory offers foundational results about the
limits of compression (Shannon 1948). The core of the theCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3134

