The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On the Hardness of Probabilistic Inference Relaxations∗
Supratik Chakraborty

Kuldeep S. Meel

Moshe Y. Vardi

Dept of Computer Science & Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay

School of Computing
National University of Singapore

Department of Computer Science
Rice University

Abstract

counting techniques (Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2013b;
Chakraborty et al. 2014; Ermon et al. 2013; Chakraborty,
Meel, and Vardi 2016; Meel et al. 2016) therefore yield a
promising approach for probabilistic inference that is complementary to variational methods (Wainwright and Jordan
2008), loopy belief propagation (Murphy, Weiss, and Jordan 1999), Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)-based techniques (Neal 1993) and the like. Indeed, the model counting
formulation has recently been hailed as a promising assembly
language for inferencing in probabilistic graphical models.
Unfortunately, model counting and probabilistic inference
are computationally hard (Valiant 1979; Roth 1996). Hence it
is unlikely that efficient algorithms exist for exact probabilistic inference, and various approximations and relaxations
are used in practice (viz. (Neal 1993; Sarkhel et al. 2016;
Fink, Huang, and Olteanu 2013; Wexler and Meek 2008;
Gordon et al. 2014)). The widespread use of relaxations
is premised on the belief that such relaxations offer computational simplicity vis-a-vis exact inference, while being
reasonably accurate in practice. Indeed, informal arguments
and experimental measurements on benchmarks are often
presented as “proof” of effectiveness of these relaxations.
While this may be acceptable in several contexts, it is clearly
not in others where the consequence of machine-computed
probabilistic inference can be dramatic, viz. clinical diagnosis (Seixas, B. Zadrozny, and Saade 2014) or military decision
support systems (Antonucci et al. 2013). In such cases, it is
imperative that we are cognizant of worst-case bounds on
approximation errors, when choosing a relaxation based on
the belief that it offers computational simplicity.
As machine intelligence affects increasing aspects of our
lives, some with far-reaching consequences, a deeper understanding of such precision-complexity tradeoff provided
by different relaxations is almost a necessity. The appropriateness of the tradeoff offered by a relaxation may differ from one context to another; hence a data scientist
must know where on the tradeoff curve a specific relaxation lies, before using it in an application. For example,
Bayesian network models have been studied for diagnosis
of serious diseases (Seixas, B. Zadrozny, and Saade 2014;
Onisko, Druzdzel, and Wasyluk 1999; Cruz-Ramirez et al.
2007). Diagnosing an individual as having (or not having) a
disease based on such complex probabilistic models, and asking “what-if” questions with respect to the treatment regime

A promising approach to probabilistic inference that has attracted recent attention exploits its reduction to a set of model
counting queries. Since probabilistic inference and model
counting are #P-hard, various relaxations are used in practice,
with the hope that these relaxations allow efficient computation while also providing rigorous approximation guarantees.
In this paper, we show that contrary to common belief, several relaxations used for model counting and its applications
(including probablistic inference) do not really lead to computational efficiency in a complexity theoretic sense. Our arguments proceed by showing the corresponding relaxed notions
of counting to be computationally hard. We argue that approximate counting with multiplicative tolerance and probabilistic
guarantees of correctness is the only class of relaxations that
provably simplifies the problem, given access to an NP-oracle.
Finally, we show that for applications that compare probability
estimates with a threshold, a new notion of relaxation with
gaps between low and high thresholds can be used. This new
relaxation allows efficient decision making in practice, given
access to an NP-oracle, while also bounding the approximation error.

1

Introduction

Decision making with uncertain data is increasingly becoming common in today’s world. In this setting, techniques like
probabilistic inference (Koller and Friedman 2009) and statistical hypothesis testing (Moyé 2006; Walpole et al. 1993) are
crucial for informed decision making. Probabilistic graphical
models, viz. Bayesian networks, Markov logic networks and
the like provide an elegant formalism for representing conditional independences between variables in a system (Koller
and Friedman 2009). Probabilistic inference on graphical
models gives algorithmic techniques to determine the posteriori probability of an event, given observations or evidence. It
is well known that probabilistic inference can be reduced to a
set of (literal-weighted) model counting queries1 (Roth 1996;
Chavira and Darwiche 2008). Recent advances in model
∗
The author list has been sorted alphabetically by last name; this
should not be used to determine the extent of authors’ contributions.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Literal-weighted model counting, in turn, can be reduced to
(unweighted) model counting (Chakraborty et al. 2015).

7785

