The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Identification of Approximate
Best Configuration of Training in Large Datasets
Silu Huang,1∗ Chi Wang,2 Bolin Ding,3† Surajit Chaudhuri2
1

University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL
2
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA
3
Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA
shuang86@illinois.edu, {wang.chi, surajitc}@microsoft.com, bolin.ding@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

size to determine the best configuration up to an accuracy
loss threshold is unknown. We develop a novel confidence
interval (CI)-based progressive sampling and pruning solution, by addressing two questions: (a) CI estimator: given a
sampled training dataset, how to estimate the confidence interval of a configuration’s real performance with full training
data? (b) scheduler: as the optimal sample size is unknown
a priori, how to allocate appropriate sample size for each
configuration?
Our contributions are summarized as the following.

A configuration of training refers to the combinations of feature engineering, learner, and its associated hyperparameters.
Given a set of configurations and a large dataset randomly
split into training and testing set, we study how to efficiently
identify the best configuration with approximately the highest testing accuracy when trained from the training set. To
guarantee small accuracy loss, we develop a solution using
confidence interval (CI)-based progressive sampling and pruning strategy. Compared to using full data to find the exact best
configuration, our solution achieves more than two orders of
magnitude speedup, while the returned top configuration has
identical or close test accuracy.

• We develop an A BC framework using progressive sampling and CI-based pruning. It ensures finding an approximate best configuration while reducing the running time.

Introduction

• We present and prove bounds for the real test accuracy
when the ML model is trained using full data, based on the
model trained with sampled data.

Increasing the productivity of data scientists has been a target
for many machine learning service providers, such as Azure
ML, DataRobot, Google Cloud ML, and AWS ML. For a new
predictive task, a data scientist usually spends a vast amount
of time to train a good ML solution. A proper configuration,
i.e., the combination of preprocessing, feature engineering,
learner (i.e., training algorithm) and the associated hyperparameters, is critical to achieving good performance. It
usually takes tens or hundreds of trials to select a suitable
configuration.
There are AutoML tools like auto-sklearn (Feurer et al.
2015) to automate these trials, and output a configuration
with highest evaluated performance. However, both the manual and AutoML approaches have become increasingly inefficient as the available ML data volume grows to millions or
more. Even the trial for a single configuration can take hours
or days for such large-scale datasets. Motivated by this efficiency issue, we propose a module called approximate best
configuration (A BC). Given a set of configurations, it outputs
the approximate best configuration, such that the accuracy
loss to the best configuration is below a threshold. Our goal
is to efficiently identify the approximate best configuration.
The intuition behind A BC is that the ML model trained
over a sampled dataset can be used to approximate the model
trained over the full dataset. However, the optimal sample

• Within A BC, we design an approximately optimal scheduling scheme based on the confidence interval, for allocating
sample size among different configurations.
• We conduct experiments with large datasets. We demonstrate that our A BC solution is tens to hundreds of times
faster, while returning top configurations with no more
than 1% accuracy loss.

Problem Formulation
Notions and Notations. In this paper, we focus on classification tasks with a large set of labeled data D. In order
for reliable evaluation of a trained classifier, data scientists
usually split the available data randomly into training and
testing set Dtr and Dte . After that, they specify a number
of configurations of the ML workflow and try to identify the
best configuration. Let C be the candidate configuration set
and Ci be the ith configuration in C. We further let n be
the number of configurations, i.e., n = |C|. Using terminology from learning theory, each configuration Ci defines a
hypothesis space Hi , where each hypothesis H ∈ Hi is a
possible classifier trained under this configuration. Given a
training dataset Dtr , the learner in Ci will output a hypothi
esis Htr
∈ Hi as the trained classifier. The quality of the
classifier is measured against the heldout testing data Dte . In
this paper, we focus on accuracy as the quality metric. We
denote the accuracy of hypothesis H ∈ Hi on dataset D as

∗

Work done while visiting Microsoft Research
Work done while working in Microsoft Research
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3862

