The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Solving Multiagent Planning Problems with Concurrent Conditional Effects
Daniel Furelos-Blanco∗

Anders Jonsson

Department of Computing
Imperial College London
London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom
d.furelos-blanco18@imperial.ac.uk

Dept. Information and Communication Technologies
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Roc Boronat 138, 08018 Barcelona, Spain
anders.jonsson@upf.edu

Abstract

volve the minimum number of agents necessary to perform a
given task. Brafman and Zoran (2014) extend the distributed
forward-search planner MAFS (Nissim and Brafman 2014)
to support concurrency constraints while preserving privacy.
Maliah, Brafman, and Shani (2017) propose MAFBS, which
extends MAFS to use forward and backward messages.
In this paper we describe a planner that can handle
arbitrary concurrency constraints, as originally proposed
by Boutilier and Brafman (2001) and later extended by Kovacs (2012). Our approach is similar to previous approaches
in that we transform a multiagent planning problem into a
single-agent problem with much fewer actions, avoiding the
exponential blowup associated with concurrent actions. The
concurrency constraints of Boutilier and Brafman are significantly more expressive than those of Crosby (2013), enabling us to solve multiagent problems with more complex
interactions (e.g. effects that depend on the concurrent actions of other agents). We show that our planner is sound and
complete, and perform experiments in several concurrent
multiagent planning domains to evaluate its performance.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
We first introduce the planning formalisms that we need
to describe our planner. Next, we describe the compilation
from multiagent planning to single-agent planning. We then
present the results of experiments in several domains that require concurrency. Finally, we relate our planner to existing
work in the literature, and conclude with a discussion.

In this work we present a novel approach to solving concurrent multiagent planning problems in which several agents act
in parallel. Our approach relies on a compilation from concurrent multiagent planning to classical planning, allowing us
to use an off-the-shelf classical planner to solve the original
multiagent problem. The solution can be directly interpreted
as a concurrent plan that satisfies a given set of concurrency
constraints, while avoiding the exponential blowup associated
with concurrent actions. Our planner is the first to handle
action effects that are conditional on what other agents are
doing. Theoretically, we show that the compilation is sound
and complete. Empirically, we show that our compilation can
solve challenging multiagent planning problems that require
concurrent actions.

Introduction
Concurrent multiagent planning is a branch of multiagent
planning in which several agents collaborate to solve a given
problem. Collaboration takes the form of concurrent or joint
actions that are executed together by multiple agents. Concurrent multiagent planning is challenging for several reasons: the number of concurrent actions is worst-case exponential in the number of agents, and restrictions are needed
to ensure that concurrent actions are well-formed. Usually, these restrictions take the form of concurrency constraints (Boutilier and Brafman 2001; Crosby 2013), which
model both the case for which two actions must occur in
parallel, and for which they cannot occur in parallel.
In spite of recent progress in multiagent planning, there
are relatively few multiagent planners that can reliably handle concurrency. CMAP (Borrajo 2013), MAPlan (Stolba,
Fiser, and Komenda 2016) and MH-FMAP (Torreño, Onaindia, and Sapena 2014) can all produce concurrent plans,
but are not designed to handle more complex concurrency
constraints. Crosby, Jonsson, and Rovatsos (2014) associate
concurrency constraints with the objects of a multiagent
planning problem and transform the problem into a sequential, single-agent problem that can be solved using a classical planner. Shekhar and Brafman (2018) adapt this approach using collaborative actions, i.e. single actions that in-

Background
In this section we describe the planning formalisms that we
use: classical planning and concurrent multiagent planning.

Classical Planning
We consider the fragment of classical planning with conditional effects and negative conditions and goals. Given a
fluent set F , a literal l is a valuation of a fluent in F , where
l = f denotes that l assigns true to f ∈ F , and l = ¬f that l
assigns false to f . A literal set L is well-defined if it does not
assign conflicting values to any fluent f , i.e. does not contain
both f and ¬f . Let L(F ) be the set of well-defined literal
sets on F , i.e. the set of all partial assignments of values to
fluents. Given a literal set L ∈ L(F ), let ¬L = {¬l : l ∈ L}
be the complement of L. We also define the projection L|X
of a literal set L onto a subset of fluents X ⊆ F .

∗

The work was conducted while at Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7594

