The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Leveraging Observations in Bandits: Between Risks and Benefits
Andrei Lupu

Audrey Durand

Doina Precup

School of Computer Science
McGill University
andrei.lupu@mail.mcgill.ca

School of Computer Science
McGill University
audrey.durand@mcgill.ca

School of Computer Science
McGill University
dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract

Observational learning, also known as social learning, has
recently been introduced in RL to model the ability of an
agent to modify its behavior or to acquire information by
observing another agent sharing its environment (Borsa et
al. 2017). Unlike typical imitation learning, observational
learning does not strictly lead to a duplication of the behavior exhibited by the teacher (Bandura and Walters 1963;
Bandura 1977). More precisely, observational learning is
characterized by the following principles (Borsa et al. 2017):
the agent observes the teacher through its own perception of
the environment; the agent is only rewarded for performing the task and doesn’t receive any incentive to imitate the
teacher; the teacher is not aware that it is watched by the
learner and does not intentionally teach or provide extra information to the learner. We highlight these differences with
imitation learning by rather referring to the teacher as a target.
In this work, we study the observational learning problem
in the context of bandits, the simplest setting for studying the
explore-exploit trade-off faced by an agent in an unknown
environment. We consider a learner (agent) that observes actions performed by a target policy in the same environment,
but not their associated rewards. Note that the target actions
can in fact be performed by several other agents. When collected from a good target, this data can potentially improve
the behaviour of the learner, specifically, by speeding up
the learning process. Consequently, we would like an agent
equipped with the ability to leverage it whenever available.
This should not be confused with cooperative bandits (Landgren, Srivastava, and Leonard 2016), where several agents
share knowledge with each other regarding the actions and
obtained rewards.
Human imitative behaviour in social learning experiments
has been studied extensively in the bandits setting, when a
learner can observe both the actions and rewards of other
agents, e.g. (Schlag 1998; Rendell et al. 2010; Toyokawa,
Kim, and Kameda 2014). The observational learning bandits setting provides a framework for extending social learning experiments to situations where the reward of peers is
not available to agents. This setting arises naturally in human interactions. Specifically, our work was motivated by a
real psychology dataset in which teens can observe the behaviour of peers (such as consuming certain soft drinks) but
cannot observe the actual reward (enjoyment) directly. This

Imitation learning has been widely used to speed up learning
in novice agents, by allowing them to leverage existing data
from experts. Allowing an agent to be influenced by external
observations can benefit to the learning process, but it also
puts the agent at risk of following sub-optimal behaviours.
In this paper, we study this problem in the context of bandits. More specifically, we consider that an agent (learner) is
interacting with a bandit-style decision task, but can also observe a target policy interacting with the same environment.
The learner observes only the target’s actions, not the rewards
obtained. We introduce a new bandit optimism modifier that
uses conditional optimism contingent on the actions of the
target in order to guide the agent’s exploration. We analyze
the effect of this modification on the well-known Upper Confidence Bound algorithm by proving that it preserves a regret
upper-bound of order O(ln T ), even in the presence of a very
poor target, and we derive the dependency of the expected
regret on the general target policy. We provide empirical results showing both great benefits as well as certain limitations
inherent to observational learning in the multi-armed bandit
setting. Experiments are conducted using targets satisfying
theoretical assumptions with high probability, thus narrowing
the gap between theory and application.

1

Introduction

The imitating behaviour of human beings has been studied
for a long time in psychology and cognitive sciences (Miller
and Dollard 1941; Bandura and Walters 1963). Our societies
have exploited the human capability to learn from a teacher
in order to increase learning speed. Imitation behaviour has
also been studied in economics (Banerjee 1992; Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch 1998) in order to explain phenomena such as herding, in which individuals forget about
their own experiences, relying only on others’ actions to
guide their own behavior. Learning from a teacher has
been tackled in reinforcement learning (RL) (Schaal 1999;
Argall et al. 2009) through imitation learning algorithms,
such as behaviour cloning or inverse RL. In the former, the
agent trains by using regression of target actions provided by
a teacher policy (Ratliff, Bagnell, and Srinivasa 2007), while
in the latter, the agent infers a reward function from the behaviour of other agents, then optimizes it (Russell 1998).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6112

