The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Balancing Relevance and Diversity in
Online Bipartite Matching via Submodularity
John P. Dickerson, Karthik Abinav Sankararaman, Aravind Srinivasan, Pan Xu
{john, kabinav, srin, panxu}@cs.umd.edu
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
“Different roads sometimes lead to the same castle.” – George R.R. Martin
Abstract

body of research on related variants (Mehta 2012). During
the last decade, OBM and its variants have seen wider applications in various matching markets: crowdsourcing Internet marketplaces (e.g., (Assadi, Hsu, and Jabbari 2015;
Ho and Vaughan 2012)), online spatial crowdsourcing platforms (e.g., (Tong et al. 2017; 2016b; 2016a)), ride-sharing
platforms (e.g., (Dickerson et al. 2018)). In each of these applications we have the following features (1) agents from at
least one side appear online (i.e., one-by-one) (2) an online
agent on arrival has to either be matched immediately to an
offline agent—or be rejected.
Most prior research on online matching focuses on maximizing the total weight of the final matching (Mehta 2012),
which captures the quality/relevance of all the matches. In
many matching markets, we also care about the diversity of
the final matching along with relevance. Ahmed, Dickerson,
and Fuge (2017) considered a motivating example of matching academic papers to potential reviewers: just maximizing the relevance (the quality of each match) could potentially assign a paper to multiple scholars in a single lab due
to shared expertise, which is undesirable. Instead, we want
to assign each paper to relevant experts with diverse backgrounds to obtain comprehensive feedback. Maximizing diversity1 is of particular importance in various recommendation systems, ranging from recommendations of new books
and movies on eBay (Chen et al. 2016) to returning searchengine queries (Agrawal et al. 2009). A common strategy
to address diversity is to first formulate a specific objective
(typically maximization over a submodular function2 ) capturing the balance of diversity and relevance and then design
an efficient algorithm—typically a greedy one—to solve it
(e.g., (Ahmed, Dickerson, and Fuge 2017) and references
within).
Inspired by the broad applications of OBM and submodular maximization, we propose a variant of the online
matching model which we call Online Submodular Bipartite Matching (OSBM). In particular, we answer the main
Question 1, defined formally below.

In bipartite matching problems, vertices on one side of a bipartite graph are paired with those on the other. In its online
variant, one side of the graph is available offline, while the
vertices on the other side arrive online. When a vertex arrives, an irrevocable and immediate decision should be made
by the algorithm; either match it to an available vertex or
drop it. Examples of such problems include matching workers to firms, advertisers to keywords, organs to patients, and
so on. Much of the literature focuses on maximizing the total relevance—modeled via total weight—of the matching.
However, in many real-world problems, it is also important
to consider contributions of diversity: hiring a diverse pool of
candidates, displaying a relevant but diverse set of ads, and so
on. In this paper, we propose the Online Submodular Bipartite Matching (OSBM) problem, where the goal is to maximize a submodular function f over the set of matched edges.
This objective is general enough to capture the notion of both
diversity (e.g., a weighted coverage function) and relevance
(e.g., the traditional linear function)—as well as many other
natural objective functions occurring in practice (e.g., limited
total budget in advertising settings). We propose novel algorithms that have provable guarantees and are essentially optimal when restricted to various special cases. We also run
experiments on real-world and synthetic datasets to validate
our algorithms.

Introduction
Online Bipartite Matching (OBM) problems are primarily
motivated by Internet advertising. In the basic version of
this problem, we are given a bipartite graph G = (U, V, E),
where U and V represent the offline vertices (advertisers)
and online vertices (keywords or impressions) respectively.
An edge e = (u, v) represents a bid by advertiser u for
a keyword v. When a keyword v arrives, a central agency
must make an instant and irrevocable decision to either reject v or assign v to one of its “neighbors” (i.e., a vertex
that is connected to v by an edge in G) u and obtain a profit
we for the match e = (u, v). A matched advertiser u is no
longer available for future matches. The goal is to design an
efficient online algorithm that maximizes the expected total
weight (profit) of the matching. Following the seminal work
of Karp, Vazirani, and Vazirani (1990), there has been a large

Main model. Suppose we have a bipartite graph G =
(U, V, E) where U and V represent the offline and on1
Both individual and aggregate diversity (Adomavicius and
Kwon 2012).
2
See Section for a formal definition and canonical examples.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1877

