The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Read, Watch, and Move: Reinforcement Learning for
Temporally Grounding Natural Language Descriptions in Videos
Dongliang He,† Xiang Zhao,† Jizhou Huang,‡,† Fu Li,† Xiao Liu,† Shilei Wen†
†

‡

Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{hedongliang01, zhaoxiang05, huangjizhou01, lifu, liuxiao12, wenshilei}@baidu.com

Abstract

Description:
The parent watches the boy play drums

The task of video grounding, which temporally localizes a
natural language description in a video, plays an important
role in understanding videos. Existing studies have adopted
strategies of sliding window over the entire video or exhaustively ranking all possible clip-sentence pairs in a presegmented video, which inevitably suffer from exhaustively
enumerated candidates. To alleviate this problem, we formulate this task as a problem of sequential decision making by
learning an agent which regulates the temporal grounding
boundaries progressively based on its policy. Specifically, we
propose a reinforcement learning based framework improved
by multi-task learning and it shows steady performance gains
by considering additional supervised boundary information
during training. Our proposed framework achieves state-ofthe-art performance on ActivityNet’18 DenseCaption dataset
(Krishna et al. 2017) and Charades-STA dataset (Sigurdsson
et al. 2016; Gao et al. 2017) while observing only 10 or less
clips per video.

1

Read

Video

Watch

Agent
Move
Reward

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed formulation of read,
watch, and move with reinforcement learning. At each time
step, the agent makes an observation, takes an action, and receives a reward evaluating that action. The policy is updated
according to this reward.

Introduction

entities. This is a challenging task as it requires both vision
and language understanding, but it has important applications in video understanding tasks such as video retrieval
and text-oriented video highlight detection. Despite the fact
that both action localization and video grounding tasks share
the same goal of extracting a well-matched video clip w.r.t. a
given query, the methods for action localization are not readily applicable to video grounding. The main reason is that it
requires to map natural language descriptions to a close set
of labels before applying these methods, which inevitably
causes information loss. For example, if the sentence “The
parent watches the boy play drums” is mapped to an action
label “play drums”, action detectors can hardly tell the start
point of the presence of the parent.
Although there is a growing interest in grounding natural language in videos, e.g., (Gao et al. 2017; Hendricks et
al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018), these methods have a limitation
that they can be applied only when all candidates are exhaustively enumerated, as they need to slide over the entire
video or rank all possible clip-sentence pairs to be successful in generating the final grounding result. Moreover, ranking strategy (Hendricks et al. 2017) is specially designed for
pre-segmented videos and is not applicable to general cases.
To effectively detect the temporal boundaries of a given de-

The task of grounding natural language in image/video,
which aims to localize a short phrase (Rohrbach et al. 2016;
Endo et al. 2017; Tellex and Roy 2009; Regneri et al.
2013) or a referring expression (Bojanowski et al. 2015;
Gao, Sun, and Nevatia 2016) in a given image/video, is essential for understanding the way human perceive images
and scenes. In the past few years, studies on detecting a
particular object in image (Pirinen and Sminchisescu 2018)
or activity in video (Yeung et al. 2016; Singh et al. 2016;
Zhao et al. 2017; Shou et al. 2017) have been extensively
exploited. However, they are restricted to a predefined close
set of object/activity space. In this paper, we take a further step by focusing on the problem of temporally grounding an open-ended natural language description in a long,
untrimmed video.
Specifically, given an untrimmed video and a natural language description, our task is to determine the start and end
time stamps of a clip in this video that corresponds to the
given description. Exploration on natural language enables
us to deal with not only an open set of objects/activities, but
also the correlations and interactions between the involved
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8393

