The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DeepCF: A Unified Framework of Representation Learning and Matching
Function Learning in Recommender System
Zhi-Hong Deng,1 Ling Huang,1 Chang-Dong Wang,1 Jian-Huang Lai,1 Philip S. Yu2,3
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, USA
3
Institute for Data Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
dengzhh7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, huanglinghl@hotmail.com, changdongwang@hotmail.com
stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn, psyu@uic.edu
2

Abstract

they match. In this case, the model learns low-dimensional
dense representation for user and item, and then adopts dot
product as matching function to calculate matching score.
Since Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are extremely good
at representation learning, deep learning methods have been
widely explored and have shown promising results in various areas such as computer vision and natural language processing (He et al. 2016a; Serban et al. 2016). In the past few
years, there are also many works adopting DNNs to introduce auxiliary data such as images, text descriptions and demographic information, to improve the representation learning process. What’s more, in vanilla matrix factorization, the
mapping between the original representation space and the
latent space is assumed to be linear, which can not be always
guaranteed. To better learn the complex mapping between
these two spaces, Xue et al. (Xue et al. 2017) proposed a
Deep Matrix Factorization (DMF), which uses a two pathway neural network architecture to replace the linear embedding operation used in vanilla matrix factorization. However,
when it comes to the matching score prediction, matrix factorization methods still resort to dot product which simply
combines latent factors linearly and seriously limits the expressiveness of the model.

In general, recommendation can be viewed as a matching
problem, i.e., match proper items for proper users. However,
due to the huge semantic gap between users and items, it’s almost impossible to directly match users and items in their initial representation spaces. To solve this problem, many methods have been studied, which can be generally categorized
into two types, i.e., representation learning-based CF methods and matching function learning-based CF methods. Representation learning-based CF methods try to map users and
items into a common representation space. In this case, the
higher similarity between a user and an item in that space
implies they match better. Matching function learning-based
CF methods try to directly learn the complex matching function that maps user-item pairs to matching scores. Although
both methods are well developed, they suffer from two fundamental flaws, i.e., the limited expressiveness of dot product and the weakness in capturing low-rank relations respectively. To this end, we propose a general framework named
DeepCF, short for Deep Collaborative Filtering, to combine
the strengths of the two types of methods and overcome
such flaws. Extensive experiments on four publicly available datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
DeepCF framework.

In addition to learning better representation for users and
items, DNNs are very suitable to learn the complex matching
function since they are capable of approximating any continuous function (Hornik, Stinchcombe, and White 1989). For
example, He et al. (He et al. 2017) proposed NeuMF under
the Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF) framework which
takes the concatenation of user embedding and item embedding as the input of a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) model
to make prediction. The high capacity and nonlinearity of
DNNs is used to learn the complex mapping relation between user-item representation and matching score. In this
case, MLP is used to replace dot product used in traditional
matrix factorization methods. However, as revealed in (Beutel et al. 2018), MLP is very inefficient in catching low-rank
relations. In fact, using dot product to estimate matching
score in traditional matrix factorization methods is to artificially limit the model to learn similarity — a low-rank relation that is thought to be positively related to matching
score according to human experience. Although using MLP
to learn the matching function directly endows the model
with a great flexibility, without introducing human experi-

Introduction
Over the past decades, with the fast development of webbased service platforms such as e-commerce platforms and
news/music/movie platforms, recommender systems have
been extensively studied and widely deployed in many different scenarios to alleviate the information overload problem (Hu et al. 2018; Srivastava et al. 2018). Due to the distinguishing capability of utilizing collective wisdoms and
experiences, Collaborative Filtering (CF) algorithms, especially Matrix Factorization (MF) algorithms, have been
widely used to build recommender systems (Wang et al.
2018a; Zhao et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2017).
Matrix factorization assumes some relationship can be established between users and items through some latent factors. By mapping users and items into a common representation space in which they can be compared directly, the similarity between them can be further used to estimate how well
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

61

