The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

RS3 CIS: Robust Single-Step Spectral Clustering with Intrinsic Subspace
Yun Xiao,1 Pengzhen Ren,1 Zhihui Li,2∗ Xiaojiang Chen,1 Xin Wang,1,3 Dingyi Fang 1
1

2

School of Information Science and Technology, Northwest University, Xi’an 710127, P.R. China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
3
Department of Geomatics Engineering, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N1N4, Canada
{yxiao, xjchen, xinwang, dyf}@nwu.edu.cn,{pzhren, zhihuilics}@gmail.com

Abstract

liers) (Roweis and Saul 2000; Yu 2009). Moreover, subspace
learning helps to produce a robust method, while feature selection helps to produce an interpretable method (Gu, Li, and
Han 2011; Zhu et al. 2017b). This is also an important reason that local representation methods are widely concerned.
In addition, the high-dimensional feature space of the original dataset is actually located in a low-dimensional subspace
(Zhu et al. 2012; Vidal 2011).
The above advantages motivate researchers to focus on
local representations of data. The projected clustering with
adaptive neighbors (PCAN) method proposed by Nie et al.
(Nie, Wang, and Huang 2014) learns the data similarity matrix and clustering structure simultaneously by projecting the
original dataset into a low-dimensional subspace. Although
PCAN has achieved certain noise suppression effect by reducing the data dimension, the clustering performance of
PCAN is still greatly affected when there is more noise in
the data.
In addition, the `2,1 -norm has a good effect in feature
selection, noise suppression and redundant information removal, etc., which has attracted the attention of many researchers (Zhu et al. 2017a; Liao et al. 2018; Nie et al. 2010).
Inspired by these papers, we apply the `2,1 -norm to spectral
clustering to obtain a robust clustering performance.
Therefore, in this paper, we construct a low-dimensional
intrinsic subspace by projecting the original dataset into
a low-dimensional subspace using a row-sparse transformation matrix. The suppression of noise and outliers is
achieved by a row-sparse transformation matrix. At the same
time, the intrinsic affinity matrix is further studied according
to the low-dimensional intrinsic subspace. Different from
the previous method (Nie, Cai, and Li 2017; Li et al. 2018;
Nie et al. 2016), which learns an affinity matrix directly
from the original dataset, this paper proposes a new learning strategy for the intrinsic affinity matrix. We introduce
a row-sparse penalty term in our method and avoid those
trivial solutions by adjusting its coefficients. In terms of parameters, our method mainly focuses on the optimization of
the dimension reduction and the row-sparse penalty coefficient, which is relatively simple. Moreover, a new iterative
update method is used to optimize the newly added rowsparse items, and this optimization problem is well solved
with our method.
In addition, affinity matrices constructed based on tradi-

Spectral clustering has been widely adopted because it can
mine structures between data clusters. The clustering performance of spectral clustering depends largely on the quality of
the constructed affinity graph, especially when the data has
noise. Subspace learning can transform the original input features to a low-dimensional subspace and help to produce a
robust method. Therefore, how to learn an intrinsic subspace
and construct a pure affinity graph on a dataset with noise
is a challenge in spectral clustering. In order to deal with this
challenge, a new Robust Single-Step Spectral Clustering with
Intrinsic Subspace (RS3 CIS) method is proposed in this paper. RS3 CIS uses a local representation method that projects
the original data into a low-dimensional subspace through a
row-sparse transformation matrix and uses the `2,1 -norm of
the transformation matrix as a penalty term to achieve noise
suppression. In addition, RS3 CIS introduces Laplacian matrix rank constraint so that it can output an affinity graph with
an explicit clustering structure, which makes the final clustering result to be obtained in a single-step of constructing an
affinity matrix. One synthetic dataset and six real benchmark
datasets are used to verify the performance of the proposed
method by performing clustering and projection experiments.
Experimental results show that RS3 CIS outperforms the related methods with respect to clustering quality, robustness
and dimension reduction.

Introduction
Spectral clustering has long been favored by researchers because of its ability to mine structures between data clusters.
The quality of the constructed affinity graph is crucial for
the clustering performance of spectral clustering, especially
when the data has noise. The existing optimization methods
for constructing affinity graphs in spectral clustering can be
roughly divided into two categories: global representation
(Nie et al. 2016; 2017; Nie, Li, and Li 2016; 2017; Ren et al.
2018) and local representation (Nie, Wang, and Huang 2014;
Zhu et al. 2017a).
Local representation methods tend to be more robust
than global representation methods due to using its neighbor nodes to represent each data point, which can effectively remove the influence of noise points (especially out∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5482

