The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bounding Uncertainty for Active Batch Selection
Hanmo Wang,1,2 Runwu Zhou,1,2 Yi-Dong Shen1∗
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
{wanghm,zhourw,ydshen}@ios.ac.cn

Abstract

tire dataset, while the uncertainty indicates that the selected instances can refine the decision boundary in a labelefficient way. Empirically, choosing representative instances
are particularly critical when labeled data is scarce, while
uncertainty plays a more important role as the number of
labeled instances increases (Guo and Schuurmans 2008;
Wang and Ye 2015; Settles 2010). There are two common
approaches to combine representativeness and (un)certainty.
The first is the direct approach, which directly combines
representativeness with uncertainty to form a single objective, such as in (Wang and Ye 2015), (Chakraborty et al.
2015a) and (Chakraborty et al. 2015b). The second is the
screening approach, which excludes some unlabeled instances about which the classifier is certain, and chooses
representative samples among the remaining instances, such
as in (Chattopadhyay et al. 2012) and (Chakraborty et al.
2015b). Neither of these two approaches can handle small
number of labeled instances in the beginning of BMAL,
when the labeled data is scarce. Under such circumstances,
there are not adequate labeled data to train an accurate classifier, and thus the output of the classifier is usually not accurate. The direct approach, which directly utilizes the output,
is therefore possibly misled; the screening approach, which
screens samples beforehand, may accidentally remove useful instances.

The success of batch mode active learning (BMAL) methods
lies in selecting both representative and uncertain samples.
Representative samples quickly capture the global structure
of the whole dataset, while the uncertain ones refine the decision boundary. There are two principles, namely the direct
approach and the screening approach, to make a trade-off
between representativeness and uncertainty. Although widely
used in literature, little is known about the relationship between these two principles. In this paper, we discover that the
two approaches both have shortcomings in the initial stage
of BMAL. To alleviate the shortcomings, we bound the certainty scores of unlabeled samples from below and directly
combine this lower-bounded certainty with representativeness in the objective function. Additionally, we show that the
two aforementioned approaches are mathematically equivalent to two special cases of our approach. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work that tries to generalize the direct and screening approaches. The objective function is then
solved by super-modularity optimization. Extensive experiments on fifteen datasets indicate that our method has significantly higher classification accuracy on testing data than the
latest state-of-the-art BMAL methods, and also scales better
even when the size of the unlabeled pool reaches 106 .

Introduction

In this paper we propose a novel method that not only
alleviates the problems of the direct and the screening approaches but also illustrates the connections between them.
In the beginning of BMAL, the output of the classifier is
usually not so accurate owing to insufficient labeled data.
We observe that samples with high certainty usually remains
certain even under a not-well-trained classifier, while samples with low certainty have low confidence on the certainty.
To alleviate this issue, we further modify existing certainty
measures by enforcing a lower-bound on the certainty score
of each unlabeled instance. With this lower-bounded certainty (LBC), some of the most misleading instances have
the same certainty score, possibly reducing their influence
to the selection process. We then prove that for any representativeness and additive certainty, the direct and screening
approaches are two special cases of our LBC method. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to make
generalizations about the direct and screening approaches
in literature. Unlike the direct approach, our LBC-based

Active learning (Settles 2010) is a machine learning and data
mining methodology to automatically select informative
data instances for annotation when facing a large amount of
unlabeled data. The goal of active learning is to train a classifier that has good generalization performance with informative instances only. Traditional active learning methods iteratively select one single informative instance and thus are
not efficient when there are multiple annotators. Recently,
batch mode active learning (BMAL) was introduced, which
makes the annotation process more productive by selecting
multiple instances in each iteration.
Informative instances in BMAL are both representative
and uncertain. The representativeness indicates that the selected instances capture some global structure of the en∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5240

