The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Abstracting Causal Models
Sander Beckers

Joseph Y. Halpern

Dept. of Philosophy and Religious Studies
Utrecht University
Utrecht, Netherlands
srekcebrednas@gmail.com

Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
halpern@cs.cornell.edu

Rubenstein et al. (2017) (RW+ from now on) provided an arguably more general approach to abstraction. They defined a
notion of an exact transformation between two causal models. They suggest that if there is an exact transformation τ
from causal model M1 to M2 , then we should think of M2
as an abstraction of M1 , so that M2 is the high-level model
and M1 is the low-level model.
Abstraction almost by definition involves ignoring
inessential differences. So it seems that RW+ would want
to claim that if there exists an exact transformation from M1
and M2 , then M2 and M1 are the same, except for “inessential differences”. This leads to the obvious question: what
counts as an inessential difference? Of course, this is to
some extent in the eye of the beholder, and may well depend on the application. Nevertheless we claim that the notion of “inessential difference” implicitly encoded in the definition of exact transformation is far too broad. As we show
by example, there are models that we would view as significantly different that are related by exact transformations.
There are two reasons for this. The first is that, because RW+
consider probabilistic causal models, some differences that
are intuitively significant are overlooked by considering just
the right distributions. Second, besides a function that maps
low-level states to high-level states, RW+ define a separate
mapping of interventions that can mask what we view as essential differences between the interventions allowed at the
low level and the high level.
In this paper, we consider a sequence of successively
more restrictive definitions of abstraction, starting with the
RW+ notion of exact transformation, moving to a notion of
uniform transformation that applies to deterministic causal
models and does not allow differences to be hidden by the
“right” choice of distribution, and then to abstraction, where
the mapping between the interventions is determined by
the mapping from low-level states to high-level states, and
strong abstraction, which takes more seriously all potential
interventions in a model, not just the allowed interventions.
Finally, we define constructive abstraction, which is the special case of strong abstraction where the mapping from lowlevel states to high-level states partitions the low-level variables and maps each cell to a unique high-level variable.
As we show, procedures for combining micro-variables into
macro-variables are instances of constructive abstraction, as
are all the other examples considered by RW+ . While we

Abstract
We consider a sequence of successively more restrictive definitions of abstraction for causal models, starting with a notion
introduced by Rubenstein et al. (2017) called exact transformation that applies to probabilistic causal models, moving to
a notion of uniform transformation that applies to deterministic causal models and does not allow differences to be hidden
by the “right” choice of distribution, and then to abstraction,
where the interventions of interest are determined by the map
from low-level states to high-level states, and strong abstraction, which takes more seriously all potential interventions in
a model, not just the allowed interventions. We show that procedures for combining micro-variables into macro-variables
are instances of our notion of strong abstraction, as are all the
examples considered by Rubenstein et al.

1

Introduction

We can and typically do analyze problems at different levels of abstraction. For example, we can try to understand human behavior by thinking at the level of neurons firing in the
brain or at the level of beliefs, desires, and intentions. A political scientist might try to understand an election in terms
of individual voters or in terms of the behavior of groups
such as midwestern blue-collar workers. Since, in these analyses, we are typically interested in the causal connections
between variables, it seems reasonable to model the various levels of abstraction using causal models (Halpern 2016;
Pearl 2000). The question then arises whether a high-level
“macro” causal model (e.g., one that considers beliefs, desires, and intentions) is a faithful abstraction of a low-level
“micro” model (e.g., one that describes things at the neuronal level). What should this even mean?
Perhaps the most common way to approach the question of abstraction is to cluster “micro-variables” in the
low-level model into a single “macro-variable” in the highlevel model (Chalupka, Eberhardt, and Perona 2015; 2016;
Iwasaki and Simon 1994). Of course, one has to be careful to do this in a way that preserves the causal relationships in the low-level model. For example, we do not want
to cluster variables X, Y , and Z into a single variable
X + Y + Z if different settings (x, y, z) and (x0 , y 0 , z 0 ) such
that x + y + z = x0 + y 0 + z 0 lead to different outcomes.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2678

