The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Incorporating Context-Relevant Knowledge into
Convolutional Neural Networks for Short Text Classification∗
Jingyun Xu

Yi Cai†

South China University of Technology
Guangzhou,China
jingyun.x@qq.com

South China University of Technology
Guangzhou,China
ycai@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

To address these problems, we propose a context-relevant
concept recurrent convolutional neural network called CCRCNN, which can incorporate context-relevant knowledge
into a standard convolutional neural network. More specially, our model consists of two main modules. One is
a lower sub-network: a context-relevant concept representation module. This module utilizes two layers to extract
concept and context features respectively and then employs
an attention layer to extract those context-relevant concepts. The other one is the upper sub-network: a contextrelevant concept word embedding based short text classification module. This module combines word embedding and
context-relevant concept embedding together called CCWE
and feeds CCWE into a convolutional neural network.

Some text classification methods don’t work well on short
texts due to the data sparsity. What’s more, they don’t
fully exploit context-relevant knowledge. In order to tackle
these problems, we propose a neural network to incorporate context-relevant knowledge into a convolutional neural
network for short text classification. Our model consists of
two modules. The first module utilizes two layers to extract
concept and context features respectively and then employs
an attention layer to extract those context-relevant concepts.
The second module utilizes a convolutional neural network
to extract high-level features from the word and the contextrelevant concept features. The experimental results on three
datasets show that our proposed model outperforms the stateof-the-art models.

Our Model
Introduction

In this paper, we propose a context-relevant concept recurrent convolutional neural network called CCRCNN, which
can capture context-relevant concepts features. Our model
consists of two main modules, as details below.

Text classification is a task to classify a sentence into predefined categories, and it is widely applied in topic classification, sentiment analysis, and language inference. Most
existing approaches use supervised machine learning approaches to establish classifiers, such as Support Vector Machine, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN).
Although previous works achieve good performance, they
don’t work well on short texts due to the data sparsity. On
the other hand, background knowledge plays an important
role in natural language understanding. With the development of knowledge base construction, we can exploit these
knowledge bases (KBs) to incorporate additional knowledge
into neural networks. Moreover, the usefulness of knowledge features varies across contexts, as general KBs involve
polysemy. For instance, the word ‘Lincoln’ can refer to a
person or a car. Incorporating context-irrelevant knowledge
into neural networks may mislead the classification result.

Context-relevant Concept Representation Module
This module utilizes two layers to extract concept and context features respectively and then employs an attention
layer to extract those context-relevant concepts.
Concept Representation Layer In Probase (Wu et
al. 2012), knowledge is represented in the form of
(word,concept) pair, which means that a word belongs to a
concept. We utilize the words belong to a same concept to
represent the concept. In other words, concept embedding is
weighted average of word embedding:
n
P

wjw ew
j

j=1
v= P
n

∗
This work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities, SCUT (No. 2017ZD048, D2182480),
the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong
Province (No.2017B050506004), the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou (No. 201704030076).
†
Corresponding author: Yi Cai, ycai@scut.edu.cn
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

j=1

(1)
wjw

w
where ew
j is the representation of word vj , which is from
1
the Google’s pre-trained word vectors and wjw represents
the relevance of the word and the concept, which can be obtained from the Probase.
1

10067

https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/

