The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Action Knowledge Transfer for Action Prediction with Partial Videos
Yijun Cai,1 Haoxin Li,1 Jian-Fang Hu,2 Wei-Shi Zheng2,3∗
1

School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
The Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education
caiyj6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, lihaoxin05@gmail.com, hujf5@mail.sysu.du.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Predicting action class from partially observed videos, which
is known as action prediction, is an important task in computer vision field with many applications. The challenge for
action prediction mainly lies in the lack of discriminative action information for the partially observed videos. To tackle
this challenge, in this work, we propose to transfer action
knowledge learned from fully observed videos for improving
the prediction of partially observed videos. Specifically, we
develop a two-stage learning framework for action knowledge transfer. At the first stage, we learn feature embeddings and discriminative action classifier from full videos.
The knowledge in the learned embeddings and classifier is
then transferred to the partial videos at the second stage. Our
experiments on the UCF-101 and HMDB-51 datasets show
that the proposed action knowledge transfer method can significantly improve the performance of action prediction, especially for the actions with small observation ratios (e.g.,
10%). We also experimentally illustrate that our method outperforms all the state-of-the-art action prediction systems.

Partially observed video
Kicking ball? Somersault?
Somersault

Fully observed video

Figure 1: Actions from different classes may be very similar
at the beginning stage. From the partially observed video, it
is not clear whether the boy was kicking a ball on the grass
or doing somersault. From the fully observed video however,
it is clear that the action was somersault. This motivates us
to transfer the knowledge from full videos to partial videos.

Action prediction is an important computer vision problem with many real-world applications. For example, in
the traffic system, it is greatly expected that accidents can
be predicted at earlier stages. Also, the computational resource can be saved if actions can be recognized from
partial observations without processing the whole videos.
Compared with the rapid progress in video action recognition (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Wang et al. 2016;
Carreira and Zisserman 2017), the advance in action prediction is still unsatisfying, especially when the actions are
observed at very early stage (e.g., 10%). In principal, the
existing action recognition systems can be directly used for
action prediction by treating partial videos as full videos.
However, these models typically perform poorly for action
prediction, since they are not specifically developed for mining action information from partial videos.
The main challenge for action prediction is that partially
observed videos often contain incomplete action executions,
and thus have less action information than the fully observed
ones. These partially observed videos are more likely to be
confused between different action classes. Take Figure 1 for

example. From the partially observed video in Figure 1, it
is not clear whether the boy was kicking a ball on the grass
or doing somersault. To improve the performance for action
prediction, previous works mainly focus on improving the
discriminative power of partial videos by developing max
margin learning (Kong and Fu 2015) or soft regression (Hu
et al. 2016) frameworks. Considering the superior performance of existing action recognition models for recognizing
actions from full videos, it is more attractive to transfer the
knowledge contained in full videos to the partial videos. This
idea was firstly explored in (Kong, Tao, and Fu 2017) and
(Qin et al. 2017), where knowledge transfer was achieved
by reconstructing the visual features of the full videos from
the features of the partial videos. To obtain better prediction results, they also incorporated the action class information as additional constraints into their learning frameworks.
This, however, could result in a sub-optimal solution both
for feature reconstruction and action class information encoding, since their objectives for optimization are quite different. Furthermore, in their works, the action label for the
full video is directly used to represent partial videos, which
may introduce noises since partial videos often contain incomplete action executions.

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8118

