The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Evolving Action Abstractions
for Real-Time Planning in Extensive-Form Games
Julian R. H. Mariño,1 Rubens O. Moraes,2 Claudio Toledo,1 Levi H. S. Lelis2
1

Departamento de Sistemas de Computação, ICMC, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil
2
Departamento de Informática, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Brazil
julianmarino@usp.br, rubens.moraes@ufv.br, claudio@icmc.usp.br, levi.lelis@ufv.br

Abstract

The main drawback of these approaches is that they are
limited to a small number of hard-coded expert-designed
strategies. That is, the action-abstracted space from which a
search algorithm derives a strategy in real time is limited to
a small number of handcrafted strategies, which often limit
the behavior of the agent controlled by the system. In this
paper we introduce an approach to automate the generation
of action abstractions for two-player extensive form games
while still using the knowledge encoded in expert-designed
strategies. Our approach generates a large pool of strategies
Z from a small set of options I designed by domain experts.
This is achieved by defining the strategies in I as rule-based
strategies, which are strategies composed by a set of rules,
that are themselves defined by a Boolean expression and an
action to be performed by the agent. For example, in RTS
games, a Boolean expression of a rule could be “controls 3
worker units”, where the number 3 is a parameter of the expression, and the action the agent performs if the expression
returns true could be “construct a base”. By changing the
parameter values of rule-based strategies we are able to generate a large pool of strategies Z, and any non-empty subset
of Z can be used to induce an action abstraction.
We cast the problem of generating an action abstraction
from Z as a two-player simultaneous-move game which we
name the subset selection game (SSG). In the SSG each
player selects a subset of Z, A and B, which are then used
to induce an action abstraction for each player. The payoff
of the SSG is defined by the result of the original two-player
extensive-form game played by two versions of a planning
system: one using the action abstraction induced by A and
another using the action abstraction induced by B.
We introduce an evolutionary algorithm for solving the
SSG and evaluate it in the domain of µRTS, an RTS game
developed for research purposes. Empirical results on small
µRTS matches show that our evolutionary approach is able
to converge to a Nash equilibrium profile for the SSG. Results in medium-sized and large µRTS matches show that
two search-based planning systems using action abstractions
derived by our method are able to outperform all state-ofthe-art planning systems tested in our experiments.

A key challenge for planning systems in real-time multiagent domains is to search in large action spaces to decide
an agent’s next action. Previous works showed that handcrafted action abstractions allow planning systems to focus
their search on a subset of promising actions. In this paper we
show that the problem of generating action abstractions can
be cast as a problem of selecting a subset of pure strategies
from a pool of options. We model the selection of a subset
of pure strategies as a two-player game in which the strategy
set of the players is the powerset of the pool of options—
we call this game the subset selection game. We then present
an evolutionary algorithm for solving such a game. Empirical results on small matches of µRTS show that our evolutionary approach is able to converge to a Nash equilibrium
for the subset selection game. Also, results on larger matches
show that search algorithms using action abstractions derived
by our evolutionary approach are able to substantially outperform all state-of-the-art planning systems tested.

Introduction
Real-time planning in multi-agent scenarios such as realtime strategy (RTS) games are challenging for current
search-based systems. In such domains search algorithms
have to choose an action from an often large number of options, and the time allowed for planning is in the order of
milliseconds. A promising approach for dealing with large
action spaces in the context of real-time planning is the use
of action abstractions to reduce the action space (Churchill
and Buro 2013). Instead of accounting for all actions available to an agent during search, algorithms searching with
action abstractions consider only a subset of the legal actions. Churchill and Buro (2013) used domain knowledge
through a set of strategies to induce action abstractions,
where a strategy is a function mapping a state to an action. Churchill and Buro’s idea was to only consider during search the actions returned by a strategy from a set
of expert-designed options, with all the other actions being ignored. Several algorithms were introduced for searching in action-abstracted state spaces (Justesen et al. 2014;
Wang et al. 2016; Lelis 2017; Moraes and Lelis 2018).

Related Works
All previous works that used strategies to induce action
abstractions (Churchill and Buro 2013; Wang et al. 2016;

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2330

