The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CGMH: Constrained Sentence Generation by Metropolis-Hastings Sampling
Ning Miao,1∗ Hao Zhou,2 Lili Mou,3 Rui Yan,1 Lei Li2
1

2

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China
ByteDance AI Lab, Beijing, China 3 AdeptMind Research, Toronto, Canada
miaoning@pku.edu.cn, zhouhao.nlp@bytedance.com
lili@adeptmind.ai, doublepower.mou@gmail.com
ruiyan@pku.edu.cn, lileilab@bytedance.com

Abstract
In real-world applications of natural language generation,
there are often constraints on the target sentences in addition to fluency and naturalness requirements. Existing language generation techniques are usually based on recurrent
neural networks (RNNs). However, it is non-trivial to impose
constraints on RNNs while maintaining generation quality,
since RNNs generate sentences sequentially (or with beam
search) from the first word to the last. In this paper, we propose CGMH, a novel approach using Metropolis-Hastings
sampling for constrained sentence generation. CGMH allows
complicated constraints such as the occurrence of multiple
keywords in the target sentences, which cannot be handled in
traditional RNN-based approaches. Moreover, CGMH works
in the inference stage, and does not require parallel corpora
for training. We evaluate our method on a variety of tasks, including keywords-to-sentence generation, unsupervised sentence paraphrasing, and unsupervised sentence error correction. CGMH achieves high performance compared with previous supervised methods for sentence generation. Our code
is released at https://github.com/NingMiao/CGMH

Figure 1: CGMH generates a sentence with the constraint of
keyword inclusion. At each step, CGMH proposes a candidate modification of the sentence, which is accepted or rejected according to a certain acceptance rate.

Introduction
Natural language generation oftentimes involves constraints
on the generated sentences. The constraints can be categorized into the following types: (1) Hard constraints, such as
the mandatory inclusion of certain keywords in the output
sentences; and (2) Soft constraints, such as requiring the
generated sentences to be semantically related to a certain
topic. Figure 1 illustrates an example of advertisement generation, where “BMW” and “sports” should appear in the advertising slogan. Hence, “BMW, the sports car of the future”
is a valid sentence as an advertisement.
Existing sentence generation methods are mostly based
on recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which generate a sentence sequentially from left to right (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014). However, it is non-trivial to impose constraints during the left-to-right generation in RNNs. Previous work proposes a backward-forward generation ap-

proach (Mou et al. 2015), which could only generate sentences with one keyword. Additionally, researchers propose grid beam search to incorporate constraints in machine translation (Post and Vilar 2018; Hasler et al. 2018;
Hokamp and Liu 2017). It works with the translation task because the source and target are mostly aligned and the candidate set of translations is small. But grid beam search would
not work well with general sentence generation, which has
many more candidate sentences.
In this paper, we propose Constrained Generation by
Metropolis-Hastings sampling (CGMH), a novel approach
that addresses sentence generation with constraints. Different from previous sentence samplers working in the variational latent space (Bowman et al. 2016), CGMH directly
samples from the sentence space using the MetropolisHastings (MH) algorithm (Metropolis et al. 1953). MH is an
instance of the general Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
sampling. It defines local operations in the sentence space
(e.g., word replacement, deletion, and insertion). During
sampling, we randomly choose a word and an operation to
form a proposal for transition. The proposal is either ac-

∗

Work done while Ning Miao was a research intern in
ByteDance AI Lab. Hao Zhou and Rui Yan are corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6834

