The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Embedding Features for Salient Object Detection
Yunzhi Zhuge,† Yu Zeng,† Huchuan Lu†
Dalian University of Technology
{zgyz, zengyu}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, † lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn
†

†

these low-level features can hardly capture high-level semantic relations of the objects and its surroundings. Thus
the low-level based methods are not robust enough to distinguish salient objects from cluttered background.
Recently, deep convolutional neural networks have shown
outstanding performance in many recognition tasks. Owning to its hierarchical structure, CNNs can learn multi-level
features from training samples. Compared with the handcrafted features, the CNNs features are more semantically
rich. Therefore, the CNNs based saliency detection methods (Wang et al. 2016; Liu and Han 2016) have achieved
impressive results by leveraging high-level semantic features to capture foreground areas. However, the CNNs based
methods still have two apparent deficiencies. On the one
hand, downsampling operations such as pooling and convolution dramatically reduce the resolution of initial image,
which degrade the details such as image boundary. On the
other hand, many CNNs based methods (Zhang et al. 2017a;
Wang et al. 2017b; Zhang et al. 2018a) introduce overloaded
layers to integrate multi-level features. Such excessive processes often cause features cluttered, and thus cause the incorrect saliency detection results.
To resolve the afore-mentioned problems, in this paper, we propose a novel multi-branch model to leverage
deep embedding features (DEF) for salient object detection. The DEF network is composed of four components:
a backbone for Initial Saliency Prediction (ISP), Feature
Embedding Network (FEN), Recursive Feature Integration
Network (RFIN) and Guided Filter Refinement Network
(GFRN). ISP is a lightweight module that generates prior
saliency maps and multi-scale side output features as a preprocessing step. FEN embeds the prior saliency maps and
the features into a metric space to weight the spatial importance of each element in feature maps. FEN can filter unrelated information in the side output features and thus generate better features that focus on salient regions. To remedy the downsampling information loss, we propose RFIN
to integrate embedded features with residual reconstructed
features in a deep-to-shallow manner. In each level of RFIN,
a stage-wise saliency map is predicted and supervised by
the ground-truth to enhance the features robustness. The
saliency map of each stage also serves as a guidance for
the next stage. Finally, we propose GFRN to further enhance the boundary consistency and smoothness of the last

Abstract
Benefiting from the rapid development of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), some salient object detection methods
have achieved remarkable results by utilizing multi-level convolutional features. However, the saliency training datasets is
of limited scale due to the high cost of pixel-level labeling,
which leads to a limited generalization of the trained model
on new scenarios during testing. Besides, some FCN-based
methods directly integrate multi-level features, ignoring the
fact that the noise in some features are harmful to saliency detection. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that transforms prior information into an embedding space to select
attentive features and filter out outliers for salient object detection. Our network firstly generates a coarse prediction map
through an encorder-decorder structure. Then a Feature Embedding Network (FEN) is trained to embed each pixel of the
coarse map into a metric space, which incorporates much attentive features that highlight salient regions and suppress the
response of non-salient regions. Further, the embedded features are refined through a deep-to-shallow Recursive Feature
Integration Network (RFIN) to improve the details of prediction maps. Moreover, to alleviate the blurred boundaries,
we propose a Guided Filter Refinement Network (GFRN) to
jointly optimize the predicted results and the learnable guidance maps. Extensive experiments on five benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art results. Our proposed method is end-to-end and achieves a realtime speed of 38 FPS.

Introduction
Salient object detection, which aims to estimate the visual
significance of image regions, has arisen widely discussions
in recent years. It serves as a pre-processing step for many
computer vision tasks, such as image regartigating (Fang et
al. 2012), image classification (Schmid, Jurie, and Sharma
2012) and quality assessment (Zhang, Shen, and Li 2014).
However, due to many uncertain factors such as cluttered
backgrounds and complex scenarios, it still remains a difficult task.
Earlier saliency detection methods (Li et al. 2013) (Jiang
et al. 2013) generate saliency maps under the guidance of
heuristic priors(e.g. color, texture and contrast). However,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9340

