The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

TrafficPredict: Trajectory Prediction for Heterogeneous Traffic-Agents
Yuexin Ma,1,2 Xinge Zhu,3 Sibo Zhang,1 Ruigang Yang,1 Wenping Wang,2 Dinesh Manocha4
Baidu Research, Baidu Inc.1 , The University of Hong Kong2 ,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong3 , University of Maryland at College Park4
yxma@cs.hku.hk, zhuxinge123@gmail.com, sibozhang@baidu.com,
yangruigang@baidu.com, wenping@cs.hku.hk, dm@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
To safely and efficiently navigate in complex urban traffic, autonomous vehicles must make responsible predictions in relation to surrounding traffic-agents (vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, etc.). A challenging and critical task is to explore the
movement patterns of different traffic-agents and predict their
future trajectories accurately to help the autonomous vehicle
make reasonable navigation decision. To solve this problem,
we propose a long short-term memory-based (LSTM-based)
realtime traffic prediction algorithm, TrafficPredict. Our approach uses an instance layer to learn instances’ movements
and interactions and has a category layer to learn the similarities of instances belonging to the same type to refine the
prediction. In order to evaluate its performance, we collected
trajectory datasets in a large city consisting of varying conditions and traffic densities. The dataset includes many challenging scenarios where vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians
move among one another. We evaluate the performance of
TrafficPredict on our new dataset and highlight its higher accuracy for trajectory prediction by comparing with prior prediction methods.

Figure 1: Heterogeneous urban traffic scenario: We
demonstrate the improved trajectory prediction accuracy of
our method over prior approaches (top). The green solid
lines denote ground truth trajectories (GT), pink solid lines
are for our method (TP) and dashed lines are the predicted
trajectories for other methods (ED, SL, SA). We observe
20% improvement in accuracy using TP. Traffic corresponding point cloud captured by LiDAR of the acquisition car
is shown on the left bottom. Original trajectories of trafficagents in the scenario are shown on the right bottom: blue
for cars, green for bicycles, and red for pedestrians.

Introduction
Autonomous driving is a significant and difficult task that
has the potential to impact people’s day-to-day lives. The
goal is to make a vehicle perceive the environment and
safely and efficiently navigate any traffic situation without
human intervention. Some of the challenges arise in dense
urban environments, where the traffic consists of different kinds of traffic-agents, including cars, bicycles, buses,
pedestrians, etc.. These traffic-agents have different shapes,
dynamics, and varying behaviors and can be regarded as an
instance of a heterogeneous multi-agent system. To guarantee the safety of autonomous driving, the system should be
able to analyze the motion patterns of other traffic-agents
and predict their future trajectories so that the autonomous
vehicle can make appropriate navigation decisions.
Driving in an urban environment is much more challenging than driving on a highway. Urban traffic is riddled
with more uncertainties, complex road conditions, and diverse traffic-agents, especially on some cross-roads. Different traffic-agents have different motion patterns. At the same

time, traffic-agents’ behaviors are deeply affected by other
traffic-agents. It is necessary to consider the interaction between the agent to improve the accuracy of trajectory prediction.
The problem of predicting trajectories for moving agents
has been studied extensively. Some traditional algorithms
are based on motion models like kinematic and dynamic models (Toledo-Moreo and Zamora-Izquierdo 2009),
Bayesian filters (Kalman 1960), Gaussian Processes (Rasmussen and Williams 2006), etc. These methods do not take
into account interactions between the traffic-agents and the
environment, making it difficult to analyze complicated sce-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6120

