The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Models of Sequential
Decision-Making with Partial Specification of Agent Behavior
Vaibhav V. Unhelkar, Julie A. Shah
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139
{unhelkar, julie a shah}@csail.mit.edu
Abstract

they may fail to recover the true model of another agent.
This occurs as multiple values of model parameters can explain the observed behavior equally well - e.g., the reward in
inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Abbeel and Ng 2004).
Further, an agent’s behavior is often influenced by factors that are not directly observable to another agent, or
are difficult to manually specify a priori. For instance,
in human-robot teamwork and assisted driving, the human’s behavior depends on both observable features of the
task/environment and latent states (e.g., trust, attention, and
workload (Thomaz et al. 2016)); hand-coded categories are
typically used to quantify such latent states (Fridman et
al. 2018). More recently, principled approaches to learning
models in the absence of missing decision factors have been
developed (for example,(Panella and Gmytrasiewicz 2017)).
However, due to their emphasis on prediction of agent’s behavior and not model alignment, these approaches may also
fail to recover the true model.
While developing these models, domain knowledge pertaining to the true model of behavior is often available or
can be acquired by querying human experts (Chernova and
Thomaz 2014). This domain knowledge corresponds to the
partial specification of that agent’s decision factors (states),
state dynamics, change points of states, and policy (mapping
from states to actions). For applications in human-agent interaction, ensuring that the learned model conforms to these
partial specifications is necessary for maintaining model
alignment. Moreover, we posit that these auxiliary inputs
(partial specification of the agent’s behavior) have the potential to alleviate the ambiguity between the true and learned
models that exists when learning via behavioral data alone.
However, algorithms capable of complying with and utilizing auxiliary inputs – especially given incomplete knowledge of an agent’s states – are currently lacking.
In this paper, we introduce an algorithm capable of learning models in the absence of complete state specification by
utilizing both behavioral data and auxiliary inputs. Both the
model representation and learning algorithm have been designed to facilitate utilization of domain information (when
available). Our model incorporates a factored state representation to encode knowledge of known decision factors, their
dynamics, and their impact on an agent’s policy. Further,
we adopt a Bayesian approach and introduce a novel learning approach – termed as constrained variational inference –

Artificial agents that interact with other (human or artificial) agents require models in order to reason about those
other agents’ behavior. In addition to the predictive utility
of these models, maintaining a model that is aligned with an
agent’s true generative model of behavior is critical for effective human-agent interaction. In applications wherein observations and partial specification of the agent’s behavior
are available, achieving model alignment is challenging for
a variety of reasons. For one, the agent’s decision factors
are often not completely known; further, prior approaches
that rely upon observations of agents’ behavior alone can
fail to recover the true model, since multiple models can explain observed behavior equally well. To achieve better model
alignment, we provide a novel approach capable of learning aligned models that conform to partial knowledge of the
agent’s behavior. Central to our approach are a factored model
of behavior (AMM), along with Bayesian nonparametric priors, and an inference approach capable of incorporating partial specifications as constraints for model learning. We evaluate our approach in experiments and demonstrate improvements in metrics of model alignment.

Introduction
Artificial agents interact with other agents, including humans, in a variety of scenarios: for example, autonomous
driving, human-robot collaborative manufacturing, intelligent tutoring, and serving as digital assistants. In order for
such interactions to be successful, these agents require accurate behavioral models of the other agents’ sequential
decision-making process. Not only are these models useful
for predicting agents’ behavior, but maintaining shared mental models (i.e., the alignment of the learned model with the
true behavior) is also critical for effective human-agent interaction (Jonker, Van Riemsdijk, and Vermeulen 2011).
Relying solely upon manual specification to develop models is expensive and typically leads to incomplete models,
thus motivating the development of algorithmic approaches
for learning models that use behavioral data (observations of
another agent’s behavior) (Albrecht and Stone 2018). While
multiple data-driven approaches utilizing different model
representations are capable of learning predictive models,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2522

