The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

EWGAN: Entropy-Based Wasserstein GAN for Imbalanced Learning
Jinfu Ren, Yang Liu, Jiming Liu
Department of Computer Science
Hong Kong Baptist University
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong
{jinfuren,csygliu,jiming}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

able to characterize the imbalance between different classes.
Moreover, a potential limitation of cGAN is the learning
instability, which is caused by the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL divergence) used in GANs (Arjovsky, Chintala,
and Bottou 2017).
To address the aforementioned limitations while inheriting
GANs’ powerful ability in data generation, we propose a
novel oversampling strategy called Entropy-based Wasserstein GAN (EWGAN), which constructs an entropy-weighted
label vector for each class to characterize the data imbalance
in different classes and trains the generator using a WGAN
model (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017), overcoming
the learning instability of GAN by using the Wasserstein
distance to replace KL divergence.

In this paper, we propose a novel oversampling strategy
dubbed Entropy-based Wasserstein Generative Adversarial
Network (EWGAN) to generate data samples for minority
classes in imbalanced learning. First, we construct an entropyweighted label vector for each class to characterize the data imbalance in different classes. Then we concatenate this entropyweighted label vector with the original feature vector of each
data sample, and feed it into the WGAN model to train the
generator. After the generator is trained, we concatenate the
entropy-weighted label vector with random noise feature vectors, and feed them into the generator to generate data samples
for minority classes. Experimental results on two benchmark
datasets show that the samples generated by the proposed
oversampling strategy can help to improve the classification
performance when the data are highly imbalanced. Furthermore, the proposed strategy outperforms other state-of-the-art
oversampling algorithms in terms of the classification accuracy.

Entropy-based Wasserstein Generative
Adversarial Network

Introduction
Oversampling is an effective strategy in sampling methods
(Chawla et al. 2002; Douzas and Bacao 2018) for imbalanced
learning. It aims to generate data for minority classes to overcome the data imbalance problem. Representative oversampling methods include the simplest data replication, the classical synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE)
(Chawla et al. 2002) and its variants (Last, Douzas, and Baçao
2017), etc.
Recently, the generative adversarial network (GAN)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014) in deep learning has received much
attention as it showed good potential in generating artificial
data which resemble the real-world data such as images. Motivated by the success of GAN in unsupervised learning tasks,
its idea has been transplanted to supervised learning, including imbalanced learning. Douzas and Bacao (2018) employed
the conditional GAN (cGAN) to incorporate label vectors
into feature vectors for training, and used the trained generator to generate samples for minority classes. Although this
method has demonstrated the state-of-the-art performance
in data generation, a shortcoming is that the label vectors
used in the method are one-hot vectors, which may not be
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10011

Given the training set {x1 , · · · , xn } with n data samples,
where xi ∈ Rd denotes the i-th sample (i = 1, · · · , n) and d
denotes the dimension of the feature vector. The label vector
associated with xi is denoted as yi , where yi = [1, 0]T
indicates that xi belongs to the majority class while yi =
[0, 1]T indicates that xi belongs to the minority class. The
objective of EWGAN is generating samples x01 , · · · , x0p for
the minority class, by learning the data distribution from
the given dataset, where p = nmajor − nminor denotes the
number of samples to be generated, and nmajor and nminor
denote the number of samples in the majority class and that
in the minority class, respectively.
To describe the imbalance between different classes, we
construct an entropy-weighted label vector for each class.
First, we define Ii (i = 1, · · · , n) for each sample to indicates the importance of class yi . Inspired by the focal loss
proposed for object detection (Lin et al. 2017), we introduce
the following entropy-based formulation to calculate Ii :
(1 − pi )2
Ii = −
log(pi ),
(1)
pi
where pi denotes the proportion of class yi in the dataset.
Obviously, small proportion indicates high importance. Accordingly, the entropy-weighted label vector is constructed
as ŷi = Ii · yi (i = 1, · · · , n).
We then concatenate xi and ŷi as ui = [xTi , ŷiT ]T , and
concatenate a random feature vector r0i and ŷi as zi =

