The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Discovering Temporal Patterns from Insurance Interaction Data
Maleeha Qazi,2 Srinivas Tunuguntla,1 Peng Lee,2 Teja Kanchinadam,2
Glenn Fung,2 Neeraj Arora1
1

University of Wisconsin - Madison
2
American Family Insurance
{stunuguntla,neeraj.arora}@wisc.edu, {mqazi,plee,tkanchin,gfung}@amfam.com

Abstract
In the insurance industry, timely and effective interaction with
customers are at the core of everyday operations and processes that are key for a satisfactory customer experience.
These interactions often result in sequences of data derived
from events that occur over time. Such recurrent patterns can
provide valuable information that can be used in a variety of
ways to improve customer related work-flows. In this paper
we demonstrate the application of a recently proposed algorithm to uncover such time patterns that takes into account the
time between events to form such patterns. We use temporal
customer data generated from two different use-cases (satisfaction and fraud) to show that this algorithm successfully
detects patterns that occur in the insurance context.

1

Figure 1: Illustration from (Magnusson 2000)

which defined the term T-pattern as a sequence of events
that occur with a relatively consistent time interval between
each event and where the sequence appears in the data
more often than one would statistically expect by chance
alone. The time dimension adds significant complexity to
the task of detecting patterns in any data, and identification of such patterns becomes quite difficult for even modest sized data. Most algorithms known in the data mining
community either assume that the time intervals between
events is constant (Mannila, Toivonen, and Inkeri Verkamo
1997), or ignore the time intervals between events and focus only in the sequential order of the events (Zaki 2000;
2001).
A simple illustration from (Magnusson 2000) helps motivate the thinking behind a T-pattern. In this illustration,
there are six events (a, b, c, d, w, k) that occur several different times during the period [1, NT ] as shown in the first
row in Figure 1. The second row reveals the time pattern
among some of the variables. At the first level of the hierarchy, two T-patterns are found: [a, b] and [c, d]. The second level of the hierarchy reveals one more T-pattern: [a, b],
[c, d]. Even in this simple example, the underlying T-pattern
is not self-evident from the observed data. As we will show,
under this paradigm, the problem of detecting a T-pattern
gets exponentially difficult as the number of events in the
data increase.
The rest of the paper is laid out as follows: In section 2, we
summarize relevant related prior work and in section 3, we
outline the original T-pattern algorithm (Magnusson 2000).
We identify several limitations that preclude this algorithm
from being usable for typical business problems and offer
possible solutions. In section 4 we summarize our algorithm
that proposes a solution for each limitation. This algorithm is

Motivation/Introduction

Recurrent patterns in event sequences occur in diverse contexts that include notes in a musical composition, moves
such as give-and-go in sports and turn-taking behavior exhibited by humans. In a retail context, buyers may engage in
predictable on-line browsing behavior patterns before making a purchase. Similarly, in many processes and work-flows
in the insurance industry, policyholders of an insurance
provider may experience distinct patterns of interactions as
they navigate the claims process. Examples of events during
this process include claim reporting, bill paying, adding a
coverage, and general inquires. Patterns extracted from the
temporal data in the claims process reveal insights that could
be used to optimize customer interactions and enhance the
overall customer experience with the insurance company.
The purpose of this paper is two fold:
1. To introduce the recently proposed scalable T-pattern algorithm (Arora, Fung, and Tunuguntla 2017) that has
been proposed in a business setting to the AI and data
mining community and to relate it to other similar methods for temporal discovery.
2. To showcase how this proposed algorithm can be used to
extract patterns from temporal sequence data that arise in
the insurance domain.
The recently proposed algorithm (Arora, Fung, and
Tunuguntla 2017) builds upon prior work (Magnusson 2000)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9573

