The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Submodular Optimization over Streams with Inhomogeneous Decays
Junzhou Zhao,1 Shuo Shang,2 Pinghui Wang,3 John C.S. Lui,4 Xiangliang Zhang1∗
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, KSA
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{junzhou.zhao, xiangliang.zhang}@kaust.edu.sa, jedi.shang@gmail.com, phwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract

insertion-only
remaining
lifespan

Cardinality constrained submodular function maximization,
which aims to select a subset of size at most k to maximize a monotone submodular utility function, is the key in
many data mining and machine learning applications such as
data summarization and maximum coverage problems. When
data is given as a stream, streaming submodular optimization (SSO) techniques are desired. Existing SSO techniques
can only apply to insertion-only streams where each element
has an infinite lifespan, and sliding-window streams where
each element has a same lifespan (i.e., window size). However, elements in some data streams may have arbitrary different lifespans, and this requires addressing SSO over streams
with inhomogeneous-decays (SSO-ID). This work formulates
the SSO-ID problem and presents three algorithms: BASIC S TREAMING is a basic streaming algorithm that achieves an
(1/2 − ) approximation factor; H ISTA PPROX improves the
efficiency significantly and achieves an (1/3 − ) approximation factor; H IST S TREAMING is a streaming version of
H ISTA PPROX and uses heuristics to further improve the efficiency. Experiments conducted on real data demonstrate that
H IST S TREAMING can find high quality solutions and is up to
two orders of magnitude faster than the naive G REEDY algorithm.

sliding-window
(homogeneous decay)
remaining
lifespan

∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞
∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞

t+1
t

0 0 0 0 1 2 3 4

t+1
0 0 0 0 0 1 2 3 4

inhomogeneous decay

t
0 1 3 2 0 4 1 5

remaining
lifespan

t

0 0 2 1 0 3 0 4 2

t+1
t+2

0 0 1 0 0 2 0 3 1 3

Figure 1: Insertion-only stream: each element has an infinite lifespan. Sliding-window stream: each element has a
same initial lifespan. Our model: each element can have an
arbitrary lifespan.

no ending, and in some cases, data is produced so rapidly
that it cannot even be stored in computer main memory,
e.g., Twitter generates more than 8, 000 tweets every second (Internet Live Stats 2018). Thus, it is crucial to design
streaming algorithms where at any point of time the algorithm has access only to a small fraction of data. To this end,
streaming submodular optimization (SSO) techniques have
been developed for insertion-only streams where a subset is
selected from all historical data (Badanidiyuru et al. 2014),
and sliding-window streams where a subset is selected from
the most recent data only (Epasto et al. 2017).
We notice that these two existing streaming settings, i.e.,
insertion-only stream and sliding-window stream, actually
represent two extremes. In insertion-only streams, a subset
is selected from all historical data elements which are treated
as of equal importance, regardless of how outdated they are.
This is often undesirable because the stale historical data is
usually less important than fresh and recent data. While in
sliding-window streams, a subset is selected from the most
recent data only and historical data outside of the window
is completely discarded. This is also sometimes undesirable
because one may not wish to completely lose the entire history of past data and some historical data may be still important. As a result, SSO over insertion-only streams may find
solutions that are not fresh; while SSO over sliding-window
streams may find solutions that exclude historical important

Introduction
Selecting a subset of data to maximize some utility function
under a cardinality constraint is a fundamental problem facing many data mining and machine learning applications. In
myriad scenarios, ranging from data summarization (Mitrovic et al. 2018), to search results diversification (Agrawal et
al. 2009), to feature selection (Brown et al. 2012), to coverage maximization (Cormode, Karloff, and Wirth 2010), utility functions commonly satisfy submodularity (Nemhauser,
Wolsey, and Fisher 1978), which captures the diminishing
returns property. It is therefore not surprising that submodular optimization has attracted a lot of interests in recent
years (Krause and Golovin 2014).
If data is given in advance, the G REEDY algorithm can be
applied to solve submodular optimization in a batch mode.
However, today’s data could be generated continuously with
∗
Shuo Shang and Xiangliang Zhang are the corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5861

