The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

HireNet: A Hierarchical Attention Model for the Automatic
Analysis of Asynchronous Video Job Interviews
Léo Hemamou,1,2,3 Ghazi Felhi,1 Vincent Vandenbussche,1 Jean-Claude Martin,2 Chloé Clavel3
1

EASYRECRUE, 3 bis Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin, 75009 Paris, France
LIMSI, CNRS, Paris-Sud University, Paris-Saclay University / F-91405 Orsay, France
3
LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Paris-Saclay University / F-75013 Paris, France
{l.hemamou,g.felhi,v.vandenbussche}@easyrecrue.com, Jean-Claude.Martin@limsi.fr, chloe.clavel@telecom-paristech.fr
2

Abstract

interview whenever and wherever it suits them the most.
However, given a large number of these asynchronous interviews it may quickly become unmanageable for recruiters.
The highly structured characteristic of asynchronous video
interviews (same questions, same amount of time per candidate) enhances their predictive validity, and reduces interrecruiter variability (Schmidt 2016). Moreover, recent advances in Social Signal Processing (SSP) (Vinciarelli 2014)
have enabled automated candidate assessment (Chen et al.
2017), and companies have already started deploying solutions serving that purpose. However, previous studies used
corpora of simulated interviews with limited sizes. The work
proposed in this paper relies on a corpus that has been built
in collaboration with a company and that consists of more
than 7000 real job interviews for 475 open positions. The
size of this corpus enables the exploration of emerging models such as deep learning models, that are known to be difficult to deploy for Social Computing because of the difficulty to obtain large annotations of social behaviors. Based
on those facts, we propose HireNet, a new hierarchical attention neural network for the purpose of automatically classifying candidates into two classes: hirable and not hirable.
Our model aims to assist recruiters in the selection process.
It does not aim to make any automatic decision about candidate selection. First, this model was built to mirror the sequential and hierarchical structure of an interview assessment: recruiters watch a sequence of questions and answers,
which are themselves sequences of words or behavioral signals. Second, the HireNet model integrates the context of
the open position (questions during the interview and job
title) in order both to determine the relative importance between question-answer pairs and to highlight important behavioral cues with regard to a question. Third, HireNet attention mechanisms enhance the interpretability of our model
for each modality. In fact, they provide a way for recruiters
to validate and trust the model through visualization, and
possibly for candidates to locate their strengths or areas of
improvement in an interview.
In this paper, we first present an overview of the related
works for automatic video interview assessment. Then we
go through the construction and the underlying hypotheses
of HireNet, our neural model for asynchronous video interview assessment. After, we discuss the binary classification results of our model compared to various baselines, and

New technologies drastically change recruitment techniques.
Some research projects aim at designing interactive systems
that help candidates practice job interviews. Other studies aim
at the automatic detection of social signals (e.g. smile, turn of
speech, etc...) in videos of job interviews. These studies are
limited with respect to the number of interviews they process,
but also by the fact that they only analyze simulated job interviews (e.g. students pretending to apply for a fake position).
Asynchronous video interviewing tools have become mature
products on the human resources market, and thus, a popular
step in the recruitment process. As part of a project to help recruiters, we collected a corpus of more than 7000 candidates
having asynchronous video job interviews for real positions
and recording videos of themselves answering a set of questions. We propose a new hierarchical attention model called
HireNet that aims at predicting the hirability of the candidates as evaluated by recruiters. In HireNet, an interview is
considered as a sequence of questions and answers containing salient socials signals. Two contextual sources of information are modeled in HireNet: the words contained in the
question and in the job position. Our model achieves better
F1-scores than previous approaches for each modality (verbal
content, audio and video). Results from early and late multimodal fusion suggest that more sophisticated fusion schemes
are needed to improve on the monomodal results. Finally,
some examples of moments captured by the attention mechanisms suggest our model could potentially be used to help
finding key moments in an asynchronous job interview.

Introduction
Among assessment methods, the job interview remains the
most common way to evaluate candidates. The interview
can be done via phone, live video, face to face, or more
recently asynchronous video interview. For the latter, candidates connect to a platform, and record themselves while
answering a set of questions chosen by the recruiter. The
platform then allows several recruiters to evaluate the candidate, to discuss among themselves and possibly to invite
the candidate to a face-to-face interview. Recruiters choose
to use these platforms because it gives them access to a
larger pool of candidates, and it speeds up the application
processing time. In addition, it allows candidates to do the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

573

