The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Neutrino Oscillation Parameter Inference with Gaussian Process
Lingge Li, Nitish Nayak, Jianming Bian, Pierre Baldi
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92617
linggel@uci.edu

Introduction

mapping between λ and (θ, δ) by v. The log-likelihood of
(θ, δ) is given by:
X
1
log L(θ, δ) =
log P ois(xi ; v(θ, δ)i ) − δ 2 (1)
2

Neutrinos are tiny sub-atomic particles that carry no electrical charge and interact with matter only through the weak
nuclear force, which makes them extremely hard to detect.
There are three distinct types of neutrinos, called “flavors”:
(νe , νµ , ντ ), each of which can “oscillate” into the other with
a detectable probability. Many experiments (Abe and others
2015) (Adamson and others 2016) have been set-up to measure the parameters governing the oscillation probabilities
accurately, with implications for the fundamental structure
of the universe. Very often, this involves inferences from tiny
samples of data which have complicated dependencies on
multiple oscillation parameters simultaneously. This is typically carried out using the unified approach of Feldman and
Cousins (Feldman and Cousins 1998) which is very computationally expensive, on the order of tens of millions of
CPU hours. In this work, we propose an iterative method using Gaussian Process to efficiently find a confidence contour
for the oscillation parameters and show that it produces the
same results at a fraction of the computation cost. To our
knowledge, the most similar existing work is using a Gaussian Process surrogate in the approximate Bayesian computation framework (Meeds and Welling 2014) but it may not
achieve desired frequentist coverage.

i∈I

where − 12 δ 2 is a penalty term for systematic error. The best
fit parameters (θ̂, δ̂) can be obtained by maximizing the loglikelihood but a confidence contour is also needed to quantify the statistical uncertainty in θ̂. This can be done by an
inverted likelihood ratio test (LRT) as a particular value θ0
should only be included in the 1 − α confidence contour if
we fail to reject the null θ = θ0 at the α level. However, the
asymptotic χ2 distribution of the likelihood ratio statistic D
is unreliable when the sample size of observed neutrinos is
small. Moreover, the distribution of D can vary drastically
as a function of θ due to the complexity of v. Therefore, for
a given θ0 , Monte Carlo experiments are used to simulate
the LRT critical value c(θ0 ). Since the parameter space is
bounded, this is done in a grid for a large number of θ values. Known as the Feldman-Cousins method in high energy
physics, this LRT based approach has high statistical power
by the Neyman-Pearson lemma but exhausting the grid is
computationally inefficient.

Oscillation Parameter Inference

Gaussian Process Iterative Method

The probability of νµ → νe oscillations, P (νµ → νe ) is determined by θ = (∆m232 , sin2 θ23 , δCP ). To infer θ, a typical
neutrino oscillation experiment sends a beam of νµ neutrinos into a detector and observes a handful of oscillated νe
neutrinos from their interactions with the detector. The observed neutrinos are binned by their energy as the oscillation probability is a function of energy. For each energy bin
i ∈ I, there is an observed neutrino count xi and an expected
count λi , which naturally gives rise to a Poisson distribution.
However, for a given θ, the expectation λ is also influenced
by the underlying model of the experiment, such as the beam
configuration and the physics of neutrino interactions. Each
of these have their own associated uncertainties, δ. Since the
relationship between λ and (θ, δ) is not available analytically, λ is deduced from Monte Carlo. Denote the implicit

With applications to hyper-parameter tuning (Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012), Bayesian optimization can be
used to find the optimum of any black-box function f that is
expensive to evaluate. Bayesian optimization is an iterative
procedure. In each iteration, a number of points are evaluated to update an approximation of f . Then based on the
approximation, the points in the next iteration are proposed
by an acquisition function a. The approximation model is
usually a zero-mean Gaussian process GP(0, κ(·, ·)). A GP
assumes any finite collection of points to be jointly Normal
with covariance matrix Σ, which is parametrized by a kernel
function κ that defines pairwise covariance. Given observed
data, a GP model can be fitted by optimizing parameters
of the kernel. The acquisition function a aims to balance
between “exploration,” reducing approximation uncertainty,
and “exploitation,” reaching the optimum.
In our context, the expensive black-box function is the mapping of LRT critical values c(θ). What we want to find is

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9967

