The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Interpreting Deep Models for Text Analysis
via Optimization and Regularization Methods
Hao Yuan

Yongjun Chen

Washington State University
hao.yuan@wsu.edu

Washington State University
yongjun.chen@wsu.edu

Xia Hu

Shuiwang Ji

Texas A&M University
hu@cse.tamu.edu

Texas A&M University
sji@tamu.edu

Abstract

best of our knowledge, there are no related studies focusing
on the interpretation of hidden neurons of NLP models.
In this paper, we propose an approach to interpret and understand deep NLP models. Specifically, we focus on convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012) for sentence classification tasks. Our approach
employs gradient-based approaches (Simonyan, Vedaldi,
and Zisserman 2013) and optimization techniques (Erhan et
al. 2009) to select spatial locations with high contribution to
the decision from hidden layers and study what is detected
by these locations. We propose to approximately interpret
the meaning of detected information using the nearest neighbors of the optimized representation based on the special
property of word representations, which imply that words
with semantically similar meanings are embedded to nearby
points (Mikolov et al. 2013). Experimental results demonstrate that our approach can obtain reasonable and meaningful interpretation for hidden units. It is shown that our
approach can explain the decision process in NLP models.

Interpreting deep neural networks is of great importance to
understand and verify deep models for natural language processing (NLP) tasks. However, most existing approaches only
focus on improving the performance of models but ignore
their interpretability. In this work, we propose an approach
to investigate the meaning of hidden neurons of the convolutional neural network (CNN) models. We first employ
saliency map and optimization techniques to approximate the
detected information of hidden neurons from input sentences.
Then we develop regularization terms and explore words in
vocabulary to interpret such detected information. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach can identify
meaningful and reasonable interpretations for hidden spatial
locations. Additionally, we show that our approach can describe the decision procedure of deep NLP models.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown great success in many
NLP tasks, such as sentence classification (Kim 2014;
Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015), natural language generation (Yu et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2017), machine translation (Vaswani et al. 2017; Gehring et al. 2016) and visual
question answering (Wang and Ji 2018). Most existing approaches treat deep neural networks as black-boxes and only
focus on the performance. Without understanding the working mechanisms of neural networks, deep models cannot be
fully trusted, since we do not know how and why decisions
are made. However, due to the complex structures of deep
neural networks, it is challenging to interpret deep models
and their behaviors, especially for NLP tasks that deal with
discrete data.
Most existing approaches for interpreting NLP models
only investigate the relationships between input sentences
and output decisions to explore which input words are more
important to make decisions (Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola
2016; Li et al. 2015). However, the inner workings of networks should also be studied to answer important questions
regarding hidden layers, such as which hidden units are more
important for a decision and why they are important. To the

Background and Related Work
Most of the existing interpretation approaches are proposed
to investigate deep models in computer vision rather than the
NLP area. The saliency map techniques study which input
pixels are more important to the final decision (Simonyan,
Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013; Du, Liu, and Hu 2018; Du et
al. 2018). The importance of different pixels can be approximated by the gradient of output score with respect to the
inputs (Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Springenberg et al. 2014;
Mordvintsev, Olah, and Tyka 2015). The similar idea was
applied to NLP models to study which input words contribute more to the prediction (Li et al. 2015). However, such
techniques only provide word-level interpretation while different words are highly correlated to convey a meaning.
In addition, several approaches focus on feature visualization, which investigates what pattern the hidden neurons of a
model try to detect (Olah, Mordvintsev, and Schubert 2017;
Erhan et al. 2009; Nguyen et al. 2016; Mahendran and
Vedaldi 2015; Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015). Optimization techniques are commonly used for such purposes.
The key idea is to iteratively update a randomly initialized input to investigate a specific behavior in hidden lay-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5717

