The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adversarial Learning of Semantic Relevance in Text to Image Synthesis
Miriam Cha, Youngjune L. Gwon, H. T. Kung
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138

Abstract
We describe a new approach that improves the training of
generative adversarial nets (GANs) for synthesizing diverse
images from a text input. Our approach is based on the conditional version of GANs and expands on previous work leveraging an auxiliary task in the discriminator. Our generated
images are not limited to certain classes and do not suffer
from mode collapse while semantically matching the text input. A key to our training methods is how to form positive
and negative training examples with respect to the class label
of a given image. Instead of selecting random training examples, we perform negative sampling based on the semantic
distance from a positive example in the class. We evaluate
our approach using the Oxford-102 flower dataset, adopting
the inception score and multi-scale structural similarity index (MS-SSIM) metrics to assess discriminability and diversity of the generated images. The empirical results indicate
greater diversity in the generated images, especially when we
gradually select more negative training examples closer to a
positive example in the semantic space.

The petals of this
flower are yellow

G1

The petals of this
flower are yellow

G2

The petals of this
flower are yellow

G3

Figure 1: An illustration of sample diversity in text-to-image
synthesis. Top: poor diversity (generated images are nearly
identical suffering from mode collapse); middle: modest diversity (generated images belong to a single class); bottom:
good diversity (generated images are not limited to classes)

Introduction
Generative adversarial net (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014)
has successfully demonstrated the learning of an empirical probability distribution to synthesize a realistic example. Computations for probabilistic inference are often intractable, and GAN provides a viable alternative that uses
neural architectures to train a generative model. GAN has
been received well and applied to a variety of synthesis tasks (Karras et al. 2018; Subramanian et al. 2017;
Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015; Reed et al. 2016b).
This paper develops a text-to-image synthesis model built
on conditional GAN (CGAN) by Mirza & Osindero (2014).
The task of translating a short text description into an image
has drawn much interest, attempted in a number of GAN
approaches (Reed et al. 2016b; Dash et al. 2017; Zhang, Xie,
and Yang 2018; Zhang et al. 2016; Cha, Gwon, and Kung
2017; Reed et al. 2016c). Conditioning both the generator
and discriminator on a text description, these approaches are
capable of creating realistic images that correspond to the
text description given.

Despite its success, GAN is known to suffer from a mode
collapse problem in which generated images lack diversity
and fall largely into a few trends. One way to mitigate mode
collapse is to encourage a bijective mapping between the
generated image output and the input latent space (Zhu et
al. 2017b; 2017a). In Odena et al. (2017), auxiliary classifier GAN (AC-GAN) is tasked to recover side information
about the generated image such as a class label. The extra
task is shown to promote the bijective mapping and discourages different input latent code from generating the same
image output. Dash et al. (2017) describe text conditioned
auxiliary classifier GAN (TAC-GAN). During the training,
the auxiliary classifier in TAC-GAN predicts the class of a
generated image. The predicted class is compared against
the ground-truth class of a training image whose text description is applied as the input.
Text is an indiscriminate input choice for CGAN (e.g.,
compared to class label). The implicit binding of text input
to the (predicted) class label output in TAC-GAN is a source
of ambiguity because some text can rightfully describe different class of images. Figure 1 illustrates diversity in gener-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3272

