The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Visual-Semantic Graph Reasoning for Pedestrian Attribute Recognition
Qiaozhe Li,1,3 Xin Zhao,1,3 Ran He,2,3,4 Kaiqi Huang1,3,4
1

CRISE, CASIA, 2 CRIPAC & NLPR, CASIA
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
liqiaozhe2015@ia.ac.cn, {xzhao,rhe,kqhuang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
3

Abstract

of attributes. However, such relations have not been fully
exploited in traditional methods. Earlier methods solve the
attribute recognition problem by learning a separate binary classifier for each of the attributes (Deng et al. 2014;
Sudowe, Spitzer, and Leibe 2015). In such way, the relationships between attributes are simply ignored. To associate attributes with their corresponding regions, some
methods employ auxiliary pose or part supervision information to learn part-based models (Zhang et al. 2014;
Li et al. 2016c) and others formulate recognition as a weakly
supervised localization problem using attention mechanism
(Liu et al. 2017b; Zhu et al. 2017; Sarafianos and Kakadiaris
2018). While better recognition accuracy can be achieved
with spatial context learning, these methods fail to capture
semantic relations of attributes.
To model attribute relations at semantic level, some methods employ probabilistic graphical models (Chen, Gallagher, and Girod 2012) or structured inference models (Hu
et al. 2016). Based on statistical hand-crafted features or
a holistic deep representation model, these methods fail
to consider spatial distribution of different attributes. The
recognition task can also be formulated as a sequential prediction process by adopting sequential encoder-decoder architecture (Wang et al. 2017) to model the high-order dependencies among attributes. Although benefiting from the
sequential prediction framework, the pairwise relations between attributes may not be described. Besides, the encoderdecoder model is deep considering RNN unrolling, which
is difficult to optimize as the length of prediction sequence
increases.
In this work, pedestrian attribute recognition is also formulated as a sequential prediction problem. A graph-based
reasoning framework is proposed to jointly model spatial
and semantic relations of region-region, attribute-attribute,
and region-attribute. For each pedestrian image, the image
regions and corresponding semantic attributes are respectively represented as nodes in a spatial graph and a directed semantic graph. Unlike existing methods which employ RNNs (Wang et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2017a; Wang et al.
2017) to characterize latent high-order dependencies, pairwise relations can be captured by performing message passing inside each graph using the Graph Convolution Network
(GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017). To better explore relations
between regions and attributes, the output representations of

Pedestrian attribute recognition in surveillance is a challenging task due to poor image quality, significant appearance variations and diverse spatial distribution of different
attributes. This paper treats pedestrian attribute recognition
as a sequential attribute prediction problem and proposes a
novel visual-semantic graph reasoning framework to address
this problem. Our framework contains a spatial graph and
a directed semantic graph. By performing reasoning using
the Graph Convolutional Network (GCN), one graph captures
spatial relations between regions and the other learns potential semantic relations between attributes. An end-to-end architecture is presented to perform mutual embedding between
these two graphs to guide the relational learning for each
other. We verify the proposed framework on three large scale
pedestrian attribute datasets including PETA, RAP, and PA100k. Experiments show superiority of the proposed method
over state-of-the-art methods and effectiveness of our joint
GCN structures for sequential attribute prediction.

Introduction
Pedestrian attribute recognition aims to make prediction of a
set of attributes as the semantic descriptions of a pedestrian
image. It has recently drawn a remarkable amount of attentions due to its promising applications in face verification
(Kumar et al. 2009), person retrieval (Siddiquie, Feris, and
Davis 2011), and person re-identification (Layne et al. 2012;
Wang et al. 2018). Although it’s easy to state, however, recognizing pedestrian attributes in real-world surveillance scenarios can be extremely challenging due to three factors: (1)
Some attributes only relate to a small part of regions, which
could be affected by ambiguous details caused by limited
image resolution; (2) The appearance of pedestrian images is
diversified caused by pose variation, viewpoint change, occlusion, background distraction, etc., which make it difficult
to learn reliable image representations; (3) A pedestrian image usually contains multiple correlated attributes and each
attribute may locate at different part regions according to its
semantic characteristics. All these factors make it difficult to
learn an effective attribute recognition model.
To deal with the above mentioned problems, it’s desirable to jointly explore the spatial and semantic relations
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8634

