The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

AI-Sketcher : A Deep Generative Model for Producing High-Quality Sketches
Nan Cao, Xin Yan, Yang Shi, Chaoran Chen
Intelligent Big Data Visualization Lab, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{nancao, xinyan, yangshi, crchen}.idvx@gmail.com

Abstract

design drafts as sketches. These applications have motivated
the need to generate sketches via AI techniques.
Previous studies in this topic have mostly focused on
sketch extraction (Yu et al. 2015; Yesilbek and Sezgin 2017;
Yu et al. 2017) and fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval (Yu et al. 2016; Sarvadevabhatla et al. 2017; Song et
al. 2017; Chen et al. 2017). Sketch-RNN (Ha and Eck 2017)
was introduced as the first AI technique that enables a computer to automatically generate simple and cursive sketch
drawings based on human input. Although it is a remarkable
concept, Sketch-RNN suffers from key limitations that considerably affect its application: (1) it only captures sequential orders of strokes, but fails to precisely preserve the relative position between strokes. Therefore, it typically generates low-quality results when a sketch consists of multiple parts. (2) Sketch-RNN is also incapable of dealing with
multi-class situations and frequently generates incoherent
sketches that integrate features from other sketch categories.
To address the aforementioned issues, in this paper, we introduce AI-Sketcher, a hybrid deep learning model that automatically generates high-quality sketch drawings by learning the sequences of strokes. It exhibits three significant improvements over the Sketch-RNN model that help overcome
the aforementioned limitations: (1) To support multi-class
generation, we imposed additional conditional information
on both encoding and decoding processes to help differentiate sketches under various classes. (2) To capture the
relative positions of strokes, we introduced an autoencoder
based on a convolutional neural network (CNN) to extract
spatial features from the training sketches. (3) To improve
drawing quality, we provided an influence layer to enforce
the effect of the encoded training data on the decoding process by considering all the previous hidden node values in
the RNN encoder, thereby better guiding the generation of
each stroke. We verified the performance of the proposed
technique by comparing it with Sketch-RNN based on the
QuickDraw dataset 1 and the FaceX dataset 2 , a collection
of high-quality sketches of cartoon facial expressions. Our
evaluation showed that AI-Sketcher outperformed the baseline models in generating coherent sketches on both datasets.

Sketch drawings play an important role in assisting humans in
communication and creative design since ancient period. This
situation has motivated the development of artificial intelligence (AI) techniques for automatically generating sketches
based on user input. Sketch-RNN, a sequence-to-sequence
variational autoencoder (VAE) model, was developed for this
purpose and known as a state-of-the-art technique. However,
it suffers from limitations, including the generation of lowquality results and its incapability to support multi-class generations. To address these issues, we introduced AI-Sketcher,
a deep generative model for generating high-quality multiclass sketches. Our model improves drawing quality by employing a CNN-based autoencoder to capture the positional
information of each stroke at the pixel level. It also introduces an influence layer to more precisely guide the generation of each stroke by directly referring to the training data.
To support multi-class sketch generation, we provided a conditional vector that can help differentiate sketches under various classes. The proposed technique was evaluated based on
two large-scale sketch datasets, and results demonstrated its
power in generating high-quality sketches.

Introduction
Deep generative models are considered one of the greatest inventions in the field of AI. It has many applications,
such as auto-programming (Mou et al. 2015), visual arts (Elgammal et al. 2017), and content development (Giacomello,
Lanzi, and Loiacono 2018). In the past few years, various impressive results have been generated by two major
types of deep generative models, i.e., the generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and
the variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling
2013). However, most existing studies have been designed
to generate raster images (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Mirza
and Osindero 2014; Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015;
Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017) but seldom used to
produce sketches in sequences of strokes. Sketch drawings
play an important role in both communication and design.
Drawing a sketch is considered one of human’s natural behavior: in ancient times, our ancestors carved strokes on
rocks to record events; at present, we draw blueprints and

1

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

2564

https://quickdraw.withgoogle.com/
https://facex.idvxlab.com

