The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Guiding the One-to-One Mapping in CycleGAN via Optimal Transport∗
Guansong Lu, Zhiming Zhou, Yuxuan Song, Kan Ren, Yong Yu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{gslu, heyohai, songyuxuan, kren, yyu}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

and dual consistency (He et al. 2016) are extensively studied
in image-to-image translation. CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017),
DiscoGAN (Kim et al. 2017) and DualGAN (Yi et al. 2017)
adopt these two techniques for solving unsupervised imageto-image translation where GAN loss is used to ensure the
generated images being indistinguishable from real images
and cycle consistency loss helps to establish a one-to-one
mapping between source distribution and target distribution.
In this paper, to simplify the terminology, we will use CycleGAN as a representative for these three similar frameworks
combining GANs and the idea of cycle consistency.
CycleGAN can establish a one-to-one mapping between
two data distributions unsupervisedly with the help of the
cycle consistency losses in both directions. However, theoretically, there is no claim on the detailed properties of
the mapping established by CycleGAN, which results in a
large feasible solution space. Consequently, without meticulously designed network and hyper-parameters, the one-toone mapping learned by CycleGAN will be a random one
within this large space.
For many cross-domain translation tasks, people actually
have expected properties on the learned mapping, e.g. in
language translation task, people would expect the semantic meaning keeps unchanged. Hence, it will be more satisfactory if we can add explicit constraints on the one-to-one
mapping within CycleGAN to control the mapping’s properties, so as to meet the requirements of specific tasks.
Among the many potential feasible maps between two
data distributions, it is more promising to find the optimal
one according to some measure. Optimal transport (OT)
aims at finding a transportation plan (Kantorovich 1942) that
holds the least cost of transporting the source distribution to
the target distribution, given a cost function that specifies
the transportation cost between any pair of samples from the
two distributions.
It is worth mentioning that the cost function in optimal
transport is very flexible. For specific tasks, it is possible to
define a cost function to reflect the underlining expectation
of the desired mapping properties. For example, given a set
of handbags and shoes, if one would like to pair the handbags with the shoes such that they have matched colors, one
can specify the cost function to be the distance between their
color histograms, and then the optimal transport would find
the mapping that has the least overall difference in color dis-

CycleGAN is capable of learning a one-to-one mapping between two data distributions without paired examples, achieving the task of unsupervised data translation. However, there
is no theoretical guarantee on the property of the learned
one-to-one mapping in CycleGAN. In this paper, we experimentally find that, under some circumstances, the one-to-one
mapping learned by CycleGAN is just a random one within
the large feasible solution space. Based on this observation,
we explore to add extra constraints such that the one-to-one
mapping is controllable and satisfies more properties related
to specific tasks. We propose to solve an optimal transport
mapping restrained by a task-specific cost function that reflects the desired properties, and use the barycenters of optimal transport mapping to serve as references for CycleGAN.
Our experiments indicate that the proposed algorithm is capable of learning a one-to-one mapping with the desired properties.

Introduction
Image-to-image translation aims at learning a mapping between a source distribution and a target distribution, which
can transform an image from the source distribution to that
from the target distribution. It covers a variety of computer
vision problems including image denoising (Buades, Coll,
and Morel 2005), segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), and saliency detection (Goferman, Zelnik-Manor,
and Tal 2012). Along with the recent popularity of deep supervised learning, many algorithms based on paired training
data and deep convolution neural networks have been proposed for specific image-to-image translation tasks. Among
them, Pix2pix (Isola et al. 2016) proposed an image-toimage translation framework utilizing adversarial training
technique to force the translation results being indistinguishable from the target distribution.
In practice, it is usually difficult to collect a large amount
of paired training data, while unpaired data can usually
be obtained more easily, hence unsupervised learning algorithms have also been widely studied. Particularly, generative adversarial networks (GANs; (Goodfellow et al. 2014))
∗
This work is supported by APEX-Yitu Joint Research. A part
of the work is done while the first author is an intern at Yitu Inc.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4432

