The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Preference-Aware Task Assignment in On-Demand
Taxi Dispatching: An Online Stable Matching Approach
Boming Zhao,1 Pan Xu,2 Yexuan Shi,1 Yongxin Tong,1 Zimu Zhou,3 Yuxiang Zeng4
1

BDBC, SKLSDE Lab, Beihang University, China
2
University of Maryland, College Park, USA
3
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
1
{tongzhbo,skyxuan,yxtong}@buaa.edu.cn, 2 panxu@cs.umd.edu, 3 zzhou@tik.ee.ethz.ch, 4 yzengal@cse.ust.hk
Abstract

A worker matched to a task needs to finish a trip predetermined by the task. The platform earns profit from the
finished tasks and aims to design matching policies that optimize certain objectives, e.g., maximizing the expected total
profit (Tong et al. 2016b; Zhang et al. 2017).
To continently make profits, it is important for taxi dispatching platforms to account for human factors such as
preferences of workers and tasks. Prior work has integrated
the preferences of either workers or tasks into the optimization objectives. For example, some researchers propose
to minimize the sum of distances between the origin of
each task and the matched worker over all matches (Bei
and Zhang 2018; Tong et al. 2016a; Bansal et al. 2014).
This way the overall waiting time of all passengers is reduced. Others maximize the total utility obtained through
all successful matches, where the utility is defined to depict the workers’ preference on payment (Tong et al. 2016b;
Dickerson et al. 2018a). Despite these pioneer studies, the
preference of only one side (workers or tasks) is considered.
We argue that the matching policies should reflect the preferences of both sides (workers and tasks), which we will
illustrate via the following example.
Image during the rush hours of Monday, Alice requested
a taxi on Uber to take her from home to office for a shortdistance trip. At the same time, Bob appeared on Uber as
driver and he happened to be close to Alice’s home. To minimize the waiting time of Alice, Uber should match Alice and
Bob. However, this might hurt Bob’s interest. This is because
during rush hours passengers far outnumber drivers. Thus
Bob preferred to wait for requests of long-distance rides to
earn more profit. A question arises whether Uber should reject Alice or assign her to Bob. This is a common example
in on-demand taxi dispatching platforms, where the preferences of workers and tasks may differ or even conflict with
each other. That is, a passenger may prefer to be picked up
immediately by a driver nearby while the driver may prefer
to wait for long-distance rides. How can we design matching
policies to reconcile the preferences of both the workers and
tasks such that they are satisfied to a best degree?
To assign tasks such that the preferences of both workers
and tasks are considered while the profit of the platform is
maximized, we propose a new online stable matching model.
Assume a compatible bipartite graph G = (U, V, E), where
U and V represent the respective set of offline workers and

A central issue in on-demand taxi dispatching platforms is
task assignment, which designs matching policies among dynamically arrived drivers (workers) and passengers (tasks).
Previous matching policies maximize the profit of the platform without considering the preferences of workers and
tasks (e.g., workers may prefer high-rewarding tasks while
tasks may prefer nearby workers). Such ignorance of preferences impairs user experience and will decrease the profit
of the platform in the long run. To address this problem, we
propose preference-aware task assignment using online stable matching. Specifically, we define a new model, Online
Stable Matching under Known Identical Independent Distributions (OSM-KIID). It not only maximizes the expected total profits (OBJ-1), but also tries to satisfy the preferences
among workers and tasks by minimizing the expected total
number of blocking pairs (OBJ-2). The model also features a
practical arrival assumption validated on real-world dataset.
Furthermore, we present a linear program based online algorithm LP-ALG, which achieves an online ratio of at least
1 − 1/e on OBJ-1 and has at most 0.6 · |E| blocking pairs expectedly, where |E| is the total number of edges in the compatible graph. We also show that a natural Greedy can have
an arbitrarily bad performance on OBJ-1 while maintaining
around 0.5 · |E| blocking pairs. Evaluations on both synthetic
and real datasets confirm our theoretical analysis and demonstrate that LP-ALG strictly dominates all the baselines on
both objectives when tasks notably outnumber workers.

1

Introduction

On-demand taxi dispatching has gained global popularity as
an economic, efficient and sustainable alternative to urban
transportation (Zhang et al. 2017; Dickerson et al. 2018a;
Tong et al. 2016a; 2016b; Xu et al. 2018). One essential
functionality of on-demand taxi dispatching platforms such
as Uber and DiDi is to assign tasks (passengers) to workers (drivers) dynamically. Task assignment in on-demand
taxi dispatching is commonly modeled as online bipartite
matching. Each worker/task has a specific location attribute
and is regarded as a vertex in the bipartite graph. Tasks arrive sequentially at random, and have to be either rejected
or matched with an available worker shortly upon arrival.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2245

