The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adversarial Framing for Image and Video Classification
Michał Zaj ˛
ac,∗1, 2 Konrad Żołna,∗1, 3 Negar Rostamzadeh,3 Pedro O. Pinheiro3
Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland†
2
Nomagic, Warsaw, Poland
3
Element AI, Montréal, Canada
emzajac@gmail.com, konrad.zolna@gmail.com, negar@elementai.com, pedro@opinheiro.com
1

Abstract
Neural networks are prone to adversarial attacks. In general, such attacks deteriorate the quality of the input by either slightly modifying most of its pixels, or by occluding
it with a patch. In this paper, we propose a method that
keeps the image unchanged and only adds an adversarial
framing on the border of the image. We show empirically
that our method is able to successfully attack state-of-theart methods on both image and video classification problems.
Notably, the proposed method results in a universal attack
which is very fast at test time. Source code can be found at
github.com/zajaczajac/adv_framing.

Figure 1: Examples from ImageNet with adversarial framing
of width 3. Most of the images are wrongly classified as a
maypole. We hypothesize that the colorfulness of that class
makes it especially easy for AF to resemble it.

In this paper, we propose a new attack which is wellsuited for the above-mentioned purposes. The method,
dubbed adversarial framing (AF), consists of simply adding
a thin border around the original image, keeping the whole
content of the image unchanged (see Figure 1 for some qualitative results). Our attack is universal (Moosavi-Dezfooli et
al. 2017), which means the same AF is applied to all inputs.
Our method only requires substantial computing during the
training procedure. At test time, the only extra computation
required is the appending of the precomputed framing to the
input.
In this work, we consider a white-box setting, in which an
access to the architecture and weights of the trained classifier is given. Previous work has shown that if only black-box
access is given, a surrogate model can be leveraged to obtain
an attack that transfers well to the original model (Papernot,
McDaniel, and Goodfellow 2016). Therefore, a white-box
model is a realistic assumption and, in fact, is the most commonly considered paradigm in the literature.
Although extensive literature exists on attacks against image classifiers, we are aware of only a few works on video
classifier attacks (Wei, Zhu, and Su 2018; Li et al. 2018;
Rey-de Castro and Rabitz 2018). While resulting in successful attacks, these approaches are fully-affecting and hence
introduce adversarial artifacts in the video. In contrast, output from our attack contains the original video and no information is lost. Moreover, the framing is constant over all
video frames, removing any “flickering” effect that could
potentially be distracting to viewers1 .

Introduction
It is a well-known fact that one can change the output of a
neural network-based classifier by applying a small perturbation to its input (Szegedy et al. 2014). Such perturbations
are a base for adversarial attacks, which we divide into two
categories: fully-affecting and partially-affecting.
• Fully-affecting attacks generate small pixel intensity
modifications which are optimized to be hardly visible for humans. These attacks typically have their `2
or `∞ norm constrained (Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and
Frossard 2016; Carlini and Wagner 2017) and hence affect the whole image.
• Partially-affecting attacks usually have their `0 norm constrained. They introduce perceptible but small occlusion to the image, such as a patch (Brown et al. 2017;
Karmon, Zoran, and Goldberg 2018) or a single pixel (Su,
Vargas, and Sakurai 2017).
The attacks mentioned above either slightly modify all the
pixels of the image or occlude parts of it. However, the attackers may find this to be a serious limitation and seek for
new types of attacks. For instance, consider a scenario where
they upload videos containing forbidden content, such as violence or pornography. The goal is to bypass video-sharing
website’s filters. At the same time, the perturbations introduced should not be distracting and all information should
be retained.
∗

Equal contribution
ul. Łojasiewicza 6, 30-348 Kraków, Poland, +48 12 664 66 29
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1

10077

See youtu.be/PrU9R6eFNTs for some video attacks.

