The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Agent Discussion Mechanism for Natural Language Generation
Xu Li, Mingming Sun, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab (CCL), Baidu Research
{lixu13,sunmingming01,liping11}@baidu.com

Abstract

al. 2018) or has multiple views (Wiseman, Shieber, and
Rush 2017). For example, in the NBA game summarization
task (Wiseman, Shieber, and Rush 2017), texts are generated from the given information of an NBA match, the input
knowledge has multiple views such as background information about teams, score records through timeline or the performances of each player. Another example is text summarization task in which text inputs are too long to be handled
by a single encoder. In these cases, a good understanding and
representation of the input information is critical in order to
generate correct texts. Given the complexity of real world
environments and limited capability or visibility of a single
agent, the multi-agent system worths an in-depth study.
In recent research, many multi-agent communicating systems (Sukhbaatar, Szlam, and Fergus 2016) have been proposed and adopted to a variety of collaborative tasks such
as logic puzzles (Foerster et al. 2016), visual dialog (Das
et al. 2017), reference games (Lazaridou, Pham, and Baroni
2016) and information extractions (Sun, Li, and Li 2018).
All those applications achieve better results when the input information becomes more complex. Among those systems, communication plays a vital role in the coordinative
behavior of agents. Agents communicate with each other
by sending messages which designed manually or learned
from data. For example, (Lazaridou, Peysakhovich, and Baroni 2016) learns to generate human language as messages
sharing between agents. In a recently proposed deep communicate model (Sukhbaatar, Szlam, and Fergus 2016), the
agents learn to represent their observed information or decision as a continuous vector and share it with other agents.
In the field of NLG, (Celikyilmaz et al. 2018) first introduced deep communicating multi-agent system to text summarization tasks to obtain a better representation of long text
inputs. In their work, multiple encoders share their previous
layer’s encoded vectors to the next layer of other encoders.
For each time step of encoders, agents make their decision
based on how other agents encoded input information in previous layers. However, how the other encoders encode input
information in the previous layer may not be valuable information that can help the agent making their decision of the
current layer at the current time step. Besides, communication in encoder request the multiple encoders has the same
structure which limited the application and capacity of such
multi-agent system. We hypothesize that agents could make

We introduce the discussion mechanism into the multiagent communicating encoder-decoder architecture for Natural Language Generation (NLG) tasks and prove that by
applying the discussion mechanism, the communication between agents becomes more effective. Generally speaking, an
encoder-decoder architecture predicts target-sequence word
by word in several time steps. At each time step of prediction, agents with the discussion mechanism predict the target word after several discussion steps. In the first step of
discussion, agents make their choice independently and express their decision to other agents. In the next discussion
step, agents collect other agents’ decision to update their own
decisions, then express the updated decisions to others again.
After several iterations, the agents make their final decision
based on a well-communicated situation. The benefit of the
discussion mechanism is that multiple encoders can be designed as different structures to fit the specified input or to
fetch different representations of inputs.We train and evaluate
the discussion mechanism on Table to Text Generation, Text
Summarization and Image Caption tasks, respectively. Our
empirical results demonstrate that the proposed multi-agent
discussion mechanism is helpful for maximizing the utility of
the communication between agents.

1

Introduction

Natural Language Generation (NLG) (Kukich 1983; Reiter
and Dale 1997) is a challenging task of generating texts
on the condition of specified information such as knowledge, images or texts. The challenge lies in understanding
the input information and organizing the texts to be generated, known as what to say and how to say it (Reiter
and Dale 1997; Wiseman, Shieber, and Rush 2017). In recent research, the sequence to sequence structure (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014) has been widely applied in NLG
tasks. More concretely, an encoder is adopted to generate
a representation of the input information, and a decoder is
used to predict the natural language with respect to the encoded inputs. Attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2014) is often adopted at each time step of the decoder to select a better representation of input information.
As NLG tasks become increasingly complex, it is common that the input information is complex (Celikyilmaz et
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6096

