The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Theoretically Guaranteed Deep Optimization
Framework for Robust Compressive Sensing MRI
Risheng Liu,1,2,∗ Yuxi Zhang,1,2 Shichao Cheng,2,3 Xin Fan,1,2 Zhongxuan Luo1,2,3,4
1

DUT-RU International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, Dalian, China
3
School of Mathematical Science, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Dalian, China
{rsliu, xin.fan, zxluo}@dlut.edu.cn, yuxizhang@mail.dlut.edu.cn, shichao.cheng@outlook.com
Abstract

ear system (Eksioglu 2016):
y = PFx + n,

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is one of the most dynamic and safe imaging techniques available for clinical applications. However, the rather slow speed of MRI acquisitions limits the patient throughput and potential indications. Compressive Sensing (CS) has proven to be an efficient technique for accelerating MRI acquisition. The most
widely used CS-MRI model, founded on the premise of reconstructing an image from an incompletely filled k-space,
leads to an ill-posed inverse problem. In the past years, lots
of efforts have been made to efficiently optimize the CS-MRI
model. Inspired by deep learning techniques, some preliminary works have tried to incorporate deep architectures into
CS-MRI process. Unfortunately, the convergence issues (due
to the experience-based networks) and the robustness (i.e.,
lack real-world noise modeling) of these deeply trained optimization methods are still missing. In this work, we develop
a new paradigm to integrate designed numerical solvers and
the data-driven architectures for CS-MRI. By introducing an
optimal condition checking mechanism, we can successfully
prove the convergence of our established deep CS-MRI optimization scheme. Furthermore, we explicitly formulate the
Rician noise distributions within our framework and obtain
an extended CS-MRI network to handle the real-world nosies
in the MRI process. Extensive experimental results verify that
the proposed paradigm outperforms the existing state-of-theart techniques both in reconstruction accuracy and efficiency
as well as robustness to noises in real scene.

(1)

where x ∈ RN is the desired MR image to be reconstructed
from observation y ∈ CM (M < N ), F is the Fourier transform, P ∈ RM ×N denotes the under-sampling operation,
and n ∈ CM represents the acquisition noises. It is easy to
find that estimating x from Eq. (1) is actually ill-posed, due
to the singularity of PF. Thus the main challenge for CSMRI lies in defining proper regularizations and proposing
corresponding nonlinear optimization or iterative algorithm
for the inverse problem. According to CS theory, the most
typical CS-MRI reconstruction techniques attempt to optimize the following nonsmooth regularized model:
1
kPFAα−yk22 +λkαkp ,
(2)
2
where α denotes the sparse code of x, corresponding to the
wavelet basis (denoted as A, so we actually have x = Aα)
of a given inverse wavelet transform (usually implemented
by DCT or DWT) and λ indicates the trade-off parameter. In this work, we consider the `p regularization with
p ∈ (0, 1), thus actually need to address a challenging nonconvex sparse optimization task.
α ∈ arg min
α

Related Works
In a conventional way, some effects are in exploring the
sparse regularization in specific transform domain (Qu et al.
2012; Lustig, Donoho, and Pauly 2007; Gho et al. 2010).
In addition, algorithms based on the nonlocal processing
paradigm aim to construct a better sparsity transform, (Qu
et al. 2014; Eksioglu 2016). Some dictionary learning based
methods focus on training a dictionary from reference images in the related subspace (Ravishankar and Bresler 2011;
Babacan et al. 2011; Zhan et al. 2016). These modelbased CS-MRI methods give satisfying performances in details restoration benefiting from the model based data prior.
While most of them are based on a sparsity introducing `1
norm or `0 norm, which have weaker abilities to describe the
sparsity in real sense and the insufficient sparse regularization may introduce artifacts. What’s more, lacking of data
dependent prior, such methods have limitation in handling
particular structure of the problem or specific data distribution in real scene.

Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is widely utilized in
clinical applications because of its none-invasive property
and excellent capability in revealing both functional and
anatomical information. However, one of the main drawbacks is the inherently slow acquisition speed of MRI in kspace (i.e., Fourier space), due to the limitation of hardwares
(Lustig et al. 2008). Compressive sensing MRI (CS-MRI) is
a commonly used technique allowing fast acquisition at data
sampling rate much lower than Nyquist rate without deteriorating the image quality.
In the process of MR data acquisition, the sparse k-space
data y can be approximated as the following discretized lin∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4368

