The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

T-Center: A Novel Discriminative
Feature Extraction Approach for Iris Recognition
Yifeng Chen,1 Cheng Wu,2 Yiming Wang3
School of Rail Transportation, Soochow University
yfchen@stu.suda.edn.cn, cwu@suda.edu.cn, ymwang@suda.edu.cn

Abstract

which learns relational features to measure the similarity between pairs of iris images (Liu et al. 2016). Gangwar (Gangwar and Joshi 2016) proposed a deep learning based method
for iris learning and various optimal tricks were used to
avoid overfitting. These typical researches have an interesting common point: all deep models are trained under the
supervision of the Softmax loss. The advantage of Softmax
loss is to make the learned features highly separable, but it
does not guarantee the features’ high discrimination. Unfortunately, higher discrimination is the key to robustly identify
new unseen classes without label prediction.
Thus, we propose a novel T -Center loss in order to enhance the discriminative power of the deeply learned features. The original center loss function fuse the Euclidean
distance between the features and features centers into loss
function to maximize the inter-class variance and minimize
the intra-class variance (Wen et al. 2016), which is essentially a kind of distance metric learning. However for iris
recognition task, we care more about the angular metric
rather than distance metric since cosine distance between
two features is used to compute the similarity score.

For large-scale iris recognition tasks, the determination of
classification thresholds remains a challenging task, especially in practical applications where sample space is growing
rapidly. Due to the complexity of iris samples, the classification threshold is difficult to determine with the increase of
samples. The key issue to solving such threshold determination problems is to obtain iris feature vectors with more obvious discrimination. Therefore, we train deep convolutional
neural networks based on a large number of iris samples to
extract iris features. More importantly, an optimized center
loss function referred to Tight Center (T -Center) Loss is used
to solve the problem of insufficient discrimination caused by
Softmax loss function. In order to evaluate the effectiveness
of our proposed method, we use cosine similarity to estimate
the similarity between the features on the published datasets
CASIA-IrisV4 and IITD2.0. Our experiment results demonstrate that the T -Center loss can minimize intra-class variance and maximize inter-class variance, which achieve significant performance on the benchmark experiments.

Introduction
T -Center loss

Iris recognition is one of the most promising fields in biometrics. The first complete iris recognition system was presented by Daugman (Daugman 1993). Over the past few
years, conventional iris recognition under homogeneous and
controlled conditions has been extensively studied. The general procedures for iris recognition include four parts: iris
location, iris segmentation, feature encoding and feature
matching. Recently, more attention has been paid on the realization of large-scale iris recognition tasks with massive
sample space. Unfortunately, the non-ideal captured images
increase the difficulty of iris segmentation and cross-device
picture sources lead to adaptive trapping of parameters.
Recent progress in deep learning, in particular, deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have significantly improved the state-of-the-art performance for computer vision
tasks, which makes deep CNNs a dominant machine learning approach for computer vision. Deep learning based approaches in iris biometrics, have been explored in recent
works. Liu proposed a deep framework for iris verification,

Deep learning uses the loss function to measure the degree
of optimization and it is clear that designing an appropriate loss function can enhance the ability of discrimination.
The most commonly used loss function is Softmax loss. Assuming that the input learned feature vectors xi and its label yi , the original Softmax loss function is as Equation:
T x +b
Wy
Pm
yi
i
Ls = − i=1 log Pne i W T xi +bj where m is the size of
j=1 e

j

a mini-batch, n the number of classes and fj the j-th element of the class score vector f . Here j ∈ [1, n]. In typical
CNNs, f is denoted as the output of the FC layers, we have
fj = WjT xi + bj and fyi = WyTi xi + byi , where Wj and
Wyi denote the weights of the last fully connected layer corresponding to the class j and yi respectively.
However, for iris recognition task, the deep features
learned under Softmax loss are not separable enough to discriminate the close-set iris samples. To enhance the discriminative power of the features, we propose the novel
Pm
2
T -Center loss function.Ltc = 21 i=1 x∗i − c∗yi where
cyi denotes the center of the deep feature corresponding to

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9929

