The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Whole New Ball Game:
Harvesting Game Data for Player Profiling
Ivan Samborskii,1 Aleksandr Farseev,2 Andrey Filchenkov,2 Tat-Seng Chua1
1

National University of Singapore
21 Lower Kent Ridge Rd, Singapore, 119077, +6565166666
2
ITMO University
49 Kronverksky Pr., St. Peterburg, 197101, +78122329704
i.samborskii@u.nus.edu, farseev@gmail.com, afilchekov@corp.ifmo.ru, dcscts@nus.edu.sg
Abstract

players’ game experiences based on different human signals recorded by various sensors. Even though the study has
shown significant progress towards automatic player profiling, it, again, has been carried out based on a small-scale
dataset collected in a “sterile” lab environment, which does
not allow for making large-scale conclusions. Nevertheless,
the tremendous amounts of data in the game domain open
the opportunity to perform player profiling from the Big
Data perspective and this study is the first preliminary attempt towards such an exciting research direction.
Despite a wide availability of the data, player profiling is
associated with the following challenges:

Nowadays, video games play a very important role in human
life and no longer purely associated with escapism or entertainment. In fact, gaming has become an essential part of our
daily routines, which give rise to the exponential growth of
various online game platforms. By participating in such platforms, individuals generate a multitude of game data points,
which, for example, can be further used for automatic user
profiling and recommendation applications. However, the literature on automatic learning from the game data is relatively
sparse, which had inspired us to tackle the problem of player
profiling in this first preliminary study. Specifically, in this
work, we approach the task of player gender prediction based
on various types of game data. Our initial experimental results
inspire further research on user profiling in the game domain.

• Ground truth collection. Most players prefer to stay
anonymous in the virtual world, as well as behave differently as compared to their social behaviour in the real
world. For example, often male players choose female
game personage, thus ground truth records must be obtained from other data sources, such as conventional social networks.

During the past decade, the game industry has faced a surge
of data, which includes tons of behavioural information (Bohannon 2010), including, for example, game preferences,
various statistics, and in-game interaction sessions. Such information is quite heterogeneous most of the time, which
complicates its processing. To structure such information,
the so-called “user profiling” techniques are often used.
In this work, we define user profiling, specifically player
profiling, as the process of automatic player attribute (e.g.,
demographic) inference from player-generated data. Knowing player attributes is beneficial for various applications.
For example, in the public sector, they can be employed for
early game addiction tendency identification (Bauckhage,
Drachen, and Sifa 2015). At the same time, the predicted
player attributes can be adopted to enhance the accuracy of
the game recommendation services, game design improvement, and game experience personalization.
Up to now, there have been several research attempts performed towards data analysis in the game research domain.
For example, social scientists have examined the problem
from the qualitative perspective (Yee 2006). However, most
such works are descriptive in nature and rely on manually
collected data, which explains the absence of large-scale
data sets in the field. In the course of time, the research
attempts on player profiling have been re-focused towards
predictive analysis. For example, Yang et al. (2018) inferred

• Cross-source identification. In order to obtain userrelated ground truth records (e.g., gender labels), one
needs to hold information about linkages to other social
network accounts, such as Facebook, Instagram, etc.
• Longitudinal variations. Players may change their behaviour over time by, for example, experiencing evolving
game scenarios (Bauckhage, Drachen, and Sifa 2015), etc.
Such behavioural fluctuations require to be handled properly during the data modelling process.
• Data fusion. Effective fusion of the multi-modal game
data (e.g., player’s chat, in-/out-game activities, etc.) in
one model in a mutually-consistent fashion is a challenging research problem (Farseev et al. 2015).
Inspired by the challenges above, we formulate our research question as follows: is it possible to learn from
multi-view temporal game experience data for player
profiling?
Due to the absence of publicly-available game datasets, in
this study, the dataset was collected from scratch via monitoring of the publicly available game accounts. To do so,
we took advantage of the public data available at Player.me
game social network. One of the network’s features is the
explicit linkage between social accounts and game accounts

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10025

