The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Coupled CycleGAN: Unsupervised Hashing Network for Cross-Modal Retrieval
Chao Li,1 Cheng Deng,1∗ Lei Wang,1 De Xie,1 Xianglong Liu2†
1

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
li chao@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {chdeng.xd, lwang.xidian, xiede.xd}@gmail.com, xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Wu et al. 2014; Masci et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2017a;
Li et al. 2018) learn hash codes under some supervision
such as label information. However, label information collection consumes massive time and labor, making it infeasible in real-world applications. Different from supervised
scenario, unsupervised hashing methods (Bronstein et al.
2010; Kumar and Udupa 2011; Feng, Wang, and Li 2014;
Yu, Liu, and Shao 2017; Yang et al. 2018b) without using semantic labels, usually depend on the criterion of maintaining
the original relationship among the training data.

In recent years, hashing has attracted more and more attention
owing to its superior capacity of low storage cost and high
query efficiency in large-scale cross-modal retrieval. Benefiting from deep leaning, continuously compelling results in
cross-modal retrieval community have been achieved. However, existing deep cross-modal hashing methods either rely
on amounts of labeled information or have no ability to learn
an accuracy correlation between different modalities. In this
paper, we proposed Unsupervised coupled Cycle generative
adversarial Hashing networks (UCH), for cross-modal retrieval, where outer-cycle network is used to learn powerful
common representation, and inner-cycle network is explained
to generate reliable hash codes. Specifically, our proposed
UCH seamlessly couples these two networks with generative
adversarial mechanism, which can be optimized simultaneously to learn representation and hash codes. Extensive experiments on three popular benchmark datasets show that the
proposed UCH outperforms the state-of-the-art unsupervised
cross-modal hashing methods.

Recently, deep cross-modal hashing methods, leveraging
the superior capacity of deep neural network (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Goodfellow et al. 2014;
Zhu et al. 2017) to capture the correlation between different modalities, have illustrated that deep cross-modal
hashing methods are usually more effective than shallow
structure based counterparts. Deep Cross-Modal Hashing
(DCMH) (Jiang and Li 2017), Triplet based Deep Hashing
(TDH) (Deng et al. 2018), Shared Predictive Deep Quantization (SPDQ) (Yang et al. 2018a), and Self-Supervised
Adversarial Hashing (SSAH) (Li et al. 2018) are reported
recently to encode individual modalities into their corresponding features by constructing two different pathways in
deep networks. SPDQ constructs two specific network layers to learn modality-common and modality-private representations. DCMH and SSAH learn hash codes by preserving semantic correlation between different modalities which
is constructed by label information. However, almost all of
these supervised methods require amounts of label information. Compared with them, unsupervised deep hashing
methods learn the modality correlation depending on correspondences between pairs of data (such as image-text pairs),
making it more feasible in real word settings. Among these
unsupervised deep hashing methods, Unsupervised Generative Adversarial Cross-modal Hashing (UGACH) (Zhang,
Peng, and Yuan 2017) exploits graph manifold structure to
learn modality correlation. Unsupervised Deep Cross-Modal
Hashing (UDCMH) (Wu et al. 2018) equips with adaptive
learning strategy to learn hash codes iteratively. Even so,
there are still some common disadvantages hindering these
methods. First, due to plentiful semantically-similar pairs
existing in real datasets, these methods just simply adopt individual network to extract features for each modality, which
cannot build accurate correlation between different modali-

Introduction
Multi-modal data, such as text and image, exhibit heterogeneous properties, making it difficult for users to search
for information of interest effectively and efficiently. Crossmodal retrieval, which aims to search the images (resp. texts)
that are relevant to a given text (resp. image) query, has
been studied in the past decade (Zhang and Wang 2016;
Yang et al. 2017b; Gu et al. 2018). However, most of these
methods suffer from high computation burden because of
large volumes and high dimensions of multimedia data.
Hashing based cross-modal retrieval, mapping multi-modal
data into compact binary codes and conducting retrieval via
fast bit-wise XOR operation, has become a hot topic. The
fundamental challenges in cross-modal hashing retrieval lie
in capturing the correlation between different modalities and
learning reliable hash codes.
Cross-modal hashing methods can be generally categorized into two groups: supervised and unsupervised. Supervised hashing methods (Liu et al. 2017; Deng et al. 2016;
∗

Corresponding author
Corresponding author
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

176

