The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Flexible Latent
Representations via Encapsulated Variational Encoders
Wenjun Bai, Changqin Quan, Zhi-Wei Luo
Department of Computational Science
Kobe University, Japan
bwj@cs11.cs.kobe-u.ac.jp, quanchqin@gold.kobe-u.ac.jp, luo@gold.kobe-u.ac.jp,

representations from two encoders respectively, i.e., zbl ∼
qφb (zb |x) and zsl ∼ qφs (zs |x). The graphical model presentation of this derived EVE is depicted in Figure 1(a).

Introduction
Representation learning – aims to capture certain aspects of
the observed data – has fuelled majority of downstream AI
applications. As an emerging technique, the usage of variational encoder 1 is a celebrated probabilistic approach to
learn efficient latent representations in a pure unsupervised
manner. However, based on the current structure of a variational encoder, learning of flexible latent representations is
still a challenge task. To this end, we propose a novel form of
variational encoder: encapsulated variational encoder (EVE)
that allows grouping of two encoders in single scaffold to
exploit their relations in representation learning.
Imposing certain constraints on this newly derived encapsulated variational encoder, e.g., the independence and
equivalence constraints, it is capable of learning diverged
and converged latent representations, respectively. We format the remaining article as follows. We chiefly render out
our proposed EVE in the following Technical Background
section. Then we demonstrate that via tuning a single hyperparameter in our proposed EVE, the diverged and converged
representations can be learned. Validated on MNIST and CIFAR10(4K) datasets, we show that these learned diverged
and converged latent representations elevate the discriminative and generative modelling performance respectively.

(
a
)

(
b)

(
c
)

Figure 1: Graphical models of (a) the proposed encapsulated
variational encoders (EVE); (b) the semi-supervised EVE,
and (c) our derived encapsulated variational auto-encoder
(EVAE). In (c), solid arrows denote probabilistic decoders,
whereas dash arrows represent variational encoders.

Learning Converged Latent Representations
Armed with our proposed EVE, it is clear that the included
hyper-parameter α exert the direct control over learned latent representations. In specific, as α → 0, it implies the
equivalence constraint on two encoders in EVE. With sufficient training and a pre-defined small αs, latent representations from two encoders in EVE are learned to coincide
with each other. As a result, driving α → 0 allows our derived EVE to learn converged latent representations.
These learned converged latent representations are
featured in production of regularised latent representations to improve the discriminative performance of
a semi-supervised model. To empirically validate this
hypothesis, we construct a semi-supervised EVE, i.e.,
qφb ,φs (zb , zs |x, y, α), to see how these converged representations benefit the model in performing a designated classification task on CIFAR-10(4k) dataset. The graphical model
presentation of this semi-supervised EVE can be found in
Figure 1(b).
Demonstrated in Table 1, it demonstrates a negative correlation between the imposed α value and its induced discriminative performance. With a diminished α, the discriminative
performance of our derived semi-supervised EVE achieved
competitive empirical performance even in the face of stateof-the-art approaches.

Learning flexible Latent Representations
Technical Background
Different to a conventional variational encoder (Kingma and
Welling 2013), in our proposed encapsulated variational encoders (EVE), we deliberately incorporate two variational
encoders, e.g., the base and scaffolding one qφb (zb |x) and
qφs (zs |x) to derive the analytic expression of our EVE as:
q((zb , zs )|x; φb , φs , α). To measure the relations between
two encoders, we adopt a discrepancy function with a positive defined hyper-parameter α, i.e., α ∈ <+ to quantify the difference between two encoded latent representaPL
tion as: Re (q(zb |x), q(zs |x)) = α · L1 l=1 exp{−||zbl −
zsl ||2 }, where zbl and zsl are Monte-Carlo sampled encoding
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Here, we intentionly separate the usage of variational encoder
that can be used in dependent of commonly assumed decoder.

9913

