The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Computing Argumentative Explanations in Bipolar Argumentation Frameworks
Zhiwei Zeng,1,2,3 Chunyan Miao,1,3,4 Cyril Leung,1,6 Zhiqi Shen,1,4 Jing Jih Chin5
1

LILY Research Center, 2 IGS, 3 Alibaba-NTU Singapore JRI, 4 SCSE, 5 LKC School of Medicine,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
6
ECE, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
i160001@e.ntu.edu.sg

Introduction

of defence in BAF, with and without reference to the support
relation respectively.

The process of arguing is also the process of justifying and
explaining. Transparent reasoning process endows argumentation good explainability. Recently, more research efforts
have been devoted to realizing the explanatory power of
argumentation (Fan and Toni 2015; Zeng et al. 2018) in
unipolar argumentation frameworks. In addition to the attack
relation, bipolar frameworks consider the support relation,
which brings greater expressibility but also complexity. It
is worth exploring how the interactions encompassed in the
support relation contribute to the arguing process and how
to capture them in explanations. In this paper, we propose a
“stronger” notion of defence and a new bipolar admissibility semantics, which are defined based on both the attack and
the support relations, and use them to formalize two types of
explanations, namely concise and strong explanations. We
then present complete and sound processes for computing
explanations by constructing bipolar dispute trees.
An Abstract Bipolar Argumentation Framework
(BAF) (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex 2005) is a tuple
BAF = hA, R− , R+ i, consisting of a set of arguments A, a
binary attack relation R− on A, and another binary support
relation R+ on A.
Let a, b ∈ A, a supports b iff there exists a sequence
(a1 , · · · , an ) of elements of A, such that n ≥ 2, a = a1 , b =
an , a1 R+ a2 , · · · , an−1 R+ an . Argument a forms a supported attack on b iff there exists a sequence (a, x, b) of arguments such that a supports x and xR− b.
Let S ⊆ A, a ∈ A, S set-attacks a iff ∃b ∈ S such that b
forms a direct or supported attack on a. S set-supports a iff
∃b ∈ S such that b supports a.
Let S ⊆ A, S is conflict-free+ iff @a, b ∈ S such that {a}
set-attacks b. S is safe iff S is conflict-free+ and @b ∈ A such
that both S set-attacks b and S set-supports b. If S is safe,
then S is conflict-free+. If S is conflict-free+ and closed for
R+ , then S is safe (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex 2005).

Definition 1. Given a BAF framework hA, R− , R+ i, let
S ⊆ A, a ∈ A. S defends a iff ∀b ∈ A, if bR− a, then
∃c ∈ S such that cR− b.
Definition 2. A set S ⊆ A strongly defends argument a ∈ A
iff ∀b ∈ A, if {b} set-attacks a, then ∃c ∈ S such that cR− b.
Example 1. As shown in Fig. 1(1), argument b directly attacks argument a. The sequence (c, b, a), (d, b, a) of arguments are two supported attacks on argument a by c and
d respectively. {e} defends a as eR− b. Set {e, f, g} and
{e, f, g, h, i, j} strongly defend a. However, set {e} and
{f, g, h} do not strongly defend a, as they cannot directly
counter-attack all direct and supported attacks on a.
Using the notion of set-attack, Definition 2 gives a new
form of defence which is more stringent than the traditional
Dung’s style defence re-contexted in Definition 1. For a set
S to strongly defend an argument a, S needs to counter not
only all direct attacks, but also all supported attacks on a.
With the two notions of defence, we then propose two
types of admissibility. The u-admissibility (unipolar admissibility) inherits Dung’s definition of admissibility in
Abstract Argumentation (AA). The b-admissibility (bipolar admissibility) is constructed based on the definition of
“strongly defend” and enforces external coherence.
Definition 3. Given a set of arguments S ⊆ A:
• S is u-admissible iff S is conflict-free+ and defends all its
elements.
• S is b-admissible iff S is safe and strongly defends all its
elements.
Proposition 1. Given a BAF framework hA, R− , R+ i, let
S ⊆ A. If S is b-admissible, then S is also u-admissible, but
not vice versa.
Example 2. (cont’d) {a, e, f, g, l} and {i, k, l, h} are badmissible and u-admissible. {a, e}, {a, e, f, h} (a not
strongly defended) are u-admissible, but not b-admissible.

Explanations in BAF
A set of arguments that contributes to the justification of an
argument a by defending a and its defenders can be used for
explaining a. Guided by this idea, we first define two types

Definition 4. Let a, b ∈ A, S ⊆ A. a is relevant to b iff
there exists a sequence (a1 , ..., an ) of elements of A such
that n ≥ 2, a = a1 , b = an , a1 Ra2 , · · · , an−1 Ran , with
R ∈ {R− , R+ }. b is referred to as a subject of S iff ∀a ∈
S \ b, a is relevant to b.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10079

