The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Adaptive Modeling for Risk-Aware Decision Making
Sandhya Saisubramanian
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
saisubramanian@cs.umass.edu

Introduction

the agent encounters risks primarily due to sub-optimal action selection that arises when planning using a simplified
model, which trades the solution quality for computational
gains. The second setting deals with the impact of missing information and the associated risks. I propose adaptive modeling that allows an agent to balance the trade-off
between model simplicity and risk awareness, for different
notions of risks, while remaining computationally tractable.
Outside of AI, models with varying fidelity have been employed for optimizing the trade-off between multiple parameters in computational fluid dynamics, combustion modeling
in turbulent flows, and video coding (Pellegrini et al. 2016;
Wu et al. 2015; Lu and Zhang 2011).
The overall scope of my thesis is to design decision theoretic mechanisms for risk-aware decision making by considering the impact of the risks and computational complexity of accounting for them, focusing on the following objectives:

Decision making under uncertainty is a core capability of an
autonomous agent. In model-based reasoning, agents reason
about the effects of their own actions and the events in the
environment based on the model parameters. A cornerstone
for long-term autonomy with safety guarantees is risk-aware
decision making. The importance of accounting for risks in
AI systems is attracting growing interest (Kulić and Croft
2005; Zilberstein 2015; Amodei et al. 2016). A risk-aware
model fully accounts for a known set of risks in the environment, with respect to the problem under consideration. The
process of decision making using such a model is risk-aware
decision making. Formulating risk-aware models is critical
for robust reasoning under uncertainty, since the impact of
using less accurate models may be catastrophic in extreme
cases due to overly optimistic view of problems. The risk
awareness in a model can be increased by improving the
model fidelity and thereby, the solution quality.
In practice, agents often operate based on models that
do not fully capture the underlying dynamics of the decision process, leading to sub-optimal solutions that may
be risky. There are three key reasons for this behavior: (i)
the notion and representation of risks is problem-specific,
which makes it challenging to design a model that is riskaware across multiple problems; (ii) improving the model
fidelity leads to significant increase in computational complexity of decision making; and (iii) complete knowledge
of the system is unavailable ahead of the planning process
which the agent discovers during plan execution. Existing
techniques that minimize risks in planning under uncertainty, using Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), assume
the models are risk-aware and optimize a risk-sensitive criterion or maximize goal reachability in the presence of unavoidable risky states (Kolobov, Mausam, and Weld 2012;
Trevizan, Teichteil-Königsbuch, and Thiébaux 2017).
This thesis specifically focuses on investigating the question of how and when to improve risk awareness and model
fidelity, taking into account the complexity of planning under uncertainty. I explore risk-aware decision making under two broad settings: planning with full information and
planning with incomplete information. In the first setting,

• Identify and characterize different forms of risks, in the
context of planning under uncertainty;
• Develop metrics for risk assessment, which quantifies the
impact of the risks, and risk awareness, which is measured
with respect to the environment;
• Develop a systematic approach for adjusting model fidelity that would guide the automated construction of
good risk-aware models, which can balance the trade-off
between model simplicity and risk awareness;
• Design robust and scalable solution techniques for solving
this class of problems, along with identifying conditions
under which bounded-optimality can be achieved; and
• Perform a comprehensive evaluation and comparison of
the approach with the existing techniques.

Current Progress
My recent works (Saisubramanian, Zilberstein, and Shenoy
2018; Saisubramanian and Zilberstein 2018) formalize riskaware decision making for problems modeled as a Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP) problem. Given the computational
complexity of solving large SSPs optimally, there has been
considerable interest in developing efficient approximations,
such as reduced models, that trade solution quality for computational gains. Reduced models simplify the problem by

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9896

