The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hyperprior Induced Unsupervised Disentanglement of Latent Representations
Abdul Fatir Ansari, Harold Soh
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{afatir, harold}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

certain applications such as EDA, the factors of variation are
unknown and precisely the information we seek to uncover.
In the unsupervised setting, a prior notion of disentanglement is required: we adopt a current standard assumption
that the data is generated from a fixed number of statistically independent factors. A popular generative model under
this assumption is the β-VAE (Higgins et al. 2017), which
learns good disentangled representations whilst being easy
to train. However, the mechanism employed to encourage
disentanglement—by increasing the weight on the KL divergence between the variational posterior and prior—sacrifices
reconstruction fidelity.
Recognizing this deficiency, very recent models—the
FactorVAE (Kim and Mnih 2018) and β-TCVAE (Chen et
al. 2018)—have improved upon the β-VAE by augmenting
the VAE loss with an extra penalty term that encourages independence in the latent codes. Although this penalty term
is well-motivated via total correlation, the drive to maximize statistical independence in this manner may not be robust to factor correlations in the data that exist due to biased
sampling. Furthermore, the need to add additional weighted
terms to the variational lower bound is unsatisfying from
a probabilistic modeling perspective; it points to an inadequacy in the underlying model formulation.
This paper takes a step back and asks whether tradingoff reconstruction and disentanglement can be handled in a
more principled fashion. Rather than introducing additional
terms or weights to the VAE evidence lower bound (ELBO),
we focus instead on the generative model and specifically,
its latent representation prior p(z). In the standard VAE,
p(z) is a standard multivariate Gaussian p(z) = N (0, Σ)
where Σ = I. By introducing a suitable hyperprior on the
covariance matrix—e.g., the inverse-Wishart (IW) used in
this study—one imagines that we can encourage (or discourage) independence in the learnt latent dimensions via the
hyperprior’s parameters. When trained via variational inference using an approximate distribution q(z, Σ), the hyperprior’s effect naturally manifests as additional terms in the
ELBO, rather than having to be inserted post-hoc as in previous studies. This approach is very natural from a Bayesian
perspective, but surprisingly, has yet to be explored in the
literature.
Unlike previous work, our model formulation entails
learning a full covariance matrix Σ; this allows the model

We address the problem of unsupervised disentanglement of
latent representations learnt via deep generative models. In
contrast to current approaches that operate on the evidence
lower bound (ELBO), we argue that statistical independence
in the latent space of VAEs can be enforced in a principled
hierarchical Bayesian manner. To this effect, we augment the
standard VAE with an inverse-Wishart (IW) prior on the covariance matrix of the latent code. By tuning the IW parameters, we are able to encourage (or discourage) independence
in the learnt latent dimensions. Extensive experimental results on a range of datasets (2DShapes, 3DChairs, 3DFaces
and CelebA) show our approach to outperform the β-VAE
and is competitive with the state-of-the-art FactorVAE. Our
approach achieves significantly better disentanglement and
reconstruction on a new dataset (CorrelatedEllipses) which
introduces correlations between the factors of variation.

1

Introduction

Learning semantically interpretable representations of data
remains an important open problem in artificial intelligence.
In particular, there has been considerable attention on learning disentangled representations—equivariant codes that exhibit predictable changes in a single associated dimension
when a factor of variation is altered (Bengio, Courville, and
Vincent 2013). Disentangled representations are beneficial
for a variety of tasks including exploratory data analysis
(EDA), transfer learning, and generative modeling. For example, one may seek to change a single aspect of a generated face (e.g., lighting, orientation, or hair color). With
an appropriate disentangled representation, only one dimension of the latent code needs to be modified to obtain the
required change. By analogy to inverse graphics, the disentangled representation can be regarded as independent parameters fed to a rendering engine to synthesize an image.
In this work, we focus on pure unsupervised learning
of disentangled representations with deep generative models. Alternative (semi-) supervised approaches have been explored in recent work (Reed et al. 2014; Kulkarni et al. 2015;
Siddharth et al. 2017; Mathieu et al. 2016), but these methods require labels that can be costly to obtain. Moreover, in
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3175

