The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Course Recommendation in MOOCs
Jing Zhang,1,2 Bowen Hao,1,2 Bo Chen,1,2 Cuiping Li,1,2 Hong Chen,1,2 Jimeng Sun3
1

Key Laboratory of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Renmin University of China
2
Information School, Renmin University of China
3
Computational Science and Engineering at College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
{zhang-jing, jeremyhao, bochen, licuiping, chong}@ruc.edu.cn, jsun@cc.gatech.edu
Recommendation
probability

Attention coefficients

Abstract
The proliferation of massive open online courses (MOOCs)
demands an effective way of personalized course recommendation. The recent attention-based recommendation models
can distinguish the effects of different historical courses when
recommending different target courses. However, when a user
has interests in many different courses, the attention mechanism will perform poorly as the effects of the contributing
courses are diluted by diverse historical courses. To address
such a challenge, we propose a hierarchical reinforcement
learning algorithm to revise the user profiles and tune the
course recommendation model on the revised profiles.
Systematically, we evaluate the proposed model on a real
dataset consisting of 1,302 courses, 82,535 users and
458,454 user enrolled behaviors, which were collected from
XuetangX—one of the largest MOOCs in China. Experimental results show that the proposed model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art recommendation models (improving 5.02% to 18.95% in terms of HR@10).

11.50

9.63

3.32

3.77

Data
Structure

Operation
System

Logic
Calculus

Contemporary
Physics

5.43

4.64

5.65

4.51

Data
Structure

Operation
System

Logic
Calculus

Contemporary
Physics

1.80

3.00

5.43

0.39

Psychology

Linear
Algebra

Programming
Foundation

Big Data
Systems

6.57

5.15

4.25

0.42

Psychology

Linear
Algebra

Programming
Foundation

Financial
Management

Real target
course

Historical courses

Historical courses

Random target
course

Figure 1: A motivating example of course recommendation.
The scores on top of the historical courses are the attention coefficients calculated by NAIS and the scores on top
of the target courses are the recommendation probabilities
predicted by NAIS (He et al. 2018). The goal of this paper is
to remove the courses with few contributions in a prediction
as much as possible.

user’s preference. To capture the order of the courses, we
can input a temporal sequence of the historical courses into
the gated recurrent unit (GRU) model (Hidasi et al. 2016)
and output the last embedding vector as the user preference.
However, the model fidelity is limited by the assumption that
all the historical courses play the same role at estimating the
similarity between the user profile and the target course. To
distinguish the effects of different courses, attention-based
models such as neural attentive item similarity (NAIS) (He
et al. 2018) and neural attentive session-based recommendation (NASR) (Li et al. 2017) can be used to estimate an
attention coefficient for each historical course as its importance in recommending the target course.
Although existing attention-based models improve the
recommendation performance, it still poses unsolved challenges. Firstly, when a user enrolled diverse courses, the
effects of the courses that indeed reflect the user’s interest in the target course will be diluted by many irrelevant
courses. For example, Figure 1 illustrates a recommendation result calculated by NAIS (He et al. 2018). The score
on top of each historical course represents the calculated attention coefficient1 . The real target course “Big Data Systems” is not successfully recommended in the top 10 ranked

Introduction
Nowadays, massive open online courses, or MOOCs, are
attracting widespread interest as an alternative education
model. Lots of MOOCs platforms such as Coursera, edX
and Udacity have been built and provide low cost opportunities for anyone to access a massive number of courses from
the worldwide top universities. The proliferation of heterogeneous courses in MOOCs platforms demands an effective
way of personalized course recommendation for their users.
The problem can be simply formalized as given a set of
historical courses that were enrolled by a user before time t,
we aim at recommending the most relevant courses that will
be enrolled by the user at time t + 1. We can view the historical enrolled courses as a user’s profile, and the key factor
of recommendation is to accurately characterize and model
the user’s preference from her profile. Many state-of-the-art
algorithms have been proposed to model users’ preferences
in different ways. For example, when ignoring the order of
the historical courses, we can adopt the factored item similarity model (FISM) (Kabbur, Ning, and Karypis 2013) to
represent each course as an embedding vector and average
the embeddings of all the historical courses to represent a

1
The sum of the attentions is normalized larger than 1 to lessen
the punishment of active users (Cf. (He et al. 2018) for details).

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

435

