The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

PopBots: Designing an Artificial
Intelligence Curriculum for Early Childhood Education
Randi Williams, Hae Won Park, Lauren Oh, Cynthia Breazeal
Personal Robots Group, MIT Media Lab
20 Ames Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02142
{randiw12,haewon,laurenoh,cynthiab}@media.mit.edu

Abstract

later in life. New AI-enabled interfaces that support interaction through gesture, touch, and speech allow younger
and younger children to access digital content and services.
However, young children do not yet understand how AIenabled devices, such as smart toys, work. It is important
that they do, however, so that children can use them constructively and safely. Although there are a growing number
of resources to learn about AI, most of these curricula target
students in high school or beyond, and very few are appropriate for non-programmers. For this reason, we designed an
early AI curriculum to help young children learn about artificial intelligence by enabling them to build, program, train
and interact with their own social robots.
The PopBots Platform and Curriculum consists of a social
robot toolkit, three hands-on AI activities, and associated assessments for young children to explore machine learning,
reasoning, and generative algorithms. In this paper, we discuss the tools we developed and the results of an evaluative
study with 80 four-to-six year olds. We investigated differences in how well children understood AI concepts based
on age and gender as well as children’s hands-on interaction with the PopBots toolkit components. While factors like
prior technical skills and age can certainly impact how much
children can learn, we hypothesized that their interaction
with the toolkit would really drive their understanding.

PopBots is a hands-on toolkit and curriculum designed to
help young children learn about artificial intelligence (AI) by
building, programming, training, and interacting with a social
robot. Today’s children encounter AI in the forms of smart
toys and computationally curated educational and entertainment content. However, children have not yet been empowered to understand or create with this technology. Existing
computational thinking platforms have made ideas like sequencing and conditionals accessible to young learners. Going beyond this, we seek to make AI concepts accessible. We
designed PopBots to address the specific learning needs of
children ages four to seven by adapting constructionist ideas
into an AI curriculum. This paper describes how we designed
the curriculum and evaluated its effectiveness with 80 Pre-K
and Kindergarten children. We found that the use of a social
robot as a learning companion and programmable artifact was
effective in helping young children grasp AI concepts. We
also identified teaching approaches that had the greatest impact on student’s learning. Based on these, we make recommendations for future modules and iterations for the PopBots
platform.

Background
Children and AI
Today, we have robots in our homes and intelligent agents
in our pockets. Children within their first years of life can
now interact with tablets and toys that have magnitudes
more computing power than personal computers even just
a decade ago. Personal background, individual experiences,
social and cultural factors (like how parents talk about technology) all impact on how children understand AI-enabled
devices as mental, psychological, and emotional entities
(Turkle 1984; Druga et al. 2017; 2018). As children gain exposure and understanding of AI technology, their reasoning
about these devices becomes more thoughtful and nuanced
(van Duuren and Scaife 1996; Severson and Carlson 2010;
Druga et al. 2017).
Technological literacy is becoming increasingly important as children grow up with intelligent machines. Previous

Figure 1: PopBot Components. The social robot is made of a
smartphone,LEGO blocks, motors, and sensors. The blocksbased programming interface resides on a tablet.
Children growing up in the era of artificial intelligence
(AI) will have fundamentally different relationships with
smart technologies than those who first encountered AI
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9729

