The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Sampling Complexity of the
Semidefinite Affine Rank Feasibility Problem
Igor Molybog,1 Javad Lavaei1
1

University of California at Berkeley
igormolybog@berkeley.edu, lavaei@berkeley.edu

Abstract

Both of the above feasibility problems encompass several practically important cases. For example, the Phase Retrieval (Candes et al., 2015) and Quantum State Tomography (Kueng, Rauhut, and Terstiege, 2017) problems can be
treated as special cases of the Semidefinite Affine Rank Feasibility problem with rank-one matrices Mr and k = 1. In
Power Systems Engineering, the State Estimation problem
consists in recovering complex voltages based on measured
power flows and select voltage magnitudes for a power grid,
which can be formulated as the Semidefinite Affine Rankone Feasibility problem (Zhang, Madani, and Lavaei, 2018).
In this case, the matrices Mr depend on the topology of the
power system and change a few times a day, while the measurements yr change every 5-15 minutes based on the data
updated by system operators. This defines a class of problems with a fixed set of matrices Mr ’s. In wireless communication systems, the problem of Feasible Downlink Beamforming (Morency and Vorobyov, 2016) can be formulated
as a block-diagonally shaped Affine Rank-one Feasibility
problem. The most commonly studied problem with the target rank being not necessarily equal to 1 is the Low-rank
Matrix Completion problem for which each matrix Mr has
exactly one nonzero element in its upper/lower triangular
part (Candès and Recht, 2009).
While the Affine Rank Minimization (ARM) (Recht, Fazel,
and Parrilo, 2010) is probably the most studied rankconstrained problem, the solution of any Affine Rank Minimization problem can also be obtained from the solutions
of O(n) Affine Rank Feasibility problems of the same size.
The same is also true for those problems with a positive
semidefinite constraint, so the results of this paper can be
extended to rank minimization problems as well. From the
point of view of computational complexity, Affine Rank
Minimization is an N P-hard, since it contains Cardinality
Minimization as a special case (Natarajan, 1995). Moreover,
the work by Marianna et al. (2013) establishes the result
that the rank-constrained completion of a semidefinite matrix with all diagonal entries equal to 1 is N P-hard as soon
as k ≥ 2. Hence, the Semidefinite Affine Rank Feasibility is
also N P-hard.
Nevertheless, the above problems have been extensively
studied over the past decade, and practical approaches have
been developed in various special cases. A major line of research assumes that the matrices Mr form a linear operator

In this paper, we study the semidefinite affine rank feasibility problem, which consists in finding a positive semidefinite
matrix of a given rank from its linear measurements. We consider the semidefinite programming relaxations of the problem with different objective functions and study their properties. In particular, we propose an analytical bound on the
number of relaxations that are sufficient to solve in order
to obtain a solution of a generic instance of the semidefinite affine rank feasibility problem or prove that there is no
solution. This is followed by a heuristic algorithm based on
semidefinite relaxation and an experimental proof of its performance on a large sample of synthetic data.

Introduction
This paper is concerned with the problem of obtaining a real
matrix X from the set S+
n;k of n × n symmetric (Sn ) and
positive semidefinite matrices of rank k that satisfies m linear specifications. In case there is no such a matrix up to a
given accuracy, we expect to receive the corresponding information within finite time. We refer to this problem as the
Semidefinite Affine Rank Feasibility (SARF), which can be
formally written as:
find
subject to

X ∈ Sn
⟨Mr , X⟩ = yr ,
X ≽ 0,
rank{X} = k.

r = 1, . . . , m,

(1a)
(1b)
(1c)

where M1 , . . . Mm ∈ Sn are some known symmetric matrices, y1 , . . . , ym ∈ R are some scalars that parametrize the
problem, and ⟨·, ·⟩ denotes the Frobenius inner product.
The above problem is closely related to the Affine Rank
Feasibility (ARF) problem, which can be obtained by dropping the constraint (1b). It is clear that a solution of the
Semidefinite Affine Rank Feasibility problem must also be a
solution of its counterpart without any positive semidefinite
constraint. More precisely, if X∗ ≽ 0 is the unique solution of the Affine Rank Feasibility problem, then it is also
a solution of the corresponding SARF problem as well. In
addition, every ARF problem can be equivalently converted
to a SARF problem (Fazel, 2002; Madani et al., 2017).
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1568

