The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

From Recommendation Systems to Facility Location Games
Omer Ben-Porat, Gregory Goren, Itay Rosenberg, Moshe Tennenholtz
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa 32000 Israel
{omerbp@campus, gregory.goren@campus, itayrose@campus, moshet@ie}.technion.ac.il

Abstract

preferences are uniformly distributed along the same segment, approach the recommendation system to have a recommendation for one blog. The social cost of the users is defined as the sum of absolute distances between preferences
and recommended contents. As Hotelling demonstrates, the
only pure Nash equilibrium (PNE hereinafter) is obtained
when both players select the center of the segment, producing identical content. The social cost of the PNE profile is
far from optimum, and users effectively suffer from strategic behavior of the players.
The difference between this example and the one considered by Hotelling in his seminal work is that in modern applications, users are not explicitly exposed to players’ content, but rather the recommendation system serves as a mediator for matching users with content. However, despite their
commercial success, current recommendation systems basically (very efficiently) implement the above principle: users
are matched with the “closest” content. A prominent example is the vector space model for document retrieval in response to a user query (Salton, Wong, and Yang 1975). Indeed, the recommendation system is just a tool for having
the users “choose” the offered content most similar to their
taste.

Recommendation systems are extremely popular tools for
matching users and contents. However, when content
providers are strategic, the basic principle of matching users
to the closest content, where both users and contents are modeled as points in some semantic space, may yield low social welfare. This is due to the fact that content providers
are strategic and optimize their offered content to be recommended to as many users as possible. Motivated by modern
applications, we propose the widely studied framework of facility location games to study recommendation systems with
strategic content providers. Our conceptual contribution is the
introduction of a mediator to facility location models, in the
pursuit of better social welfare. We aim at designing mediators that a) induce a game with high social welfare in equilibrium, and b) intervene as little as possible. In service of
the latter, we introduce the notion of intervention cost, which
quantifies how much damage a mediator may cause to the social welfare when an off-equilibrium profile is adopted. As a
case study in high-welfare low-intervention mediator design,
we consider the one-dimensional segment as the user domain.
We propose a mediator that implements the socially optimal
strategy profile as the unique equilibrium profile, and show a
tight bound on its intervention cost. Ultimately, we consider
some extensions, and highlight open questions for the general
agenda.

1

1.1

The Connection to Facility Location Games

Facility location games (Anderson, De Palma, and Thisse
1992; Brenner 2010; Fournier and Scarsini 2014), which are
extensively studied in economics, operations research and
computer science, portray recommendation systems with
strategic content providers incredibly well, due to the nature of recommendation systems described above. This is
true since in many (and perhaps even most) recommendation systems, the computational task of matching users with
content is carried out by modeling both into a joint metric
space. In the vast majority of facility location games literature, it is assumed that users are attracted to their nearest
facility1 . In the example above, this amounts to each user
selecting the closest blog to her preference.
Given a strategy profile, i.e., the selection of each player
for a particular mix of news and articles in her blog, the best
(in terms of social cost) recommendation system matches
each user with the nearest blog to her preference. However,

Introduction

Publishing, blogging, and content creation are fundamental
to data science. Indeed, many of the AI-based recommendation systems aim at matching users with data created by
content providers. While at first glance this task might be
viewed as purely computational, a major topic that should
be tackled is the participants’ incentives.
To illustrate such incentives, consider the following example inspired by Hotelling’s seminal work (Hotelling 1929).
A blogging recommendation system recommends users with
relevant blogs. Two players (i.e., publishers/blog owners)
write one blog each. For simplicity, assume every blog is
represented as a point along the [0, 1] segment, e.g., the mix
between news and articles in the blog. Thus, each player
selects a point in that segment. A set of users, where user
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1772

Some exceptions appear in Subsection 1.4.

