The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Private Model Compression via Knowledge Distillation
Ji Wang,1 Weidong Bao,1 Lichao Sun,2 Xiaomin Zhu,1,3 Bokai Cao,4 Philip S. Yu2,5
1

College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, USA
3
State Key Laboratory of High Performance Computing, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
4
Facebook Inc., Menlo Park, USA
5
Institute for Data Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{wangji,wdbao,xmzhu}@nudt.edu.cn, lsun29@uic.edu, caobokai@fb.com, psyu@uic.edu
Abstract

et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2017). Mobile application service
providers are facing a series of challenges to widely adopt
DNNs in their mobile apps.
Capacity bottleneck. In spite of the great advances of
mobile chips and mobile batteries, the limited-capacity nature of mobile devices still imposes the intrinsic bottleneck
making resource-demanding applications remain off bounds
(Wang et al. 2018). The modern DNNs with millions of
parameters often require prohibitive runtime to execute on
computationally limited devices. What is worse, the massive
floating point operations during the execution aggravate the
burden of processing chips and easily dominate the whole
system energy consumption, which widens the chasm between DNNs and their deployability on mobile devices. It is
difficult to directly adopt powerful DNNs on mobile systems
so far (Lee 2017).
Data privacy and intellectual piracy concerns. Developing a strong predictive DNN needs abundant data. The
more data accessible, the more effective and powerful a
DNN will be. In practice, app service providers usually collect and utilize a large volume of data from users, which
often contains sensitive information, to build their sophisticated DNN models. Directly releasing these models trained
by users’ data presents potential privacy issues because the
adversary can recover sensitive information encoded in the
public models (Abadi et al. 2016). It is illegal to share individuals’ data or models directly in many domains like
medicine (Claerhout and DeMoor 2005). Apart from data
privacy, releasing DNN models may invade app service
providers’ right due to intellectual piracy. It is sometimes
not appealing for app service providers to share their valuable and highly tuned models (Osia et al. 2017).
In order to deploy efficient DNNs on mobile devices,
academia and industry put forward a number of model compression methods among which knowledge distillation plays
a key role (Bucilua, Caruana, and Niculescu-Mizil 2006).
In knowledge distillation, the knowledge embedded in the
cumbersome model, known as the teacher model, is distilled to guide the training of a smaller model called the
student model. The student model has a different architecture and fewer parameters, but can achieve comparable performance by mimicking the behavior of the cumbersome model. Other compression methods like quantization and low-rank factorization (Han, Mao, and Dally 2016;

The soaring demand for intelligent mobile applications calls
for deploying powerful deep neural networks (DNNs) on mobile devices. However, the outstanding performance of DNNs
notoriously relies on increasingly complex models, which in
turn is associated with an increase in computational expense
far surpassing mobile devices’ capacity. What is worse, app
service providers need to collect and utilize a large volume of
users’ data, which contain sensitive information, to build the
sophisticated DNN models. Directly deploying these models
on public mobile devices presents prohibitive privacy risk. To
benefit from the on-device deep learning without the capacity
and privacy concerns, we design a private model compression framework RONA. Following the knowledge distillation
paradigm, we jointly use hint learning, distillation learning,
and self learning to train a compact and fast neural network.
The knowledge distilled from the cumbersome model is adaptively bounded and carefully perturbed to enforce differential privacy. We further propose an elegant query sample selection method to reduce the number of queries and control
the privacy loss. A series of empirical evaluations as well as
the implementation on an Android mobile device show that
RONA can not only compress cumbersome models efficiently
but also provide a strong privacy guarantee. For example, on
SVHN, when a meaningful (9.83, 10−6 )-differential privacy
is guaranteed, the compact model trained by RONA can obtain 20× compression ratio and 19× speed-up with merely
0.97% accuracy loss.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed impressive breakthroughs of
deep learning in various areas. Thanks to the large volume
of data and the easy availability of computational resources,
customized deep learning models attain unprecedented performance that beats many records of traditional machine
learning algorithms.
The significant progress in deep learning, on the other
hand, is notorious for its dependence on cumbersome models which require massive data to learn their millions of parameters. This major drawback restricts the large-scale deployment of deep learning applications, especially the deployability of deep neural network on mobile devices such as
smartphones, wearable devices, and medical monitors (Cao
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1190

