The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Symmetry-Breaking Constraints for Grid-Based Multi-Agent Path Finding∗
Jiaoyang Li,1 Daniel Harabor,2 Peter J. Stuckey,2 Hang Ma,1 Sven Koenig1
1

University of Southern California
2
Monash University
jiaoyanl@usc.edu, {daniel.harabor,peter.stuckey}@monash.edu, {hangma,skoenig}@usc.edu

Abstract
We describe a new way of reasoning about symmetric collisions for Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) on 4-neighbor
grids. We also introduce a symmetry-breaking constraint to
resolve these conflicts. This specialized technique allows us
to identify and eliminate, in a single step, all permutations of
two currently assigned but incompatible paths. Each such permutation has exactly the same cost as a current path, and each
one results in a new collision between the same two agents.
We show that the addition of symmetry-breaking techniques
can lead to an exponential reduction in the size of the search
space of CBS, a popular framework for MAPF, and report
significant improvements in both runtime and success rate
versus CBSH and EPEA* – two recent and state-of-the-art
MAPF algorithms.

1

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Two situations involving symmetric conflicts between two agents. (a) highlights the problem in general: every shortest path for one agent conflicts with every shortest
path for the other agent somewhere in the yellow rectangular
area. (b) shows a cardinal conflict, a related class of conflicts
which requires that all shortest paths for each agent must
pass through a common location at the same timestep: here
location (3, 3) at timestep 3.

Introduction

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the planning problem
of finding a set of paths for a team of agents. Each agent is
required to move from an initial start location to a specified
goal location, while avoiding conflicts with other agents. A
conflict (i.e., collision) happens when two agents stay at the
same vertex or traverse the same edge at the same time. Such
problems appear in a range of application areas, including warehouse logistics (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz
2008), office robots (Veloso et al. 2015), aircraft-towing vehicles (Morris et al. 2016) and computer games (Silver 2005;
Ma et al. 2017).
MAPF is known to be NP-hard on general graphs (Yu
and LaValle 2013b; Ma et al. 2016b), planar graphs (Yu
2016) and grids (Banfi, Basilico, and Amigoni 2017). Despite these intractability results and due to the substantial interest in applications, numerous optimal MAPF algorithms
have been proposed in recent years. Approaches include reducing MAPF to instances of other well known problems

(e.g., multi-commodity flow (Yu and LaValle 2013a), satisfiability (Surynek et al. 2016) and Answer Set Programming (Erdem et al. 2013)); solving MAPF with a single integrated A*-search (Standley 2010; Wagner and Choset 2011;
Goldenberg et al. 2014); and solving MAPF with a twolevel search (Sharon et al. 2013; 2015; Boyarski et al. 2015;
Felner et al. 2018), which constructs a plan by keeping track
of constraints between agents at a high level and computing
paths consistent with those constraints at a low level, one
agent at a time. More detailed surveys are given in (Ma et
al. 2016a; Felner et al. 2017).
In this paper, we introduce a new way of reasoning about
symmetric conflicts between two agents for MAPF on 4neighbor grids (which are arguably the most common way
of representing the environment for MAPF). Our approach
exploits grid symmetries: equivalences between sets of paths
or path segments which have the same start and goal locations, the same cost, and which differ only in the order in
which grid actions (up, down, left, right, or wait) appear on
them. Figure 1 shows two examples. All shortest paths for
the two agents conflict somewhere inside the yellow rectangular area. The optimal strategy here is for one agent to
wait for the other. We refer to such cases as cardinal rectangle conflicts. In this paper, we propose several efficient
algorithms to detect cardinal rectangle conflicts as well as
two other types of conflicts, semi-cardinal rectangle con-

∗

The research at the University of Southern California was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grant numbers 1409987, 1724392, 1817189 and 1837779 as well as a gift
from Amazon. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the
sponsoring organizations, agencies or the U.S. government.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6087

