The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Innovative Genetic Algorithm for the Quantum Circuit Compilation Problem
Riccardo Rasconi, Angelo Oddi
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies,
National Research Council of Italy (ISTC-CNR)
Rome, Italy
{riccardo.rasconi, angelo.oddi}@istc.cnr.it

Abstract

qubits and by a series of quantum gates that operate on those
qubits, and whose execution realizes a specific quantum algorithm. Executing a quantum circuit entails the chronological evaluation of each gate and the modification of the
involved qstates according to the gate logic. Unfortunately,
real current quantum computing technologies like ion-traps,
quantum dots, super-conducting qubits, etc. limit the qubit
interaction distance to the extent of allowing the execution of gates between adjacent (i.e., nearest-neighbor) qubits
only (Cirac and Zoller 1995; Herrera-Martı́ et al. 2010;
Yao et al. 2013). This has opened the way to the exploration
of techniques and/or heuristics aimed at the compilation of
ideal circuits to real quantum hardware through the synthesis of additional gates that bring the qstates involved in a
gate to satisfying nearest-neighborhood compliance (Quantum Circuit Compilation Problem - QCCP). In addition, the
Achilles’ heel of quantum computational hardware is the
problem of decoherence, which degrades the performance
of quantum programs over time. In order to minimize the
negative effects of decoherence and guarantee more stability to the computation, it is therefore essential to produce
circuits whose overall duration (i.e., makespan) is minimal.
The field of applying evolutionary algorithms to quantum
computing follows two major directions: designing quantum
inspired evolutionary algorithms (da Silveira, Tanscheit, and
Vellasco 2017; Talbi and Draa 2017) and designing quantum computers by means of evolutionary algorithms. Specifically, while the research in quantum circuit design focuses
mainly on using genetic algorithm (or genetic programming)
for automatically discovering or synthesizing quantum algorithms given a desired output function (Mukherjee et al.
2009; Ruican et al. 2007), to the best of our knowledge
there are no examples of genetic algorithms used to tackle
the problem of compiling idealized quantum circuits to real
quantum machines focusing on swap insertions.
In this work, we investigate the performance of a genetic algorithm (GA) applied to the problem of compiling
quantum circuits to near-term quantum hardware. Experimenting on a set of benchmark instances of different size
belonging to the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) class (Farhi, Goldstone, and Gutmann 2014;
Guerreschi and Park 2017) tailored for the MaxCut problem
and devised to be executed on top of a hardware architecture
proposed by Rigetti Computing Inc. (Sete, Zeng, and Rigetti

Quantum Computing represents the next big step towards
speed boost in computation, which promises major breakthroughs in several disciplines including Artificial Intelligence. This paper investigates the performance of a genetic algorithm to optimize the realization (compilation)
of nearest-neighbor compliant quantum circuits. Currrent
technological limitations (e.g., decoherence effect) impose
that the overall duration (makespan) of the quantum circuit realization be minimized, and therefore the makespanminimization problem of compiling quantum algorithms on
present or future quantum machines is dragging increasing
attention in the AI community. In our genetic algorithm, a solution is built utilizing a novel chromosome encoding where
each gene controls the iterative selection of a quantum gate to
be inserted in the solution, over a lexicographic double-key
ranking returned by a heuristic function recently published in
the literature.
Our algorithm has been tested on a set of quantum circuit
benchmark instances of increasing sizes available from the
recent literature. We demonstrate that our genetic approach
obtains very encouraging results that outperform the solutions
obtained in previous research against the same benchmark,
succeeding in significantly improving the makespan values
for a great number of instances.

Introduction
Quantum Computing represents the next big step towards
speed boost in computation, which promises major breakthroughs in several disciplines including Artificial Intelligence for the resolution of important problems, for example the optimization of complex systems and drug discovery. The impact of quantum computing technology on theoretical/applicative aspects of computation as well as on the
society in the next decades is considered to be immensely
beneficial (Nielsen and Chuang 2011). While classical computing revolves around the execution of logical gates based
on two-valued bits, quantum computing uses quantum gates
that manipulate multi-valued bits (qubits) that can represent
as many logical states (qstates) as are the obtainable linear
combinations of a set of basis states (state superpositions).
A idealized quantum circuit is composed of a number of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7707

