The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Enriching Non-Parametric Bidirectional Search Algorithms
Shahaf S. Shperberg

Ariel Felner

Nathan R. Sturtevant

CS Department
Ben-Gurion University
Be’er-Sheva, Israel
shperbsh@post.bgu.ac.il

ISE Department
Ben-Gurion University
Be’er-Sheva, Israel
felner@bgu.ac.il

CS Department
University of Alberta
Canada
sturtevant@cs.du.edu

Abstract

CS Department
Ben-Gurion University
Be’er-Sheva, Israel
shimony@cs.bgu.ac.il
hyounav@cs.bgu.ac.il

the optimal parameter values, both algorithms may expand
many more nodes than an MVC of GMX .
In this paper we focus on non-parametric Bi-HS algorithms. NBS (Chen et al. 2017) is a robust state-of-the-art
non-parametric algorithm that computes a vertex cover (VC)
of GMX whose size is at most 2|MVC|. We enrich this line
of research and introduce new settings and new algorithms
that aim to find a VC of GMX . In particular, we make the
following contributions:
(1) We describe and motivate the problem of finding all optimal solutions, and introduce two new versions of GMX
(with/without ) that are suited for such settings. This results
in four different problem settings, each with its own GMX .
(2) We introduce a 2-level framework for non-parametric
Bi-HS algorithms and reformulate NBS as a special case.
(3) Utilizing our framework, we adapt NBS to the four settings, while maintaining the 2|MVC| guarantee.
(4) We introduce a new algorithm Dynamic Vertex Cover
Bidirectional Search (DVCBS). It uses the same high-level
framework we developed, but unlike NBS, always tries to
expand a VC of a dynamic GMX graph which is also introduced. Here too, four versions are possible.
(5) Our experimental results show that the new variants of
NBS, as well as DVCBS, outperform previous variants of
NBS for finding both the first and all optimal solutions, expanding significantly fewer nodes in many cases.

NBS is a non-parametric bidirectional search algorithm
proven to expand at most twice the number of node expansions required to verify the optimality of a solution. We introduce new variants of NBS that are aimed at finding all optimal
solutions. We then introduce an algorithmic framework that
includes NBS as a special case. Finally, we introduce DVCBS,
a new algorithm in this framework that aims to further reduce the number of expansions. Unlike NBS, DVCBS does
not have any worst-case bound guarantees, but in practice it
outperforms NBS in verifying the optimality of solutions.

1

Solomon E. Shimony
Avi Hayoun

Introduction and Overview

Given a graph G, the shortest-path problem is to find the
least-cost path from state s to state g in G. Bidirectional
heuristic search algorithms (denoted henceforth by Bi-HS)
interleave two separate searches, a search forward from s
and a search backward from g. Recent research (Eckerle
et al. 2017) defined conditions on the node expansions required by Bi-HS algorithms to guarantee solutions optimality. Following work reformulated these conditions as a mustexpand graph (GMX ), showing that the Minimum Vertex
Cover (MVC) of GMX corresponds to the minimal number of
expansions (Chen et al. 2017) required to prove optimality.
Finally, Shaham et al. (2017; 2018) studied the GMX structure and its extension, GMX , that exploits knowledge of the
minimal edge cost (), to characterize properties of the MVC.
Bi-HS algorithms can be classified as parametric or as
non-parametric. Two parametric algorithms were recently
developed. Fractional MM (fMM(p)) (Shaham et al. 2017)
generalizes the MM algorithm (Holte et al. 2017) by controlling the fraction p of the optimal path at which the forward
and backward frontiers meet. There exists an optimal fraction p∗ for which fMM(p∗ ) will expand exactly an MVC of
GMX , but p∗ is not known a priori. Another parametric algorithm is GBFHS (Barley et al. 2018), which iteratively
increases the depth of the search. It is parametric in a predefined split function that determines how deep to search
on each side at each iteration. GBFHS with an optimal split
function also converges to an MVC of GMX . However, such
a split function is not known a priori. Without knowledge of

2

Definitions and Background

Let d(x, y) denote the shortest distance between x and y,
C ∗ = d(s, g), and let fF , gF and hF indicate f -, g-, and
h-costs in the forward search, and likewise fB , gB and hB
in the backward search. The forward heuristic hF is admissible iff hF (u) ≤ d(u, g) for every state u ∈ G and is consistent iff hF (u) ≤ d(u, u0 ) + hF (u0 ) for all u, u0 ∈ G. The
backward heuristic hB is defined analogously. Front-to-end
Bi-HS algorithms use these two heuristic functions and in
this paper we assume that both are admissible and consistent. Front-to-front Bi-HS algorithms use heuristics between
pairs of states on opposite frontiers, and are outside the focus
of this paper; see Holte et al. (2017) for a survey.

2.1

Guaranteeing Solution Optimality

Unidirectional search algorithms must expand all nodes n
with f (n) < C ∗ in order to guarantee the optimality of so-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2379

