The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Real-Time Planning as Decision-Making under Uncertainty
Andrew Mitchell,1 Wheeler Ruml,1 Fabian Spaniol,2 Jörg Hoffmann,2 Marek Petrik1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of New Hampshire, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Saarland University, Germany
ajx256@wildcats.unh.edu, ruml@cs.unh.edu, s9faspan@stud.uni-saarland.de,
hoffmann@cs.uni-saarland.de, mpetrik@cs.unh.edu

Abstract

A
0.49

In real-time planning, an agent must select the next action
to take within a fixed time bound. Many popular real-time
heuristic search methods approach this by expanding nodes
using time-limited A* and selecting the action leading toward
the frontier node with the lowest f value. In this paper, we reconsider real-time planning as a problem of decision-making
under uncertainty. We propose treating heuristic values as uncertain evidence and we explore several backup methods for
aggregating this evidence. We then propose a novel lookahead strategy that expands nodes to minimize risk, the expected regret in case a non-optimal action is chosen. We
evaluate these methods in a simple synthetic benchmark and
the sliding tile puzzle and find that they outperform previous
methods. This work illustrates how uncertainty can arise even
when solving deterministic planning problems, due to the
inherent ignorance of time-limited search algorithms about
those portions of the state space that they have not computed,
and how an agent can benefit from explicitly metareasoning
about this uncertainty.

0.51

B1
0.3

B2
0.5

C1
x1

0.35

C2
x2

x3

0.35

C3
x4

x5

C4
x6

x7

x8

Figure 1: Should an agent at A move to B1 or B2 ?
is performed using A* (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968),
the value estimates in step two are implicitly calculated for
each node as the minimum f value among its successors
(the ‘minimin’ backup), and the learning in step three is performed by updating h values for all nodes in the LSS using
a variant of Dijkstra’s algorithm.
However, this paradigm is not necessarily optimal. This
becomes apparent when one considers the problem from the
perspective of decision-making under uncertainty. For example, Pemberton and Korf (1994) observed that, given an
LSS, the optimal decision for the agent is not, in general, to
head toward the frontier node with the lowest f value. Figure 1 shows their example LSS, in which an agent located at
node A must decide whether to transition to node B1 or B2 .
All nodes at depth three after the Ci are goals. Recall that
the principle of rationality demands that an agent take an action that minimizes expected cost. The edge costs xi are unknown but uniformly distributed between 0 and 1, so h = 0
for all nodes Ci . C1 is the node of lowest f (namely 0.79) so
a typical real-time search would move to B1 . However, moving to B2 minimizes the agent’s expected cost, because in
the next iteration the costs x5 , ..., x8 will be revealed and the
expected minimum of these four values (0.2) yields a total
expected cost for B2 (1.06) less than that of B1 (1.066, see
Pemberton, 1995, eq. 1 for details). In other words, having
many good-looking options can be statistically better than a
single great-looking option. This problem does not arise in
the off-line planning setting, as there the agent can discover
all relevant edge costs before committing to an action.
Furthermore, it was noted by Mutchler (1986) that A*’s

Introduction
In some AI applications, such as user interfaces or fixedwing aircraft control, it is undesirable for the system to exhibit unbounded pauses between actions. In real-time planning, an agent is required to select its next action within a
fixed time bound. The agent attempts to minimize its total trajectory cost as it incrementally plans toward a goal.
Many real-time heuristic search methods have been developed for this problem setting. Many of them follow the basic three-phase paradigm set down in the seminal work of
Korf (1990): 1) starting at the agent’s current state, expand
a fixed number of nodes to form a local lookahead search
space (LSS), 2) use the heuristic values of the frontier nodes
in combination with the path costs incurred to reach them
to estimate the cost-to-goal the agent would incur if it selected each possible currently-applicable action, and then 3)
commit to the lowest cost action and, to prevent the agent
from cycling if it returns to the same state in the future, update the heuristic values of one or more states in the LSS.
For example, in the popular and typical algorithm LSSLRTA* (Koenig and Sun 2008), the lookahead in step one
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2338

