The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Region-Based Message Exploration over Spatio-Temporal Data Streams
Lisi Chen,1 Shuo Shang2∗
2

1,2

UESTC, China
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
1
chenlisi.cs@gmail.com 2 jedi.shang@gmail.com

Abstract

The problems of existing studies of online spatial keyword search aim at finding a set of spatio-temporal messages
as the result. In other words, users may receive all messages
satisfying their pre-defined spatial and textual requirements.
However, such item-based spatial keyword search has the
following limitations. First of all, most of the users prefer receiving summary information that satisfies their interested topics and location-based patterns rather than receiving a list of raw items (Farzindar and Khreich 2015;
Tobler 1970). Secondly, users may receive a set of nearduplicate messages (Ozsoy, Onal, and Altingovde 2014),
which greatly reduce the result diversity and topic coverage. Thirdly, it is difficult for users to understand the key
topics and the local distribution of a large number of result
spatio-temporal messages within a few seconds. In particular, besides informative messages, many messages on data
streams are not related to any particular real-world events
and are often exhibit low quality (e.g., spam messages) (He
et al. 2007).
To address the above limitations, we develop a regionbased message exploration mechanism that retrieve spatiotemporal message clusters (i.e., cluster regions) based on
users’ preferences on message topic and message spatial distribution (i.e., subscription region). Next, we devise a region
summarization algorithm that finds a subset of representative messages in a cluster to summarize the topics and the
spatial attributes of messages in the cluster.
Two challenges exist in our proposal. First, we need to define a metric that can effectively measure the relevancy between a cluster region and a subscription region. Second, we
need to develop an efficient and effective algorithm to generate a region summary for each cluster region, which is an
NP-hard problem. To address the first challenge, we leverage triplet network, which is a deep metric learning model,
to learn a metric that measures the relevancy between a subscription region and a cluster region. We use Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) to extract spatial and topic features.
In addition, we propose a novel method to train our triplet
to make our relevancy metric robust to noise and skewness
of spatio-temporal data. To address the second challenge, we
investigate the region summarization problem and prove that
the problem is NP-hard. We develop an efficient greedy algorithm for region summarization problem. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of our rele-

Massive amount of spatio-temporal data that contain location and text content are being generated by location-based
social media. These spatio-temporal messages cover a wide
range of topics. It is of great significance to discover local trending topics based on users’ location-based and topicbased requirements. We develop a region-based message exploration mechanism that retrieve spatio-temporal message
clusters from a stream of spatio-temporal messages based on
users’ preferences on message topic and message spatial distribution. Additionally, we propose a region summarization
algorithm that finds a subset of representative messages in
a cluster to summarize the topics and the spatial attributes
of messages in the cluster. We evaluate the efficacy and efficiency of our proposal on two real-world datasets and the
results demonstrate that our solution is capable of high efficiency and effectiveness compared with baselines.

Introduction
Massive amount of spatio-temporal data containing location,
text, and time information are being generated on an unprecedented scale. Such type of data, which can be modelled
as multimodal data streams, offer first-hand information for
various kinds of local breaking news, bursty events, and general public concerns.
Due to the high arrival rate of spatio-temporal data
streams and their vast topic coverage, it is of great interest
for users to discover and monitor trending events and topics
based on their preferred spatial and textual attributes. Additionally, end-users may want to effectively grab the key
points of the spatio-temporal messages within a particular
region. The problem of online spatial keyword search, which
allows users to retrieve spatio-temporal messages (e.g., geotagged tweets) relevant to their queries has been studied by
a number of research projects (Rocha-Junior et al. 2011;
Hu et al. 2015a; Guo et al. 2015; Li et al. 2013). Through
online spatial keyword search, users stay informed about local events, trending activities, public concerns, and so forth
that happen around them. Moreover, users browse various
types of location-aware news and information in a real-time
fashion.
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

873

