The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Higher-Order Multi-Layer Community Detection
Ling Huang, Chang-Dong Wang, Hong-Yang Chao

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
huanglinghl@hotmail.com, changdongwang@hotmail.com, isschhy@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

in the p-th layer and c is the number of communities. The
community structure C p should well preserve the topological structure in the p-th layer while the degree of consistency
between community structures C p and C q should reflect the
consistency level between the two layers.
One representative higher-order structure is motif, which
is defined as follows (Benson, Gleich, and Leskovec 2016).
Definition 1 (Motif) Motif is a dense subgraph occurring
in complex networks at numbers that are significantly larger
than those in randomized networks. The motif is denoted as
M = {VM , EM } where VM and EM denote the node set consisting of m nodes and edge set consisting of e edges in the
motif M respectively, with e being between m − 1 (a line
motif) and m(m−1)
(a clique motif).
2
Despite the bursty studies of motifs in community detection in single-layer network, the higher-order structure
of multi-layer community detection remains largely unknown (Huang, Wang, and Chao 2018). This paper aims to
study the following new problem.
Definition 2 Higher-order multi-layer community detection
aims to discover a set of v community structures, each for
one individual layer, satisfying the following two requirements.
• Requirement I [Intra-layer Higher-order Community
Quality]: For each layer p, the number of motif instances
within each community Clp should be as large as possible compared with the expected number of motifs within
community Clp .
• Requirement II [Inter-layer Higher-order Community
Consistency]: For each node i, if the motif structures containing node i are consistent across two views p and q, the
community label should also be consistent.
Requirement I ensures that the motif structure can be best
preserved in the discovered communities. On the other hand,
Requirement II ensures the consistency degree of community structures matches the consistency degree of higherorder structures across layers.

In this paper, we define a new problem of multi-layer network
community detection, namely higher-order multi-layer community detection. A multi-layer motif (M-Motif) approach
is proposed, which discovers communities with good intralayer higher-order community quality while preserving interlayer higher-order community consistency. Experimental results have confirmed the superiority of the proposed method.

Introduction
Many efforts have been made in developing effective
approaches for community detection in multi-layer network (Mucha et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2018). However, they
are conducted relying on lower-order microscopic proximity
structure (e.g. first- and second-order proximities of nodes)
that can be captured at the level of individual nodes and
edges. Very recently, higher-order structure at the level of
small network subgraphs has been introduced for discovering communities that preserve higher-order connectivity
patterns. Since higher-order structure lies between lowerorder microscopic proximity structure and mesoscopic community structure, it plays the role of building blocks for
complex network (Benson, Gleich, and Leskovec 2016)
and therefore helps discover communities that best avoid
damaging building blocks. In this paper, we define a new
problem, namely higher-order multi-layer community detection, and propose a novel approach called multi-layer motif
(M-Motif), which for the first time discovers communities
in multi-layer network from the perspective of preserving
higher-order structure.

Background and Problem Statement
The input is a multi-layer network G = {G 1 , . . . , G v } consisting of v layers with each layer G p = {V, E p }, ∀p =
1, 2, . . . , v having the same set of n nodes V but slightly
different linkage structure E p . The community structure in
different layers may differ slightly due to different linkage
structures across different layers. The goal is to discover
the community structures C = {C 1 , . . . , C v } with C p =
{C1p , . . . , Ccp } for the p-th layer, where Cjp , ∀j = 1, . . . , c
is the set of nodes that are assigned to the j-th community

The Proposed Multi-layer Motif Approach
For each layer, the statistically significant motifs will be
identified first by means of the Abundance measure as described in (Milo et al. 2004), which are denoted as the motif

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9945

