The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Detect or Track: Towards Cost-Effective Video Object Detection/Tracking
Hao Luo,1∗ Wenxuan Xie,2 Xinggang Wang,1 Wenjun Zeng2
1

School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{luohao, xgwang}@hust.edu.cn, {wenxie, wezeng}@microsoft.com

Abstract

of-the-art approaches consider the temporal consistency of
the detection results via tubelet proposals (Kang et al. 2016;
2017), optical flow (Zhu et al. 2017b; 2017a; 2018) and
regression-based trackers (Feichtenhofer, Pinz, and Zisserman 2017). These approaches, however, are optimized for
the detection accuracy of each individual frame. They either
do not associate the presence of an object in different frames
as a tracklet, or associate after performing object detection
on each frame, which is time-consuming.
This paper is motivated by the constraints from practical
video analytics scenarios such as autonomous driving and
video surveillance. We argue that algorithms applied to these
scenarios should be:
• capable of associating an object appearing in different
frames, such that the trajectory or velocity of the object
can be further inferred.
• in realtime (e.g., over 30 fps) and as fast as possible, such
that the deployment cost can be further reduced.
• with low latency, which means to produce results once a
frame in a video stream has been processed.
Considering these constraints, we focus in this paper on
the task of video object detection/tracking (Russakovsky et
al. 2017). The task is to detect objects in each frame (similar
to the goal of video object detection), with an additional goal
of associating an object appearing in different frames.
In order to handle this task under the realtime and low latency constraint, we propose a detect or track (DorT) framework. In this framework, object detection/tracking of a video
sequence is formulated as a sequential decision problem – a
scheduler network makes a detection/tracking decision for
every incoming frame, and then these frames are processed
with the detector/tracker accordingly. The architecture is illustrated in Figure 1.
The scheduler network is the most unique part of our
framework. It should be light-weight but be able to determine to detect or track. Rather than using heuristic rules
(e.g., thresholds of tracking confidence values), we formulate the scheduler as a small CNN by assessing the tracking
quality. It is shown to be a generalization of Siamese trackers
and a special case of reinforcement learning (RL).
The contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose the DorT framework, in which the object detection/tracking of a video sequence is formulated as a
sequential decision problem, while being in realtime and

State-of-the-art object detectors and trackers are developing
fast. Trackers are in general more efficient than detectors but
bear the risk of drifting. A question is hence raised – how to
improve the accuracy of video object detection/tracking by
utilizing the existing detectors and trackers within a given
time budget? A baseline is frame skipping – detecting every N -th frames and tracking for the frames in between.
This baseline, however, is suboptimal since the detection frequency should depend on the tracking quality. To this end, we
propose a scheduler network, which determines to detect or
track at a certain frame, as a generalization of Siamese trackers. Although being light-weight and simple in structure, the
scheduler network is more effective than the frame skipping
baselines and flow-based approaches, as validated on ImageNet VID dataset in video object detection/tracking.

Introduction
Convolutional neural network (CNN)-based methods have
achieved significant progress in computer vision tasks such
as object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016; Dai
et al. 2016; Tang et al. 2018b) and tracking (Held, Thrun,
and Savarese 2016; Bertinetto et al. 2016; Nam and Han
2016; Bhat et al. 2018). Following the tracking-by-detection
paradigm, most state-of-the-art trackers can be viewed as a
local detector of a specified object. Consequently, trackers
are generally more efficient than detectors and can obtain
precise bounding boxes in subsequent frames if the specified
bounding box is accurate. However, as evaluated commonly
on benchmark datasets such as OTB (Wu, Lim, and Yang
2015) and VOT (Kristan et al. 2017), trackers are encouraged to track as long as possible. It is non-trivial for trackers
to be stopped once they are not confident, although heuristics, such as a threshold of the maximum response value, can
be applied. Therefore, trackers bear the risk of drifting.
Besides object detection and tracking, there have been recently a series of studies on video object detection (Kang et
al. 2016; 2017; Feichtenhofer, Pinz, and Zisserman 2017;
Zhu et al. 2017b; 2017a; 2018; Chen et al. 2018). Beyond the baseline to detect each frame individually, state∗
This work was done when Hao Luo was an intern at Microsoft
Research Asia.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8803

