The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dictionary-Guided Editing Networks for Paraphrase Generation
Shaohan Huang,†§ Yu Wu,‡ Furu Wei,† Zhongzhi Luan§
§

Sino-German Joint Software Institute, Beihang University, Beijing, China
†
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
‡
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{shaohanh, fuwei}@microsoft.com wuyu@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

33'%
(a) Retrieve

An intuitive way for a human to write paraphrase sentences is
to replace words or phrases in the original sentence with their
corresponding synonyms and make necessary changes to ensure the new sentences are fluent and grammatically correct.
We propose a novel approach to modeling the process with
dictionary-guided editing networks which effectively conduct
rewriting on the source sentence to generate paraphrase sentences. It jointly learns the selection of the appropriate word
level and phrase level paraphrase pairs in the context of the
original sentence from an off-the-shelf dictionary as well as
the generation of fluent natural language sentences. Specifically, the system retrieves a set of word level and phrase
level paraphrase pairs derived from the Paraphrase Database
(PPDB) for the original sentence, which is used to guide the
decision of which the words might be deleted or inserted with
the soft attention mechanism under the sequence-to-sequence
framework. We conduct experiments on two benchmark
datasets for paraphrase generation, namely the MSCOCO and
Quora dataset. The automatic evaluation results demonstrate
that our dictionary-guided editing networks outperforms the
baseline methods. On human evaluation, results indicate that
the generated paraphrases are grammatically correct and relevant to the input sentence.

0.4

RYHUFRPH

JHWULGRI

2ULJLQDO6HQWHQFH

0.3

EHRYHUFRPH

EHUHVROYHG

:KDWDUHWKHEHVWZD\VWR
RYHUFRPHERUHGRP"

0.1

EHVW

QLFHVW

0.1

WKHEHVWZD\V

WKHPRVWVXLWDEOHZD\V

0.1

EHVWZD\V

WKHPRVWHIILFLHQWZD\V

(b) Generate
3DUDSKUDVH6HQWHQFH

JHWWLQJULGRI
:KDWLVWKHPRVWHIILFLHQWZD\RIERUHGRP"

Figure 1: The dictionary-guided editing networks model
first retrieves a group of paraphrase pairs from the Paraphrase Database and then generates a paraphrase using the
original sentence as a prototype.

necessary changes to ensure the new sentences are fluent and
grammatically correct. Figure 1 shows an example. Given
the input sentence “What are the best ways to overcome
boredom?”, we can first replace “overcome” with the word
level paraphrase phrases “get rid of ”, and then make small
changes over the new sentence to ensure it is grammatically
correct and fluent. Certainly, it should be emphasized that
the selection of context-relevant paraphrase pairs from an
off-the-shelf dictionary with respect to the original sentence
is also important for a good revision. This process demonstrates that humans usually write paraphrase sentences by
editing the input sentence, which motivates us to develop
models for paraphrase generation through editing.
We are inspired by Guu et al.’s pioneer work (2018) on a
new paradigm to generate sentences. Specifically, they propose a new generative model of sentences that first samples
a prototype sentence from the training corpus and then edits it into a new sentence using a randomly sampled edit
vector. For prototypes in paraphrase generation task, we
use original sentences as prototypes directly instead of random examples. For edit vectors, unlike randomly sampling
the edit vector to generate a new sentence, we can leverage
the word level and phrase level paraphrase pairs (e.g. synonyms) to construct the editing vector where the deletion
of words from the original sentence and the insertion words
into the target sentence can be explicitly modeled.

Introduction
Paraphrase generation aims to generate restatements of the
meaning of a text or passage using other words. It is
a fundamental task in natural language processing with
many applications in information retrieval, question answering, dialogue, and conversation systems. Existing work
on paraphrase generation focuses on generating paraphrase
sentences from scratch. Traditional paraphrase generation
methods have been addressed using rule-based approaches
(Hassan et al. 2007; Zhao et al. 2009) and statistical machine translation (SMT) based approaches (Quirk, Brockett,
and Dolan 2004; Zhao et al. 2009; 2010). Recently, neural networks based generative models under the sequenceto-sequence framework have also been used for paraphrase
generation (Prakash et al. 2016; Gupta et al. 2018).
However, an intuitive way for a human to write paraphrase sentences is to replace words or phrases in the original sentence with their corresponding synonyms and make
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6546

