The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

TransGate: Knowledge Graph Embedding with Shared Gate Structure
Jun Yuan,1,2,3 Neng Gao,1,2 Ji Xiang1,2∗
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yuanjun,gaoneng,xiangji}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

knowledge graph completion (KGC) has emerged an important open research problem (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel
2011). For example, it is shown by (Dong et al. 2014) that
more than 66% of the person entities are missing a birthplace
in Freebase and DBLP. The aim of KGC task is to predict relations and determine specific-relation type between entities
based on existing triplets. Due to the extremely large data
size, an effective and scalable solution is crucial for KGC
task (Liu, Wu, and Yang 2017).
Various KGC methods have been developed in recent
years, and the most successful methods are representation learning based methods which encode KGs into lowdimensional vector spaces. Among these methods, TransE
(Bordes et al. 2013) is a simple and effective model and
regards every relation as translation between the heads and
tails. We denote embedding vector with the same letters in
boldface. When (h, r, t) holds, the embedding h is close to
the embedding t by adding the embedding r, that is h+r ≈ t.
Indiscriminate models, like TransE, can scale to realworld KGs (Xu et al. 2017a), due to the limited number of parameters and low computational costs. However,
indiscriminate models often learn less expressive features
(Dettmers et al. 2018), leading to either low parameter efficiency or low accuracy. In fact, an entity may have multiple
aspects which may be related to different relations (Lin et
al. 2015). Therefore, relation-specific information discrimination of entities is the key to improving embeddings.
Many discriminate models (Lin et al. 2015; Ji et al. 2015;
2016) have been proposed recently and usually outperform
indiscriminate models on public data sets. We note that current methods always assumed the independence between relations and tried to learn unique discriminate parameter set
for each relation. Although there are always thousands of
relations in a KG, but they are not independent from each
other (Bordes et al. 2013). For example, among WordNet,
the most frequently encoded relation is the hierarchical relation and each hierarchical relation has its inverse relation,
e.g. hyponym/hypernym.
As a result, current discriminate models potentially suffer from following three problems, which all prevent current
models from efficiently applying on real-world KGs.
First, current discriminate models potentially suffer from
large parameters. For instance, when applying TransD (Ji et
al. 2015) on Freebase with an embedding size of 100, the pa-

Embedding knowledge graphs (KGs) into continuous vector space is an essential problem in knowledge extraction.
Current models continue to improve embedding by focusing on discriminating relation-specific information from entities with increasingly complex feature engineering. We noted
that they ignored the inherent relevance between relations
and tried to learn unique discriminate parameter set for each
relation. Thus, these models potentially suffer from high
time complexity and large parameters, preventing them from
efficiently applying on real-world KGs. In this paper, we
follow the thought of parameter sharing to simultaneously
learn more expressive features, reduce parameters and avoid
complex feature engineering. Based on gate structure from
LSTM, we propose a novel model TransGate and develop
shared discriminate mechanism, resulting in almost same
space complexity as indiscriminate models. Furthermore, to
develop a more effective and scalable model, we reconstruct
the gate with weight vectors making our method has comparative time complexity against indiscriminate model. We
conduct extensive experiments on link prediction and triplets
classification. Experiments show that TransGate not only outperforms state-of-art baselines, but also reduces parameters
greatly. For example, TransGate outperforms ConvE and RGCN with 6x and 17x fewer parameters, respectively. These
results indicate that parameter sharing is a superior way to
further optimize embedding and TransGate finds a better
trade-off between complexity and expressivity.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) such as WordNet (Miller 1995)
and Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008) have been widely
adopted in various applications, like web search, Q&A, etc.
KGs are large-scale multi-relational structures and usually
organized in the form of triplets. Each triplet is denoted as
(h, r, t), where h and t are head and tail entities, respectively,
and r is the relation between h and r. For instance, (Beijing,
CapitalOf, China) denotes the fact that the capital of China
is Beijing.
Although existing KGs already have consisted of billions
of triplets, but they are far from completeness. Thus, the
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3100

