The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Mind Your Language: Abuse and Offense Detection for Code-Switched Languages
Raghav Kapoor

Yaman Kumar

Kshitij Rajput

MIDAS Lab, NSIT-Delhi
raghavk.co@nsit.net.in

MIDAS Lab, IIIT-Delhi
yaman@nsitonline.in

MIDAS Lab, NSIT-Delhi
rajput.kshitij97@gmail.com

Rajiv Ratn Shah

Ponnurangam Kumaraguru

Roger Zimmermann

MIDAS Lab, IIIT-Delhi
rajivratn@iiitd.ac.in

IIIT, Delhi
pk@iiitd.ac.in

NUS, Singapore
rogerz@comp.nus.edu.sg
Hinglish
acha
s**la

Abstract
In multilingual societies like the Indian subcontinent, use of
code-switched languages is much popular and convenient for
the users. In this paper, we study offense and abuse detection
in the code-switched pair of Hindi and English (i.e, Hinglish),
the pair that is the most spoken. The task is made difficult due
to non-fixed grammar, vocabulary, semantics and spellings of
Hinglish language. We apply transfer learning and make a
LSTM based model for hate speech classification. This model
surpasses the performance shown by the current best models
to establish itself as the state-of-the-art in the unexplored domain of Hinglish offensive text classification. We also release
our model and the embeddings trained for research purposes.

English
good
blo*dy

Hinglish
gunda
ra*di

English
thug
h*oker

Table 1: Examples of word-pairs in Hinglish-English dictionary
on is”. Moreover, the word yatra here, can have phonetic
variations, which would result in multiple spellings of the
word as yatra, yaatra, yaatraa, etc. Also, the problem of
hate speech has been rising in India, and according to the
policies of the Indian government and the various social networks, one is not allowed to misuse his right to speech to
abuse some other community or religion. Due to the various
difficulties associated with the Hinglish language, it is challenging to automatically detect and ban such kind of speech.
Thus, with this in mind, we build a transfer learning based
model for the code-switched language Hinglish, which outperforms the baseline model of (Mathur et al. 2018). We
also release the embeddings and the model trained at https:
//github.com/dhumketu/mind-your-language-aaai.

Introduction
With the penetration of Internet among masses, the content
being posted on social media channels has uptaken. Specifically, in the Indian subcontinent, number of Internet users
has crossed 500 mi1 , and is rising rapidly due to inexpensive data2 . With this rise, comes the problem of hate speech,
offensive and abusive posts on social media. Although there
are many previous works which deal with Hindi and English
hate speech (the top two languages in India), but very few on
the code-switched version (Hinglish) of the two (Mathur et
al. 2018). This is partially due to the following reasons: (1)
Hinglish consists of no-fixed grammar and vocabulary. It derives a part of its semantics from Devnagari and another part
from the Roman script. (2) Hinglish speech and written text
consists of a concoction of words spoken in Hindi as well
as English, but written in the Roman script. This makes the
spellings variable and dependent on the writer of the text.
Hence, code-switched languages present tough challenges
in terms of parsing and getting the meaning out of the text.
For instance, the sentence, “Modiji foreign yatra par hai”,
is in the Hinglish language. Somewhat correct translation of
this would be, “Mr. Modi is on a foriegn tour”. However,
even this translation has some flaws due to no direct translation available for the word ji, which is used to show respect.
Verbatim translation would lead to “Mr. Modi foreign tour

Methodology
Our methodology primarily consists of: pre-processing of
the dataset, training of word embeddings, training of the
classifier model and then using that on HEOT dataset.

Pre-Processing
In this work, we use the datasets released by (Davidson et al.
2017) and HEOT dataset provided by (Mathur et al. 2018).
The datasets obtained pass through these steps of processing: (i) Removal of punctuations, stopwords, URLs, numbers, emoticons, etc. This was then followed by transliteration using the Xlit-Crowd conversion dictionary 3 and translation of each word to English using Hindi to English dictionary4 . To deal with the spelling variations, we manually
added some common variations of popular Hinglish words.
Final dictionary comprised of 7200 word pairs. Additionally, to deal with profane words, which are not present in
Xlit-Crowd, we had to make a profanity dictionary (with 209

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://bit.ly/2MCXz2Q
2
https://bit.ly/2NUjOGh

3
4

9951

http://bit.ly/2OGL872
http://bit.ly/2PYPSK8

