The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Compose Topic-Aware
Mixture of Experts for Zero-Shot Video Captioning
Xin Wang,1 Jiawei Wu,1 Da Zhang,1 Yu Su,2 William Yang Wang1
1

University of California, Santa Barbara
2
The Ohio State University
xwang@cs.ucsb.edu, jiawei wu@cs.ucsb.edu, dazhang@cs.ucsb.edu, su.809@osu.edu, william@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Although promising results have been achieved in video captioning, existing models are limited to the fixed inventory of
activities in the training corpus, and do not generalize to open
vocabulary scenarios. Here we introduce a novel task, zeroshot video captioning, that aims at describing out-of-domain
videos of unseen activities. Videos of different activities usually require different captioning strategies in many aspects,
i.e. word selection, semantic construction, and style expression etc, which poses a great challenge to depict novel activities without paired training data. But meanwhile, similar activities share some of those aspects in common. Therefore, we propose a principled Topic-Aware Mixture of Experts (TAMoE) model for zero-shot video captioning, which
learns to compose different experts based on different topic
embeddings, implicitly transferring the knowledge learned
from seen activities to unseen ones. Besides, we leverage external topic-related text corpus to construct the topic embedding for each activity, which embodies the most relevant semantic vectors within the topic. Empirical results not only
validate the effectiveness of our method in utilizing semantic knowledge for video captioning, but also show its strong
generalization ability when describing novel activities.

External Corpus
Existing Methods

Our Method

A man is seen speaking
to the camera. The man
then puts a shoe on the
ice.

A man is seen speaking to
the camera while holding
up a knife. He then uses a
tool to sharpen the knife.

Label

Figure 1: Example of zero-shot video captioning. “Sharpening Knives” is a novel activity unseen in training, and existing methods fail to generate a pertinent caption because
it is aware of neither the action “sharpening” nor the object “knife”. Our method effectively utilizes the knowledge
from the external corpus based on predicted activity label
and generates a more pertinent caption.

a new task of zero-shot video captioning, where a model
is required to accurately describe novel activities in videos
without any explicit paired training data.
An example of zero-shot video captioning is shown in
Figure 1, where an existing method fails to correctly caption a video about the novel activity “sharpening knives” because it has learned no knowledge about the activity in training. Moreover, the description of different activities vary in
word selection, semantic construction, style expression etc,
so videos of different activities usually require different captioning strategies, which poses a great challenge in the open
vocabulary scenario. Despite the difference, many activities
share similar characteristics, e.g., playing baseball and playing football are both sports activities and a few words can be
used to describe both in common.
Therefore, we propose a novel Topic-Aware Mixture of
Experts (TAMoE) approach to caption videos of unseen activities. First, we define a set of primitive experts that are
sharable by all possible activities, each of which has their
own parameters and learns a specialized mapping from latent features to the output vocabulary (the primitive captioning strategies). Then we introduce a topic-aware gating
function that learns to decide the utilization of those primi-

Introduction
Video captioning aims at automatically describing the content of a video in natural language. It is not only an important
testbed for advances in visual understanding and grounded
natural language generation, but also has many practical applications such as video search and assisting visually impaired people. As a result, it has attracted increasing attention in recent years in both NLP (Venugopalan et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2018a) and computer vision communities (Krishna et al. 2017). Although existing video captioning
methods (e.g., sequence-to-sequence model) have achieved
promising results, they largely rely on paired videos and textual descriptions for supervision (Xu et al. 2016). In other
words, they are solely trained to caption the activities that
have appeared during training and thus cannot generalize
well to novel activities that have never been seen before.
However, it is prohibitively expensive to collect paired training data for every possible activity. Therefore, we introduce
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8965

