The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Meaningful Explanations of Black Box AI Decision Systems
Dino Pedreschi,1 Fosca Giannotti,2 Riccardo Guidotti,2
Anna Monreale,1 Salvatore Ruggieri,1 Franco Turini1
1

1

University of Pisa, 2 ISTI-CNR Pisa, Italy
{name.surname}@di.unipi.it, 2 {name.surname}@isti.cnr.it

Abstract

health status, personality profile. Black boxes map user features into a class or a score without explaining why, because the decision model is not comprehensible to stakeholders, even to expert data scientists. This is worrying not
only for the lack of transparency, but also for the possible biases hidden in the algorithms. Machine learning constructs
predictive models and decision-making systems based on
data, i.e., the digital records of human activities and decisions, such as opinions, movements, preferences, judicial
sentences, medical diagnoses, performance scores, etc. Consequently, ML models may reflect human biases and prejudices, as well as collection artifacts and sample selection biases, possibly leading to unfair or simply wrong decisions.
Many controversial cases have already highlighted that delegating decision-making to black box algorithms is critical in
many sensitive domains, including crime prediction, personality scoring, image classification, personal assistance, and
more (Pedreschi et al. 2018).
A missing step in the construction of an ML model is
precisely the explanation of its logic, expressed in a comprehensible, human-readable format, that highlights the biases learned by the model, allowing to understand and validate its decision rationale. This limitation impacts not only
information ethics, but also accountability, safety and industrial liability (Danks and London 2017; Kingston 2016;
Kroll et al. 2017). Companies increasingly market services
and products with embedded ML components, often in
safety-critical industries such as self-driving cars, robotic assistants, domotic IoT systems, and personalized medicine.
An inherent risk of these components is the possibility of inadvertently making wrong decisions, learned from artifacts
or spurious correlations in the training data, such as recognizing an object in a picture by the properties of the background, due to a systematic bias in training data collection.
How can companies trust their products without understanding the rationale of their machine learning components?
Likewise, the use of machine learning models in scientific
research, for example in medicine, biology, socio-economic
sciences, requires explanations not only for trust and acceptance of results, but also for the very sake of the openness of
scientific discovery and the progress of research.
An explanation technology would be of immense help
to companies for creating safer, more trustable products,
and better managing any possible liability they may have.

Black box AI systems for automated decision making, often
based on machine learning over (big) data, map a user’s features into a class or a score without exposing the reasons why.
This is problematic not only for lack of transparency, but also
for possible biases inherited by the algorithms from human
prejudices and collection artifacts hidden in the training data,
which may lead to unfair or wrong decisions. We focus on the
urgent open challenge of how to construct meaningful explanations of opaque AI/ML systems, introducing the local-toglobal framework for black box explanation, articulated along
three lines: (i) the language for expressing explanations in
terms of logic rules, with statistical and causal interpretation;
(ii) the inference of local explanations for revealing the decision rationale for a specific case, by auditing the black box in
the vicinity of the target instance; (iii), the bottom-up generalization of many local explanations into simple global ones,
with algorithms that optimize for quality and comprehensibility. We argue that the local-first approach opens the door
to a wide variety of alternative solutions along different dimensions: a variety of data sources (relational, text, images,
etc.), a variety of learning problems (multi-label classification, regression, scoring, ranking), a variety of languages for
expressing meaningful explanations, a variety of means to audit a black box.

Open the Black Box
We are evolving, faster than expected, from a time when humans are coding algorithms and carry responsibility of the
resulting software quality and correctness, to a time when
machines automatically learn algorithms from sufficiently
many examples of the algorithms’ expected input/output behavior. It is dramatically urgent that machine learning and
AI be explainable and comprehensible in human terms; this
is instrumental for validating quality and correctness of the
resulting systems, and also for aligning the algorithms with
human values, as well as preserving human autonomy and
awareness in decision making.
On the contrary, the last decade has witnessed the rise of
a black box society (Pasquale 2015). Ubiquitous obscure
algorithms, increasingly often based on sophisticated machine learning (ML) models trained on (big) data, which
predict behavioural traits of individuals, such as credit risk,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9780

