The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient and Scalable Multi-Task Regression on Massive Number of Tasks
Xiao He

Francesco Alesiani

Ammar Shaker

NEC Labs Europe
Heidelberg, Germany
xiao.he@neclab.eu

NEC Labs Europe
Heidelberg, Germany
francesco.alesiani@neclab.eu

NEC Labs Europe
Heidelberg, Germany
ammar.shaker@neclab.eu

Abstract

2012) can deal with the situation where different tasks form
clusters. However, despite being accurate, these latter methods are computationally expensive for problems with a large
number of tasks.
In real-world regression applications, the number of tasks
can be tremendous. For instance, in the retail market, shops’
owners would like to forecast the sales amount of all the
products based on the historical sales information and external factors. For a typical shop, there are thousands of products, where each product can be modeled as a separate regression task. In addition, if we consider large retail chains,
where the number of shops in a given region is in the order
of hundreds, the total number of learning tasks easily grows
up to hundreds of thousands. A similar scenario can also be
found in other applications, e.g. demand prediction in transportation, where each task is one public transport station demand in a city at a certain time per line. Here, at least tens
of thousands of tasks are expected.
In all these scenarios, MTL approaches that exploit relationships among tasks are appropriate. Unfortunately most
of existing SoA multi-task learning methods cannot be applied, because either they are not able to cope with task
heterogeneity or are too computationally expensive, scaling
super-linearly in the number of tasks.
To tackle these issues, this paper introduces a novel algorithm, named Convex Clustering Multi-Task regression
Learning (CCMTL). It integrates the objective of convex
clustering (Hocking et al. 2011) into the multi-task learning framework. CCMTL is efficient with linear runtime in
the number of tasks, yet provides accurate prediction. The
detailed contributions of this paper are fourfold:

Many real-world large-scale regression problems can be formulated as Multi-task Learning (MTL) problems with a massive number of tasks, as in retail and transportation domains.
However, existing MTL methods still fail to offer both the
generalization performance and the scalability for such problems. Scaling up MTL methods to problems with a tremendous number of tasks is a big challenge. Here, we propose
a novel algorithm, named Convex Clustering Multi-Task
regression Learning (CCMTL), which integrates with convex clustering on the k-nearest neighbor graph of the prediction models. Further, CCMTL efficiently solves the underlying convex problem with a newly proposed optimization
method. CCMTL is accurate, efficient to train, and empirically scales linearly in the number of tasks. On both synthetic and real-world datasets, the proposed CCMTL outperforms seven state-of-the-art (SoA) multi-task learning methods in terms of prediction accuracy as well as computational
efficiency. On a real-world retail dataset with 23, 812 tasks,
CCMTL requires only around 30 seconds to train on a single
thread, while the SoA methods need up to hours or even days.

Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a branch of machine learning that aims at exploiting the correlation among tasks.
To achieve this, the learning of different tasks is performed jointly. It has been shown that learning task relationships can transfer knowledge from information-rich
tasks to information-poor tasks (Zhang and Yeung 2014)
so that overall generalization error can be reduced. With
this characteristic, MTL has been successfully applied in
use cases ranging from Transportation (Deng et al. 2017)
to Biomedicine (Li, He, and Borgwardt 2018).
Various multi-task learning algorithms have been proposed in the literature, Zhang and Yang (Zhang and Yang
2017) wrote a comprehensive survey on state-of-the-art
(SoA) methods. For instance, feature learning approach (Argyriou, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2007) and low-rank approach
(Ji and Ye 2009; Chen, Zhou, and Ye 2011) assume all the
tasks are related, which may not be true in real-world applications. Task clustering approaches (Bakker and Heskes
2003; Jacob, Vert, and Bach 2009; Kumar and Daume III

1. Model: A new model for multi-task regression that integrates with convex clustering on the k-nearest neighbor graph of the prediction models;
2. Optimization Method: A new optimization method
for the proposed problem that is proved to converge to
the global optimum;
3. Accurate Prediction: Accurate predictions on both
synthetic and real-world datasets in retail and transportation domains which outperform eight SoA multitask learning methods;
4. Efficient and Scalable Implementation: An efficient
and linearly scalable implementation of the algorithm.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3763

