The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Generating Character Descriptions for Automatic Summarization of Fiction
Weiwei Zhang,1 Jackie Chi Kit Cheung,1,2 Joel Oren3∗
1

McGill University, Montreal, Canada
2
Mila, Montreal, Canada
3
Yahoo! Research, Haifa, Israel
weiwei.zhang@mail.mcgill.ca, jcheung@cs.mcgill.ca, joren@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract
Summaries of fictional stories allow readers to quickly decide whether or not a story catches their interest. A major challenge in automatic summarization of fiction is the
lack of standardized evaluation methodology or high-quality
datasets for experimentation. In this work, we take a bottomup approach to this problem by assuming that story authors
are uniquely qualified to inform such decisions. We collect a dataset of one million fiction stories with accompanying author-written summaries from Wattpad, an online story
sharing platform. We identify commonly occurring summary
components, of which a description of the main characters is
the most frequent, and elicit descriptions of main characters
directly from the authors for a sample of the stories. We propose two approaches to generate character descriptions, one
based on ranking attributes found in the story text, the other
based on classifying into a list of pre-defined attributes. We
find that the classification-based approach performs the best
in predicting character descriptions.

1

Figure 1: Sample summary for the story “Starting Out”
adapted summarizers from the news domain to this genre,
evaluating using ROUGE scores.
Rather than adapting models and evaluation methods
from news summarization, we instead take a bottom-up,
data-driven view towards these issues. We start by observing how authors write summaries of their own stories, then
use that to inform our modeling and dataset construction
decisions. We collected a million stories with accompanying author-written summaries from Wattpad, an online story
sharing platform. An example of a summary is shown in Figure 1.
We first analyze a sample of summaries drawn from the
dataset to examine the frequency of components that are
characteristic of fiction, such as C HARACTER D ESCRIP TION and S ETTING . We find that character descriptions are
the most common component found in summaries, occurring in 81% of the summaries.
Based on this result, we decided to focus on generating character attributes as the first step towards a full fictional summary generation system. We define a framework
for generating character descriptions using the story text as
input. We examine two sources of information for generating gold-standard character attributes. First, descriptions of
characters can be extracted from the summaries and used as
a form of gold standard, especially for training supervised
machine learning models of attribute inference. However,
the extraction process can be noisy, and the labels incomplete, as there are usually other attributes that apply to the
characters which are not explicitly mentioned in the summaries. Thus, we surveyed the authors of a sample of stories in order to elicit a set of character attributes to use as a
higher-quality gold standard for evaluation.
We compared two models for generating these character
descriptions. The first is an extractive model which ranks

Introduction

Reading fiction online has become popular because of its
convenience and low cost. Online publishing communities
such as Wattpad and Scribd allow users to post and share
written works. Readers on such platforms face the problem
of deciding which story to read from a large collection of
varying quality. One solution is to provide readers with a
short summary (a.k.a., synopsis) of the story.
The first research challenge in developing an automatic
summarization system for fiction is to establish a framework
which defines the expected inputs and desired outputs of the
system, as well as a method to evaluate the output quality.
A closely related concern is to collect a dataset such that
experiments can be carried out under this framework.
There is to our knowledge little work on basic methodological issues in summarizing fiction, and no large-scale
datasets of stories and accompanying summaries that encompass large numbers of authors and sub-genres of fiction. The most relevant dataset was created by Mihalcea
and Ceylan (2007), consisting of 50 books, each with two
manually created summaries. Mihalcea and Ceylan (2007)
∗

Work done while the author was working at Wattpad
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7476

