The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Logistic Circuits
Yitao Liang, Guy Van den Broeck
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
{yliang, guyvdb}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

We run experiments on standard image classification
benchmarks (MNIST and Fashion) and achieve accuracy
higher than much larger MLPs and even CNNs with an order of magnitude more parameters. For example, logistic circuits obtain 99.4% accuracy on MNIST. Compared to other
tractable learners on MNIST, and the state-of-the-art discriminative SPN learner in particular (Peharz et al. 2018),
our logistic circuit learner cuts the error rate by a factor of
three. Furthermore, we show our learner is highly data efficient, managing to still learn well with limited data.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the
syntax and semantics of logistic circuits. Sections 3 and 4
describe our parameter and structure learning algorithms,
which Section 5 evaluates empirically. Section 6 elaborates
on the connection with tractable generative models, after
which we conclude with related and future work.

This paper proposes a new classification model called logistic
circuits. On MNIST and Fashion datasets, our learning algorithm outperforms neural networks that have an order of magnitude more parameters. Yet, logistic circuits have a distinct
origin in symbolic AI, forming a discriminative counterpart to
probabilistic-logical circuits such as ACs, SPNs, and PSDDs.
We show that parameter learning for logistic circuits is convex optimization, and that a simple local search algorithm can
induce strong model structures from data.

1

Introduction

Circuit representations are a promising synthesis of symbolic and statistical methods in AI. They are “deep” layered
data structures with statistical parameters, yet they also capture intricate structural knowledge. Recently, many representations have been proposed for learning tractable probability distributions: arithmetic circuits (Lowd and Domingos
2008), weighted SDD (Bekker et al. 2015), PSDD (Kisa et
al. 2014), cutset networks (Rahman, Kothalkar, and Gogate
2014) and sum-product networks (SPNs) (Poon and Domingos 2011). Collectively, these approaches achieve the state
of the art in discrete density estimation and vastly outperform classical probabilistic graphical model learners (Gens
and Domingos 2013; Rooshenas and Lowd 2014; Adel,
Balduzzi, and Ghodsi 2015; Rahman and Gogate 2016;
Liang, Bekker, and Van den Broeck 2017). However, we
have not observed the same success when deploying circuit
representations for classification or discriminative learning.
Probabilistic circuit classifiers significantly lag behind the
performance of neural networks (Benenson 2018).
In this paper, we propose a new classification model
called logistic circuits, which shares many syntactic properties with the representations mentioned earlier. One can view
logistic circuits as the discriminative counterpart to probabilistic circuits. Owing to their elegant properties, learning
the parameters of a logistic circuit can be reduced to a logistic regression problem and is therefore convex. Learning
logistic circuit structure is reduced to a simple local search
problem using primitives from the probabilistic circuit learning literature (Liang, Bekker, and Van den Broeck 2017).

2

Representation

This section introduces the logistic circuit representation.
Notation We use uppercase X to denote a Boolean random variable and lowercase x for a specific assignment to it.
Interchangeably, we also interpret Boolean random variables
as logical variables. A set of variables X and their joint assignments x are denoted in bold. A complete assignment x
to all variables is a possible world, or interchangeably, a data
sample. Literals are variables X or their negation ¬X. Logical sentences are constructed from literals and connectives
such as AND and OR in the standard way. An assignment x
that satisfies a logical sentence α is denoted as x |= α.

2.1

Logical Circuits

A logical circuit is a directed acyclic graph representing a
logical sentence, as depicted in Figure 1a (ignoring parameters for now). Each inner node is either an AND gate or an
OR gate.1 A leaf (input) node represents a Boolean literal,
that is, X or ¬X, where the node can only be satisfied if X
is set to 1 (true) respectively 0 (false).
The following properties are key for logical circuits to be
well-behaved (Darwiche and Marquis 2002). An AND gate
1
We consider negation-normal-form circuits where no negation
is allowed except at the leafs/inputs (Darwiche and Marquis 2002).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4277

