The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Antonym-Synonym Classification Based on New Sub-Space Embeddings
Muhammad Asif Ali,1 Yifang Sun,1 Xiaoling Zhou,1 Wei Wang,1,2 Xiang Zhao3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, UNSW, Australia
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, DGUT, China
3
Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Information System Engineering, NUDT, China
muhammadasif.ali@unsw.edu.au, {yifangs, xiaolingz, weiw}@cse.unsw.edu.au, xiangzhao@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

words can be used interchangeably and are considered indistinguishable (Mohammad et al. 2013). This is verified in this
paper by the poor performance of a baseline classifier, i.e.,
Direct, that is purely designed based on pre-trained word
embeddings.
Recently, pattern based approaches have gained considerable research attention for lexical-semantic relation extraction (Roth and Schulte im Walde 2014; Schwartz, Reichart,
and Rappoport 2015). Nguyen, Schulte im Walde, and Vu
(2017) formulated special lexico-syntactic pattern features
that concatenate the lemma, POS-tag and dependency label along the dependency path. Their model achieved the
state-of-the-art result on antonym/synonym distinction task.
Pattern based methods yield a low recall owing to the lexical variations and the sparsity of lexico-syntactic patterns,
which limits the information sharing among semantically
similar patterns. Existing attempts to resolve the sparsity via
generalization cause the resultant patterns to be highly overlapping across different classes, which has a detrimental effect on the classification accuracy. Moreover, they have to
use a large-scale text corpus to combat sparsity, which drastically increases the computational overhead.
In this paper, we propose a novel two-phase approach to address the above-mentioned challenges for
antonym/synonym distinction by eliminating the need for a
large text corpus. Firstly, we use a new model named: Distiller, which is a set of non-linear encoders, to distill taskspecific information from pre-trained word embeddings to
dense sub-spaces. For this, we design two new loss functions
to capture unique relation-specific properties for antonyms
and synonyms, i.e., symmetry, transitivity and the special
trans-transitivity (explained in section 3.3), in two different sub-spaces namely: SYN for synonyms and ANT for
antonyms. Finally, a classifier is trained using features constructed from the distilled information, in addition to other
word-level features, to distinguish antonym and synonym
pairs.
Note that our problem formulation is same as that of existing works with the distinction that we replace the requirement of a large-scale corpus by the availability of pre-trained
word embeddings. This makes our setting more appealing
and flexible, as pre-trained embeddings are widely available (e.g., word2vec, Glove, and ELMo), and they have arguably high coverage and quality due to the gigantic train-

Distinguishing antonyms from synonyms is a key challenge
for many NLP applications focused on the lexical-semantic
relation extraction. Existing solutions relying on large-scale
corpora yield low performance because of huge contextual
overlap of antonym and synonym pairs. We propose a novel
approach entirely based on pre-trained embeddings. We hypothesize that the pre-trained embeddings comprehend a
blend of lexical-semantic information and we may distill the
task-specific information using Distiller, a model proposed in
this paper. Later, a classifier is trained based on features constructed from the distilled sub-spaces along with some word
level features to distinguish antonyms from synonyms. Experimental results show that the proposed model outperforms existing research on antonym synonym distinction in both speed
and performance.

1

Introduction

Distinguishing between antonymy and synonymy is one
of the crucial problems for NLP applications, especially
those focused on lexical-semantic relation extraction, such
as sentiment analysis, semantic relatedness, opinion mining
and machine translation. We define synonyms as semantically similar words (e.g., disperse and scatter) and
antonyms as highly contrasting words (e.g., disperse and
garner) (Ono, Miwa, and Sasaki 2015). Existing manually
curated lexical resources (e.g., WordNet (Fellbaum 1998))
are unable to address this problem, due to the limited coverage. This calls the need for a machine learning model to classify a given pair of words as either synonyms or antonyms.
Traditional research on antonym/synonym distinction
makes use of word embeddings to capture the semantic relatedness among antonym/synonym pairs based on
co-occurrence statistics (Scheible, Schulte im Walde, and
Springorum 2013; Ono, Miwa, and Sasaki 2015; Nguyen,
Schulte im Walde, and Vu 2016; Vulic 2018). However, the
embedding models have a tendency to mix different lexicosemantic relations, so the performance cannot be guaranteed
when they are applied on specific lexical-semantic analysis tasks (Glavas and Vulic 2018). This situation worsens in
the case of antonym and synonym distinction, because these
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6204

