The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Marginal Inference in Continuous
Markov Random Fields Using Mixtures
Yuanzhen Guo, Hao Xiong, Nicholas Ruozzi
University of Texas at Dallas
800 W. Campbell Road
Richardson, TX 75080
{yuanzhen.guo, hao.xiong, nicholas.ruozzi}@utdallas.edu
Abstract

Much of the work on inference in models with continuous variables has focused on extensions of the BP algorithm.
However, efficient computation and representation of the BP
messages turns out to be a challenging problem involving a
variety of trade-offs. There are two primary approaches to
computing the BP message updates in the continuous case.
First, one class of methods approximate the messages, e.g.,
by using Gaussian mixtures (Sudderth et al. 2003), particles
(Ihler and McAllester 2009), finite terms of orthogonal series
expansions (Noorshams and Wainwright 2013), or kernels
(Song et al. 2011). The BP message updates are then reformulated as expectations, and the expectations are calculated using either a sampling scheme or an inner product, in the case
of the orthogonal series and kernel methods. Alternatively,
the message updates can be approximated via moment matching: The expectation propagation algorithm approximates the
messages using an exponential family and computes approximate BP message updates via a moment matching procedure
(Minka 2001). In general, these iterative message-passing algorithms are not guaranteed to converge on arbitrary graphs
with arbitrary potentials. In practice, convergent methods
can be designed by exploiting the connection between fixed
points of BP/EP and local optima of the Bethe free energy optimization problem. This objective is defined over locally consistent pseudomarginals and can be used to design convergent
methods based on gradient ascent (Welling and Teh 2001;
Heskes and Zoeter 2002). Here, we move the approximations from the messages to the pseudomarginals and design
convergent methods for approximate inference over pseudomarginals that are mixtures of Gaussians. As the Bethe free
energy objective requires the computation of expectations
of the model potentials with respect to the pseudomarginals,
our method will make use of Gauss-Hermite quadrature, a
classical numerical integration method (Golub and Welsch
1969).
Our proposed approach has many advantages over existing
methods in terms of practical performance, scalability, and
flexibility:

Exact marginal inference in continuous graphical models is
computationally challenging outside of a few special cases.
Existing work on approximate inference has focused on approximately computing the messages as part of the loopy belief
propagation algorithm either via sampling methods or moment
matching relaxations. In this work, we present an alternative
family of approximations that, instead of approximating the
messages, approximates the beliefs in the continuous Bethe
free energy using mixture distributions. We show that these
types of approximations can be combined with numerical
quadrature to yield algorithms with both theoretical guarantees on the quality of the approximation and significantly
better practical performance in a variety of applications that
are challenging for current state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Graphical models provide a flexible framework that can be
used to represent joint probability distributions in a variety
of application areas. The primary tool for approximate inference in these models is a local message-passing algorithm
known as belief propagation (BP) and its myriad variants. In
this work, we will be interested in designing algorithms for
the marginal inference task (computing the partition function
and/or marginal distributions) in continuous graphical models.
Such inference tasks arise naturally in a variety of applications such as optical flow estimation (Fleet and Weiss 2006),
depth estimation, scientific modeling, etc. As in the discrete
case, inference in continuous and mixed models is an NPhard problem that is only known to admit efficient algorithms
in special cases, e.g., Gaussian graphical models (Malioutov,
Johnson, and Willsky 2006) (Ruozzi and Tatikonda 2013).
As a result, approximate inference algorithms such as loopy
BP, and its variants, are typically employed in practice. As
the focus of this work is on inference in graphical models,
we will assume that the potential functions are known in
advance or have already been learned from data using some
other method, e.g., Chow-Liu trees (Chow and Liu 1968) or
kernel BP (Song et al. 2011). Given the potential functions,
our aim is then to approximately compute marginals and/or
the partition function of the model.

• The approximation does not need to form products of mixture distributions such as those required by nonparametric
BP (Sudderth et al. 2003), but it still gains the modeling
advantages that Gaussian mixtures possess.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• The gradient optimization methods proposed here can be
7834

