The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Reinforcement Learning for Full-Length Game of StarCraft∗
Zhen-Jia Pang, Ruo-Ze Liu, Zhou-Yu Meng, Yi Zhang, Yang Yu, Tong Lu
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
pangzj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, liuruoze@163.com, misskanagi@gmail.com, zhangyi@smail.nju.edu.cn,
yuy@nju.edu.cn, lutong@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

have become the perfect simulation environments for many
institutions such as DeepMind (Vinyals et al. 2017), FAIR
(Tian et al. 2017), and Alibaba (Peng et al. 2017).
From the perspective of reinforcement learning, StarCraft
poses a grand challenge. Firstly, it is an imperfect information game. Players can only see a small area of map through
a local camera and there is a fog of war in the game. Secondly, the state space and action space of StarCraft are huge.
StarCraft’s image size is much larger than that of Go. There
are hundreds of units and buildings, and each of them has
unique operations, making the action space extremely large.
Thirdly, a full-length game of StarCraft usually lasts from
30 minutes to more than an hour, and players need to make
thousands of decisions to win. Finally, StarCraft is a multiagent game. The combination of these issues makes StarCraft a great challenge for reinforcement learning.
Most previous agents in StarCraft are based on manual
rules and scripts. Some works related to reinforcement learning are usually about micromanagement (e.g. (Usunier et
al. 2016)) and macromanagement (e.g. (Justesen and Risi
2017)). These works solved some specific problems like local combat in StarCraft. However, there are rare works about
the full-length games. In the paper of SC2LE (Vinyals et
al. 2017), the benchmark result given by DeepMind shows
that the A3C algorithm (Mnih et al. 2016) in SC2LE did
not achieve one victory on the easiest level-1, which reveals
the difficulty of the full-length game in StarCraft II. In the
next section, we will have a summary of the difficulties encountered in the StarCraft II and introduce the simulation
platform SC2LE (StarCraft II Learning Environment).
In this paper, we investigate a set of techniques of reinforcement learning for the full-length game of StarCraft II
(SC2). In the section following the background, we present
the hierarchical architecture investigated in this paper, which
uses several levels of abstractions to make intractable largescale reinforcement learning problems easier to handle. An
effective training algorithm tailed to the architecture is also
investigated. After that, we give some experiments in the
full-length game on a 64x64 map of SC2LE. At last, we
discuss about the impacts of the architecture, reward design and settings of curriculum learning. Experimental results achieved in several difficult levels of full-length games
on SC2LE illustrate the effectiveness of our method. The
main contributions of this paper are as follow:

StarCraft II poses a grand challenge for reinforcement learning. The main difficulties include huge state space, varying
action space, long horizon, etc. In this paper, we investigate a
set of techniques of reinforcement learning for the full-length
game of StarCraft II. We investigate a hierarchical approach,
where the hierarchy involves two levels of abstraction. One is
the macro-actions extracted from expert’s demonstration trajectories, which can reduce the action space in an order of
magnitude yet remain effective. The other is a two-layer hierarchical architecture, which is modular and easy to scale. We
also investigate a curriculum transfer learning approach that
trains the agent from the simplest opponent to harder ones.
On a 64×64 map and using restrictive units, we train the
agent on a single machine with 4 GPUs and 48 CPU threads.
We achieve a winning rate of more than 99% against the difficulty level-1 built-in AI. Through the curriculum transfer
learning algorithm and a mixture of combat model, we can
achieve over 93% winning rate against the most difficult noncheating built-in AI (level-7) within days. We hope this study
could shed some light on the future research of large-scale
reinforcement learning.

Introduction
In recent years, reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto
1998) (RL) has developed rapidly in many different domains. The game of Go has been considered conquered after
AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016) and AlphaGo Zero (Silver et
al. 2017) . Many Atari games are nearly solved using DQN
(Mnih et al. 2013) and follow-up methods. Various mechanical control problems, such as robotic arms (Levine et al.
2016) and self-driving vehicles (Shalev-Shwartz, Shammah,
and Shashua 2016), have made great progress. However, reinforcement learning algorithms at present are still difficult
to be used in large-scale reinforcement learning problems.
Agents can not learn to solve problems as smartly and efficiently as human. In order to improve the ability of reinforcement learning, complex strategic games like StarCraft
∗

This work was supported by the National Key
R&D Program of China (2017YFB1002201), NSFC
(61876077,61672273,61832008), Jiangsu Science Foundation
(BK20170013,BK20160021). Yang Yu is the corresponding
author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4691

