The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Partial Multi-Label Learning via Credible Label Elicitation
Jun-Peng Fang,1,2 Min-Ling Zhang1,2,3,∗
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Collaborative Innovation Center of Wireless Communications Technology, China
fangjp@seu.edu.cn, zhangml@seu.edu.cn* (corresponding author)

Abstract
In partial multi-label learning (PML), each training example
is associated with multiple candidate labels which are only
partially valid. The task of PML naturally arises in learning
scenarios with inaccurate supervision, and the goal is to induce a multi-label predictor which can assign a set of proper
labels for unseen instance. To learn from PML training examples, the training procedure is prone to be misled by the false
positive labels concealed in candidate label set. In light of this
major difficulty, a novel two-stage PML approach is proposed
which works by eliciting credible labels from the candidate
label set for model induction. In this way, most false positive
labels are expected to be excluded from the training procedure. Specifically, in the first stage, the labeling confidence of
candidate label for each PML training example is estimated
via iterative label propagation. In the second stage, by utilizing credible labels with high labeling confidence, multi-label
predictor is induced via pairwise label ranking with virtual label splitting or maximum a posteriori (MAP) reasoning. Extensive experiments on synthetic as well as real-world data
sets clearly validate the effectiveness of credible label elicitation in learning from PML examples.

Figure 1: An examplar partial multi-label learning scenario.
In crowdsourcing image tagging, among the set of 7 candidate labels given by crowdscourcing annotators, only 4
of them are valid ones including house, tree, lavender and
France.

is a d-dimensional feature vector and Yi ⊆ Y is the set of
candidate labels associated with xi . The key assumption of
partial multi-label learning lies in that the ground-truth labels Yei ⊆ Y for xi reside in the candidate label set, i.e.
Yei ⊆ Yi , and are not directly accessible to the learning algorithm. Accordingly, the task of PML is to induce a multilabel predictor f : X 7→ 2Y from D.
A straightforward strategy to learn from PML examples
is to treat all the candidate labels in Yi as ground-truth ones,
and then apply off-the-shelf multi-label learning algorithms
(Zhang and Zhou 2014; Gibaja and Ventura 2015) to induce
the desired multi-label predictor. Obviously, the resulting
multi-label training procedure will be significantly affected
by the labeling noise brought by false positive labels in Yi .
One recent attempt towards PML works by utilizing the confidence of each candidate label being the ground-truth one
(Xie and Huang 2018), where confidence scores and predictive model are optimized in an alternative manner by minimizing the confidence-weighted ranking loss between candidate and non-candidate labels. Nonetheless, the estimated
confidence scores would be error-prone especially when the
proportion of false positive labels is high, which in turn will
impact the predictive model due to the alternative optimization procedure.
To deal with the major difficulty that ground-truth labels

Introduction
Partial multi-label learning deals with one particular learning framework with inaccurate supervision, where multiple
candidate labels are assigned to each training example which
are only partially valid. The need to learn from PML examples naturally arises in many real-world scenarios, where
accurate supervision information is difficult to be obtained
from the collected data (Zhou 2018; Xie and Huang 2018).
For instance, in crowdsourcing image tagging (Figure 1),
among the set of candidate labels given by crowdsourcing
annotators only some of them are valid ones due to potential
unreliable annotators. The task of partial multi-label learning is to learn a multi-label predictor from PML training examples which can assign a set of proper labels for the unseen
instance.
Formally, let X = Rd denote the d-dimensional feature
space and Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yq } denote the output space
with q possible class labels. Furthermore, given the PML
training set D = {(xi , Yi ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ m}, where xi ∈ X
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3518

