The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Early Detection of Vacant Parking Spaces Using Dashcam Videos
Ming-Che Wu, Mei-Chen Yeh
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan
Email: myeh@csie.ntnu.edu.tw

Abstract

from a fixed camera positioned at the top of a parking area.
A vision-based system has advantages in terms of coverage,
cost, and versatility; and it can provide many value-added
services such as parking space guidance and video surveillance (Enrı́quez et al. 2017). This would be helpful when
surveillance cameras are available; however, many parking
areas do not have such a camera monitoring system.
For this study, we are interested in automatically detecting vacant parking spaces by analyzing the content of videos
captured during the driving process. We propose to take
advantage of the cheap and widely available dashcams to
collect data at scale and train a robust detection model.
Prior studies concerning parking lot monitoring have often assumed that the locations of the parking spots are already known and the cameras are fixed, making conventional vision-based parking space detection methods not directly applicable for unconstrained dashcam videos.
Detecting a vacant parking space as early as possible is
a key goal for drivers. This practical necessity requires vacant parking spaces to be detected before they are completely seen. Most existing methods (Viola and Jones 2004;
Girshick et al. 2014) for object detection have been designed
for offline processing and are thus limited in their ability to
signal the observation of objects of interest as early as possible. For vacant parking space detection, it is necessary to
predict the availability of a parking space when it is partially
observed or even completely occluded, a fact that has been
ignored in the training processes of existing object detectors.
Learning to detect vacant parking spaces in dashcam
videos is a practical but challenging task because it must
handle typical visual recognition problems such as light conditions, viewpoint changes, the presence of shadows, and occlusions. Early detection of vacant parking spaces is even
more challenging because a vacant parking space is often
less visible when it is relatively distant from the driver. We
follow the trend of applying deep learning techniques to address this problem. In particular, we simulate the sequential frame-by-frame data arrival for a training time series
and create a vacant parking space detector that can correctly
classify partially observed instances. We train a detector to
predict the availability of parking spaces located “ahead” of
a driver even when the target parking space has not yet been
observed. This requires monotonicity of the detection reliability with respect to the distance from the driver to the park-

A major problem in metropolitan areas is finding parking
spaces. Existing parking guidance systems often adopt fixed
sensors or cameras that cannot provide information from the
driver’s point of view. Motivated by the advent of dashboard
cameras (dashcams), we develop neural-network-based methods for detecting vacant parking spaces in videos recorded
by a dashcam. Detecting vacant parking spaces in dashcam
videos enables early detection of spaces. Different from conventional object detection methods, we leverage the monotonicity of the detection confidence with respect to the distance away of the approaching target parking space and propose a new loss function, which can not only yield improved
detection results but also enable early detection. To evaluate
our detection method, we create a new large dataset containing 5,800 dashcam videos captured from 22 indoor and outdoor parking lots. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first and largest driver’s view video dataset that supports parking space detection and provides parking space occupancy annotations.

Introduction
Finding a vacant parking space in a congested area or a large
parking lot is time consuming and frustrating for drivers,
especially at peak hours or when the target parking lot is
crowded or almost full. Furthermore, the distraction caused
by searching for a parking space is one of the main causes of
parking lot accidents because drivers are focused on finding
a vacant spot and often neglect to watch for other drivers and
pedestrians who are on the move. This situation is dangerous when the parking lot is congested with vehicular traffic
and pedestrians. An intelligent parking guidance system can
mitigate much of this hassle by promptly providing accurate
information concerning car park space availability to drivers.
Current parking guidance systems determine the availability of parking spaces using the sensors installed throughout an entire parking lot. However, deploying sensors in a
large parking lot can be costly and is limited in indoor parking lots. Alternatively, some studies (Huang and Wang 2010;
Ichihashi et al. 2009; Almeida et al. 2015; Amato et al.
2017) have explored the application of image analysis techniques for parking space detection by using images taken
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9613

