The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multiple Saliency and Channel Sensitivity
Network for Aggregated Convolutional Feature
Xuanlu Xiang, Zhipeng Wang, Zhicheng Zhao, Fei Su
School of Communication and Information Engineering
Beijing Key Laboratory of Network System and Network Culture
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
bigcabbagexxl@gmail.com,{wzpycg, zhaozc, sufei}@bupt.edu.cn
Abstract

a triplet ranking loss (Gordo et al. 2016) and pairwise similarity (Radenović, Tolias, and Chum 2016) were proposed
to enhance the power of image representation and achieved
the state-of-the-art results for instance retrieval. However,
their models were based on a large-scale training set, which
restricted the scalability of the system. So far, the distinctiveness of image representation and the generalization ability of
the model have been the key problems for this task.
Consequently, we aim at exploring three key factors of
particular object retrieval and focus on learning a good image
representation on a very limited training dataset. The first key
point is to employ multi-scale representation(Radenović, Tolias, and Chum 2018). According to (Gordo et al. 2017)(Seddati et al. 2017), multi-scale feature extraction can enhance
the robustness of the model, thus needs to be further mined.
Additionally, exploiting different details of spatial semantic
information could also be considered. For example, (Xu et al.
2018) defined special channels of normalized feature maps as
a kind of part detectors, and then aggregated multiple ones to
generate convolutional features. This proposal significantly
outperformed previous state-of-the-art unsupervised CNN
methods. However, the choosing of part detectors has two
problems: (i) it was too simple to adapt complicated retrieval
scenarios, (ii) it needed too many attention maps to achieve a
good result.Therefore, how to adaptively learn saliency masks
was another key factor of performance improvement. The
last important factor is how to perform channel weighting
for feature recalibration. For instance, (Kalantidis, Mellina,
and Osindero 2016; Jimenez, Alvarez, and Giro-i Nieto 2017;
Siméoni et al. 2017) used sparsity-sensitive weighting (SSW)
scheme to improve the power of image representations. However, this method did not utilize the correlations between
different channels and could not be end-to-end learned. Inspired by (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016; 2015), which
leveraged Gram matrix to describe the structural information for image style transfer, we regard Gram matrix as a
covariance matrix and present a Gram matrix based channel
sensitivity weighting scheme.
In this paper, we propose a novel and simple network based
on multiple saliency and Gram matrix based channel sensitivity, named as Multiple Saliency and Channel Sensitivity
Network(MSCNet)(see Fig 1). Considering that annotation
data is precious for retrieval task, we propose to train this network in both unsupervised and supervised manners based on

In this paper, aiming at two key problems of instance-level image retrieval, i.e., the distinctiveness of image representation
and the generalization ability of the model, we propose a novel
deep architecture - Multiple Saliency and Channel Sensitivity
Network(MSCNet). Specifically, to obtain distinctive global
descriptors, an attention-based multiple saliency learning is
first presented to highlight important details of the image, and
then a simple but effective channel sensitivity module based
on Gram matrix is designed to boost the channel discrimination and suppress redundant information. Additionally, in
contrast to most existing feature aggregation methods, employing pre-trained deep networks, MSCNet can be trained in
two modes: the first one is an unsupervised manner with an
instance loss, and another is a supervised manner, which combines classification and ranking loss and only relies on very
limited training data. Experimental results on several public
benchmark datasets, i.e., Oxford buildings, Paris buildings and
Holidays, indicate that the proposed MSCNet outperforms the
state-of-the-art unsupervised and supervised methods.

1

Introduction

Content-based Image Retrieval (CBIR) is a very active visual task in the field of computer vision. After the work
of (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), hand-crafted
features (e.g. SIFT (Lowe 2001)) have given way to CNNbased ones. In (Gong et al. 2014) and (Babenko et al. 2014),
the activations of the fully-connected layers were directly
utilized to build image representation for similarity comparison. Since then, more literatures have demonstrated that the
activations of convolutional layers can provide better performance for object retrieval because of conveying spatial
information (Babenko and Lempitsky 2015; Tolias, Sicre,
and Jégou 2016; Kalantidis, Mellina, and Osindero 2016;
Jimenez, Alvarez, and Giro-i Nieto 2017; Seddati et al. 2017;
Xu et al. 2018). These works mostly used networks pretrained for image classification tasks. This is challenging because CBIR needs distinctive compact codes but the networks
for classification are insensitive to intra-class differences,
and do not fit the purpose of instance search. More recently,
some supervised methods by fine-tuning CNN models with
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9013

