The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Incorporating Structured Commonsense Knowledge in Story Completion
Jiaao Chen,∗1 Jianshu Chen,2 Zhou Yu3
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Tencent AI Lab
3
University of California, Davis
3150105589@zju.edu.cn, jianshuchen@tencent.com,joyu@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
The ability to select an appropriate story ending is the first
step towards perfect narrative comprehension. Story ending
prediction requires not only the explicit clues within the context, but also the implicit knowledge (such as commonsense)
to construct a reasonable and consistent story. However, most
previous approaches do not explicitly use background commonsense knowledge. We present a neural story ending selection model that integrates three types of information: narrative sequence, sentiment evolution and commonsense knowledge. Experiments show that our model outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches on a public dataset, ROCStory Cloze Task
(Mostafazadeh et al. 2017), and the performance gain from
adding the additional commonsense knowledge is significant.

(a) An example story

Introduction

(b) Clues in ConceptNet

Narrative is a fundamental form of representation in human
language and culture. Stories connect individuals and deliver experience, emotions and knowledge. Narrative comprehension has attracted long-standing interests in natural
language processing (Schubert and Hwang 2000), and is
widely applicable to areas such as content creation. Enabling
machines to understand narrative is also an important first
step towards real intelligence. Previous studies on narrative
comprehension include character roles identification (VallsVargas, Ontañón, and Zhu 2015), narratives schema construction (Chambers and Jurafsky 2009), and plot pattern
identification (Jockers 2013). However, their main focus is
on analyzing the stories themselves. In contrast, we concentrate on training machines to predict the end of the stories. Story completion tasks rely not only on the logic of the
story itself, but also requires implicit commonsense knowledge outside the story. To understand stories, human can use
the information from both the story itself and other implicit
sources such as commonsense knowledge and normative social behaviors. In this paper, we propose to imitate such behaviors to incorporate structured commonsense knowledge
to aid the story ending prediction.
Recently, (Mostafazadeh et al. 2017) introduced a ROCStories dataset as a benchmark for evaluating models’ abil-

Figure 1: (a) shows an example story from ROCStories
dataset, words in colors are key-words. (b) shows the keywords and their relations in ConceptNet Knowledge Graph

ity to understand the narrative structures of a story, where
the model is asked to select the correct ending from two
candidates for a given story. To solve this task, both traditional machine learning approaches (Schwartz et al. 2017)
and neural network models (Cai, Tu, and Gimpel 2017) have
been used. Some works also exploit information such as sentiment and topic words (Chaturvedi et al. 2017) and event
frames (Li et al. 2018). Recently, there has been work (Radford et al. 2018) that leverages large unlabeled corpus, like
the BooksCorpus (Zhu et al. 2015) dataset, to improve the
performance. However, none of them explicitly uses structured commonsense knowledge, which humans would naturally incorporate to improve model performance.
Figure 1(a) shows a typical example in ROCStories
dataset: a story about Dan and his parents. The blue words
are key-words in the body of the story, and the red word is
the key-word in the correct story ending. Figure 1(b) shows
the (implicit) relations among these key-words, which are
obtained as a subgraph from ConceptNet (Speer, Chin, and
Havasi 2017), a commonsense knowledge base. By incorporating such structured external commonsense knowledge,
we are able to discover strong associations between these

∗
This work was finished while Jiaao Chen was an intern in University of California, Davis.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6244

