The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Point Cloud Processing via Recurrent Set Encoding
Pengxiang Wu,1 Chao Chen,2 Jingru Yi,1 Dimitris Metaxas1
1
2

Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, NJ, USA, {pw241, jy486, dnm}@cs.rutgers.edu
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University, NY, USA, chao.chen.cchen@gmail.com

Abstract

operate directly on point clouds. Representative works include PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) and PointNet++ (Qi et al.
2017b), which process point clouds by combining multilayer perceptron (MLP) network with symmetric operations
(e.g., max-pooling) to learn point features globally or hierarchically. Inspired by PointNet, several recent methods have
been proposed to further improve the point feature representation (Shen et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2018; Li, Chen, and Lee
2018). This class of networks are invariant to input permutation and have achieved state-of-the-art results. However, due
to the reliance on the coarse feature pooling technique, they
fail to fully exploit fine-scale geometric details.
In this work, we aim to completely bypass the coarse
pooling-based technique, and propose a new deep network
for point cloud data. At the core of our method is a recurrent
set encoder, which divides the ambient domain into parallel
beams and encodes the points within each beam as subregional geometric features with an RNN. Our key observation is that when the beam is of moderate size, the RNN is
approximately dealing with a sequence of points, as a beam
only contains points near a 1D line. Such a sequential input largely benefits the learning of RNN. Meanwhile, noticing that the beams are packed in a regular spatial layout, we
use a 2D CNN to further analyze the beam features (called
the convolutional feature aggregator). Being efficient and
powerful at feature learning, the 2D CNN can effectively
aggregate the subregional features into a global one, while
further benefiting the RNN learning in return. Our method
(see Fig. 1) is surprisingly efficient and effective for point
cloud processing. It is invariant to point order permutation,
and competes favorably with the state-of-the-arts (SOTAs)
in terms of both accuracy and computational efficiency.
A few recent works also adopt convolution for point
cloud processing. They typically utilize carefully designed
domain transformations to map point data into suitable
spaces, where convolution could be applied. Examples include SPLATNet (Su et al. 2018) and PCNN (Atzmon,
Maron, and Lipman 2018). However, these methods are inefficient as they rely on sophisticated geometric transformations and complex convolutional operations, e.g., continuous volumetric convolution or sparse bilateral convolution.
In contrast, our method only employs regular spatial partitioning and sorting, and leverages classic neural network
architectures such as RNN and 2D CNN, which are well

We present a new permutation-invariant network for 3D point
cloud processing. Our network is composed of a recurrent
set encoder and a convolutional feature aggregator. Given an
unordered point set, the encoder firstly partitions its ambient space into parallel beams. Points within each beam are
then modeled as a sequence and encoded into subregional geometric features by a shared recurrent neural network (RNN).
The spatial layout of the beams is regular, and this allows the
beam features to be further fed into an efficient 2D convolutional neural network (CNN) for hierarchical feature aggregation. Our network is effective at spatial feature learning, and
competes favorably with the state-of-the-arts (SOTAs) on a
number of benchmarks. Meanwhile, it is significantly more
efficient compared to the SOTAs.

Introduction
Point cloud is a simple and compact geometric representation of 3D objects, and has been broadly used as the standard output of various sensors. In recent years, the analysis
of point clouds has gained much attention due to its wide application in real world problems such as autonomous driving
(Chen et al. 2017), robotics (Kehoe et al. 2015), and navigation (Liu 2016). However, it is nontrivial to solve such tasks
using traditional deep learning tools, e.g., convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Unlike a 2D image with regularly
packed pixels, a point cloud consists of sparse points without a canonical order. Moreover, the spatial distribution of a
point cloud is heterogeneous due to factors in data acquisition, e.g., perspective effects and radial density variations.
Due to the 3D nature of the problem, various methods
have been proposed to convert a point cloud into a 3D volumetric representation, to which 3D CNNs are then applied
(Wu et al. 2015; Maturana and Scherer 2015b). However,
despite their success in analyzing 2D images, CNNs are not
satisfactory in this context. The commonly used 3D CNN is
extremely memory consuming, and thus can not be trained
efficiently. A more serious issue is that converting a point
cloud into a volumetric representation introduces quantization artifacts and loses fine-scale geometric details.
Better performance has been achieved by deep networks
that avoid the volumetric convolutional architechture and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5441

