The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Joint Extraction of Entities and Overlapping
Relations Using Position-Attentive Sequence Labeling
Dai Dai,1 Xinyan Xiao,1 Yajuan Lyu,1 Shan Dou,2 Qiaoqiao She,1 Haifeng Wang1
1

Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{daidai,xiaoxinyan,lvyajuan,sheqiaoqiao,wanghaifeng}@baidu.com
ds16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Born_in
President_of

Joint entity and relation extraction is to detect entity and relation using a single model. In this paper, we present a novel
unified joint extraction model which directly tags entity and
relation labels according to a query word position p, i.e., detecting entity at p, and identifying entities at other positions
that have relationship with the former. To this end, we first
design a tagging scheme to generate n tag sequences for an
n-word sentence. Then a position-attention mechanism is introduced to produce different sentence representations for every query position to model these n tag sequences. In this
way, our method can simultaneously extract all entities and
their type, as well as all overlapping relations. Experiment
results show that our framework performances significantly
better on extracting overlapping relations as well as detecting long-range relation, and thus we achieve state-of-the-art
performance on two public datasets.

Located_in

Born_in

The United States President Trump was born in the borough of Queens in New York City .
Location
Person
Location
Location
Extracted Relation Triplets
Entity 1

Relation Type

Entity2

Trump

President_of

United States

Trump

Born_in

Queens

Trump

Born_in

New York City

Queens

Located_in

New York City

Figure 1: An example sentence that contains overlapping relations which share the same entity in the sentence. For example, the first three relations in the table are overlapping
because they share the same entity “Trump”. Similarly, the
last two relations are also overlapping due to the shared entity “New York City”. Such overlapping relations are very
common in datasets of relation extraction (see Table 1).

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE) aims to detect the semantic relation
between entities in unstructured text. Traditional RE systems
separate this task into pipelined subtasks: first detecting entities and then classifying the relation types between candidate entity pairs. Such a framework makes the task easy
to conduct, but it ignores the underlying interdependencies
and error propagation between these two subtasks (Li and Ji
2014; Gupta, Schütze, and Andrassy 2016).
Different from the pipelined methods, joint extraction is
to detect entities together with their relations using a joint
model. Recent studies show that joint learning approaches
can effectively integrate the information of entity and relation, and therefore achieve better performance in both subtasks. Most previous joint models are based on feature-based
structured learning (Kate and Mooney 2010; Li and Ji 2014;
Miwa and Sasaki 2014; Ren et al. 2017). These methods
heavily depend on hand-crafted features and other NLP
toolkits. Recently, several neural architectures have been applied, most of which utilize parameter sharing for joint modeling, but still require explicit separate components for entity recognition and relation classification (Miwa and Bansal
2016; Gupta, Schütze, and Andrassy 2016). In contrast,
Zheng et al. (2017b) proposes a special tagging scheme

to convert joint extraction to a sequence labeling problem,
solving the task in a unified way. However, their method cannot identify overlapping relations, which may lead to poor
recall when processing a sentence with overlapping relations
(see Figure 1). Another unified method proposed by Zeng et
al. (2018) employs sequence-to-sequence learning with copy
mechanism. Although it can extract overlapping relations,
their model fails to identify multi-word entities. Overall, it
is still challenging to jointly extract entities and overlapping
relations using a single unified model.
In this paper, we present a new unified method to solve
the joint extraction by tagging entity and relation labels simultaneously according to a query word position p. Given a
sentence and a query position p, our model is to answer two
pseudo questions: “What is the entity and its type at p?” and
“Which entities have relationship with the the one at p?” To
this end, we design a special tagging scheme that annotates
entity labels at query position p, as well as relation labels at
other positions in the sentence (see Figure 2). Thus, it actually transforms the joint relation extraction problem to a list
of sequence labeling problems, e.g., for an n-word sentence,
we annotate n different tag sequences according to n query
positions. To model these n tag sequences in a single unified
model, a novel position-attention mechanism is introduced

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6300

