The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Optimizing in the Dark: Learning an
Optimal Solution through a Simple Request Interface
Qiao Xiang,1,2∗ Haitao Yu,1 James Aspnes,2 Franck Le,3 Linghe Kong,4 Y. Richard Yang1,2
1

Tongji University, 2 Yale University, 3 IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
qiao.xiang@cs.yale.edu, haitao.yu@tongji.edu.cn, james.aspnes@yale.edu,
fle@us.ibm.com, linghe.kong@sjtu.edu.cn, yry@cs.yale.edu

set of flows: request(flow set, bw values)), and returns either success or failure. A major concern of this design is
its inefficiency for the applications/users to find the optimal
amount of network resources to reserve. To further illustrate
the issues, consider the example in Figure 1, where a user
(e.g., application) wants to determine and reserve the maximum achievable bandwidth for two flows from S1 to D1 ,
and S2 to D2 , respectively. Using existing solutions that offer only a simple reservation interface, finding the constraint
that both flows can collectively get only 100 Mbps of bandwidth is already an instance of the NP-hard membershipquery based constraint acquisition problem (Bessiere et al.
2017), letting alone finding the optimal reservation for both
flows (e.g., 50 Mbps for each flow).

Abstract
Network resource reservation systems are being developed
and deployed, driven by the demand and substantial benefits of providing performance predictability for modern distributed applications. However, existing systems suffer limitations: They either are inefficient in finding the optimal resource reservation, or cause private information (e.g., from
the network infrastructure) to be exposed (e.g., to the user). In
this paper, we design BoxOpt, a novel system that leverages
efficient oracle construction techniques in optimization and
learning theory to automatically, and swiftly learn the optimal resource reservations without exchanging any private information between the network and the user. We implement
a prototype of BoxOpt and demonstrate its efficiency and efficacy via extensive experiments using real network topology
and trace. Results show that (1) BoxOpt has a 100% correctness ratio, and (2) for 95% of requests, BoxOpt learns the
optimal resource reservation within 13 seconds.

1

Each link: 100 Mbps

S1

S2

Introduction

When facing a genie that only tells you whether it can grant
a wish or not, how can you find the best wish it can grant?

l1

l7

sw1
l2
sw2 l8

sw3

sw6
sw5 l3

l4 sw

8

l5

l9 sw l10 l11
7

l6

sw4 l

12

D1

D2

Figure 1: An example network topology: the routes of two
flows share bottleneck links, i.e., l3 and l4 , hence they can
only collectively get a 100 Mbps bandwidth.

Although the question may sound like one from fairy
tales, people deal with such question in many real world scenarios. For example, modern distributed applications (e.g.,
(Zaharia et al. 2012; White 2012)) construct complex data
flows between end hosts, e.g., in data center networks. The
key to supporting these applications is the ability to provide
guaranteed network resources (i.e., bandwidth) for performance predictability (Mogul and Popa 2012). As such, many
network resource reservation systems are developed and deployed (Campanella et al. 2006; Guok and Robertson 2006;
Johnston, Guok, and Chaniotakis 2011; Riddle 2005; Zheng
et al. 2005; Sobieski, Lehman, and Jabbari 2004). However,
because of the underlying networks’ concern of revealing
sensitive information, existing reservation systems do not
provide applications with an interface to access information of the underlying network infrastructure (e.g., topology,
links’ available bandwidth). Instead, networks only offer a
simple reservation interface for applications to submit requests for reserving a specific amount of bandwidths for a

To address this problem, researchers have proposed several solutions, but all of them suffer limitations, and violate privacy requirements. For example, to determine optimal bandwidth reservations, recent proposals depart from
the simple reservation interface, and require either networks
to reveal sensitive information to users (Soulé et al. 2014;
Subramanian, D’Antoni, and Akella ; Heorhiadi, Reiter, and
Sekar 2016; Lee et al. ), or vice versa (Gao et al. 2016;
Gao et al. 2017; Xiang et al. 2018). These solutions are
therefore limited to settings where the level of trust between
the applications and the underlying network is high. These
solutions cannot be deployed in general settings as malicious
parties may use the exposed network information to identify
vulnerable links and launch attacks (e.g., DDoS).
In this paper, we explore the feasibility and benefits of
learning the optimal network resource reservation for the
user without exposing the private information of the network
(i.e., bandwidth capacity region) and the user (e.g., resource
orchestration policy) to each other. In particular, we tackle
the following question: How can a user learn the optimal

∗

The corresponding authors are Q.Xiang and Y. R. Yang.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1674

