The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Functional Connectivity Network Analysis with Discriminative Hub Detection for
Brain Disease Identification
Mingliang Wang,1 Jiashuang Huang,1 Mingxia Liu,2* Daoqiang Zhang1*
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
2
Department of Radiology and BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
*
Corresponding authors (mxliu@med.unc.edu, dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn)

Abstract

also lead to the development of biomarkers that quantify reorganizational mechanisms of brain diseases (Fox and Greicius 2010; Yang et al. 2015). Brain connectivity networks
derived from resting-state functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) scans have shown to be effective in revealing functional connectivity patterns of the brain (Sporns
2012; Bolton et al. 2017; Liu, Kong, and Philip 2017). In
computer-aided brain network analysis, it remains a fundamental but challenging task to effectively represent functional brain networks constructed on fMRI data.
Existing fMRI-based studies first extract humanengineered features (e.g., clustering coefficient) to represent
brain connectivity networks, and then feed these features
to a pre-defined machine learning model for classification (Shervashidze et al. 2011; Wee et al. 2012;
Jie et al. 2014). Since feature extraction and classifier
training are treated as stand-alone tasks, the heterogeneity between features and classifiers would lead to
a sub-optimal performance in brain disease diagnosis.The network embedding technology (Cao et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2018) is applied to brain network analysis by
performing feature extraction and classifier training jointly.
However, features of a brain network in these methods are
usually manifested in the latent representation space, thus
lacking of good interpretation of brain connectivity patterns.
On the other hand, network hubs have proven to be vulnerable to pathogenic processes of brain disorders (Dai, Bi,
and He 2015), by effectively revealing communication and
information integration across different brain regions. Here,
the term “hub” refers to a particular node that occupies a
central position in a brain connectivity network, reflecting
the global structure of this network (Heuvel, Sporns, and
Olaf 2013; He et al. 2016). Several network hubs have been
shown to reveal significant abnormalities in brain connectivity networks of patients with schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s
disease (Huang et al. 2011; Stam 2014). Intuitively, exploring such hubs could bring prior knowledge for modeling
global structure of brain networks, thus promoting the learning performance of network-based brain disease diagnosis.
However, existing studies cannot effectively identify network hubs from brain connectivity networks.
To address these issues, in this paper, we propose a Connectivity Network analysis method with discriminative Hub
Detection (CNHD) for brain disease diagnosis using fMRI

Brain network analysis can help reveal the pathological basis of neurological disorders and facilitate automated diagnosis of brain diseases, by exploring connectivity patterns
in the human brain. Effectively representing the brain network has always been the fundamental task of computeraided brain network analysis. Previous studies typically utilize human-engineered features to represent brain connectivity networks, but these features may not be well coordinated
with subsequent classifiers. Besides, brain networks are often equipped with multiple hubs (i.e., nodes occupying a central position in the overall organization of a network), providing essential clues to describe connectivity patterns. However, existing studies often fail to explore such hubs from
brain connectivity networks. To address these two issues, we
propose a Connectivity Network analysis method with discriminative Hub Detection (CNHD) for brain disease diagnosis using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
data. Specifically, we incorporate both feature extraction of
brain networks and network-based classification into a unified model, while discriminative hubs can be automatically
identified from data via ℓ1 -norm and ℓ2,1 -norm regularizers.
The proposed CNHD method is evaluated on three real-world
schizophrenia datasets with fMRI scans. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method not only outperforms several
state-of-the-art approaches in disease diagnosis, but also is
effective in automatically identifying disease-related network
hubs in the human brain.

Introduction
Recent advances in network analysis have allowed new insights for our understanding of complex networks and interactions (i.e., connectivity patterns) within each network.
A human brain can be modeled as a complex network, containing a number of structurally/functionally interconnected
brain regions (Power et al. 2010; Liu, Kong, and Ragin
2017). Generally, a brain network (a.k.a., connectome) can
be characterized by a set of nodes and edges, where nodes
represent regions-of-interest (ROIs) in the brain and edges
denote the connectivity strength or correlation between brain
regions. The characterization of brain networks can not only
help uncover the pathological basis of brain disorders, but
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1198

