The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Diversity-Driven Extensible Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
Yuhang Song,1 Jianyi Wang,2,† Thomas Lukasiewicz,1 Zhenghua Xu,1,3,* Mai Xu2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Reliability and Intelligence of Electrical Equipment, Hebei University of Technology, China
*
Corresponding author, email: xuzhenghua1987@gmail.com
†
Co-first author
2

Abstract

However, such top-down solutions are not practical in situations with sparse extrinsic rewards and large action space,
where extrinsic rewards are almost unreachable by exploration using primitive actions. Therefore, more recent works
focus on discovering “useful” subpolicies in a bottom-up
fashion (Lakshminarayanan et al. 2016; Kompella et al.
2017), which are capable of discovering subpolicies before reaching any extrinsic rewards. In addition, the bottomup strategy can discover subpolicies that better facilitate
learning for an unseen problem (Frans et al. 2018). This is
also called meta-reinforcement-learning (Al-Shedivat et al.
2018), where subpolicies are shared across different tasks
and thus called meta subpolicies.
However, none of the above methods shows the capability to build extensible HRL with multiple levels, i.e., building subpolicies upon subpolicies, which is usually needed in
many real-world scenarios, whose ultimate goals are highly
abstract, while their basic actions are very primitive. We take
the game OverCooked in Figure 1 as an example. The ultimate goal of OverCooked is to let an agent fetch multiple
ingredients (purple boxes) in a particular sequence according to a to-pick list (orange box), which is shuffled in every
episode. However, the basic action of the agent is so primitive (thus called primitive action in the following) that it can
just move one of its four legs towards one of the four directions at each step (marked by red arrows), and the agent’s
body can be moved only when all four legs are moved to the
same direction. Consequently, although we can simplify the
task by introducing subpolicies to learn to move the body
towards different directions with four steps of primitive actions, it is still difficult to reach the ultimate goal, because
the to-pick list changes in every episode.
Fortunately, this problem can be easily overcome if HRL
has multiple levels: by defining the previous subpolicies as
subpolicies at level 0, HRL with multiple levels can build
subpolicies at level 1 to learn to fetch different ingredients
based on subpolicies at level 0; obviously, a policy based on
subpolicies at level 1 is capable to reach the ultimate goal
more easily than that based on subpolicies at level 0. Motivated by the above observation, we propose Diversity-driven
Extensible HRL (DEHRL), which is constructed and trained
levelwise (i.e., each level shares the same structure and is
trained with exactly the same algorithm) to make it extensible to build higher levels. DEHRL follows a widely adopted

Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) has recently
shown promising advances on speeding up learning, improving the exploration, and discovering intertask transferable
skills. Most recent works focus on HRL with two levels, i.e., a
master policy manipulates subpolicies, which in turn manipulate primitive actions. However, HRL with multiple levels
is usually needed in many real-world scenarios, whose ultimate goals are highly abstract, while their actions are very
primitive. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a diversitydriven extensible HRL (DEHRL), where an extensible and
scalable framework is built and learned levelwise to realize
HRL with multiple levels. DEHRL follows a popular assumption: diverse subpolicies are useful, i.e., subpolicies are believed to be more useful if they are more diverse. However,
existing implementations of this diversity assumption usually
have their own drawbacks, which makes them inapplicable to
HRL with multiple levels. Consequently, we further propose
a novel diversity-driven solution to achieve this assumption
in DEHRL. Experimental studies evaluate DEHRL with nine
baselines from four perspectives in two domains; the results
show that DEHRL outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines
in all four aspects.

Introduction
Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) recombines sequences of basic actions to form subpolicies (Sutton, Precup,
and Singh 1999; Parr and Russell 1998; Dietterich 2000).
It can be used to speed up the learning (Bacon, Harb, and
Precup 2017), improve the exploration to solve tasks with
sparse extrinsic rewards (i.e., rewards generated by the environment) (Şimşek and Barto 2004), or learn meta-skills
that can be transferred to new problems (Frans et al. 2018).
Although most previous approaches to HRL require handcrafted subgoals to pretrain subpolicies (Heess et al. 2016)
or require extrinsic rewards as supervisory signals (Vezhnevets et al. 2016), the recent ones seek to discover subpolicies without manual subgoals or pretraining. Most of
them (Xu et al. 2018a; Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017) are
working in a top-down fashion, where a given agent first explores until it accomplishes a trajectory that reaches a positive extrinsic reward, and then tries to recombine the basic
actions in the trajectory to build subpolicies.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4992

