The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Orderly Subspace Clustering
Jing Wang,1 Atsushi Suzuki,1 Linchuan Xu,1,∗ Feng Tian,2 Liang Yang,3 Kenji Yamanishi1
1

Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Japan
2
Faculty of Science and Technology, Bournemouth University, UK
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, China
{jing wang, atsushi suzuki, linchuan xu, yamanishi}@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, ftian@bournemouth.ac.uk, yangliang@vip.qq.com

Abstract

2001). However, the pairwise relationships only characterize the relationships between data and cluster, yet the relationships among data are far beyond what they can describe.
Also, it is often difficult to identify whether two objects must
or cannot belong to the same cluster if there is no cluster categories known in advance. To remedy this, we are inspired
to seek for and utilize novel supervision information, so as
to exploit data information more deeply and further achieve
more accurate clustering.
In reality, one may easily observe that orderly relationships are ubiquitous among data. An orderly relationship
represents that the data a is closer to b than to c. For example, an image of “apple” is often more related to that of
“banana” than to that of “ball”; a frame of a video sequence
is often more related to its neighbouring frames than to those
far way. Such relative order naturally exists among data
and it is reliable (Kendall 1948; Amid and Ukkonen 2015;
Wang et al. 2018b). Preserving such relative relationships
enables us to find a good representation that uncovers the
true data relationship. With these advantages, the orderly relationship has been widely used in various applications, such
as ordinal classification (Liu, Tsang, and Müller 2017), ordinal embedding (Terada and Luxburg 2014), hashing (Liu et
al. 2016) and social networks (Song, Meyer, and Tao 2015;
Wang et al. 2017b). Unfortunately, existing subspace clustering approaches have largely ignored the orderly relationship.
In this paper, we propose an orderly subspace clustering
(OSC) approach by using the orderly relationship as a novel
constraint to learn orderly representations. Compared with
pairwise subspace clustering approaches, OSC works quite
differently and is more advanced in three aspects. Firstly,
the must-link/cannot-link is limited to paired data which belong to the same class or two different ones, but the orderly relationship is a triplet information among three data
within one class or across multiple ones. Secondly, with
must-link/cannot-link, the pairwise subspace clustering enforces representations to be close/far away, while OSC takes
a step further by preserving relative order among data, even
when they are from the same cluster. Thirdly, two pairwise
relations may derive an orderly relationship, such as if the
data a is must-link to b but cannot-link to c, we can derive
that a is more related to b than to c. However, the reverse
derivation may not hold. That is to say, the pairwise rela-

Semi-supervised representation-based subspace clustering is
to partition data into their underlying subspaces by finding
effective data representations with partial supervisions. Essentially, an effective and accurate representation should be
able to uncover and preserve the true data structure. Meanwhile, a reliable and easy-to-obtain supervision is desirable
for practical learning. To meet these two objectives, in this
paper we make the first attempt towards utilizing the orderly
relationship, such as the data a is closer to b than to c, as
a novel supervision. We propose an orderly subspace clustering approach with a novel regularization term. OSC enforces the learned representations to simultaneously capture
the intrinsic subspace structure and reveal orderly structure
that is faithful to true data relationship. Experimental results
with several benchmarks have demonstrated that aside from
more accurate clustering against state-of-the-arts, OSC interprets orderly data structure which is beyond what current approaches can offer.

Introduction
Subspace clustering, which aims at partitioning high dimensional data into multiple low-dimensional subspaces with
each subspace corresponding to one class or subject, has
been widely used in machine learning, computer vision and
pattern recognition area (Rao et al. 2010; Liu et al. 2013;
Zhou et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2018).
Recently, several subspace clustering methods have been
proposed to explore the relationships among data with selfrepresentation (Wu et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2017). These
representation-based methods can be roughly divided into
two categories: the unsupervised and the semi-supervised.
The former (Liu, Lin, and Yu 2010; Lu et al. 2012; Hu
et al. 2014) mainly focuses on the intrinsic structure of
data, while the later (Zhou et al. 2014; Fang et al. 2015;
Wang et al. 2017a) utilizes a small amount of supervision
information on top of data structure as a valuable guidance.
The pairwise information, including must-link constraints
and cannot-link constraints which specify whether the data
must be or cannot be in the same cluster, has been demonstrated that it helps to improve performance (Wagstaff et al.
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5264

