The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Pareto Efficient Auctions with Interest Rates
Gagan Goel, Vahab Mirrokni, Renato Paes Leme
Google Research
gagangoel@gmail.com, mirrokni@google.com, renatoppl@google.com

Abstract

functions of their payments. To be more specific, we consider utilities of the form u = v(x) − β(π) where v(x) is
the value the agent derives from the implemented outcome,
π is the payment and β is a non-linear convex function of
the payment. This can be used to model scenarios with interest rates. For example, suppose that an agent has B monetary units readily available and has access to a bank that
can lend him money with interest rate, say, γ − 1. This setting can be modeled by defining β(π) := π for π ≤ B and
β(π) := B + γ(π − B) for π > B. To see this, if the agent
is charged π > B by the auctioneer, he can use B from his
own funds and borrow π − B from the bank. Since the agent
has to pay (γ − 1)(π − B) in interest to the bank, his final
true cost will be β(π) := B + γ(π − B).
The problem of designing auctions with non-quasi-linear
utilities is notoriously hard, which explains why the vast majority of work in mechanism design assumes quasi-linearity.
The progress in non quasi-linear utilities has been limited,
with a few exceptions, mostly to budget-constraints and riskaversion. In this paper, we seek to make progress in the problem of utilities that take interest rates into account. We consider the simplest possible setting: an auction for one unit of
a divisible good between two agents who have access to Bi
monetary units and can borrow at the same common interest
rate.
Our main result is an individually-rational, incentivecompatible and Pareto-efficient auction for the setting described above. We note that the usual notion of efficiency
in mechanism design - social welfare maximization - is impossible to be achieved in an incentive compatible manner
in this setting (even if one allows for approximations). By
social welfare here we mean the sum ofPthe utilities
P of all
agents
(including
the
seller)
which
is
u
+
i
i
i πi =
P
i vi (xi ) + πi − βi (πi ). Note that unlike quasi-linear settings the payments no longer cancel out and henceP
our social
welfare doesn’t coincide with the sum of values i vi (xi ).
The reason is that a special case of our setting is that of budget constrained utility functions (by taking γ → ∞), for
which incentive compatible social welfare maximization is
known to be impossible (Dobzinski, Lavi, and Nisan 2008).
In such cases, Pareto-efficiency becomes the natural way to
achieve efficiency. Note for example that when Bi are very
large or the interest rates tend to zero, Pareto-efficiency boils
down to social-welfare maximization.

We consider auction settings in which agents have limited access to monetary resources but are able to make payments
larger than their available resources by taking loans with a
certain interest rate. This setting is a strict generalization of
budget constrained utility functions (which corresponds to infinite interest rates). Our main result is an incentive compatible and Pareto-efficient auction for a divisible multi-unit setting with 2 players who are able to borrow money with the
same interest rate. The auction is an ascending price clock
auction that bears some similarities to the clinching auction but at the same time is a considerable departure from
this framework: allocated goods can be de-allocated in future
and given to other agents and prices for previously allocated
goods can be raised.

Introduction
One of the common simplifications in mechanism design
is to assume that the monetary resources available to each
agent are far more than the magnitude of the economic transaction for which a mechanism is being designed. This assumption is hidden in the quasi-linear utility model, which
states that the utility for a certain outcome is its value minus
the payment, no matter how large the payments are. While
this assumption is fine for a variety of settings, this breaks if
the magnitude of a transaction is large. For example, if one
wants to buy a house or pay for college tuition, the amount of
available funds may even be more important than the actual
value. A first order approximation to this issue is to consider
the budget constrained utility function, which assumes that
the utility is quasi-linear if the payment is below the budget and minus infinity otherwise. In the recent past, some
progress has been made to develop our understanding of design of efficient mechanisms for budget-constrained utility
functions. However, budget constrained utility functions fail
to capture an important aspect of real life: to make large purchases one can borrow money. This is done by using financial instruments such as credit-cards, loans, mortgages, etc.
In this paper we investigate this gap – between the realworld scenario and our theoretical understanding of moneyconstrained mechanism design – by designing mechanisms
for agents whose utility functions are non-linear convex
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1989

