The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Hierarchical Framework for Relation
Extraction with Reinforcement Learning
Ryuichi Takanobu,1,3∗ Tianyang Zhang,1,3∗ Jiexi Liu,2,3∗ Minlie Huang1,3†
1

Dept. of Computer Science & Technology, 2 Dept. of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI), China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science & Technology, China
{gxly15, zhang-ty15, liujx15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

scans from the beginning to the end of a sentence (I). The
high-level process is to detect a relation indicator at some
particular position. If a certain relation is identified, a lowlevel sequential process is triggered to identify the corresponding entities for that relation (II). When the low-level
subtask for entity extraction is completed (III), the highlevel RL process continues its scan to search for the next
relation (IV) in the sentence.
This paradigm has strengths in dealing with two issues
existing in prior studies. First, most traditional models
(Gormley, Yu, and Dredze 2015; Hoffmann et al. 2011;
Miwa and Bansal 2016) determine a relation type only after all the entities have been recognized, whereas the interaction between the two tasks is not fully captured. In some
sense, these methods are aligning a relation to entity pairs,
and therefore, they may introduce additional noise since a
sentence containing an entity pair may not truly mention the
relation (Zhang et al. 2013), or may describe multiple relations (Takamatsu, Sato, and Nakagawa 2012).
Second, there still lacks the elegance of the joint
extraction method to deal with one-to-many problems
(overlapping relations): one entity may participate in multiple relations in the same sentence (see Steve Blichick in
Figure 1), or even the same entity pair within a sentence is
associated with different relations. To our best knowledge,
CopyR (Zeng et al. 2018) is the only method that discussed
this issue, which views relation extraction as a triple generation process. However, this method, as our experiments reveal, strongly relies on the training data, and cannot extract
multi-word entity mentions.
In our paradigm, the first issue is handled by treating entities as the arguments of a relation. The dependency between
entity mentions and relation types is formulated through designing the state representations and rewards in the highlevel and low-level RL processes. The interaction is well
captured since the main task (high-level RL process for relation detection) passes messages when launching a subtask
(low-level RL process for entity extraction), and the lowlevel rewards, signifying how well a subtask is completed,
are passed back to the main task. In this manner, the interaction between relation types and entity mentions can be better
modeled.
The second issue is addressed by our hierarchical structure. By decomposing relation extraction into a high-level

Most existing methods determine relation types only after all
the entities have been recognized, thus the interaction between relation types and entity mentions is not fully modeled. This paper presents a novel paradigm to deal with relation extraction by regarding the related entities as the arguments of a relation. We apply a hierarchical reinforcement
learning (HRL) framework in this paradigm to enhance the
interaction between entity mentions and relation types. The
whole extraction process is decomposed into a hierarchy of
two-level RL policies for relation detection and entity extraction respectively, so that it is more feasible and natural to deal
with overlapping relations. Our model was evaluated on public datasets collected via distant supervision, and results show
that it gains better performance than existing methods and is
more powerful for extracting overlapping relations1 .

Introduction
Extracting entities, relations, or events from unstructured
texts is crucial for building large-scale, reusable knowledge which can facilitate many other tasks (Mintz et al.
2009; Nadeau and Sekine 2007), including knowledge base
construction (Dong et al. 2014; Luan et al. 2018), question answering (Fader, Zettlemoyer, and Etzioni 2014), and
biomedical text mining (Huang and Lu 2015).
The task of relation extraction is to identify relations
(es , r, et )2 , a triple consisting of a relation type r, a source
entity es and a target entity et . In this paper, we propose
a novel joint extraction paradigm in the framework of hierarchical reinforcement learning (Sutton, Precup, and Singh
1999), where we first detect a relation and then extract the
corresponding entities as the argument of a relation.
Our model detects relation indicators by a high-level reinforcement learning (RL) process and identifies the participating entities for the relation by a low-level RL process. As
shown in Figure 1, the extraction process makes sequential
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Data and code are publicly available at: https://github.com/
truthless11/HRL-RE.
∗
All authors contributed equally to this work.
†
Corresponding author: Minlie Huang.
2
Throughout this paper, a relation refers to a triple (es , r, et ), a
relation type refers to r.

7072

