The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Trust Region Evolution Strategies
Guoqing Liu,†∗ Li Zhao,‡ Feidiao Yang,‡§ Jiang Bian,‡ Tao Qin,‡ Nenghai Yu,† Tie-Yan Liu‡
†

University of Science and Technology of China
‡
Microsoft Research
§
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
lgq1001@mail.ustc.edu.cn; {lizo, jiang.bian, taoqin, tyliu}@microsoft.com; yangfeidiao@ict.ac.cn
𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑥𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐿𝜃 ( ෨
𝜃)

Abstract
𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝐽( ෨
𝜃)

Evolution Strategies (ES), a class of black-box optimization
algorithms, has recently been demonstrated to be a viable alternative to popular MDP-based RL techniques such as Qlearning and Policy Gradients. ES achieves fairly good performance on challenging reinforcement learning problems
and is easier to scale in a distributed setting. However, standard ES algorithms perform one gradient update per data
sample, which is not very efficient. In this paper, with the
purpose of more efficient using of sampled data, we propose a novel iterative procedure that optimizes a surrogate
objective function, enabling to reuse data sample for multiple
epochs of updates. We prove monotonic improvement guarantee for such procedure. By making several approximations
to the theoretically-justified procedure, we further develop
a practical algorithm called Trust Region Evolution Strategies (TRES). Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of TRES on a range of popular MuJoCo locomotion tasks in
the OpenAI Gym, achieving better performance than ES algorithm.

𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝜃

𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑥𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝐾𝐿 𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑦
𝑚𝑎𝑥
෨
𝐿𝜃 𝜃෨ − 𝑐𝐷𝐾𝐿
(𝜃, 𝜃)

Figure 1: Red curve represents true objective. Green curve
represents local approximation. Blue curve represents local
approximation with KL penalty, which is the surrogate objective function. The surrogate objective function forms a
lower bound of the true objective, so optimizing this surrogate objective is guaranteed to improve the true objective.
on Atari games. With competitive performance and good
parallelization, ES algorithms are receiving more and more
attention as a scalable alternative to popular MDP-based RL
techniques.
Compared to MDP-based RL techniques, ES algorithms
employ a different path of techniques by directly searching
optimal policy in parameter space. To be specific, the ES
algorithm in (Salimans et al. 2017) proposed to optimize the
Gaussian smoothing of objective function,

Introduction
Developing agents that can accomplish challenging tasks
in complex, uncertain environments is a primary goal of
Reinforcement Learning (RL). The most popular paradigm
for analyzing such problem has been using a class of
MDP-based algorithms, such as DQN (Mnih et al. 2015),
DDPG (Lillicrap et al. 2015), and TRPO (Schulman et
al. 2015), which have gained significant achievements after applying to a variety of applications, including Atari
games (Mnih et al. 2015; Van Hasselt, Guez, and Silver
2016; Mnih et al. 2016), robot locomotion tasks (Schulman
et al. 2015; 2017) and the game of Go (Silver et al. 2016;
2017).
Recently, as a class of black-box optimization algorithms,
Evolution Strategies (ES) (Salimans et al. 2017) has been
risen to be a viable alternative to popular MDP-based RL
techniques. As comparable to state-of-the-art policy gradient
methods, ES has demonstrated its success in training policies on a variety of simulated robotics tasks in MuJoCo and

J(θ) = EX∼N (θ,σ2 I) [F (X)],

(1)

where F (X) is the objective function representing the expected total reward. In each training iteration of above ES algorithm, two phrases are executed sequentially: 1) Sampling
search directions i from Gaussian distribution N (0, σ 2 I)
and evaluating these search directions by sampling data using policy with parameter (θ + i ) in the environment. 2)
Using sampled data to estimate the gradient which are then
applied to update the corresponding parameter. Given such
procedure, in order to enhance ES algorithms, one vital direction is to improve sample efficiency, which is not that
high in current ES algorithm since the sampled data is only
used for one gradient update.
To boost sample efficiency, it is essentially comprised of
two major aspects. One aspect concerns how to sample better or more diverse search directions, and the other one corresponds to how to make more efficient use of existing sampled data. Some recent works (Choromanski et al. 2018;
Maheswaranathan et al. 2018) have been proposed for improving sample efficiency of ES algorithms from the first

∗
This work was done when the first author was on an internship
with Microsoft Research.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4352

