The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Non–Convex Optimization Approach to Correlation Clustering
Erik Thiel, Morteza Haghir Chehreghani, Devdatt Dubhashi
Chalmers University of Technology
{erikthi, morteza.chehreghani, dubhashi}@chalmers.se

Abstract

We then observe that our formulation is very well suited to
the classical Frank-Wolfe (FW) or conditional gradient optimization algorithm and develop new algorithms for correlation clustering. There have been many recent advances in
the FW method that renders it very suitable for large scale
optimization and we take advantage of the block coordinate
version of the FW algorithm. Also, we leverage recent advances in acceleration of first order optimization methods
to develop several variants of our algorithms for correlation clustering ranging from a very simple combinatorial local search algorithm to various accelerated and randomized
methods which are highly scalable for ”Big Data” settings.
In all these versions, we can either specify the number of
clusters or we can have the algorithm discover the number
of clusters in a data driven fashion. Building on recent results
on the FW algorithm, we show that for multilinear functions
(not necessarily concave/convex), the block FW algorithm
has fast convergence properties. This translates into rigorous guarantees for the running time of our combinatorial
correlation clustering algorithms. We also show that all our
algorithms can be implemented very efficiently to scale to
large scale systems (unlike previous methods based on LP
and SDP relaxations. We also show that the quality of results obtained are vastly superior to those obtained from the
methods from the approximation algorithms literature.

We develop a non-convex optimization approach to correlation clustering using the Frank-Wolfe (FW) framework. We
show that the basic approach leads to a simple and natural local search algorithm with guaranteed convergence. This algorithm already beats alternative algorithms by substantial margins in both running time and quality of the clustering. Using ideas from FW algorithms, we develop subsampling and
variance reduction paradigms for this approach. This yields
both a practical improvement of the algorithm and some interesting further directions to investigate. We demonstrate the
performance on both synthetic and real world data sets.

Introduction
Clustering is a central task in exploratory data analytics with
applications in many domains including image processing,
compression, knowledge management, social media analytics, etc. Clustering models usually assume a set of n objects (for instance, a set of documents, images or users) and
the corresponding measurements in form of, e.g., the feature
vectors or the pairwise similarities. The latter form, considers a (weighted) graph where the objects are the nodes and
the pairwise similarities constitute the edge weights. Most of
graph clustering models, e.g., normalized cut (Shi and Malik 2000), spectral clustering (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2001;
von Luxburg 2007), power iteration clustering (Lin and Cohen 2010) and dominant set clustering (Pavan and Pelillo
2007; Haghir Chehreghani 2016), assume nonnegative pairwise similarities.
However, a particular clustering model, called correlation
clustering (Bansal, Blum, and Chawla 2004; Demaine et al.
2006; Williamson and Shmoys 2011) is a very useful and
flexible framework for unsupervised learning in the setting
when one has both similarity as well as dissimilarity judgments between a set of objects. The problem has been extensively studied in the literature on approximation algorithms
using linear programming (LP) and semi–definite programming (SDP) techniques.
Here we introduce a new approach to the problem based
on a natural non–convex relaxation. We show that this relaxation is tight, in contrast to LP or SDP based relaxations.

Background on Correlation Clustering
In the correlation clustering problem, we are given a graph
G = (V, E) with weights wi,j on the edges which may be
both positive and negative. In the maximizing agreements
version of the problem, we are required to partition the vertices into clusters so that the sum of the weights of edges
within a cluster is maximized. We start with the exact formulation similar to (6.7) from (Williamson and Shmoys 2011):
X
max
wi,j v i · v j z
(i,j)∈E

v i ∈ {e1 , · · · , ek }, i = 1 · · · n

(1)

(where ei , i = 1 · · · k are the basis vectors). In (Williamson
and Shmoys 2011) and in much approximation algorithm
literature, often the SDP relaxation of this formulation is
considered. In this high dimensional relaxation, the number of clusters k disappears (which could be both a strength

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5159

