The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Balanced Linear Contextual Bandits
Maria Dimakopoulou,1 Zhengyuan Zhou,2 Susan Athey,3 Guido Imbens3
1

Department of Management Science & Engineering, Stanford University
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
3
Graduate School of Business, Stanford University
madima@stanford.edu, zyzhou@stanford.edu, athey@stanford.edu, imbens@stanford.edu

Abstract

In the contextual setting, one does not expect to see many
future observations with the same context as the current observation, and so the value of learning from pulling an arm
for this context accrues when that observation is used to estimate the outcome from this arm for a different context in
the future. Therefore, the performance of contextual bandit
algorithms can be sensitive to the estimation method of the
outcome model or the exploration method used. In the initial
phases of learning when samples are small, biases are likely
to arise in estimating the outcome model using data from
previous non-uniform assignments of contexts to arms. The
bias issue is aggravated in the case of a mismatch between
the generative model and the functional form used for estimation of the outcome model, or similarly, when the heterogeneity in treatment effects is too complex to estimate
well with small datasets. In that case methods that proceed
under the assumption that the functional form for the outcome model is correct may be overly optimistic about the
extent of the learning so far, and emphasize exploitation
over exploration. Another case where biases can arise occurs when training observations from certain regions of the
context space are scarce (e.g., prejudice in training data if
a non-representative set of users arrives in initial batches of
data). These problems are common in real-world settings,
such as in survey experiments in the domain of social sciences or in applications to health, recommender systems, or
education. For example, early adopters of an online course
may have different characteristics than later adopters.

Contextual bandit algorithms are sensitive to the estimation
method of the outcome model as well as the exploration
method used, particularly in the presence of rich heterogeneity or complex outcome models, which can lead to difficult
estimation problems along the path of learning. We develop
algorithms for contextual bandits with linear payoffs that integrate balancing methods from the causal inference literature
in their estimation to make it less prone to problems of estimation bias. We provide the first regret bound analyses for
linear contextual bandits with balancing and show that our
algorithms match the state of the art theoretical guarantees.
We demonstrate the strong practical advantage of balanced
contextual bandits on a large number of supervised learning
datasets and on a synthetic example that simulates model misspecification and prejudice in the initial training data.

Introduction
Contextual bandits seek to learn a personalized treatment assignment policy in the presence of treatment effects that vary
with observed contextual features. In such settings, there is
a need to balance the exploration of actions for which there
is limited knowledge in order to improve performance in the
future against the exploitation of existing knowledge in order to attain better performance in the present (see (Bubeck
and Cesa-Bianchi 2012) for a survey). Since large amounts
of data can be required to learn how the benefits of alternative treatments vary with individual characteristics, contextual bandits can play an important role in making experimentation and learning more efficient. Several successful
contextual bandit designs have been proposed (Auer 2003),
(Li et al. 2010), (Agrawal and Goyal 2013), (Agarwal et al.
2014), (Bastani and Bayati 2015). The existing literature has
provided regret bounds (e.g., the general bounds of (Russo
and Van Roy 2014), the bounds of (Rigollet and Zeevi 2010),
(Perchet and Rigollet 2013), (Slivkins 2014) in the case of
non-parametric function of arm rewards), has demonstrated
successful applications (e.g., news article recommendations
(Li et al. 2010) or mobile health (Lei, Tewari, and Murphy
2017)), and has proposed system designs to apply these algorithms in practice (Agarwal et al. 2016).

Reweighting or balancing methods address model misspecification by making the estimation “doubly-robust,”, robust against misspecification of the reward function, important here, and robust against the specification of the propensity score (not as important here because in the bandit setting
we know the propensity score). The term “doubly-robust”
comes from the extensive literature on offline policy evaluation (Scharfstein, Rotnitzky, and Robins 1999); it means in
our case that when comparing two policies using historical
data, we get consistent estimates of the average difference
in outcomes for segments of the context whether we have
either a well-specified model of rewards or not, as long as
we have a good model of the arm assignment policy (i.e.,
accurate propensity scores). Because in a contextual bandit
the learner controls the arm assignment policy conditional
on the observed context, we therefore have access to accu-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3445

