The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Embedding Uncertain Knowledge Graphs
Xuelu Chen, Muhao Chen, Weijia Shi, Yizhou Sun, Carlo Zaniolo
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA
{shirleychen, muhaochen, swj0419, yzsun, zaniolo}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

machine learning. These models encode entities as lowdimensional vectors and relations as algebraic operations
among entity vectors. They accurately capture the similarity of entities and preserve the structure of KGs in the embedding space. Hence, they have been the crucial feature
models that benefit numerous knowledge-driven tasks (Bordes, Weston, and Usunier 2014; He et al. 2017; Das et al.
2018). Recently, extensive efforts have been devoted into
embedding deterministic KGs. Translational models, e.g.,
TransE (Bordes et al. 2013) and TransH (Wang et al. 2014)),
and bilinear models, e.g. DistMult (Yang et al. 2015) and
ComplEx (Trouillon et al. 2016), have achieved promising
performance in many tasks, such as link prediction (Yang
et al. 2015; Trouillon et al. 2016), relation extraction (Weston, Bordes, and others 2013), relational learning (Nickel,
Rosasco, and Poggio 2016), and ontology population (Chen
et al. 2018).
While current embedding models focus on capturing deterministic knowledge, it is critical to incorporate uncertainty information into knowledge sources for several reasons. First, uncertainty is the nature of many forms of
knowledge. An example of naturally uncertain knowledge
is the interactions between proteins. Since molecular reactions are random processes, biologists label the protein interactions with their probabilities of occurrence and present
them as uncertain KGs called Protein-Protein Interaction
(PPI) Networks. Second, uncertainty enhances inference in
knowledge-driven applications. For example, short text understanding often entails interpreting real-world concepts
that are ambiguous or intrinsically vague. The probabilistic KG Probase (Wu et al. 2012) provides a prior probability distribution of concepts behind a term that has critically
supported short text understanding tasks involving disambiguation (Wang et al. 2015; Wang and Wang 2016). Furthermore, uncertain knowledge representations have largely
benefited various applications, such as question answering
(Yih et al. 2013) and named entity recognition (Ratinov and
Roth 2009).
Capturing the uncertainty information with KG embeddings remains an unresolved problem. This is a non-trivial
task for several reasons. First, compared to deterministic KG
embeddings, uncertain KG embeddings need to encode additional confidence information to preserve uncertainty. Second, current KG embedding models cannot capture the sub-

Embedding models for deterministic Knowledge Graphs
(KG) have been extensively studied, with the purpose of capturing latent semantic relations between entities and incorporating the structured knowledge they contain into machine
learning. However, there are many KGs that model uncertain knowledge, which typically model the inherent uncertainty of relations facts with a confidence score, and embedding such uncertain knowledge represents an unresolved
challenge. The capturing of uncertain knowledge will benefit many knowledge-driven applications such as question answering and semantic search by providing more natural characterization of the knowledge. In this paper, we propose a
novel uncertain KG embedding model UKGE, which aims to
preserve both structural and uncertainty information of relation facts in the embedding space. Unlike previous models
that characterize relation facts with binary classification techniques, UKGE learns embeddings according to the confidence
scores of uncertain relation facts. To further enhance the precision of UKGE, we also introduce probabilistic soft logic to
infer confidence scores for unseen relation facts during training. We propose and evaluate two variants of UKGE based on
different confidence score modeling strategies. Experiments
are conducted on three real-world uncertain KGs via three
tasks, i.e. confidence prediction, relation fact ranking, and relation fact classification. UKGE shows effectiveness in capturing uncertain knowledge by achieving promising results, and
it consistently outperforms baselines on these tasks.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Graphs (KGs) provide structured representations of real-world entities and relations, which are categorized into the following two types: (i) Deterministic KGs,
such as YAGO (Rebele et al. 2016) and FreeBase (Bollacker et al. 2008), consist of deterministic relation facts
that describe semantic relations between entities; (ii) Uncertain KGs including ProBase (Wu et al. 2012), ConceptNet
(Speer, Chin, and Havasi 2017) and NELL (Mitchell et al.
2018) associate every relation fact with a confidence score
that represents the likelihood of the relation fact to be true.
KG embedding models are essential tools for incorporating the structured knowledge representations in KGs into
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3363

