The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

FRIDAYS: A Financial Risk Information Detecting and Analyzing System
∗

∗

Chi-Han Du,1 Yi-Shyuan Chiang,1 Kun-Che Tsai,1
Liang-Chih Liu,2 Ming-Feng Tsai,3,4 Chuan-Ju Wang1
2

1
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
Department of Information and Finance Management, National Taipei University of Technology, Taiwan
3
Department of Computer Science, National Chengchi University, Taiwan
4
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare, Taiwan
hans@citi.sinica.edu.tw, s107074604@m107.nthu.edu.tw, q40603.cs05@nctu.edu.tw,
lcliu@ntut.edu.tw, mftsai@cs.nccu.edu.tw, cjwang@citi.sinica.edu.tw

a comprehensive system for detecting financial risk,∗ and
for visualizing financial reports to reduce the burden on financial personnel or other professionals such as educators or
researchers and to bridge the gap between technical results
and useful interpretation. FRIDAYS, the proposed system, is
an NLP system that analyzes 10-K filings – the annual financial reports of companies subject to SEC regulations – and
specializes in visualizing and integrating the four sentiment
classes of financial words (FWs) and financial multiword
expressions (FMWEs) (i.e., positive, negative, litigious, and
uncertain), and the financial risk levels of sentences (FSs)
(including high, natural, and low risk levels). To address the
challenges of revealing information between the different text
granularity levels, the proposed system integrates multiple
NLP models. These models either detect the existence of
FWs and FMWEs, classify their sentiments (Schneider and
Smith 2015), or classify FS risk (Joulin et al. 2017). Our
system aims to showcase three different kinds of analytical
information at the same time in an effective way. FRIDAYS
provides two types of user interfaces: one for the assessment
of a single report, and the other for an overview of a given
company. The system helps users to efficiently comprehend
financial sentiment and risk delivered by financial reports.
With the proposed system, we provide the following potential usage scenarios for professionals: (1) Financial professionals (e.g., accountants) can easily identify problematic
(e.g., potentially high-risk) sentences, and use it as a doublecheck tool for use in decision-making; (2) Accounting educators can verify the assumptions and conclusions in financial
NLP research, and can also utilize the system to facilitate
their teaching; (3) Machine learning researchers can use the
system to assess prediction results and thus locate potential
problems in proposed models to improve performance.

Abstract
We present FRIDAYS, a financial risk information detecting
and analyzing system that enables financial professionals to
efficiently comprehend financial reports in terms of risk and
domain-specific sentiment cues. Our system is designed to
integrate multiple NLP models trained on financial reports
but on different levels (i.e., word, multi-word, and sentence
levels) and to illustrate the prediction results generated by the
models. The system is available online at https://cfda.csie.org/
FRIDAYS/.

Introduction
Financial reports, carefully written by accounting professionals and composed of detailed information about the operating
conditions of companies and domain-specific terms, usually
make for tedious, difficult reading. Given the crucial information contained in such financial reports, they are usually
the object of formal requests by administrations for regulation. Auditors and investors across governments and business
domains are thus obliged to digest all materials manually,
in order to assess the operational risk for official decisionmaking; yet the nature of financial report texts leads to great
difficulties for auditors and investors, who seek to interpret
these reports both comprehensively and efficiently.
A further challenge is that the semantics contained in text is
far from a simple composition of the meanings of individual
words, for which usual keyword matching techniques are often inadequate or even infeasible in some cases. Though this
phenomenon is universal when dealing with text information,
it becomes a serious problem for financial report analysis as
the sentences in reports are usually long and complicated.
Thus, a significant amount of time and effort is required for
practitioners to decode the information in financial reports.
Given the importance and the great challenge of financial
report interpretation, it is surprising that there are few tools
to assist professionals in this task. A rare exception is the
publicly available RiskFinder (Liu et al. 2018), which however only visualizes the prediction result of text classification
models on financial sentences. Therefore, our goal is to build

User Interface
FRIDAYS enables users to investigate financial risk using two
different methods: (1) Single report assessment, analyzing
the risk composition and sentiment cues of individual reports;
(2) Company overview, comparing a company’s reports over
the years. To assess a single report, as shown in Fig. 1(a), by

∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

∗
Financial risk is often understood to include the potential for
financial loss and uncertainty about its extent.

9853

