The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

“Bilingual Expert” Can Find Translation Errors
Kai Fan,∗ Jiayi Wang,∗ Bo Li,∗ Fengming Zhou, Boxing Chen, Luo Si
Alibaba Group Inc.
k.fan,joanne.wjy,shiji.lb,zfm104435,boxing.cbx,luo.si@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

in CAT to reduce human efforts, thereby increasing productivity (Specia 2011). Either the global sentence quality score
or the fine-grained word “OK/BAD” tags can guide the CAT
as an evidence to indicate whether a machine translation output requires further manual post-editing, or even which particular token needs special correction.

The performances of machine translation (MT) systems are
usually evaluated by the metric BLEU when the golden references are provided. However, in the case of model inference or production deployment, golden references are usually expensively available, such as human annotation with
bilingual expertise. In order to address the issue of translation quality estimation (QE) without reference, we propose
a general framework for automatic evaluation of the translation output for the QE task in the Conference on Statistical
Machine Translation (WMT). We first build a conditional target language model with a novel bidirectional transformer,
named neural bilingual expert model, which is pre-trained
on large parallel corpora for feature extraction. For QE inference, the bilingual expert model can simultaneously produce the joint latent representation between the source and the
translation, and real-valued measurements of possible erroneous tokens based on the prior knowledge learned from parallel data. Subsequently, the features will further be fed into
a simple Bi-LSTM predictive model for quality estimation.
The experimental results show that our approach achieves the
state-of-the-art performance in most public available datasets
of WMT 2017/2018 QE task.

Figure 1: The correct translation should be “Apple is better than Google”. Note that the screenshot is taken on
04/03/2018, and this error has been fixed.
One traditional direction for translation quality estimation is to formulate the sentence level score or word level
tags prediction as a constraint regression or sequence labeling problem respectively (Bojar et al. 2017). The classical
baseline model is to use the QuEst++ (Specia, Paetzold, and
Scarton 2015) with two modules: rule based feature extractor and scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011) SVM algorithms.
Similarly, the recent predictor-estimator model (Kim et al.
2017) is a recurrent neural network (RNN) based feature extractor and quality estimation model, ranking first place at
WMT 2017 QE.
Another promising direction is to build a multi-task learning model to incorporate quality estimation task with automatic post-editing (APE) together (Hokamp 2017; Tan et al.
2017; Chatterjee et al. 2018), achieving the goal of CAT
eventually. In this paper, we will first adopt the traditional
single task framework to describe our model. In the experimental section, we also propose an extension to support
multi-task learning for QE and APE simultaneously.
However, the final prediction model for scoring or tagging is not the main contribution in our work. Since there
are many publicly available bilingual corpora, we can readily build a conditional language model as a robust feature
extractor. The high level joint latent representation of the
source and the target in a parallel pair can hopefully capture

Introduction
The neural machine translation (NMT) in a sequenceto-sequence fashion, empowering an end-to-end learning
approach for automatic translation system, has accomplished great success to potentially overcome many of the
weaknesses of conventional phrase-based translation, and
claimed being close to human parity for certain language
pairs (Wu et al. 2016; Hassan et al. 2018). However, current
MT systems are still not perfect to meet the real-world applications without human post-editing (a popular example is
the Chinese to English translation test at Google online system in Figure 1). Apparently, additional error correction is
needed for even such a simple translation output. A possible
solution to take advantage of the existing MT technologies
is to collaborate with human translators within a computerassisted translation (CAT) (Barrachina et al. 2009). In such
cases, translation quality estimation (QE) plays a critical role
∗

indicates equal contribution.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6367

