The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Stochastic Submodular Maximization with Performance-Dependent Item Costs∗
Takuro Fukunaga,1 Takuya Konishi,2 Sumio Fujita,3 Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi2
1

RIKEN Advanced Intelligence Project and JST, PRESTO, takuro.fukunaga@riken.jp
2
National Institute of Informatics, {takuya-ko,k keniti}@nii.ac.jp
3
Yahoo Japan Corporation, sufujita@yahoo-corp.jp

Abstract

This problem models many natural settings of decision
making. Here, we present two examples.
Recommendation: Diminishing marginal return property
plays a key role in designing objectives for recommender
systems (Ziegler et al. 2005). For example, in news recommendation, users often browse news articles in order to cover
daily news or to know the different aspects of a favorite topic.
It is critical for such users to recommend diverse and unseen
items, and the objective function is modeled through submodular functions (El-Arini et al. 2009; Yue and Guestrin 2011;
Ahmed et al. 2012). In several practical scenarios, the performance of a recommended item is determined by some
random factors, and it incurs a cost according to the performance; e.g., when a user receives recommended news
articles, he/she decides to skip or (partially) read them and
spends his/her own time or money by reading the selected
articles. The existing formulations are not applicable to this
situation because they cannot deal with the case where both
the performances and the costs of items are unknown before
recommending them.
Batch-mode active learning: In the batch-mode active
learning, we have a set of unlabeled data and the objective
is to select several data points to label subject to a budget
constraint on the cost. In a previous study (Hoi et al. 2006),
this task is formulated as a monotone submodular maximization problem, where the objective function represents the
information amount of data. However, this existing formulation does not consider uncertainty in the performance of
labeling. In many cases, time for labeling the given data is
limited, and it is uncertain in advance how much data can
be processed within the given time due to factors such as
variation of labelers’ skill and experimental conditions. Also,
it is natural that the cost (e.g., the fee paid to labelers) for
the labeling depends on the amount of processed data (see
also Figure 1). Our problem can model this situation while it
cannot be handled by the existing formulation.
We present algorithms that compute adaptive policies for
this problem together with the theoretical analysis of their
performances. One of our proposed algorithms is guaranteed
√
to achieve an expected objective value of least (1 − 1/ 4 e)/2
(> 0.110) times that attained by any adaptive policy. In addition to the theoretical guarantee, we evaluate the empirical
performances of our algorithms through numerical experiments. The experimental results indicate that our algorithms

We formulate a new stochastic submodular maximization problem by introducing the performance-dependent costs of items.
In this problem, we consider selecting items for the case where
the performance of each item (i.e., how much an item contributes to the objective function) is decided randomly, and the
cost of an item depends on its performance. The goal of the
problem is to maximize the objective function subject to a budget constraint on the costs of the selected items. We present an
adaptive algorithm for this problem with a theoretical guaran√
tee that its expected objective value is at least (1 − 1/ 4 e)/2
times the maximum value attained by any adaptive algorithms.
We verify the performance of the algorithm through numerical
experiments.

1

Introduction

In the stochastic submodular maximization, we are given a
set of items associated with a random utility function that has
a certain diminishing marginal return property. The goal of
the problem is to select items so as to maximize the utility
function subject to constraints. To deal with decision making
under uncertainty, several variants of stochastic submodular
maximization are actively being considered (see Section 2),
and the approaches proposed in this literature have been
successfully applied to numerous decision making tasks.
The aim of this paper is to introduce the performancedependent costs of items into the stochastic submodular maximization. In many decision making applications, we sometimes have to make a decision without exact information on
the performance of each item (i.e., how much an item contributes to the utility function) because it varies on several
uncertain factors. Moreover, it is often the case that the cost
of selecting an item varies depending on its performance. To
deal with this situation, we introduce random performance
and performance-dependent costs of items, and consider the
stochastic optimization problem of maximizing the utility
function subject to a budget constraint on the costs of the
selected items.
∗
The first author is supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number
JP17K00040 and JST PRESTO Grant Number JPMJPR1759. The
second and the fourth authors are supported by JST ERATO Grant
Number JPMJER1201.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1485

