The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On the Proximity of Markets with Integral Equilibria
Siddharth Barman

Sanath Kumar Krishnamurthy

Indian Institute of Science
barman@iisc.ac.in

Stanford University
sanathsk@stanford.edu

Abstract

The convex program of Eisenberg and Gale provides a
remarkable characterization (and, in conjunction, a proof
of existence) of equilibria in Fisher markets with additive valuations: the primal and dual solutions of their convex program correspond to the equilibrium allocations and
prices, respectively (Eisenberg and Gale 1959; Nisan et al.
2007). The seminal work of Arrow and Debreu (1954) further shows that equilibria exist under more general market models and convex settings; see, e.g., Mas-Colell et al.
(1995). The notable aspect of the Eisenberg-Gale characterization is that—in contrast to the encompassing result
of Arrow and Debreu—it provides an efficient method for
finding equilibria under additive valuations. Several algorithmic results have been developed recently for computing
Fisher market equilibria and, in fact, strongly polynomialtime algorithms are known for the additive case (Orlin 2010;
Végh 2012).
Along with efficiency, market equilibria provide strong
fairness guarantees. A well-known result of Varian (1974)
shows that if in a market all the agents have equal budgets,
then any market equilibrium—specifically called competitive equilibrium from equal incomes (CEEI)—leads to an
envy-free allocation. Envy freeness is a standard solution
concept and it deems an (fractional) allocation of the (divisible) goods to be fair if, under it, each agent prefers its
own bundle over that of any other agent (Foley 1967).
However, Fisher markets do not yield a representative
model in the context of indivisible goods. Such goods correspond to discrete resources (that cannot be fractionally assigned) and naturally occur in several allocation problems,
e.g., course assignment (Othman et al. 2010) and inventory
pricing (Rotemberg 2011). A market equilibrium, in general,
requires a fractional assignment of goods to agents. Hence,
one cannot simply consider a market with indivisible goods
and expect an equilibrium outcome wherein the goods do not
have to be fractionally assigned. In other words, the desirable market properties of efficiency, fairness, and computational tractability are somewhat confined to divisible goods.
Our work shows that one can bypass this hurdle and,
up to a bounded change in budgets, always obtain markets that admit integral equilibria. Specifically, we will consider markets that admit an equilibrium wherein each good
is integrally assigned to some agent. We will refer to such
Fisher markets as pure markets. Of course, not all mar-

We study Fisher markets that admit equilibria wherein each
good is integrally assigned to some agent. While strong existence and computational guarantees are known for equilibria of Fisher markets with additive valuations (Eisenberg and
Gale 1959; Orlin 2010), such equilibria, in general, assign
goods fractionally to agents. Hence, Fisher markets are not
directly applicable in the context of indivisible goods. In this
work we show that one can always bypass this hurdle and, up
to a bounded change in agents’ budgets, obtain markets that
admit an integral equilibrium. We refer to such markets as
pure markets and show that, for any given Fisher market (with
additive valuations), one can efficiently compute a “near-by,”
pure market with an accompanying integral equilibrium.
Our work on pure markets leads to novel algorithmic results for fair division of indivisible goods. Prior work in discrete fair division has shown that, under additive valuations,
there always exist allocations that simultaneously achieve
the seemingly incompatible properties of fairness and efficiency (Caragiannis et al. 2016); here fairness refers to envyfreeness up to one good (EF1) and efficiency corresponds to
Pareto efficiency. However, polynomial-time algorithms are
not known for finding such allocations. Considering relaxations of proportionality and EF1, respectively, as our notions
of fairness, we show that fair and Pareto efficient allocations
can be computed in strongly polynomial time.

1

Introduction

Fisher markets are fundamental models of resource allocation in mathematical economics (Brainard and Scarf 2000).
Such markets consist of a set of divisible goods along with a
set of buyers who have prespecified budgets and valuations
(over all possible bundles of the goods). In this work we focus on the basic setup wherein the valuations of the buyers
are additive. In an equilibrium of a Fisher market, goods are
assigned prices, each buyer spends its entire budget selecting only those goods that provide maximum value per unit of
money spent, and the market clears. The relevance of market equilibria (specifically from a resource-allocation perspective) is substantiated by the first welfare theorem which
asserts that such equilibria are always Pareto efficient (MasColell, Whinston, and Green 1995, Chapter 16).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1748

