The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

PGANs: Personalized Generative Adversarial Networks for ECG Synthesis to
Improve Patient-Specific Deep ECG Classification
Tomer Golany

Kira Radinsky

Technion-Israel Institute of Technology
Tomer.golany@cs.technion.ac.il

Technion-Israel Institute of Technology
Kirar@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract

an attempt to reach high performance in ECG classification
(Kass and Clancy 2006). Such models were used to reduce
interpretation errors by identifying life-threatening arrhythmias or as systems to alert about potential risks to patients.
Most methods today for ECG classification focus on
applying classical supervised machine learning methods
(Chazal and Reilly 2007; Ye, Kumar, and Coimbra 2012;
Escalona-Moran et al. 2014) and manual feature engineering. Lately, deep learning models (Al Rahhal et al. 2016)
were successfully applied and reached state-of-the-art results reducing the need for feature engineering. However,
in practice, neither of these methods have been able to scale
well across different patient’s types of ECGs (Kiranyaz,
Ince, and Gabbouj 2016). The changing nature of the ECG
signal dynamics and morphological characteristics are significantly different across patients, and strongly depend on
the patient’s physical condition. Given the high variability
between patients and internal-variability of heartbeat classification for same patients, building deep ECG models that
might be used in practice has been limited.
To scale deep learning to perform personalized ECG
classification, subject-specific labeled examples are needed.
However, labeling a sufficient amount of ECG samples for
each patient is an infeasible task. In this work, we overcome this sparseness of data by learning to synthetically
generate personalized ECG signals of different arrhythmias
that exhibit similar morphological characteristics to those of
the subject of classification. Those are then used to train
deep learning models which are better adapted to the subject. To learn patient-specific signals, we devise a novel
generative algorithm – Personalized Generative Adversarial Networks (PGANs). PGANs learn to generate personalized arrhythmia-specific ECG signals without any need for
subject-specific ECG labeling. This is achieved by learning
to generate ECGs that mimic the patient’s atrial and ventricular depolarization and repolarization patterns during the
specific arrhythmia, which are learned in an unsupervised
way from a few minutes of unlabeled ECG signals of the
patient.
GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014) are a class of machine
learning algorithms used in an unsupervised machine learning, usually implemented by two deep networks (a generator and a discriminator). The two networks compete with
each other in a zero-sum game framework. The generator at-

The Electrocardiogram (ECG) is performed routinely by
medical personnel to identify structural, functional and electrical cardiac events. Many attempts were made to automate
this task using machine learning algorithms including classic supervised learning algorithms and deep neural networks,
reaching state-of-the-art performance. The ECG signal conveys the specific electrical cardiac activity of each subject
thus extreme variations are observed between patients. These
variations are challenging for deep learning algorithms, and
impede generalization. In this work, we propose a semisupervised approach for patient-specific ECG classification.
We propose a generative model that learns to synthesize
patient-specific ECG signals, which can then be used as additional training data to improve a patient-specific classifier performance. Empirical results prove that the generated signals
significantly improve ECG classification in a patient-specific
setting.

1

Introduction

Patient-specific modeling (PSM) is the development of computational models of human pathophysiology that are individualized to patient-specific data (Neal and Kerckhoffs
2010). In the last years, PSM has been gaining attention
from the research community due to the potential to improve diagnosis. Today, medical diagnosis is based on rough
averages derived from clinical trials which might not apply
directly to a specific patient condition (Kent and Hayward
2007). PSM can be used to optimize an individual’s diagnosis and reach higher accuracies.
In this work, we focus on PSM in the field of cardiology. Electrocardiography (ECG) is a non-invasive tool used
for diagnosis and follow-up of cardiac anomalies, functional
disorders and cardiac arrhythmias. Any anomaly regarding
the heart rhythm or the morphological pattern of the cardiac
heart beats as sampled by the ECG, can indicate acute functional emergencies such as acute Myocardial Ischemia or
acute rhythm disturbances, meaning an arrhythmia. With the
ongoing shortage of trained cardiologists and with the widespread use of home ECGs to monitor patients with cardiac
risks, a need to develop fully automated ECG classification
mechanisms has arisen. Many studies were conducted in
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

557

