The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Anytime Predictions in Neural Networks via Adaptive Loss Balancing
Hanzhang Hu,1 Debadeepta Dey,2 Martial Hebert,1 J. Andrew Bagnell1
1

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Microsoft Research
hanzhang@cs.cmu.edu, dedey@microsoft.com, hebert@cs.cmu.edu, dbagnell@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
This work considers the trade-off between accuracy and testtime computational cost of deep neural networks (DNNs)
via anytime predictions from auxiliary predictions. Specifically, we optimize auxiliary losses jointly in an adaptive
weighted sum, where the weights are inversely proportional
to average of each loss. Intuitively, this balances the losses
to have the same scale. We demonstrate theoretical considerations that motivate this approach from multiple viewpoints,
including connecting it to optimizing the geometric mean of
the expectation of each loss, an objective that ignores the
scale of losses. Experimentally, the adaptive weights induce
more competitive anytime predictions on multiple recognition data-sets and models than non-adaptive approaches including weighing all losses equally. In particular, anytime
neural networks (ANNs) can achieve the same accuracy faster
using adaptive weights on a small network than using static
constant weights on a large one. For problems with high performance saturation, we also show a sequence of exponentially deepening ANNs can achieve near-optimal anytime results at any budget, at the cost of a const fraction of extra
computation.

1

Figure 1: The common ANN training strategy increases final
errors from the optimal (green vs. blue), which decreases
exponentially slowly. By learning to focus more on the final
auxiliary losses, the proposed adaptive loss weights make a
small ANN (orange) to outperform a large one (green) that
has non-adaptive weights.

Introduction
An anytime predictor (Horvitz 1987; Boddy and Dean
1989; Zilberstein 1996; Grubb and Bagnell 2012; Huang et
al. 2018) can automatically trade off between computation
and accuracy. For each test sample, an anytime predictor
produces a fast and crude initial prediction and continues
to refine it as budget allows, so that at any test-time budget, the anytime predictor has a valid result for the sample,
and the more budget is spent, the better the prediction. Anytime predictors are different from cascaded predictors (Viola and Jones 2001; Xu et al. 2014; Cai, Saberian, and Vasconcelos 2015; Bolukbasi et al. 2017; Guan et al. 2017) for
budgeted prediction, which aim to minimize average testtime computational cost without sacrificing average accuracy: a different task (with relation to anytime prediction).
Cascades achieve this by early exiting on easy samples to
save computation for difficult ones, but cascades cannot incrementally improve individual samples after an exit. Furthermore, early exit policy of cascades can be combined
with existing anytime predictors (Bolukbasi et al. 2017;
Guan et al. 2017). Hence, we consider cascades to be orthogonal to anytime predictions.

Recent years have seen advancement in visual recognition tasks by increasingly accurate convolutional neural
networks, from AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) and VGG (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015), to
ResNet (He et al. 2016), ResNeXt (Xie et al. 2017), and
DenseNet (Huang et al. 2017). As models become more
accurate and computationally expensive, it becomes more
difficult for applications to choose between slow predictors
with high accuracy and fast predictors with low accuracy.
Some applications also desire multiple trade-offs between
computation and accuracy, because they have computational
budgets that may vary at test time. E.g., web servers for facial recognition or spam filtering may have higher load during the afternoon than at midnight. Autonomous vehicles
need faster object detection when moving rapidly than when
it is stationary. Furthermore, real-time and latency sensitive
applications may desire fast predictions on easy samples and
slow but accurate predictions on difficult ones.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3812

