The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Combined Reinforcement Learning via Abstract Representations
Vincent François-Lavet

Yoshua Bengio

McGill University, Mila
vincent.francois-lavet@mcgill.ca

Université de Montreal, Mila
yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec

Doina Precup

Joelle Pineau

McGill University, Mila, DeepMind
dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca

McGill University, Mila, Facebook AI Research
jpineau@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract

of the encoder. As compared to previous works that build
implicitly an abstract representation through model-free objectives (see Section 5 for details), the CRAR agent creates a
low-dimensional representation that captures meaningful dynamics, even in the absence of any reward (thus without the
model-free part). In addition, our approach is modular thanks
to the explicit learning of the model-based and model-free
components. The main elements of the CRAR architecture
are illustrated in Figure 1.

In the quest for efficient and robust reinforcement learning
methods, both model-free and model-based approaches offer
advantages. In this paper we propose a new way of explicitly
bridging both approaches via a shared low-dimensional
learned encoding of the environment, meant to capture
summarizing abstractions. We show that the modularity
brought by this approach leads to good generalization while
being computationally efficient, with planning happening in a
smaller latent state space. In addition, this approach recovers a
sufficient low-dimensional representation of the environment,
which opens up new strategies for interpretable AI, exploration
and transfer learning.

s0
a0

r0

encoder

1

Introduction

abstract
state

In reinforcement learning (RL), there are two main approaches to learn how to perform sequential decision-making
tasks from experience. The first approach is the model-based
approach where the agent learns a model of the environment
(the dynamics and the rewards) and then makes use of a planning algorithm to choose the action at each time step. The
second approach, so-called model-free, builds directly a policy or an action-value function (from which an action choice
is straightforward). For some tasks, the structure of the policy
(or action-value function) offers more regularity and thus a
model-free approach would be more efficient, whereas in
other tasks it may be easier to learn the dynamics directly
due to some structure of the environment in which case a
model-based approach would be preferable. In practice, it is
possible to develop a combined approach that incorporates
both strategies.
We present a novel deep RL architecture, which we call
CRAR (Combined Reinforcement via Abstract Representations). The CRAR agent combines model-based and modelfree components, with the additional specificity that the proposed model forces both components to jointly infer a sufficient abstract representation of the environment. This is
achieved by explicitly training both the model-based and
the model-free components end-to-end, including the joint
abstract representation. To ensure the expressiveness of the
abstract state, we also introduce an approximate entropy maximization penalty in the objective function, at the output

s1

environment

a1

r1

encoder
reward
model
transition
model
model-based

abstract
state

s2

environment

encoder
reward
model
transition
model
model-based

...

abstract
state

modelfree

modelfree

modelfree

Q

Q

Q

Figure 1: Illustration of the integration of model-based
and model-free RL in the CRAR architecture, with a lowdimensional abstract state over which transitions and rewards
are modeled. The elements related to the actual environment
dynamics are in red (the state st , the action at and the reward
rt ). The model-free elements are depicted in green (value
function Q(s, a)) while the model-based elements (transition
model and reward model) are in blue. The encoder and the
abstract state are shared for both the model-based and modelfree approaches and are depicted in light cyan. Note that the
CRAR agent can learn from any off-policy data (red circles).
Learning everything through the abstract representation
has the following advantages:
• it ensures that the features inferred in the abstract state
provide good generalization, since they must be effective
for both the model-free and the model-based predictions;
• it enables computationally efficient planning within the
model-based module since planning is done over the
abstract state space;
• it facilitates interpretation of the decisions taken by the
agent by expressing dynamics and rewards over the
abstract state;

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3582

