The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Attention-Based Multi-Context Guiding for Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Tao Hu,1,2 Pengwan Yang,2 Chiliang Zhang,3 Gang Yu,4 Yadong Mu,2 Cees G. M. Snoek1
1

University of Amsterdam, 2 Peking University, 3 Tsinghua University, 4 Megvii Inc. (Face++)
taohu620@gmail.com, yangpengwan2016@gmail.com, zhangcl16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
yugang@megvii.com, myd@pku.edu.cn, cgmsnoek@uva.nl

Abstract

Traditional Method

Few-shot learning is a nascent research topic, motivated by
the fact that traditional deep learning methods require tremendous amounts of data. The scarcity of annotated data becomes
even more challenging in semantic segmentation since pixellevel annotation in segmentation task is more labor-intensive
to acquire. To tackle this issue, we propose an Attentionbased Multi-Context Guiding (A-MCG) network, which consists of three branches: the support branch, the query branch,
the feature fusion branch. A key differentiator of A-MCG is
the integration of multi-scale context features between support and query branches, enforcing a better guidance from
the support set. In addition, we also adopt a spatial attention along the fusion branch to highlight context information
from several scales, enhancing self-supervision in one-shot
learning. To address the fusion problem in multi-shot learning, Conv-LSTM is adopted to collaboratively integrate the
sequential support features to elevate the final accuracy. Our
architecture obtains state-of-the-art on unseen classes in a
variant of PASCAL VOC12 dataset and performs favorably
against previous work with large gains of 1.1%, 1.4% measured in mIoU in the 1-shot and 5-shot setting.

Support Branch

Support Image
Query Branch

Query Image
Our Method

Support Branch

Support Image

Attention based Multi-Context Guiding(A-MCG)

Query Branch

Query Image

Figure 1: Our motivation. The support image mask is overlaid with ground truth in red, the query image is overlaid
with ground truth in blue. The above is previous method, the
below is our method. Our A-MCG network can help the support branch fuse multi-context information to hand on hand
guide the query branch.

Introduction
The state-of-the-art in image classification, detection and
segmentation have been greatly advanced by convolution
neural networks (CNN). Although CNNs exhibit superior
performances in a variety of tasks, it has the key problem
of being data hungry. Typically gigantic data with annotations are required for achieving high accuracy. This issue
becomes more severe for pixel-level annotations. In recent
years, there emerged a new research thrust which learns
new concepts from limited data, known as few-shot learning (Vinyals et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017;
Ravi and Larochelle 2017). Though widely explored in tasks
like image classification, few-shot learning is rarely considered for dense pixel prediction problems.
Most existing methods in few-shot semantic segmentation
are based on the framework shown in the top panel of Fig.
1. Conceptually, the framework is comprised of a support
branch and a query branch. The support branch provides discriminative support feature to assist the target segmentation,

the query branch is the feature extractor for target segmentation. This paradigm has the following difficulties: (1). Inefficient support feature utilization. The feature of the support
branch is precious, as it determines the final category the network will segment. However, most of the previous methods
only consider the single output from the end of the network,
which do not take full advantage of the multi-context feature. (2). Lack of attention. As the amount of support and
query data is often very small, optimization based on a large
amount of data is impossible, some self-supervised methods
such as attention should be introduced to make the network
concentrate on our target class. (3). Inconvenience in multishot learning. The traditional fusion method for multi-shot
semantic segmentation is the logical or operation, this inflexible approach lacks in exploring the inner common feature
between various support images.
To attack the above problems in few-shot semantic segmentation, we propose an Attention-based Multi-Context

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8441

