The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Enriching Word Embeddings with a Regressor Instead of Labeled Corpora
Mohamed Abdalla,1,2 Magnus Sahlgren,3 Graeme Hirst1,2
1

Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
3
Swedish Institute of Computer Science, RISE SICS, Stockholm
msa@cs.toronto.edu, magnus.sahlgren@ri.se, gh@cs.toronto.edu
2

Abstract

sentiment and the learning of context (Tang et al. 2016;
Lan et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2016; Faruqui et al. 2015). However, the vast majority of these techniques require the entire dataset to be labeled at the sentence level as either positive or negative. This requirement is limiting as many commonly used datasets (e.g., news corpora and Wikipedia) do
not come with sentiment labels.
In this work, we introduce a more effective and generalizable way of incorporating sentiment during the creation of
word embeddings. Our approach, replacing sentence level
labels with pseudo-labels predicted by a regressor, can be
used: (i) to allow for the enrichment of text corpora that
originally did not have labels, and (ii) in conjunction with
a variety of different enrichment architectures.
For this work, we demonstrate the effect of our approach
on Tang et al. (2016)’s architecture, although it can be applied on other architectures (Lan et al. 2016; Ren et al.
2016). Our approach improves performance on a diverse set
of tasks and enables us to enrich unlabeled corpora, which
we show has the same positive effects. We quantitatively
evaluate our proposed techniques in comparison with previous ones on a variety of tasks, including both sentiment
and non-sentiment tasks to see whether the increase in performance for sentiment-related tasks comes at a price of performance in other unrelated tasks.

We propose a novel method for enriching word-embeddings
without the need of a labeled corpus. Instead, we show that
relying on a regressor – trained with a small lexicon to predict pseudo-labels – significantly improves performance over
current techniques that rely on human-derived sentence-level
labels for an entire corpora. Our approach enables enrichment for corpora that have no labels (such as Wikipedia).
Exploring the utility of this general approach in both sentiment and non-sentiment-focused tasks, we show how enriching embeddings, for both Twitter and Wikipedia-based embeddings, provide notable improvements in performance for:
binary sentiment classification, SemEval Tasks, embedding
analogy task, and, document classification. Importantly, our
approach is notably better and more generalizable than other
state-of-the-art approaches for enriching both labeled and unlabeled corpora.

Introduction
Word embeddings (i.e., word vectors, distributed representations) are dense numeric sequences that represent words
and can subsequently be used as input for a wide variety of
statistical machine learning models and techniques for various tasks. The complexity of such encodings varies from the
very simple (e.g., one-hot encoding) to the relatively complex (i.e., automatically generated embeddings by newer
machine learning techniques).
While word embeddings have worked well for a variety
of NLP tasks, because of the distributional hypothesis (Firth
1957), there remains room for improvement. For example,
sentiment words with opposite emotional values are often
used in the same context, and thus have very close representations in a language’s vector space — closer than their
antonymy implies. If we could incorporate additional information during the creation of our embeddings, we would add
some degree of separation between words that occur in the
same context but with opposite meanings.
Incorporating additional information during embedding
creation, termed “enrichment”, is a well-studied area of
research. In sentiment-analysis, there exist many different
structures for combining the traditional context loss with a
sentiment loss, with the aim of balancing the learning of

Previous Work
Word Embeddings
Word embeddings are dense vector representations of words
from a corpus. They range from low-rank approximations
of co-occurrence matrices (e.g., Sahlgren 2005; Bullinaria
and Levy 2012; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) to
those created using shallow neural networks (e.g., Mikolov
et al. 2013a). The latter approach has been shown to be connected to the former approach (Hashimoto, Alvarez-Melis,
and Jaakkola 2016), and all embeddings are heavily influenced by the distributional hypothesis (Sahlgren 2008).
The specific algorithm that we improve upon is a model
that attempts to predict the current word given the context (surrounding words), termed continuous bag of words
(CBOW) (Mikolov et al. 2013a), which contrasts with the
common Skip-Gram approach (Mikolov et al. 2013b) that
attempts to predict the context words given the current word.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6188

