The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Traffic Updates: Saying a Lot While Revealing a Little
John Krumm, Eric Horvitz
Microsoft Research
Redmond, Washington USA
jckrumm@microsoft.com, horvitz@microsoft.com

Abstract
Taking speed reports from vehicles is a proven, inexpensive
way to infer traffic conditions. However, due to concerns
about privacy and bandwidth, not every vehicle occupant may
want to transmit data about their location and speed in real
time. We show how to drastically reduce the number of transmissions in two ways, both based on a Markov random field
for modeling traffic speed and flow. First, we show that a only
a small number of vehicles need to report from each location.
We give a simple, probabilistic method that lets a group of vehicles decide on which subset will transmit a report, preserving privacy by coordinating without any communication. The
second approach computes the potential value of any location’s speed report, emphasizing those reports that will most
affect the overall speed inferences, and omitting those that
contribute little value. Both methods significantly reduce the
amount of communication necessary for accurate speed inferences on a road network.

1

Introduction

Accurate traffic speed information is vital for computing efficient routes for vehicles on roads. Dedicated road sensors,
such as embedded induction loops, are expensive to install
and maintain. An obvious alternative is to use the mobile
phones of vehicle occupants to sense and report speeds to a
central server. As of early 2018, 95% of Americans owned a
cellphone of some kind, and 77% owned a smartphone (Center 2018). Both fractions are rising. As an example, Waze
gathers GPS data from its users at a rate of one reading per
second to compute road speeds to use for routing (Parmy Olson 2014). This location data not only uses bandwidth, but
it is vulnerable to privacy attacks. In fact, researchers were
able to create fake Waze accounts that allowed them to track
Waze users (Wang et al. 2018), a vulnerability that was
patched by Waze (Waze 2016). Even coordinating among
vehicles with vehicle-to-vehicle communication has negative privacy implications (Williams 2017).
Problems with bandwidth and privacy can be fixed with
advanced compression (Lelewer and Hirschberg 1987) and
location privacy techniques (Krumm 2009), respectively.
However, another solution is to transmit less data. This paper
introduces two techniques to reduce the number of revealing

Figure 1: The white circles show 109 traffic measurement
stations around central Los Angeles, California, USA. The
black lines show which stations were connected in the
Markov random field.

transmissions required to maintain accurate inferences about
traffic speeds. Both approaches are based on a Markov random field (MRF) that models varying quantities of vehicle
speed report data as well as the observed correlations between traffic conditions on different parts of the road network. Using this model, we show that a small number of
speed reports can be combined to infer traffic conditions on
all the roads in the network.
Our first approach to reduce privacy-compromising transmissions from vehicles is to show that only a relatively small
number of vehicles needs to report from any road segment,
and that we can choose the subset of vehicles to report without any communication. Normally this coordination might
be accomplished with each vehicle communicating to a central server or with with vehicle-to-vehicle communication.
Instead, we develop a probabilistic technique where each vehicle makes an independent decision to transmit, while still

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

986

