The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Guided Dropout
Rohit Keshari, Richa Singh, Mayank Vatsa
IIIT-Delhi, India
{rohitk, rsingh, mayank}@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract

dropout. (Kingma, Salimans, and Welling 2015) have proposed variational dropout to reduce the variance of Stochastic Gradients for Variational Bayesian inference (SGVB).
They have shown that variational dropout is a generalization
of Gaussian dropout where the dropout rates are learned.
(Klambauer et al. 2017) have proposed alpha-dropout
for Scaled Exponential Linear Unit (SELU) activation function. (Ba and Frey 2013) have proposed “standout” for a
deep belief neural network where, instead of initializing
dropout mask using Bernoulli distribution with probability
p, they have adapted the dropout probability for each layer
of the neural network. In addition to the conventional learning methods of dropout, (Gal and Ghahramani 2016) have
utilized the Gaussian process for the deep learning models which allows estimating uncertainty of the function, robustness to over-fitting, and hyper-parameter tuning. They
have measured model uncertainty by measuring the first and
second moments of their approximate predictive distribution. (Gal, Hron, and Kendall 2017) have proposed “Concrete Dropout” which is a variant of dropout where concrete
distribution has been utilized to generate the dropout mask.
They have optimized the probability p via path-wise derivative estimator.
In the literature, methods related to dropout have been explored in two aspects: 1) sampling dropout mask from different distributions and maintaining mean of the intermediate
input while dropping nodes, and 2) adapting dropout probability. However, if prior information related to nodes of a
Neural Network (NN) is available, nodes can be dropped
selectively in such a way that generalization of NN is improved. Therefore, in this research, we propose “strength
parameter” to measure the importance of nodes and featuremap for dense NN and CNN, respectively and use it for guiding dropout regularization. Figure 1 illustrates the graphical
abstract of the paper “guided dropout”. For understanding
the behavior of strength parameter t, a three hidden layer
neural network with 8192 nodes is trained with strength parameter using Equation 2 (details discussed in the next section). After training, the accuracy is evaluated by removing
low strength to high strength nodes one by one. The effect
on the accuracy can be observed in Figure 2. It shows that
removing up to almost 5000 low strength nodes has minimal
affect on the network accuracy. Therefore, such nodes are
considered to be inactive nodes, lying in the inactive region.

Dropout is often used in deep neural networks to prevent
over-fitting. Conventionally, dropout training invokes random
drop of nodes from the hidden layers of a Neural Network. It
is our hypothesis that a guided selection of nodes for intelligent dropout can lead to better generalization as compared to
the traditional dropout. In this research, we propose “guided
dropout” for training deep neural network which drop nodes
by measuring the strength of each node. We also demonstrate
that conventional dropout is a specific case of the proposed
guided dropout. Experimental evaluation on multiple datasets
including MNIST, CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHN, and Tiny
ImageNet demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed guided
dropout.

Introduction
“Better than a thousand days of diligent study is one day
with a great teacher.”
— Japanese proverb
Deep neural network has gained a lot of success in multiple applications. However, due to optimizing millions of parameters, generalization of Deep Neural Networks (DNN) is
a challenging task. Multiple regularizations have been proposed in the literature such as l1 − norm (Nowlan and Hinton 1992), l2 − norm (Nowlan and Hinton 1992), maxnorm (Srivastava et al. 2014), rectifiers (Nair and Hinton
2010), KL-divergence (Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006),
drop-connect (Wan et al. 2013), and dropout (Hinton et al.
2012), (Srivastava et al. 2014) to regulate the learning process of deep neural networks consisting of a large number
of parameters. Among all the regularizers, dropout has been
widely used for the generalization of DNNs.
Dropout (Hinton et al. 2012), (Srivastava et al. 2014) improves the generalization of neural networks by preventing
co-adaptation of feature detectors. The working of dropout
is based on the generation of a mask by utilizing Bernoulli
and N ormal distributions. At every iteration, it generates a
random mask with probability (1 − θ) for hidden units of the
network. (Wang and Manning 2013) have proposed a Gaussian dropout which is a fast approximation of conventional
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4065

