The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Machine Learning Based Heuristic Search
Algorithms to Solve Birds of a Feather Card Game
Bryon Kucharski, Azad Deihim, Mehmet Ergezer
Wentworth Institute of Technology
550 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115
{kucharskib, deihima, ergezerm}@wit.edu

Abstract

moves to be organized into a decision tree, which can be traversed through with various types of algorithms. Depth-first
search (DFS) and breadth-first search (BFS) are two rudimentary approaches to tree traversal that are straightforward
to implement and can solve the game if possible. However,
there is still room left for improving their performance using auxiliary algorithms. As part of the challenge proposed
by Neller, teams were asked to explore potential heuristics
to guide the performance of these graph algorithms. This
compelled our team to delve into more intelligent solutions
such as heuristic-based traversal algorithms. There are several features that can be extracted from any state of a BoF
game to be used directly as a heuristic to guide the traversal. This abundance of applicable features facilitated a machine learning approach: suitable features can be used as
an input, and the output can be applied as a heuristic which allows the traversal to be directed by multiple features
rather than just one. The team compared the provided depthfirst search to heuristic algorithms such as Monte Carlo tree
search (MCTS), as well as a novel heuristic search algorithm
guided by machine learning.
The applications of machine learning to solving games
have been well studied. IBM engineers have applied linear approaches as well as alpha-beta pruning to solve the
game of checkers (Samuel 1959), (Samuel 1967). (Yan et al.
2005) proposed an heuristic approach to the Klondike solitaire that solved twice as many games on average than an
expert human player. Machine learning based solutions to
FreeCell have also been explored. (Chan 2006) compared
the performance of multiple algorithms, including heuristic
approaches, neural networks, Bayesian learning and decision trees.
Besides machine learning algorithms, randomized searchbased techniques are employed to decrease the number of
nodes that are evaluated to solve a game. Alpha-beta pruning (Knuth and Moore 1975) has been the forefront for finite, zero-sum two player games with perfect information.
(Coulom 2006) introduced a new algorithm, Monte Carlo
tree search, which combines Monte Carlo methods with tree
search to solve these types of games. MCTS has been widely
used in solving various games, including a 9 x 9 computer
Go program named Crazy Stone (Coulom 2007), Othello
(Nijssen 2007), and Tic Tac Toe (Auger 2011). Google’s
DeepMind employed a combination of Deep Learning and

This research was conducted by an interdisciplinary team of
two undergraduate students and a faculty to explore solutions
to the Birds of a Feather (BoF) Research Challenge. BoF is a
newly-designed perfect-information solitaire-type game. The
focus of the study was to design and implement different algorithms and evaluate their effectiveness. The team compared
the provided depth-first search (DFS) to heuristic algorithms
such as Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS), as well as a novel
heuristic search algorithm guided by machine learning. Since
all of the studied algorithms converge to a solution from a
solvable deal, effectiveness of each approach was measured
by how quickly a solution was reached, and how many nodes
were traversed until a solution was reached. The employed
methods have a potential to provide artificial intelligence enthusiasts with a better understanding of BoF and novel ways
to solve perfect-information games and puzzles in general.
The results indicate that the proposed heuristic search algorithms guided by machine learning provide a significant improvement in terms of number of nodes traversed over the
provided DFS algorithm.

1

Introduction

This research was conducted by an interdisciplinary team of
two undergraduate students and a faculty to explore solutions to the Birds of a Feather (BoF) Research Challenge
proposed by (Neller 2016). BoF is a perfect-information
solitaire game, comparable to FreeCell solitaire.
BoF is played with a standard 52 card deck. Each game
begins with a starting deal of sixteen random cards organized into a 4-by-4 grid. The player must select an individual
card and move it on top of another card in the selected card’s
row or column provided that one of the following conditions
are met: (1) Both cards have the same suit. (2) Both cards
have the same rank. (3) Both cards have adjacent ranks. For
example, a King of Hearts can be placed on top of a Queen of
Clubs since their ranks are adjacent, or that King of Hearts
can be placed on top of a Nine of Hearts since they have
the same rank. The game concludes when fifteen moves are
made resulting in one stack of all sixteen cards.
Newly-discovered perfect-information puzzles offer a
plethora of terrain for exploration and allow for fun and creative solutions. The nature of BoF allows for all possible
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9656

