The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Theoretical Analysis of Label Distribution Learning
Jing Wang, Xin Geng∗
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{wangjing91, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

eling of different relative importance of labels assigned to
the instance, which is more suitable for many real scenarios.
Recently, LDL has been extensively applied in many realworld applications, which can be classified into three classes
according to the source of label distribution. The first one
features that label distribution is from data itself, which includes pre-release rating prediction on movies (Geng and
Hou 2015), emotion recognition (Zhou, Xue, and Geng
2015), et al. The second one is characterized by that label
distribution is originated from pre-knowledge, among which
applications include age estimation (Geng, Yin, and Zhou
2013), head pose estimation (Geng and Xia 2014), et al.
The third one is attributed to that label distribution is learned
from data automatically. Applications of such class include
label-importance-aware multi-label learning (Li, Zhang, and
Geng 2015), beauty sensing (Ren and Geng 2017), video
parsing (Geng and Ling 2017), et al. The secret of successes
of LDL being applied in a variety of fields is that explicit introduction of label ambiguity with label distribution boosts
performance of real-world applications.
In this paper, we re-examine LDL from theoretical aspects, towards analyzing generalization of LDL algorithms.
Precisely, there are at least two arguments related to the
generalization of LDL. The first one is on generalization
of LDL itself, and the second one is on generalization of
LDL to perform classification. On one hand, LDL can be
regarded as one kind of multi-output regression (Borchani
et al. 2015), and generalization of multi-output regression
algorithms (Kakade, Sridharan, and Tewari 2009) can be
transfered to LDL somewhat. However, specializations of
LDL should not be neglected. The first thing to note is probability simplex constraint of label distribution. As suggested
by (Geng 2016), the target label distribution is real-valued
and
distribution constraints, i.e., ηxy ∈ [0, 1], and
P satisfies
y
y∈Y ηx = 1 (formally defined in Preliminary). This constraint is often satisfied by applying a softmax function onto
each output of a multi-output regression model, which complicates complexity of the corresponding multi-output regression model. Furthermore, the second thing to note is
specialization of measures for LDL. Although Lipschitzness
of loss function is a general assumption when bounding the
risk, Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence as loss function for
LDL (e.g., SA-ME) does not satisfy Lipschitzness instead.
On another hand, we find that LDL is usually adopted to per-

As a novel learning paradigm, label distribution learning
(LDL) explicitly models label ambiguity with the definition
of label description degree. Although lots of work has been
done to deal with real-world applications, theoretical results
on LDL remain unexplored. In this paper, we rethink LDL
from theoretical aspects, towards analyzing learnability of
LDL. Firstly, risk bounds for three representative LDL algorithms (AA-kNN, AA-BP and SA-ME) are provided. For
AA-kNN, Lipschitzness of the label distribution function is
assumed to bound the risk, and for AA-BP and SA-ME,
rademacher complexity is utilized to give data-dependent risk
bounds. Secondly, a generalized plug-in decision theorem is
proposed to understand the relation between LDL and classification, uncovering that approximation to the conditional
probability distribution function in absolute loss guarantees
approaching to the optimal classifier, and also data-dependent
error probability bounds are presented for the corresponding
LDL algorithms to perform classification. As far as we know,
this is perhaps the first research on theory of LDL.

Introduction
Traditional learning paradigms include single-label learning (SLL) and multi-label learning (MLL) (Zhang and Zhou
2014). SLL assumes that an instance is associated with one
label, while MLL assumes that multiple labels are assigned
to an instance. Essentially both SLL and MLL aim at finding related label/labels to describe the instance, while neither SLL nor MLL support relative importance of labels assigned to the instance. However in some real-word applications, labels are related to the instance with different relative
importance degree. Thus it seems reasonable to label an instance with a soft label rather than a hard one (e.g., single
label or a set of labels). Inspired by this, (Geng 2016) proposes a novel learning paradigm, Label Distribution Learning (LDL), which labels an instance with a distribution of
description degree over label space, called label distribution,
and learns a mapping from instance to label distribution directly. Compared with MLL, where positive labels are commonly treated equally (with description degree equals 1/c
implicitly for c positive labels), LDL allows explicitly mod∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5256

