The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Pareto Optimization for Subset Selection with Dynamic Cost Constraints
Vahid Roostapour,1 Aneta Neumann,1 Frank Neumann,1 Tobias Friedrich1, 2
1

Optimisation and Logistics, School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
2
Chair of Algorithm Engineering, Hasso Plattner Institute, Potsdam, Germany
{vahid.roostapour, aneta.neumann, frank.neumann}@adelaide.edu.au, tobias.friedrich@hpi.de

measures the closeness of the considered function f to submodularity. The approximation matches the worst-case performance ratio of the generalized greedy algorithm (Zhang
and Vorobeychik 2016).

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the subset selection problem for
function f with constraint bound B which changes over time.
We point out that adaptive variants of greedy approaches
commonly used in the area of submodular optimization are
not able to maintain their approximation quality. Investigating the recently introduced POMC Pareto optimization approach, we show that this algorithm efficiently computes a
φ = (αf /2)(1 − eα1f )-approximation, where αf is the submodularity ratio of f , for each possible constraint bound
b ≤ B. Furthermore, we show that POMC is able to adapt
its set of solutions quickly in the case that B increases. Our
experimental investigations for the influence maximization in
social networks show the advantage of POMC over generalized greedy algorithms.

Our contribution
In this paper, we study monotone functions with a constraint where the constraint bound B changes over time.
Such constraint changes reflect real-world scenarios where
resources vary during the process. We show that greedy algorithms have difficulties in adapting their current solutions
after changes have happened. In particular, we show that
there are simple dynamic versions of the classical knapsack problem where adding elements in a greedy fashion
when the constraint bound increases over time can lead to
an arbitrary bad performance ratio. For the case where constraint bounds decrease over time, we introduce a submodular graph covering problem and show that the considered
adaptive generalized greedy algorithm may encounter an arbitrarily bad performance ratio on this problem.
Investigating POMC, we show that this algorithm obtains
for each constraint bound b ∈ [0, B], a φ = (αf /2)(1 −
1
)-approximation efficiently. Furthermore, when relaxing
eαf
the bound B to B ∗ > B, φ-approximations for all values
of b ∈ [0, B ∗ ] are obtained efficiently. We evaluate the considered algorithms on influence maximization in social networks that have dynamic routing or cardinality constraints.
Benchmarking the algorithms over sequences of dynamic
changes, we show that POMC obtains superior results to the
generalized greedy and adaptive generalized greedy algorithms. Furthermore, POMC shows an even more prominent
advantage as more dynamic changes are carried out because
it is able to improve the quality of its solutions and cater for
changes that occur in the future.
The paper is structured as follows. In the next section,
we define the dynamic problems and the algorithms under
investigation. Then, we show that the adaptive generalized
greedy algorithm may encounter an arbitrary bad performance ratio even when starting with an optimal solution for
the initial budget. In contrast, we show that POMC is able to
maintain a φ-approximation efficiently. We present experimental investigations for influence maximization in social
networks that show the advantage of the Pareto optimization
approach and finish with some concluding remarks.

Introduction
Many combinatorial optimization problems consist of optimizing a given function under a given constraint. Constraints
often limit the resources available to solve a given problem
and may change over time. For example, in the area of supply chain management, the problem may be constrained by
the number of vehicles available which may change due to
vehicle failures and vehicles being repaired or added as a
new resource.
Submodular functions form an important class of problems as many important optimization problems can be modeled by them. The area of submodular function optimization under given static constraints has been studied quite extensively in the literature (Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher
1978; Lee et al. 2010; Lee, Sviridenko, and Vondrák 2010;
Krause and Golovin 2014). In the case of monotone submodular functions, greedy algorithms are often able to
achieve the best possible worst case approximation guarantee (unless P=NP).
Recently, Pareto optimization approaches have been investigated for a wide range of subset selection problems (Friedrich and Neumann 2015; Qian, Yu, and Zhou
2015; Qian et al. 2017a; 2017b). It has been shown in (Qian
et al. 2017b) that an algorithm called POMC is able to
achieve a φ = (αf /2)(1 − eα1f )-approximation where αf
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2354

