The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

TAPAS: Train-Less Accuracy Predictor for Architecture Search
R. Istrate,1,2 F. Scheidegger,1 G. Mariani,1 D. Nikolopoulos,2 C. Bekas,1 A. C. I. Malossi1
1

2

IBM Research – Zurich, Switzerland
University of Belfast, United Kingdom

Abstract

of networks without (or with very limited) training. Prediction is obtained either from partial learning curves (Domhan,
Springenberg, and Hutter 2015; Klein et al. 2017; Baker
et al. 2018; Swersky, Snoek, and Adams 2014), or from a
database of trained experiments (Deng, Yan, and Lin 2017).
The former approach requires partial training of each specific network. The latter one, implies training hundreds of
networks on the given input dataset, to build a reliable
ground-truth. Thus, none of them can be used out-of-the-box
for near real-time architecture search.
In this work, we introduce a train-less accuracy predictor for architecture search (TAPAS), that provides reliable
architecture peak accuracy predictions when used with unseen (i.e., not previously seen by the predictor) datasets. Our
accuracy predictor is train-less in the sense that it estimates
the accuracy of a network on a dataset without training the
network. This is achieved by adapting the prediction to the
difficulty of the dataset, that is automatically determined by
the framework. In addition, we reuse experience accumulated from previous experiments. The main features of our
framework are summarized as follows: (i) it is not bounded
to any specific dataset, (ii) it learns from previous experiments, whatever dataset they involve, improving prediction
over usage and (iii) it allows to run large-scale architecture
search on a single GPU device within a few minutes.
In summary, our main contributions are the following: i) a
fast, scalable, and reliable framework for CNN architecture
performance prediction; ii) a flexible prediction algorithm,
that dynamically adapts to the difficulty of the input; iii)
an extensive comparison with preexisting methods/results,
clearly illustrating the advantages of our approach.
In Section 2 we briefly review literature approaches and
analyze pros and cons of each of them. In Section 3 we
present the design of our prediction framework, with a deep
dive into its three main components. Then, in Section 4 we
compare experimental results with current state-of-the-art.
An additional discussion and final conclusions are summarized in Sections 5 and 6, respectively.

In recent years an increasing number of researchers and
practitioners have been suggesting algorithms for large-scale
neural network architecture search: genetic algorithms, reinforcement learning, learning curve extrapolation, and accuracy predictors. None of them, however, demonstrated highperformance without training new experiments in the presence of unseen datasets. We propose a new deep neural
network accuracy predictor, that estimates in fractions of a
second classification performance for unseen input datasets,
without training. In contrast to previously proposed approaches, our prediction is not only calibrated on the topological network information, but also on the characterization
of the dataset-difficulty which allows us to re-tune the prediction without any training. Our predictor achieves a performance which exceeds 100 networks per second on a single
GPU, thus creating the opportunity to perform large-scale architecture search within a few minutes. We present results of
two searches performed in 400 seconds on a single GPU. Our
best discovered networks reach 93.67% accuracy for CIFAR10 and 81.01% for CIFAR-100, verified by training. These
networks are performance competitive with other automatically discovered state-of-the-art networks however we only
needed a small fraction of the time to solution and computational resources.

1

Introduction

Automatic generation and tuning of convolutional neural
network (CNN) architectures is a growing research topic.
The majority of approaches in the literature (for a deep
overview, see Section 2) are rooted into the fundamental idea of large-scale explorations; more precisely, they
can be based either on evolution and mutations (Real et
al. 2017; Xie and Yuille 2017; Miikkulainen et al. 2017),
or on reinforcement learning (Zhong, Yan, and Liu 2017;
Zoph and Le 2016; Zoph et al. 2017; Cai et al. 2018;
Baker et al. 2016). All these algorithms require a large
amount of training experiments which quickly leads to massive resource and time to solution requirements.
Recently, the concept of performance prediction for architecture search has emerged. The fundamental idea is to
drastically reduce exploration cost, by forecasting accuracy

2

Related work

This paper follows a similar design idea as Peephole (Deng,
Yan, and Lin 2017), which predicts a network accuracy by
only analyzing the network structure. Similar to our approach, a long short-term memory (LSTM) based network

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3927

