The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Find Me if You Can: Deep Software Clone Detection by
Exploiting the Contest between the Plagiarist and the Detector
Yan-Ya Zhang, Ming Li
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Nanjing 210023, China
{zhangyy, lim}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
Abstract

the code pairs for detecting software clones. For example,
CDLH (Wei and Li 2017) formalizes the clone detection as a
supervised learning to hash problem and learns deep features
for functional clone detection, CDPU (Wei and Li 2018) addresses the clone detection in a positive-unlabeled (PU) perspective to leverage the unlabeled data for functional feature
learning.
All of these approaches have shown their effectiveness
in software clone detection. However, the clone detection
is not a task in a closed and static environment. The plagiarists can easily acquire the techniques of clone detection
tools, and by studying the tools they can camouflage the
cloned code with particularly designed strategies. Therefore,
the software clone detectors may have to deal with new patterns of code cloning. The current data for training the clone
detector is always insufficient to identify the new clone patterns, and the clone detector is doomed to be not robust to
such adversarial revision of the code.
In fact, there exists a contest between the plagiarists and
the clone detectors, where the former will modify the cloned
code in order to fool the detectors, and the latter tries to learn
the patterns of the modifications made by the plagiarists.
Only if such contest is considered in learning the clone detector, the model can be robust to adversarial code revisions
in real world.
In this paper, we propose a novel Adversarial Clone Detection approach, namely ACD, to mimic the adversarial
process between the plagiarist and the detector. The detector in ACD is an AST-based LSTM to learn the pattern
of the code clones. Unlike the existing clone detection approaches, ACD also models the plagiarist based on reinforcement learning, which tries to camouflage the cloned
code to make the code pairs appear to be dissimilar and difficult to be detected through a series modifications on the
original source code learned using policy gradient (Sutton
et al. 2000) and Monte-Carlo search. The plagiarist model
and detector model are trained adversarially (Goodfellow et
al. 2014), where the generated code clones are used to improve the robustness of the detector while the detection results are used in turn to find better policy for fooling the
detector. ACD can not only build a strong clone detector but
also model the behavior of the plagiarists. Such a plagiarist
model may in turn help to understand the vulnerability of the
current software clone detection tools.

Code clone is common in software development, which usually leads to software defects or copyright infringement. Researchers have paid significant attention to code clone detection, and many methods have been proposed. However, the
patterns for generating the code clones do not always remain
the same. In order to fool the clone detection systems, the
plagiarists, known as the clone creator, usually conduct a series of tricky modifications on the code fragments to make
the clone difficult to detect. The existing clone detection approaches, which neglects the dynamics of the “contest” between the plagiarist and the detectors, is doomed to be not
robust to adversarial revision of the code. In this paper, we
propose a novel clone detection approach, namely ACD, to
mimic the adversarial process between the plagiarist and the
detector, which enables us to not only build strong a clone
detector but also model the behavior of the plagiarists. Such
a plagiarist model may in turn help to understand the vulnerability of the current software clone detection tools. Experiments show that the learned policy of plagiarist can help us
build stronger clone detector, which outperforms the existing
clone detection methods.

Introduction
Software clones are usually introduced when people reuse
the code by copy-paste operations (Roy and Cordy 2007) to
shorten software development time. To avoid the infringement of copyright, they intend to camouflage the reused
code. Such code clones not only violate the intellectual properties of the software being cloned but also lead to the injection of software defects easily due to the lack of detailed
knowledge about the cloned code. Thus, software clone detection, aiming to find those plagiarized code automatically
has attracted significant attention.
Many clone detection models have been proposed, most
of them hand-craft certain similarity between two code fragments by exploiting either lexical information or syntactical information of the code. For example, NICAD (Roy
and Cordy 2008) considers the similarity of code fragments in lexical level, Deckard (Jiang et al. 2007) computes the code syntax similarity based on Abstract Syntax
Tree. Recent studies suggest to learn semantic features from
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5813

