The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adding Constraints to Bayesian Inverse Problems
Jiacheng Wu

Jian-Xun Wang

Shawn C. Shadden

University of California
Berkeley, CA, 94706

University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN, 46556

University of California
Berkeley, CA, 94706

Abstract

egorized into two classes: variational and statistical approaches (Asch, Bocquet, and Nodet 2016). The variational approach aims to minimize a specific cost function
based on classical optimization theory and calculus of variations (Smedstad and O’Brien 1991), while the statistical
approach aims to evaluate or maximize posterior functions
based on statistics and Bayesian theory (Cotter et al. 2009).
Because of its robustness and capability for uncertainty
quantification, Bayesian inversion techniques are widely
used for hidden state and parameter estimation for many
physical systems (Iglesias, Lin, and Stuart 2014; Wang et al.
2017; Wang and Xiao 2016; Li et al. 2017). In the Bayesian
framework, both the hidden state/parameters (prior) and
observable quantities (likelihood) are described as random
variables with statistical distributions. The Bayesian estimation aims to calculate the posterior distributions of the
inferred quantities from the prior and likelihood based on
Bayes theorem. Directly computing the posterior distribution based on the prior and likelihood functions is referred
to as the exact Bayesian approach. In general, the posterior is
obtained by sampling the prior and likelihood distributions
based on efficient Monte Carlo sampling such as the Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method. However, since
MCMC requires an enormous amount of samples, which
is computationally infeasible when the likelihood calculation involves expensive model evaluations, many approximate Bayesian inversion approaches have been developed,
such as the extended Kalman filter (EKF) (Haykin 2004),
unscented Kalman filter (UKF) (Wan and Van Der Merwe
2000), ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) (Evensen 2003), and
sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) method (Del Moral, Doucet,
and Jasra 2006).
A common challenge in solving inverse problems is identifiability. Measurement data is typically very limited and solutions for the hidden states and parameters are nonunique.
Moreover, numerical stability of the inversion can be significantly reduced for ill-posed problems and uncontrolled
inference may happen due to small random noise in the observation data. To address these issues, a general strategy is
to incorporate additional information into the inversion process, either by including more observation data or imposing
additional constraints. In most mission-critical applications,
data are difficult to collect and limited in quality. In such
cases, additional constraints can be significantly useful to

Using observation data to estimate unknown parameters in
computational models is broadly important. This task is often challenging because solutions are non-unique due to the
complexity of the model and limited observation data. However, the parameters or states of the model are often known
to satisfy additional constraints beyond the model. Thus, we
propose an approach to improve parameter estimation in such
inverse problems by incorporating constraints in a Bayesian
inference framework. Constraints are imposed by constructing a likelihood function based on fitness of the solution to
the constraints. The posterior distribution of the parameters
conditioned on (1) the observed data and (2) satisfaction of
the constraints is obtained, and the estimate of the parameters is given by the maximum a posteriori estimation or posterior mean. Both equality and inequality constraints can be
considered by this framework, and the strictness of the constraints can be controlled by constraint uncertainty denoting a confidence on its correctness. Furthermore, we extend
this framework to an approximate Bayesian inference framework in terms of the ensemble Kalman filter method, where
the constraint is imposed by re-weighing the ensemble members based on the likelihood function. A synthetic model is
presented to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method and in both the exact Bayesian inference and ensemble Kalman filter scenarios, numerical simulations show that
imposing constraints using the method presented improves
identification of the true parameter solution among multiple
local minima.

1

Introduction

Computational models are pervasively used in wide-ranging
engineering applications. Recent advances in computer platforms and numerical methods have enabled models to be
increasingly sophisticated and comprehensive.With greater
model complexity comes greater challenge to determine
model parameters (including initial/boundary conditions),
which are often unknown or uncertain. To address this
challenge, one typically solves an inverse problem by using observational data to specify model parameters so that
the model output matches the observational data. Many inversion techniques have been developed and used by different communities. These methods can be roughly catc 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1666

