The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Sentence-Wise Smooth
Regularization for Sequence to Sequence Learning
Chengyue Gong,†∗ Xu Tan,§ Di He,† Tao Qin§
†

Peking University
Microsoft Research
§
{xuta,taoqin}@microsoft.com, † {cygong,di he}@pku.edu.cn
§

Abstract

tasks, such as exposure bias (Wiseman and Rush 2016;
Wu et al. 2018; Guo et al. 2019), loss-evaluation mismatch
(Wiseman and Rush 2016; Vijayakumar et al. 2016), and
myopic bias (He et al. 2017).
In this paper, we investigate the MLE loss for sequence
to sequence tasks from an optimization and algorithmic perspective. According to our empirical study, we find that for
a well-trained model, the probabilities of individual tokens
(i.e., per-token probabilities) in the target sequence for a
given source sequence sometimes vary dramatically across
time steps. We conduct an analysis on WMT14 EnglishGerman validation set to explore the relationship between
the smoothness1 of probabilities and BLEU scores, as shown
in Figure 1(a). As can be seen, for source-target pairs with
same/similar MLE loss, the smoother the per-token probabilities are, the higher BLEU score is. Intuitively speaking, for
source-target sequence pairs with the same/similar MLE loss,
the sequence pair with non-smooth probabilities indicates
that it has more small and large per-token probabilities. First,
if the probability of certain target token is relatively low, the
model is likely to make a wrong prediction for this token and
thus generates a bad sequence during inference. Second, if
the probability of certain target token is extremely large, i.e.,
larger than 0.9, which is enough to ensure correct prediction,
there is no need to continue optimizing this token and it’s better to leave the efforts of the model to other low-probability
tokens.
Besides, we wonder where the non-smooth problem comes
from and then study the components of tokens with low
probability in the train set. As is well-known, rare words are
hard to learn (Gong et al. 2018) and low probabilities may just
come from rare words. However, as shown in Figure 1(b), we
find that nearly 6% of low-probability tokens are rare words,
and this ratio almost equals to the ratio of rare words in the
whole dataset, which demonstrates low-probability tokens do
not prefer rare words more than popular words.2 We further
partition the low-probability tokens into different POS tags
and find that the major part are nouns, determiners, pronouns,

Maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE) is widely used in sequence to sequence tasks for model training. It uniformly
treats the generation/prediction of each target token as multiclass classification, and yields non-smooth prediction probabilities: in a target sequence, some tokens are predicted with
small probabilities while other tokens are with large probabilities. According to our empirical study, we find that the
non-smoothness of the probabilities results in low quality of
generated sequences. In this paper, we propose a sentence-wise
regularization method which aims to output smooth prediction probabilities for all the tokens in the target sequence. Our
proposed method can automatically adjust the weights and
gradients of each token in one sentence to ensure the predictions in a sequence uniformly well. Experiments on three
neural machine translation tasks and one text summarization
task show that our method outperforms conventional MLE
loss on all these tasks and achieves promising BLEU scores
on WMT14 English-German and WMT17 Chinese-English
translation task.

1

Introduction

Sequence to sequence learning has achieved great success
in many natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as
machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Cho
et al. 2014; Wu et al. 2016; Vaswani et al. 2017; Gehring et
al. 2017; He et al. 2018; Song et al. 2018; Shen et al. 2018),
text summarization (Rush et al. 2015; Shen et al. 2016) and
dialog systems (Serban et al. 2016). The most popular model
architecture for sequence to sequence learning is the encoderdecoder framework, which learns a probabilistic mapping
P (y|x) from a source sequence x to a target sequence y.
During training, maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE)
is widely used to learn the model parameters. Since y =
{y1 , y2 , · · · , yn } is a sequence of tokens, by decomposing
P (y|x) using the chain rule, MLE becomes to minimize the
average of the
Pnnegative log probabilities of individual target
tokens − n1 i=1 log P (yi |y<i , x; θ) over all (x, y) pairs in
training data, where θ is the model parameter. While MLE
training objective sounds reasonable in general, it has several potential issues in the context of sequence to sequence

1

Here we simply use variance to represent the smoothness for
clearness and simplicity at the beginning of the paper. The formal
definition of the smoothness obeys the definition in Section 3.2.
2
We simply set the top 10% frequent words as popular words
and denote the rest as rare words. Other reasonable thresholds still
come to similar conclusion.

∗
The work was conducted when the first author was an intern at
Microsoft.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6449

