The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Transforming Underwriting in the Life Insurance Industry
Marc Maier, Hayley Carlotto, Freddie Sanchez, Sherriff Balogun, Sears Merritt
MassMutual Data Science
59 E Pleasant St, Amherst, Massachusetts 01002
{mmaier, hcarlotto, freddiesanchez, sbalogun, smerritt}@massmutual.com

Abstract

million applicants spanning 15 years and containing health,
behavioral, and financial attributes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest and most comprehensive application
data set in the industry. Combining this data with advancements in machine learning and survival modeling enables
accurate estimation of mortality risk. We develop a highresolution model that generates a life score and underpins
the MassMutual Mortality Score (M3S) and LifeScore360.1
Collaborating with actuaries, we design a novel evaluation framework to compare historical underwriting decisions
against simulated model decisions over a 15-year period.
This empirical study demonstrates that the life score outperforms traditional underwriting, yielding a 6% reduction in
claims in the healthiest pool of applicants. Based on these
promising results, we engaged additional partners across
MassMutual to implement an algorithmic underwriting system with this mortality model as its primary risk-driving engine. Over the past two years, this system has reduced time
to issue by >25% and increased customer acceptance by
>30% for offers made with light manual review, while saving millions of dollars in operational efficiency and driving
the decisions behind tens of billions of dollars of benefits.
The remainder of this paper: (1) provides background
on life insurance and the mathematical frameworks used to
quantify risk in insurance; (2) describes the data set and
methodologies used to estimate mortality risk; (3) presents
performance results and deployment details; and (4) discusses the future and implications of using predictive models
as a core component of underwriting in life insurance.

Life insurance provides trillions of dollars of financial security for hundreds of millions of individuals and families
worldwide. Life insurance companies must accurately assess
individual-level mortality risk to simultaneously maintain financial strength and price their products competitively. The
traditional underwriting process used to assess this risk is
based on manually examining an applicant’s health, behavioral, and financial profile. The existence of large historical
data sets provides an unprecedented opportunity for artificial
intelligence and machine learning to transform underwriting
in the life insurance industry. We present an overview of how
a rich application data set and survival modeling were combined to develop a life score that has been deployed in an algorithmic underwriting system at MassMutual, an American
mutual life insurance company serving millions of clients.
Through a novel evaluation framework, we show that the life
score outperforms traditional underwriting by 6% on the basis of claims. We describe how engagement with actuaries,
medical doctors, underwriters, and reinsurers was paramount
to building an algorithmic underwriting system with a predictive model at its core. Finally, we provide details of the
deployed system and highlight its value, which includes saving millions of dollars in operational efficiency while driving
the decisions behind tens of billions of dollars of benefits.

1

Introduction

Life insurance is a critical protective financial tool for millions of households. In the United States, life insurance
companies collectively manage trillions of dollars of benefits. While there are numerous types of insurance contracts,
a common component is the estimation of individual-level
mortality risk through the process of underwriting. Traditionally, this is performed manually using human judgment
and point-based systems that consider risk factors independently. These methods are sufficient in industry but are
coarse and subject to inconsistency. As a result, traditional
underwriting limits the degree to which an insurer can estimate risk from data and offer efficiently priced products.
The availability of large historical data sets provides an
opportunity for machine learning to transform underwriting
for life insurance. MassMutual, a large insurance and financial services company, has curated a data set of nearly one

2

Background

This section provides background on the traditional underwriting process, survival modeling, and actuarial science.

2.1

Life Insurance and Underwriting

A life insurance policy is an agreement between a policyholder and an insurer whereby the insurer agrees to pay beneficiaries a sum of money at the time of the policyholder’s
death. In return, the policyholder pays premiums over a predefined period of time (Atkinson and Dallas 2000). Life insurance provides security to the beneficiaries by reducing
1
M3S and LifeScore360 refer to branded versions of the mortality model described in this work.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9373

