The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Depthwise Convolution Is All You Need for Learning Multiple Visual Domains
Yunhui Guo,∗1 Yandong Li,∗2 Liqiang Wang,2 Tajana Rosing1
1

University of California, San Diego, CA, 2 University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL
yug185@eng.ucsd.edu, lyndon.leeseu@outlook.com, lwang@cs.ucf.edu, tajana@ucsd.edu

Abstract
There is a growing interest in designing models that can deal
with images from different visual domains. If there exists a
universal structure in different visual domains that can be
captured via a common parameterization, then we can use a
single model for all domains rather than one model per domain. A model aware of the relationships between different
domains can also be trained to work on new domains with
less resources. However, to identify the reusable structure in
a model is not easy. In this paper, we propose a multi-domain
learning architecture based on depthwise separable convolution. The proposed approach is based on the assumption that
images from different domains share cross-channel correlations but have domain-specific spatial correlations. The proposed model is compact and has minimal overhead when being applied to new domains. Additionally, we introduce a gating mechanism to promote soft sharing between different domains. We evaluate our approach on Visual Decathlon Challenge, a benchmark for testing the ability of multi-domain
models. The experiments show that our approach can achieve
the highest score while only requiring 50% of the parameters
compared with the state-of-the-art approaches.

(a) Animals

(b) Textures

(c) Signs

(d) Omniglot

(e) Digits

(f) Aircraft

(g) Flowers (h) Pedestrian

Figure 1: Image examples from different domains.
Can we build a single neural network that can deal with
images across different domains?
The question motivates the field called multi-domain
learning, where we target designing a common feature extractor that can capture the universal structure in different
domains and reducing the overhead of adding new tasks to
the model. With multi-domain learning, the visual models
are vested with the ability to work well on different domains
with minimal or no domain-specific parameters.
There are two challenges in multi-domain learning. The
first one is to identify a common structure among different domains. As shown in Fig 1, images from different
domains are visually different, it is challenging to design
a single feature extractor for all domains. Another challenge is to add new tasks to the model without introducing additional parameters. Existing neural network based
multi-domain learning approaches (Bilen and Vedaldi 2017;
Rebuffi, Bilen, and Vedaldi 2017; 2018) mostly focus on the
architecture design while ignoring the structural regularity
hidden in different domains which leads to sub-optimal solutions.
In this paper, we propose a multi-domain learning
approach based on depthwise separable convolution.
Depthwise separable convolution has been proved to be a
powerful variation of standard convolution for many applications, such as image classification (Chollet 2017), natural
language processing (Kaiser, Gomez, and Chollet 2017) and
embedded vision applications (Howard et al. 2017). To the

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016) have been the
state-of-the-art methods for tackling vision tasks. The existing CNN models are powerful but mostly designed for dealing with images from a specific visual domain (e.g. digits,
animals, or flowers) (Gan et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018). This
limits the applications of current approaches, as each time
the network needs to be retrained when new tasks arrive.
In sharp contrast to such CNN models, humans can easily
generalize to new domains based on the acquired knowledge (Cichon and Gan 2015; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017). Previou (Bilen and Vedaldi 2017; Rebuffi, Bilen, and Vedaldi
2018) show that images from different domains may have a
universal structure that can be captured via a common parameterization. A natural question then arises:
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Equal contribution. Work done during internship at IBM Research mentored by Rogerio Feris. ‡ The authors’ work was supported in part by NSF-1741431.

8368

