The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

No-Reference Image Quality Assessment
with Reinforcement Recursive List-Wise Ranking
Jie Gu,1,2 Gaofeng Meng,1 Cheng Da,1,2 Shiming Xiang,1,2 Chunhong Pan1
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
{jie.gu, gfmeng, cheng.da, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

al. 2011)) and no-reference/blind (NR/B) IQA models. NRIQA does not require information from the reference image.
It has a wide range of applications as usually no reference
is available in practice. Recently, many efforts have been
made to develop general-purpose (non-distortion-specific)
NR-IQA methods, which require no access to not only the
reference but also the distortion type.
A large proportion of current general-purpose NR-IQA
methods are regression-based (Gastaldo, Zunino, and Redi
2013; Kim et al. 2017). They typically first extract qualityaware representations, e.g., natural scene statistics (NSS)
features (Mittal, Moorthy, and Bovik 2012) or learningbased feature representations (Ye et al. 2012; Kang et al.
2014; Tang, Joshi, and Kapoor 2014; Kim and Lee 2017).
Then a regression model, implemented by an SVR or a neural network, maps the extracted features (representations) to
the quality score. This kind of methods are often considered
as “opinion-aware” (OA) since the ground-truth data for supervised learning is mostly the mean opinion score (MOS).
One of the main drawbacks of these methods is the lack of
a large MOS-aware IQA database for training. Accordingly,
their performance and generalization ability are questionable on real-world images.
Some other recent studies explore to formulate the NRIQA as a quality-based ranking problem. They typically do
not regress the image to a specific quality score but learn to
rank a pair of images according to their visual quality. There
are several advantages with such a formulation. One is that
the preference label (representing the relative quality of two
images) is generally more reliable and valid than the quality score (Keelan 2002). Thus building a pair-wise ranking
model for quality assessment is fully reasonable and may
probably benefit the performance (Gao et al. 2015). Another
is that learning from pair-wise rankings can be used as a
data augmentation technique. Collecting MOS is slow, cumbersome and expensive, which leads to the absence of large
IQA databases. In contrast, the preference labels associated
with image pairs can be intuitively generated by identifying
distortion levels (Liu, van de Weijer, and Bagdanov 2017) or
applying FR-IQA models (Ma et al. 2017b). However, there
are also problems with the pair-wise approaches (Liu 2009),
e.g., they transforms the ranking into classification on image
pairs rather than modeling it directly.
In this paper, we develop a new NR-IQA method based

Opinion-unaware no-reference image quality assessment
(NR-IQA) methods have received many interests recently because they do not require images with subjective scores for
training. Unfortunately, it is a challenging task, and thus far
no opinion-unaware methods have shown consistently better
performance than the opinion-aware ones. In this paper, we
propose an effective opinion-unaware NR-IQA method based
on reinforcement recursive list-wise ranking. We formulate
the NR-IQA as a recursive list-wise ranking problem which
aims to optimize the whole quality ordering directly. During
training, the recursive ranking process can be modeled as a
Markov decision process (MDP). The ranking list of images
can be constructed by taking a sequence of actions, and each
of them refers to selecting an image for a specific position of
the ranking list. Reinforcement learning is adopted to train the
model parameters, in which no ground-truth quality scores or
ranking lists are necessary for learning. Experimental results
demonstrate the superior performance of our approach compared with existing opinion-unaware NR-IQA methods. Furthermore, our approach can compete with the most effective
opinion-aware methods. It improves the state-of-the-art by
over 2% on the CSIQ benchmark and outperforms most compared opinion-aware models on TID2013.

Introduction
Nowadays digital images are everywhere. Unfortunately, the
images are often distorted at various stages of their life cycle and the distortions may lead to a reduction of the experience of human viewers. Objective image quality assessment
(IQA) refers to the technique of automatically predicting the
perceptual quality of distorted images. It plays an important
role in many applications, like image restoration, compression, transmission, super-resolution and enhancement.
IQA has gained much attention over the past decade, with
a lot of methods proposed (Bovik 2013). Existing IQA methods can be roughly classified into three categories according
to the availability of the distortion-free reference (original)
image. They are the full-reference (FR, where the reference
image is fully available, e.g., (Zhang, Shen, and Li 2014;
Wang et al. 2004)), reduced-reference (RR, where only partial information about the reference is available, e.g., (Ma et
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8336

