The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

LiveBot: Generating Live Video Comments Based on Visual and Textual Contexts
1

Shuming Ma,1,∗ Lei Cui,2 Damai Dai,1 Furu Wei,2 Xu Sun1

MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{shumingma,daidamai,xusun}@pku.edu.cn
{lecu,fuwei}@microsoft.com

Abstract

Vision

We introduce the task of automatic live commenting. Live
commenting, which is also called “video barrage”, is an
emerging feature on online video sites that allows real-time
comments from viewers to fly across the screen like bullets
or roll at the right side of the screen. The live comments
are a mixture of opinions for the video and the chit chats
with other comments. Automatic live commenting requires
AI agents to comprehend the videos and interact with human
viewers who also make the comments, so it is a good testbed
of an AI agent’s ability to deal with both dynamic vision
and language. In this work, we construct a large-scale live
comment dataset with 2,361 videos and 895,929 live comments. Then, we introduce two neural models to generate live
comments based on the visual and textual contexts, which
achieve better performance than previous neural baselines
such as the sequence-to-sequence model. Finally, we provide
a retrieval-based evaluation protocol for automatic live commenting where the model is asked to sort a set of candidate
comments based on the log-likelihood score, and evaluated on
metrics such as mean-reciprocal-rank. Putting it all together,
we demonstrate the first “LiveBot”. The datasets and the
codes can be found at https://github.com/lancopku/livebot.

Vision

Language

Language

Language

Image captioning

Visual question answering

Language

Language
Machine translation

Vision

Language

Language
Live commenting

Figure 1: The relationship between vision and language in
different tasks.
positive effect on the number of users, video clicks, and usage duration.
Motivated by the advantages of live comments for the
videos, we propose a novel task: automatic live commenting. The live comments are a mixture of the opinions for the
video and the chit chats with other comments, so the task
of living commenting requires AI agents to comprehend the
videos and interact with human viewers who also make the
comments. Therefore, it is a good testbed of an AI agent’s
ability to deal with both dynamic vision and language.
With the rapid progress at the intersection of vision and
language, there are some tasks to evaluate an AI’s ability
of dealing with both vision and language, including image
captioning (Donahue et al. 2017; Fang et al. 2015; Karpathy
and Fei-Fei 2017), video description (Rohrbach et al. 2015;
Venugopalan et al. 2015a; 2015b), visual question answering (Agrawal, Batra, and Parikh 2016; Antol et al. 2015),
and visual dialogue (Das et al. 2017). Live commenting is
different from all these tasks. Image captioning is to generate the textual description of an image, and video description
aims to assign a description for a video. Both the two tasks
only require the machine to see and understand the images
or the videos, rather than communicate with the human. Visual question answering and visual dialogue take a significant step towards human-machine interaction. Given an image, the machine should answer questions about the image
or conduct multiple rounds of a dialogue with the human.
Different from the two tasks, live commenting requires to

Introduction
The comments of videos bring many viewers fun and new
ideas. Unfortunately, on many occasions, the videos and the
comments are separated, forcing viewers to make a tradeoff between the two key elements. To address this problem,
some video sites provide a new feature: viewers can put
down the comments during watching videos, and the comments will fly across the screen like bullets or roll at the right
side of the screen. We show an example of live comments in
Figure 2. The video is about drawing a girl, and the viewers share their watching experience and opinions with the
live comments, such as “simply hauntingly beautiful”. The
live comments make the video more interesting and appealing. Besides, live comments can also better engage viewers
and create a direct link among viewers, making their opinions and responses more visible than the average comments
in the comment section. These features have a tremendously
∗
Joint work between Microsoft Research Asia and Peking University
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6810

