The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Parameterized Heuristics
for Incomplete Weighted CSPs
Atena M. Tabakhi

Washington University in St. Louis
One Brookings Dr. Jolley Hall, Suite 304
St. Louis, MO, 63130
amtabakhi@wustl.edu
Abstract

x1

The key assumption in Weighted Constraint Satisfaction Problems (WCSPs) is that all constraints are specified a priori. This
assumption does not hold in some applications that involve
users preferences. Incomplete WCSPs (IWCSPs) extend WCSPs by allowing some constraints to be partially specified.
Unfortunately, existing IWCSP approaches either guarantee to
return optimal solutions or not provide any quality guarantees
on solutions found. To bridge the two extremes, we propose
a number of parameterized heuristics that allow users to find
boundedly-suboptimal solutions, where the error bound depends on user-defined parameters. These heuristics thus allow
users to trade off solution quality for fewer elicited preferences
and faster computation times.

x3

x2

(a) Constraint Graph

x1 x2 f˜1 f1
0 0 15 15
0 1 ? 11
1 0 21 21
1 1 ? 30

x1 x3 f˜2 f2
0 0 4 4
0 1 ? 45
1 0 ? 8
1 1 10 10

(b) Weighted Constraints

Figure 1: IWCSP Example

Introduction
In Weighted Constraint Satisfaction Problems (WCSPs), the
goal is to find an optimal solution, given a set of preferences expressed by means of cost functions (Shapiro and
Haralick 1981; Schiex, Fargier, and Verfaillie 1995). A key
assumption in all these constraint-based models is that all
the constraints are specified or known a priori. In some
applications, such as roster and meeting scheduling problems, some constraints encode the preferences of human
users. As such, they may not be fully specified simply because it is unrealistic to accurately know the preferences
of users for all possible scenarios in an application. Motivated by such applications, (Tabakhi et al. 2017a; 2017b;
2018) assumed all cost functions are not specified a priori
and ask users a number of preset questions to elicit cost functions before the search. While (Gelain et al. 2010) proposed
the Incomplete WCSP (IWCSP) problem formulation, which
extends WCSPs by allowing some constraints to be partially
specified (i.e., the costs for some constraints are unknown).
To solve IWCSPs, they introduced a series of algorithms that
interleave the search process, which seeks to find a good
solution, and the preference elicitation process, which seeks
to obtain some subset of cost functions from the user.
Unfortunately, existing approaches fall into two extremes –
they are either guaranteed to find optimal solutions or they do
not provide any quality guarantees on the quality of solutions
found. In this paper, we seek to bridge the two extremes
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10045

by introducing parameterized heuristics that allow one to
find boundedly-suboptimal solutions. In other words, these
heuristics will allow users to trade off solution quality for
fewer elicited preferences and faster computation times.
An Incomplete Weighted Constraint Satisfaction Problem (IWCSP) extends WCSPs and is defined by a tuple
P = hX , D, F, F̃i, where X , D, and F are a set of finite
variables, domains, and weighted constraints, respectively,
which are the same as WCSPs. The key difference is that
the set of fully-specified constraints F are not known to an
IWCSP algorithm. Instead, only the set of partially-specified
constraints F̃ are known. More formally, F̃ = {f˜1 , . . . , f˜m }
is a set of partially-specified weighted constraints (or cost
tables). Each partially-specified constraint is a function f˜i :
"xj ∈xfi Dj → R+
0 ∪ {∞, ?}, where ? is a special element
denoting that the cost for a given combination of value assignment is not specified. Further, the costs R+
0 ∪ {∞} that are
specified are exactly the costs of the corresponding specified
constraints fi ∈ F. A solution x is a value assignment to a
set of variables Xx ⊆ X that is
Pconsistent with the variables’
domains. The cost FP (x) = f ∈F ,xf ⊆Xx f (x) is the sum
of the costs of all the applicable cost functions in x. The goal
is to find an optimal complete solution x∗ = argminx FP (x)
while eliciting as few unspecified costs as possible.
Figure 1(a) shows the constraint graph of an example
IWCSP with three variables x1 , x2 , and x3 where the domains are D1 = D2 = D3 = {0, 1}. Figure 1(b) shows both
the partially-specified and fully-specified cost tables for all
constraints. In this example, the optimal complete solution is
x∗ = hx1 = 0, x2 = 1, x3 = 0i, which has a cost of 15. This
can theoretically be found, but not proven to be optimal, by
only eliciting the unknown cost f˜1 (hx1 = 0, x2 = 1i) since
f2 (hx1 = 0, x3 = 0i) is known.

