The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CAFE: Adaptive VDI Workload Prediction with Multi-Grained Features
Yao Zhang,1,2 Wen-Ping Fan,2 Xuan Wu,1 Hua Chen,2 Bin-Yang Li,2 Min-Ling Zhang1,3,∗
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
VMware Information Technology (China) Ltd.
3
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{yaoz, wfan}@vmware.com, wuxuan@seu.edu.cn, {huac, binyangl}@vmware.com, zhangml@seu.edu.cn∗ (corr. author)

Abstract
Virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI) is a virtualization technology that hosts desktop operating system on centralized
server in a data center of private or public cloud. Effective
resource management is of crucial importance for VDI customers, where maintaining sufficient virtual machines helps
guarantee satisfactory user experience while turning off spare
virtual machines helps save running cost. Generally, existing
techniques work in passive manner by either driving available capacity reactively or configuring management schedules manually. In this paper, a novel proactive resource management approach is proposed which aims to predict VDI
pool workload adaptively by utilizing CoArse to Fine historical dEscriptive (C AFE) features. Specifically, aggregate session count from pool end users serves as the basis for workload measurement and predictive model induction. Extensive
experiments on real VDI customers data sets clearly validate
the effectiveness of multi-grained features for VDI workload
prediction. Furthermore, practical insights identified in our
VDI data analytics are also discussed.

Figure 1: A typical VDI architecture.

the number of desktops that should be powered on. Today
in VDI systems, this is dealt with by either driving available capacity reactively or configuring management schedules manually. The passive management scheme would result in many issues in VDI resource management, such as
poor user experience, unnecessary cost, time-consuming and
error-prone. To enable proactive VDI resource management,
it is desirable to predict the pool workload adaptively. In
this way, the VDI system can power on enough desktops for
sudden workload climb and shut down unnecessary desktops once the workload starts dropping in a timely manner.
Therefore, adaptive VDI pool workload prediction can help
generate suitable resource management schedule automatically, and thus reduce infrastructure/administration cost and
improve user experience.
In this paper, we introduce C AFE, an adaptive prediction
model with multi-grained features which can predict VDI
workload with high accuracy. Specifically, we consider the
aggregate session count from pool end users which is the
most evident indicator on VDI workload. For each pool, its
aggregate session count is recorded once per minute unless
the pool terminates. On every minute, C AFE creates multigrained feature representation by utilizing coarse to fine historical descriptions of the workload sequence. Accordingly,
the pool workload in forthcoming time span are regarded as
the target for prediction.1 Regression model for workload

Introduction
Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) is a technology that
separates personal computer desktop environments from
physical machines using a client-server architecture. It provides the ability to virtualize personal desktops in the data
center and access them via a remote client through a display
protocol. As shown in Figure 1, VDI uses a client-server architecture where all the virtual desktops (and applications)
run remotely on top of the physical infrastructure in the data
center. As the physical infrastructure is managed centrally,
the virtual desktops can be managed centrally as well. In this
way, the desktop end users can access their desktops on any
devices including PC, laptop, smartphone, tablet and thin
clients. According to a recent analysis report (ReportLinker
2017), VDI market is expected to reach 15.3 billion dollars
by 2023.
One key feature of VDI lies in the non-persistent desktop
pool in which any virtual desktop can be used by any user.
The non-persistent pool is highly efficient as it can shrink or
expand its size dynamically. The pool needs to understand
the required pool capacity at any time in order to determine

1

In this paper, workload in forthcoming 30 or 60 minutes is predicted which serves as feasible time span for adaptive VDI resource
provisioning.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5821

