The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Spatial and Temporal Mutual Promotion for Video-Based Person Re-Identification
Yiheng Liu,1 Zhenxun Yuan,2 Wengang Zhou,1 Houqiang Li1
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University
lyh156@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yuan141@purdue.edu, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Compared with a single image to represent a person, a
video sequence contains richer information (Zheng et al.
2016). The information of different video frames complements each other, so that it is more robust to noise. More
importantly, motion context in video sequences is useful for
identifying pedestrians. Therefore, how to make full use of
spatial-temporal information is the key to video-based person re-identification. Some methods (McLaughlin, del Rincon, and Miller 2016; Zhou et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2017)
use recurrent networks to fuse temporal information. Another alternative is to predict a quality score for whole or
part of each video frame (Liu, Yan, and Ouyang 2017;
Song et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018). However, a key effect of
temporal information is ignored by these methods: the temporal information is useful to resist spatial noise. Usually,
in a video sequence, although a region in one frame is corrupted by noise, the missing information can be recovered
by regions of the same location in some other frames. Given
a video frame, the difficulty lies in how to refine the noisy
regions with the features of previous video frames.
In this paper, we propose a new approach to handle the
difficulty of video-based person re-identification. Instead of
directly using the features of each video frame to extract
temporal features, we first propose a refining recurrent unit
(RRU) to recover the missing parts and suppress noisy parts
based on the appearance and motion context from historical
video frames. After that, with the refined feature representation, we introduce a spatial-temporal clues integration module (STIM) to integrate spatial information and temporal information simultaneously. Meanwhile, the proposed multilevel training objective further enhances the capability of
RRU and STIM. The cooperation of those modules enables
the network to learn more robust and discriminative feature
representation for accurate person re-identification.

Video-based person re-identification is a crucial task of
matching video sequences of a person across multiple camera views. Generally, features directly extracted from a single
frame suffer from occlusion, blur, illumination and posture
changes. This leads to false activation or missing activation in
some regions, which corrupts the appearance and motion representation. How to explore the abundant spatial-temporal information in video sequences is the key to solve this problem.
To this end, we propose a Refining Recurrent Unit (RRU) that
recovers the missing parts and suppresses noisy parts of the
current frame’s features by referring historical frames. With
RRU, the quality of each frame’s appearance representation
is improved. Then we use the Spatial-Temporal clues Integration Module (STIM) to mine the spatial-temporal information from those upgraded features. Meanwhile, the multilevel training objective is used to enhance the capability of
RRU and STIM. Through the cooperation of those modules,
the spatial and temporal features mutually promote each other
and the final spatial-temporal feature representation is more
discriminative and robust. Extensive experiments are conducted on three challenging datasets, i.e., iLIDS-VID, PRID2011 and MARS. The experimental results demonstrate that
our approach outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods
of video-based person re-identification on iLIDS-VID and
MARS and achieves favorable results on PRID-2011.

Introduction
Person re-identification aims to identify persons across different cameras views. Recently, this topic has drawn more
and more attention thanks to its significant applications in
video surveillance analysis and retrieval. This task is very
challenging due to background clutter, blur, occlusion, as
well as the dramatic variation in illumination, pedestrian’s
postures and viewpoints. Generally, person re-identification
is approached with either image or video data for representation. Many image-based person re-identification methods
have achieved impressive progress. However, those methods are susceptible to the quality of images. Limited amount
of information in a single image results in a lower tolerance to noise. For similar pedestrians, if the discriminative
patches are lost due to occlusion or blur, it will easily lead
to misidentification.

Related Works
Most prior works on person re-identification are based on
still images and dedicated to two key issues: discriminative
feature representation learning and distance metric learning. Features that are both discriminative and invariant to
background and viewpoint changes are crucial to person reidentification. Handcrafted features such as color histograms
(Karanam, Li, and Radke 2015), texture histograms (Gray
and Tao 2008) and Local Binary Pattern (Xiong et al. 2014)

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8786

