The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

3D Face Synthesis Driven by Personality Impression
Yining Lang,1 Wei Liang,1 Yujia Wang,1 Lap-Fai Yu2
1

Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 George Mason University
langyining@bit.edu.cn, liangwei@bit.edu.cn, wangyujia@bit.edu.cn, craigyu@gmu.edu.

Abstract

animations are usually designed to look confident and smart,
whereas the “bad guys” are usually designed to look hostile.
There are automatic tools for synthesizing human faces of
different ethnicities and genders, however, the problem of
synthesizing 3D faces with respect to personality impressions is still unsolved. We propose a data-driven optimization approach to solve this problem.
As the personality impression of a face depends a lot
on its subtle details, under the current practice, creating a
face to give a certain personality impression is usually done
through a “trial-and-error” approach: a designer creates several faces; asks for people’s feedback on their impressions of
the faces; and then modifies the faces accordingly. This process iterates until a satisfactory face is created. This design
process involves substantial tuning efforts by a designer and
is not scalable. Manual creation of faces could also be very
challenging if the objectives are abstract or sophisticated.
For example, while it could be relatively easy to create a
face to give an impression of being friendly, it could be hard
to create a face to give an impression of being friendly but
silly, which could be desirable for a certain virtual character.
We propose a novel approach to automate this face creation process. Our approach leverages Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) techniques to learn the non-trivial mapping between low-level subtle details of a face and high-level
personality impressions. The trained networks can then be
applied for synthesizing a 3D face to give a desired personality impression via an optimization process. We demonstrate
that our approach can automatically synthesize a variety of
3D faces to give different personality impressions, hence
overcoming the current scalability bottleneck. The synthesized faces could find practical uses in virtual world applications (e.g. , synthesizing a gang of hostile-looking guys to
be used as enemies in a game).
The major contributions of our paper include:

Synthesizing 3D faces that give certain personality impressions is commonly needed in computer games, animations,
and virtual world applications for producing realistic virtual
characters. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to synthesize 3D faces based on personality impression for creating virtual characters. Our approach consists of two major
steps. In the first step, we train classifiers using deep convolutional neural networks on a dataset of images with personality impression annotations, which are capable of predicting
the personality impression of a face. In the second step, given
a 3D face and a desired personality impression type as user
inputs, our approach optimizes the facial details against the
trained classifiers, so as to synthesize a face which gives the
desired personality impression. We demonstrate our approach
for synthesizing 3D faces giving desired personality impressions on a variety of 3D face models. Perceptual studies show
that the perceived personality impressions of the synthesized
faces agree with the target personality impressions specified
for synthesizing the faces.

Introduction
A face conveys a lot of information about a person. People
usually form an impression about another person in less than
a second, mainly by looking at another person’s face. Researchers in psychology, cognitive science, and biometrics
conducted a lot of studies to explore how facial appearances
may influence personality impression (Willis and Todorov
2006; Hassin and Trope 2000). Some researchers investigated the relationship between personality impressions and
specific facial features (Eisenthal, Dror, and Ruppin 2006).
There are also attempts in training machine learning models
for predicting personality impressions based on facial features (Gray et al. 2010; Joo, Steen, and Zhu 2015).
To create realistic 3D faces for the computer games, digital entertainments, and virtual reality applications, some
works have been carried on generating realistic faces (Hu
et al. 2017), vivid animations (Sohre et al. 2018), natural expressions (Marsella et al. 2013), and so on. Yet, synthesizing
3D faces that give certain personality is not explored, which
is one of the most important considerations during the creative process. For example, the main characters in games and

• Introducing a novel problem of synthesizing 3D faces
based on personality impressions.
• Proposing a learning-based optimization approach and a
data-driven MCMC sampler for synthesizing faces with
desired personality impressions.
• Demonstrating the practical uses of our approach for different novel face editing, virtual reality applications and
digital entertainments.

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1707

