The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

QUOTA: The Quantile Option Architecture for Reinforcement Learning
Shangtong Zhang,∗1 Hengshuai Yao 2
1

2

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Driving Lab, Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
shangtong.zhang@ualberta.ca, hengshuai.yao@huawei.com

Abstract

later.) We first compared different exploration strategies in
two Markov chains, where naive mean-based RL algorithms
fail to explore efficiently as they cannot exploit the distribution information during training, which is crucial for efficient exploration. In the first chain, faster exploration is
from a high quantile (i.e., an optimistic exploration strategy).
However, in the second chain, exploration benefits from a
low quantile (i.e., a pessimistic exploration strategy). Different tasks need different exploration strategies. Even within
one task, an agent may still need different exploration strategies at different stages of learning. To address this issue, we
use the option framework (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999).
We learn a high-level policy to decide which quantile to use
for action selection. In this way, different quantiles function
as different options, and we name this special option the
quantile option. QUOTA adaptively selects a pessimistic and
optimistic exploration strategy, resulting in improved exploration consistently across different tasks.
We make two main contributions in this paper:

In this paper, we propose the Quantile Option Architecture
(QUOTA) for exploration based on recent advances in distributional reinforcement learning (RL). In QUOTA, decision
making is based on quantiles of a value distribution, not only
the mean. QUOTA provides a new dimension for exploration
via making use of both optimism and pessimism of a value
distribution. We demonstrate the performance advantage of
QUOTA in both challenging video games and physical robot
simulators.

Introduction
Mean of the return has been the center for reinforcement
learning (RL) for a long time, and there have been many
methods to learn a mean quantity (Sutton 1988; Watkins and
Dayan 1992; Mnih et al. 2015). Thanks to the advances in
distributional RL (Jaquette 1973; Bellemare, Dabney, and
Munos 2017), we are able to learn the full distribution, not
only the mean, for a state-action value. Particularly, Dabney
et al. (2017) used a set of quantiles to approximate this value
distribution. However, the decision making in prevailing distributional RL methods is still based on the mean (Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos 2017; Dabney et al. 2017; BarthMaron et al. 2018; Qu, Mannor, and Xu 2018). The main
motivation of this paper is to answer the questions of how
to make decision based on the full distribution and whether
an agent can benefit for better exploration. In this paper, we
propose the Quantile Option Architecture (QUOTA) for control. In QUOTA, decision making is based on all quantiles,
not only the mean, of a state-action value distribution.
In traditional RL and recent distributional RL, an agent
selects an action greedily with respect to the mean of the
action values. In QUOTA, we propose to select an action
greedily w.r.t. certain quantile of the action value distribution. A high quantile represents an optimistic estimation of
the action value, and action selection based on a high quantile indicates an optimistic exploration strategy. A low quantile represents a pessimistic estimation of the action value,
and action selection based on a low quantile indicates a pessimistic exploration strategy. (The two exploration strategies are related to risk-sensitive RL, which will be discussed

• First, we propose QUOTA for control in discrete-action
problems, combining distributional RL with options. Action selection in QUOTA is based on certain quantiles instead of the mean of the state-action value distribution,
and QUOTA learns a high-level policy to decide which
quantile to use for decision making.
• Second, we extend QUOTA to continuous-action problems. In a continuous-action space, applying quantilebased action selection is not straightforward. To address
this issue, we introduce quantile actors. Each quantile actor is responsible for proposing an action that maximizes
one specific quantile of a state-action value distribution.
We show empirically QUOTA improves the exploration
of RL agents, resulting in a performance boost in both challenging video games (Atari games) and physical robot simulators (Roboschool tasks)
In the rest of this paper, we first present some preliminaries of RL. We then show two Markov chains where naive
mean-based RL algorithms fail to explore efficiently. Then
we present QUOTA for both discrete- and continuous-action
problems, followed by empirical results. Finally, we give an
overview of related work and closing remarks.

∗

Work done during an internship at Huawei
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5797

