The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Performance Guarantees for Homomorphisms beyond Markov Decision Processes
Sultan Javed Majeed,1 Marcus Hutter2
1,2

Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University, Australia
1
http://www.sultan.pk, 2 http://www.hutter1.net

Abstract

and other typical environment models (Hutter 2016; Leike
2016). But this generality comes at the cost of an infinite
state-action space: every agent-environment interaction generates a unique history. Hence, there is no other option but
to consider every history as a unique state of the environment. Therefore, GRL suffers, inevitably, from the curse of
dimensionality.
A homomorphism framework originated by Whitt (1978)
is a well-studied solution to handle the state-action space
curse of dimensionality. In the homomorphism framework a
problem of a large state-action space is solved by using an
abstract problem with a relatively small state-action space.
The (near-)optimal policy of the abstract problem is a solution if it is also a (near-)optimal policy in the true environment.
It is important to highlight that homomorphism is not the
only technique for abstracting actions. The options framework is a competing method for temporal action abstractions (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999). In the option/macroaction framework, the original action space is augmented
with long-term/built-in policies (McGovern, Sutton, and
Fagg 1997). The agent using an option/marco-action commits to execute a fixed set of actions for a fixed (expected)
time duration. This temporal action abstraction framework is
arguably more powerful but beyond the scope of this work.
Because, to the best of our knowledge, there are no theoretical performance guarantees available for such methods, and
most probably such bounds might not exist.
In the homomorphism framework, it is typically assumed
that the abstract problem is an MDP (Ravindran and Barto
2003; 2004; Taylor, Precup, and Panangaden 2008). However, the size of the abstract state-action space can be significantly reduced if non-MDP abstractions are possible (Abel,
Hershkowitz, and Littman 2016; Li, Walsh, and Littman
2006). Moreover, the reduction of abstract state-action space
roughly translates into faster learning and planning3 (Strehl,
Li, and Littman 2009; Lattimore and Hutter 2014).
It has recently been shown that the MDP restriction is not
a necessary condition for near-optimal performance guarantees in state-only abstractions of GRL (Hutter 2016). In

Most real-world problems have huge state and/or action
spaces. Therefore, a naive application of existing tabular solution methods is not tractable on such problems. Nonetheless, these solution methods are quite useful if an agent has
access to a relatively small state-action space homomorphism
of the true environment and near-optimal performance is
guaranteed by the map. A plethora of research is focused on
the case when the homomorphism is a Markovian representation of the underlying process. However, we show that nearoptimal performance is sometimes guaranteed even if the homomorphism is non-Markovian.

Introduction
The task of learning a near-optimal behavior from a sequence of experiences can naturally be formulated as a Reinforcement Learning (RL) problem (Sutton and Barto 2018).
In a typical RL framework, an agent interacts with an environment by taking an action and receiving a feedback.
It is typically assumed that the agent is facing a small
state-action space1 Markov Decision Process (MDP) so the
agent can advise a stationary policy as a function of state
(Puterman 2014). Unfortunately, the number of state-action
pairs in most of real-world problems is prohibitively large,
e.g. driving a car, playing Go, personal assistance, controlling a plant with real-valued inputs, and so forth. The agent
can neither simply visit each state-action pair nor can it keep
record of these visits to learn a near-optimal behavior. This
explosion of state-action space is known as the curse of dimensionality (Sutton and Barto 2018). Therefore, it is essential for the agent to generalize over its experiences in such a
huge state-action space problem.
The curse of dimensionality is not a mere artifact of limited experience and computation constraints if the problem has an infinite state-action space. In a typical General Reinforcement Learning2 (GRL) framework the agent is
faced with an environment without any known structure. The
GRL setup is arguably the most general setup: it can represent MDP, k−MDP, partially observed MDP (POMDP)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We refer a state and action space/pair jointly as a state-action
space/pair.
2
We formally define a typical GRL setup in Preliminaries.

3

Although reduction of state-action space is necessary for faster
learning/planning but not sufficient (Littman, Dean, and Kaelbling
1995).

7659

