The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Partial Label Learning with Self-Guided Retraining
Lei Feng,1,2 Bo An1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute, Singapore
feng0093@e.ntu.edu.sg, boan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

assumption of partial label learning lies in that the groundtruth label for xi is concealed in its candidate label set
Si . The task of partial label learning is to learn a function
f : X → Y from the PL training set D, to correctly predict
the label of a test instance.
Obviously, the available labeling information in the PL
training set is ambiguous, as the ground-truth label is concealed in the candidate label set. Hence the key for accomplishing the task of learning from PL examples is how to
disambiguate the candidate labels. Based on the employed
strategy, existing approaches can be roughly grouped into
two categories, including the average-based strategy and the
identification-based strategy. The average-based strategy assumes that each candidate label makes equal contributions
to the model training, and the prediction is made by averaging their modeling outputs (Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006;
Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011; Zhang, Zhou, and Liu 2016).
The identification-based strategy considers the ground-truth
label as a latent variable, which is identified by an iterative refining procedure (Jin and Ghahramani 2003; Nguyen
and Caruana 2008; Liu and Dietterich 2012; Yu and Zhang
2016). Although these approaches are able to extract the relative labeling confidence of each candidate label, they fail to
reflect the mutually exclusive relationships among different
candidate labels.
Motivated by self-training that takes into account such
mutually exclusive relationships by directly labeling an unlabeled instance with enough high confidence, this paper
gives the first attempt to leverage the similar idea to deal
with PL instances. A straightforward method is to first apply
a multi-output model on the PL examples, then pick up the
candidate label with enough high confidence as the groundtruth label, finally retrain the model on the resulting data.
This process is repeated until no PL examples exist, or no
PL examples can be picked up as the ground-truth label. Although this method is intuitive, the model learned from PL
examples are probably hard to directly identify the groundtruth label in accordance with the modeling outputs, as candidate label sets exist. Furthermore, the incorrectly identified
labels could have contagiously negative impacts on the final
predictions.
To address this problem, we propose a novel partial label
learning approach named SURE (Self-gUided REtraining).
Specifically, we propose a novel unified formulation with

Partial label learning deals with the problem where each training instance is assigned a set of candidate labels, only one
of which is correct. This paper provides the first attempt
to leverage the idea of self-training for dealing with partially labeled examples. Specifically, we propose a unified
formulation with proper constraints to train the desired model
and perform pseudo-labeling jointly. For pseudo-labeling, unlike traditional self-training that manually differentiates the
ground-truth label with enough high confidence, we introduce the maximum infinity norm regularization on the modeling outputs to automatically achieve this consideratum, which
results in a convex-concave optimization problem. We show
that optimizing this convex-concave problem is equivalent to
solving a set of quadratic programming (QP) problems. By
proposing an upper-bound surrogate objective function, we
turn to solving only one QP problem for improving the optimization efficiency. Extensive experiments on synthesized
and real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art partial
label learning approaches.

Introduction
In partial label (PL) learning, each training example is represented by a single instance (feature vector) while associated with a set of candidate labels, only one of which
is the ground-truth label. This learning paradigm is also
termed as superset label learning (Liu and Dietterich 2012;
2014; Hüllermeier and Cheng 2015; Gong et al. 2018) or
ambiguous label learning (Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006;
Zeng et al. 2013; Chen et al. 2014; Chen, Patel, and Chellappa 2017). Since manually labeling the ground-truth label
of each instance could incur unaffordable monetary or time
cost, partial label learning has various application domains,
such as web mining (Luo and Orabona 2010), image annotation (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011; Zeng et al. 2013), and
ecoinformatics (Liu and Dietterich 2012).
Formally, let X ∈ Rn be the n-dimensional feature space
and Y = {1, 2, · · · , l} be the corresponding label space
with l labels. Suppose the PL training set is denoted by
D = {xi , Si }m
i=1 where xi ∈ X is an n-dimensional feature vector and Si denotes the candidate label set. The key
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3542

