The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Constraint-Based Sequential Pattern Mining with Decision Diagrams∗
Amin Hosseininasab,1 Willem-Jan van Hoeve,1 Andre A. Cire2
1

Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Dept. of Management, University of Toronto Scarborough, Canada
aminh@andrew.cmu.edu, vanhoeve@andrew.cmu.edu, andre.cire@rotman.utoronto.ca
2

Abstract

a post-processing step to retain patterns that satisfy the desired constraints. This approach, however, may be expensive
in terms of memory requirements and computational time,
in particular when the resulting subset of constrained patterns is small in comparison to the full unconstrained set.
Constraint-based sequential pattern mining (CSPM) aims at
providing more efficient methods by embedding constraint
reasoning within existing mining algorithms (Pei, Han, and
Wang 2007; Negrevergne and Guns 2015). Nonetheless,
while certain constraint types are relatively easy to incorporate in a mining algorithm, others of practical use are still
challenging to handle in a general and effective way. This is
particularly the case of non-monotone constraints representing, e.g., sums and averages of attributes.
Contributions. In this paper, we propose a novel representation of sequential database using a multi-valued decision
diagram (MDD), a graphical model that compactly encodes
the sequence of items and their attributes by leveraging symmetry. The MDD representation can be augmented with
constraint-specific information, so that constraint satisfaction is either guaranteed or enforced during the mining algorithm. Finally, as a proof of concept, we implement a general
prefix-projection algorithm equipped with an MDD to enforce several constraint types, including complex constraints
such as average (“avg”) and median (“md”). To the best of
our knowledge, this paper is the first to consider the “sum,”
“avg,” and “md” constraints with arbitrary item-attribute association within the pattern mining algorithm. Lastly, we
provide an experimental comparison on real-world benchmark databases, and show that our approach is competitive
with or superior to a state-of-the-art CSPM algorithm.

Constraint-based sequential pattern mining aims at identifying frequent patterns on a sequential database of items while
observing constraints defined over the item attributes. We introduce novel techniques for constraint-based sequential pattern mining that rely on a multi-valued decision diagram
(MDD) representation of the database. Specifically, our representation can accommodate multiple item attributes and various constraint types, including a number of non-monotone
constraints. To evaluate the applicability of our approach, we
develop an MDD-based prefix-projection algorithm and compare its performance against a typical generate-and-check
variant, as well as a state-of-the-art constraint-based sequential pattern mining algorithm. Results show that our approach
is competitive with or superior to these other methods in
terms of scalability and efficiency.

Introduction
Sequential Pattern Mining (SPM) is a fundamental data mining task with a large array of applications in marketing,
health care, finance, and bioinformatics, to name a few. Frequent patterns are used, e.g., to extract knowledge from data
within decision support tools, to develop novel association
rules, and to design more effective recommender systems.
We refer the reader to (Fournier-Viger et al. 2017) for a recent and thorough review of SPM and its applications.
In practice, mining the entire set of frequent patterns in
a database is not of interest, as the resulting number of
items is typically large and may provide no significant insight to the user. It is hence desirable to restrict the mining
algorithm search to smaller subsets of patterns that satisfy
problem-specific constraints. For example, in online retail
click-stream analysis, we may seek frequent browsing patterns from sessions where users spend at least a minimum
amount of time on certain items that have specific price
ranges. Such constraints limit the output of SPM and are
much more effective in knowledge discovery, as compared
to an arbitrary large set of frequent click-streams.
A naı̈ve approach to impose constraints in SPM is to first
collect all unconstrained frequent patterns, and then to apply

Related work
Research in CSPM has primarily focused on exploiting special properties of constraints, such as monotonicity or antimonotonicity, to guarantee the feasibility of pattern extensions in the mining algorithm (Garofalakis, Rastogi, and
Shim 1999; Zaki 2000; Lin and Lee 2005; Bonchi and Lucchese 2005; Chen and Hu 2006; Pei, Han, and Wang 2007;
Nijssen and Zimmermann 2014; Mallick, Garg, and Grover
2014; Aoga, Guns, and Schaus 2017). Constraint types that
do not possess such properties remain a challenge for CSPM
algorithms, although some of these have been successfully
incorporated in more general item-set mining on databases

∗

This work was supported by ONR grant N00014-18-1-2129.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1495

