The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Community Focusing: Yet Another Query-Dependent Community Detection
∗

∗

Zhuo Wang,1,3 Weiping Wang,1 Chaokun Wang,2 Xiaoyan Gu,1 Bo Li,1 Dan Meng1
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{wangzhuo, wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn, chaokun@tsinghua.edu.cn, {guxiaoyan, libo, mengdan}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

Gary J. Whitman Mia K. Markey

As a major kind of query-dependent community detection,
community search finds a densely connected subgraph containing a set of query nodes. As density is the major consideration of community search, most methods of community search often find a dense subgraph with many vertices
far from the query nodes, which are not very related to the
query nodes. Motivated by this, a new problem called community focusing (CF) is studied. It finds a community where
the members are close and densely connected to the query
nodes. A distance-sensitive dense subgraph structure called
β-attention-core is proposed to remove the vertices loosely
connected to or far from the query nodes, and a combinational
density is designed to guarantee the density of a subgraph.
Then CF is formalized as finding a subgraph with the largest
combinational density among the β-attention-core subgraphs
containing the query nodes with the largest β. Thereafter, effective methods are devised for CF. Furthermore, a speed-up
strategy is developed to make the methods scalable to large
networks. Extensive experimental results on real and synthetic networks demonstrate the performance of our methods.

Tamara Miner Haygood

Zhou Wang

Tanya W. Stephens

Gautam S. Muralidhar
Alan C. Bovik

Gautam S. Muralidhar
William R. Geiser

(a) LCTC

William R. Geiser Zhou Wang

(b) FLCF

Figure 1: Case study 1. In the subgraphs, the circles are the
discovered members and the rectangles are the query nodes.
As too many members exist in (a), only the query nodes are
tagged with names. The white circles in (a) are the vertices
that are also in (b).

ralidhar and William R. Geiser) are selected from the network as the query nodes. They have the experience studying
or working at the University of Texas, and articles published
in J. Digital Imaging. Given the query nodes, the subgraph
found by LCTC (a state-of-the-art method of community
search) is shown in Fig.1(a). It is not very meaningful to
the query nodes as: (1) The query nodes are marginalized in
the subgraph. (2) The members in the subgraph come from
various backgrounds. (3) Many members (60%) in the subgraph publish articles in NeuroComputing whereas none of
the query nodes have articles published in the journal.
Intuitively, a community meaningful to the query nodes
should satisfy the following conditions: (1) The members of
the community should be close to the query nodes. In general, the further a vertex is away from the query nodes, the
less relevant the vertex is to the query nodes. (2) The members of the community should be densely connected to the
query nodes, which requires strong associations to the query
nodes. Therefore, a new problem called community focusing
is proposed in this paper. Given a set of query nodes, we find
a community where the members are close and densely connected to the query nodes. Different from community search,
distance to the query nodes and density of a subgraph are
equally important in our problem.
Our first contribution is proposing and formalizing the
community focusing problem (CF). A distance-sensitive

Introduction
As a major kind of query-dependent community detection
(Fang et al. 2016), community search finds a densely connected subgraph containing a set of given query nodes
(Sozio and Gionis 2010). The problem has attracted great
interest due to its wide applications in biological networks
(Wu et al. 2015), tagging systems (Sozio and Gionis 2010),
and social networks (Cui et al. 2014).
Unfortunately, as density is the major consideration of
community search, most methods of community search often find a dense subgraph where many vertices are far from
the query nodes and the query nodes stage at the periphery.
As a result, the subgraph is not very related to the query
nodes, and it is hard to interpret the cause of the subgraph.
As a case study, we build a DBLP co-author network in
which each edge between two authors indicates they have
co-authored no less than three times (Huang et al. 2015;
Wu et al. 2015). The network contains 242K vertices and
530K edges. Three scholars (Zhou Wang, Gautam S. Mu∗

Corresponding authors: Weiping Wang and Chaokun Wang
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

329

