The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Predicting the Argumenthood of English Prepositional Phrases
Najoung Kim,† Kyle Rawlins,† Benjamin Van Durme,†,∂ Paul Smolensky†,∆
†
∂

Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
∆
Microsoft Research AI, Redmond, WA, USA
{n.kim,kgr,vandurme,smolensky}@jhu.edu

Abstract

parsing (Carroll, Minnen, and Briscoe 1998) and PP attachment disambiguation (Merlo and Ferrer 2006). In particular,
automatic distinction of argumenthood could prove useful
in improving structure-aware semantic role labeling, which
has been shown to outperform structure-agnostic models
in recent works (Marcheggiani and Titov 2017). However,
argument-adjunct distinction is one of the most difficult linguistic properties to annotate, and has remained unmarked
in popular resources including the Penn TreeBank. PropBank (Palmer, Gildea, and Kingsbury 2005) addresses this
issue to an extent by providing ARG - N labels, but does not
provide full coverage (Hockenmaier and Steedman 2002).
Thus, there are theoretical and practical motivations to a systematic approach for predicting argumenthood.
We focus on PPs in this paper, which are known to be one
of the most challenging verbal dependents to classify correctly (Abend and Rappoport 2010). The paper is structured
as follows. First, we discuss the theoretical and practical motivations for PP argumenthood prediction in more detail and
review related works. Second, we formulate two different argumenthood tasks—binary and gradient—and describe how
each dataset is constructed. Results for each task using various word embeddings and linguistic features as predictors
are reported. Finally, we investigate whether better PP argumenthood prediction is indeed useful for NLP. Through
a controlled evaluation setup, we demonstrate that pretraining sentence encoders on our proposed tasks improves the
quality of learned representations.

Distinguishing between arguments and adjuncts of a verb
is a longstanding, nontrivial problem. In natural language
processing, argumenthood information is important in tasks
such as semantic role labeling (SRL) and prepositional phrase
(PP) attachment disambiguation. In theoretical linguistics,
many diagnostic tests for argumenthood exist but they often yield conflicting and potentially gradient results. This
is especially the case for syntactically oblique items such
as PPs. We propose two PP argumenthood prediction tasks
branching from these two motivations: (1) binary argumentadjunct classification of PPs in VerbNet, and (2) gradient argumenthood prediction using human judgments as gold standard, and report results from prediction models that use pretrained word embeddings and other linguistically informed
features. Our best results on each task are (1) acc. = 0.955,
F1 = 0.954 (ELMo+BiLSTM) and (2) Pearson’s r = 0.624
(word2vec+MLP). Furthermore, we demonstrate the utility of
argumenthood prediction in improving sentence representations via performance gains on SRL when a sentence encoder
is pretrained with our tasks.

1

Introduction

In theoretical linguistics, a formal distinction is made between arguments and adjuncts of a verb. For example, in the
following example, the window is an argument of the verb
open, whereas this morning and with Mary are adjuncts.
John opened [the window] [this morning] [with Mary].
What distinguishes arguments (or complements) from adjuncts (or modifiers)1 , and why is this distinction important? Theoretically, the distinct representations given to arguments and adjuncts manifest in different formal behaviors (Chomsky 1993; Steedman 2000). There is also a range
of psycholinguistic evidence which supports the psychological reality of the distinction (Tutunjian and Boland 2008).
In natural language processing (NLP), argumenthood information is useful in various applied tasks such as automatic

2

Argumenthood Prediction

Theoretical Motivation Although arguments and adjuncts are theoretically and practically important concepts,
distinguishing arguments from adjuncts in practice is not a
trivial problem even for linguists (Schütze 1995). Numerous
diagnostic tests have been proposed in the literature; for instance, omissibility and iterability tests are commonly used
(Pollard and Sag 1987). However, none of the existing diagnostic tests (or a set of tests) provide necessary or sufficient
criteria to determine the status of a verbal dependent. Moreover, it has long been noted that argumenthood is a gradient
phenomenon rather than a strict dichotomy (e.g., some arguments are less argument-like than others, resulting in different syntactic and semantic behaviors (Rissman, Rawlins,
and Landau 2015)). This raises many interesting theoretical

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Various combinations of the terminology are found in the literature, with subtle domain-specific preferences. We use arguments
and adjuncts, with a rough definition of arguments as elements
specifically selected or subcategorized by the verb. We use the umbrella term (verbal) dependents to refer to both.

6578

