The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Set Functions with Limited Complementarity
Hanrui Zhang
Computer Science Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
hrzhang@cs.duke.edu

Abstract

However, in real-world scenarios, it is common that a valuation function exhibits limited complementarity. For example, a pen is useful only if accompanied by paper to write
on. Paper therefore complements pens. This complementarity to pens is limited, in the sense that owning items other
than paper, like computers, is unlikely to make pens more
valuable. So in the above example, complementarity exists
only between pens and paper. One significant real-world
example of limited complementarity is the spectrum auctions, where the rights to use specific bands in specific regions are sold. The complementarity there lies in the fact
that a buyer would like the same band in neighboring regions (say states). Since there are only 50 states, one would
naturally cosider the degree of complementarity limited.
More motivating everyday examples of limited complementarity can be found in (Feige et al. 2015; Eden et al. 2017;
Chen, Teng, and Zhang 2019).
In the past decade, there has been a growing interest in
studying set functions with limited complementarity, especially in the combinatorial optimization and algorithmic game theory communities. In particular, recent results
seem to suggest, that there exists smooth transitions from
complement-free to completely arbitrary monotone set functions, parametrized by the degree of complementarity of
the function. The transitions support graceful degrading of
the approximation ratio for various combinatorial optimization tasks (Feige and Izsak 2013; Feldman and Izsak 2014;
Feige et al. 2015; Chen, Teng, and Zhang 2019), and the
revenue and efficiency (measured by the Price of Anarchy)
of well-studied simple protocols for combinatorial auctions
(Feige et al. 2015; Feldman et al. 2016; Eden et al. 2017;
Chen, Teng, and Zhang 2019).
So one natural question arises:

We study PMAC-learning of real-valued set functions with
limited complementarity. We prove, to our knowledge, the
first nontrivial learnability result for set functions exhibiting
complementarity, generalizing Balcan and Harvey’s result for
submodular functions. We prove a nearly matching information theoretical lower bound on the number of samples required, complementing our learnability result. We conduct
numerical simulations to show that our algorithm is likely to
perform well in practice.

Introduction
A central problem in economics and algorithmic game theory is to price items. Intuitively, a seller would like to set
the highest price such that the customer would still buy,
which requires decent understanding of the customer’s valuation. When there are multiple items which can be sold
in any combination, the valuation is usually modeled as a
set function with the items being the ground set. That is,
the valuation function of the customer maps each subset of
the items to her utility when she gets the subset. To be able
to better price the items for maximum profit, one need to
learn the customer’s valuation function. Set functions are
also used to model influence propogation in social networks
(Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003), and for solving clustering problems (Narasimhan and Bilmes 2007). In all these
scenarios, learning the corresponding set function plays an
essential part in solving the problem.
There is a rich body of research on learning of set functions, e.g. (Balcan and Harvey 2011; Balcan et al. 2012;
Lin and Bilmes 2012; Bach and others 2013). All of these results focus on an important class of monotone set functions
— complement-free set functions. Such set functions model
the natural property of diminishing returns, and are generally considered much easier to tackle than general monotone
set functions. For example, various optimization problems
admit efficient constant factor approximations when the set
function involved is complement-free or submodular (which
is stronger than complement-free) (Nemhauser and Wolsey
1978; Vondrák 2008; Feige 2009), while for general monotone functions the best possible approximation ratio can be
arbitrarily large.

Is there a way to generalize learnability of complementfree set functions to those with limited complementarity,
without incurring too much penalty?
In this paper, based on understanding of the underlying combinatorial and statistical structures, we give, to our
knowledge, the first nontrivial learnability result for monotone set functions with limited complementarity:
Theorem 1 (Main Theorem (Informal)). Restricted to
product distributions, there is an efficient algorithm that
O(1/ log(ε))-approximately learns any monotone set func-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5749

