The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Very Hard Electoral Control Problems
Zack Fitzsimmons

Edith Hemaspaandra

Alexander Hoover

David E. Narváez

College of the Holy Cross
Worcester, MA 01610

Rochester Inst. of Technology
Rochester, NY 14623

University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637

Rochester Inst. of Technology
Rochester, NY 14623

Abstract

election systems whose winner problems are in NP, the most
common control problems are still in NP.
There are election systems that have many desirable
social-choice properties, but whose winner problems are not
in NP (assuming NP 6= coNP). One important example
is the Kemeny rule (Kemeny 1959), whose winner problem is Θp2 -complete (i.e., complete for parallel access to
NP) (Hemaspaandra, Spakowski, and Vogel 2005) and so
the complexity of the standard control problems for Kemeny
are all Θp2 -hard and thus also not in NP. For election systems with Θp2 -complete winner problems, control is in Σp2
(i.e., NPNP , the second level of the polynomial hierarchy),
and we show that control is typically Σp2 -complete for such
systems.
This is a very high level of complexity. And so a
natural question to ask is how Kemeny control can be
solved. We mention here that there has been a long line
of work that considers ways to solve hard election problems. This includes work on computing Kemeny winners
(see, e.g., (Conitzer, Davenport, and Kalagnanam 2006;
Betzler et al. 2008; Ali and Meilă 2012; Betzler, Bredereck,
and Niedermeier 2014)) and on solving election-attack problems (see, e.g., Rothe and Schend (2013)). The work on
solving hard election-attack problems has been restricted to
problems in NP, and such approaches do not work for Σp2 complete problems. Answer set programming (ASP) is an
approach that has been recently applied for winner determination in voting, including for systems with hard winner
problems (Charwat and Pfandler 2015). ASP is suited to express Σp2 problems. However, encoding Σp2 -complete problems in ASP requires the use of more advanced techniques
than encoding computationally easier problems. We present
an encoding of Kemeny control using these advanced techniques and discuss other related approaches.
We make the following main contributions.

It is important to understand how the outcome of an election
can be modified by an agent with control over the structure of
the election. Electoral control has been studied for many election systems, but for all these systems the winner problem is
in P, and so control is in NP. There are election systems, such
as Kemeny, that have many desirable properties, but whose
winner problems are not in NP. Thus for such systems control
is not in NP, and in fact we show that it is typically complete
for Σp2 (i.e., NPNP , the second level of the polynomial hierarchy). This is a very high level of complexity. Approaches
that perform quite well for solving NP problems do not necessarily work for Σp2 -complete problems. However, answer
set programming is suited to express problems in Σp2 , and we
present an encoding for Kemeny control.

Introduction
The study of elections often deals with trade-offs for different properties that an election system satisfies. Elections
have a wide range of applications from voting in political
elections to applications in artificial intelligence (see, e.g.,
Brandt et al. (2016)). And given the role of elections in multiagent system settings, it is important that we study the computational properties of election systems.
Attacks on the structure of an election, referred to as control, were introduced by Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick (1992)
and model natural scenarios where an agent, with control
over the structure of an election, modifies the structure (e.g.,
by adding candidates) to ensure that their preferred candidate wins. It is important to study how these types of attacks
on the structure of an election can affect the outcome and
how computationally difficult it is to determine if such an
attack exists.
The complexity of electoral control has been studied for
many different natural elections systems and has been an
important line of research in computational social choice
(see, e.g., Faliszewski and Rothe (2016)). However, for all
of those systems the winner problems are in P, and so the
standard control problems are in NP. To go beyond what
can easily be encoded for SAT solvers, we need to look at
election systems with harder winner problems. But even for

• We obtain the first natural Σp2 -completeness results for
elections.
• We define several new natural and simple Σp2 -complete
graph problems to prove our results, and these problems
compare favorably in naturalness and simplicity to other
Σp2 -complete problems, and so in usefulness as problems
to reduce from.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We show for the most commonly-studied election sys1933

