The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Object Reachability via Swaps along a Line
Sen Huang, Mingyu Xiao∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{huangsen47, myxiao}@gmail.com

Abstract

are allowed to be indifferent between objects. Both preference sets have been widely studied. Under strict preferences, the celebrated Top Trading Cycle rule (Shapley
and Scarf 1974) has several key desirable properties. Some
modifications of Top Trading Cycle rule, called Top Trading Absorbing Sets rule and Top Cycles rule, were introduced for weak preferences (Alcalde-Unzu and Molis 2011;
Jaramillo and Manjunath 2012), which also hold some
good properties. More studies of H OUSING M ARKET under the two preference sets from different aspects can be
found in the literature (Jaramillo and Manjunath 2012;
Aziz and De Keijzer 2012; Saban and Sethuraman 2013;
Ehlers 2014; Sonoda et al. 2014; Ahmad 2017).
Some rules allow a single exchange involving many
agents. It is natural and fundamental to consider exchanges
being bilateral deals (swaps), i.e., each exchange of objects happens only between two agents. A swap between
two agents is allowed when they are mutually beneficial
from the exchange. This natural rule for H OUSING M ARKET
has been studied in the literature (Damamme et al. 2015;
Gourvès, Lesca, and Wilczynski 2017).
In some models, it is implicitly assumed that all agents
have a tie with others. However, some agents often do not
know each other and do not have the capacity to exchange
even they can mutually get benefits. So Gourvès, Lesca, and
Wilczynski (2017) studied H OUSING M ARKET where the
agents are embedded in a social network to denote the ability
to exchange objects between them. In fact, recently it is a hot
topic to study resources allocation problems over social networks and analyze the influences of networks. Abebe, Kleinberg, and Parkes (2017) and Bei, Qiao, and Zhang (2017) introduced social network of agents into the FAIR D IVISION
problem of cake cutting. Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and Niedermeier (2018) and Beynier et al. (2018) also considered
network-based FAIR D IVISION in allocating indivisible resources.
In this paper, we study H OUSING M ARKET in a social
network with simple trades between pairs of neighbors in the
network. In this model, there are the same number of agents
and objects and each agent is initially endowed with a single object. Each agent has preferences over all objects. The
agents are embedded in a social network which determines

The H OUSING M ARKET problem is a widely studied resources allocation problem. In this problem, each agent can
only receive a single object and has preferences over all objects. Starting from an initial endowment, we want to reach
a certain assignment via a sequence of rational trades. We
consider the problem whether an object is reachable for a
given agent under a social network, where a trade between
two agents is allowed if they are neighbors in the network
and no participant has a deficit from the trade. Assume that
the preferences of the agents are strict (no tie is allowed). This
problem is polynomially solvable in a star-network and NPcomplete in a tree-network. It is left as a challenging open
problem whether the problem is polynomially solvable when
the network is a path. We answer this open problem positively by giving a polynomial-time algorithm. Furthermore,
we show that the problem on a path will become NP-hard
when the preferences of the agents are weak (ties are allowed).

Introduction
Allocating indivisible objects to agents is an important problem in both computer science and economics. A widely studied setting is that each agent can only receive one single object and each agent has preferences over objects. This problem was previously called A SSIGNMENT problem (Gardenfors 1973; Wilson 1977) and now we prefer to call it H OUSE
A LLOCATION problem (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez 1998;
Manlove 2013). When each agent is initially endowed with
an object and we want to reallocate objects under some
conditions without any monetary transfers, the problem
is known as H OUSING M ARKET problem (Shapley and
Scarf 1974). H OUSING M ARKET has several real-life applications such as allocation of housings (Abdulkadiroğlu
and Sönmez 1999), organ exchange (Roth, Sönmez, and
Ünver 2004) and so on. There are two different preference sets for agents. One is strict, which is a full ordinal
list of all objects, and the other one is weak, where agents
∗

The corresponding author and supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, under grants 61772115 and
61370071.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2037

