The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Calibrated Stochastic Gradient Descent for Convolutional Neural Networks
Li’an Zhuo,1 Baochang Zhang,1∗ Chen Chen,2 Qixiang Ye,∗5 Jianzhuang Liu,4 David Doermann3
1

School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing
2
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{lianzhuo, bczhang}@buaa.edu.cn, chenchen870713@gmail.com
Abstract

Many improvements have been made on the basic gradient descent algorithm (Ruder 2016), including batch gradient descent (BGD), stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and
mini-batch gradient descent (MBGD). MBGD takes the best
of both BGD and SGD and performs an update with every mini-batch of training examples. It is typically the algorithm of choice when training a neural network and the
term SGD is often employed when mini-batches are used
(Zhang, Choromanska, and Lecun 2015). The gradient oscillation of SGD, on the one hand, enables it to jump to
a new and potentially better local minimum, but this ultimately complicates the convergence because it can cause
overshooting. To circumvent this problem, by slowly decreasing the learning rate, SGD shows similar convergence
behavior as BGD, converging close to a local or global minimum for non-convex and convex optimization respectively
(Dauphin et al. 2014). An unbiased gradient estimator based
on the likelihood-ratio method is introduced in (Gu et al.
2016) to estimate a stable gradient, which however is implemented based on complex mean-field networks that cause
inefficiency for model calculation. In (Soudry, Hubara, and
Meir 2014), the expectation BP is introduced to optimize the
neural network calculation only when a prior distribution is
given to approximate posteriors in the Bayesian inference. In
(Zhang, Kjellström, and Stephan 2017), a mini-batch diversification scheme for SGD is introduced based on a similarity measure between data points. It gives lower probabilities
to mini-batches which contain redundant data, and higher
probabilities to mini-batches with more diverse data. Biased
gradient schemes (Zhang, Kjellström, and Stephan 2017)
(Qian 1999) may reduce the stochastic gradient noise or ease
the optimization problem, which could lead to faster convergence. However, the biased estimators are heuristic and
difficult to enumerate the situations in which these estimators will work well (Zhang, Kjellström, and Stephan 2017).
These algorithms prove to be effective in their engineering applications. However, existing methods have following
limitations: (1) they focus on unbiased or biased gradient
estimators which rely on a prior knowledge about model optimization or a heuristic method; (2) unbiased variable estimation could be used to understand CNNs better, which
is however neglected in prior arts. In this paper, we provide a theoretical framework for unbiased variable estimation to optimize the CNNs model parameters in an end-to-

In stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants, the optimized gradient estimators may be as expensive to compute
as the true gradient in many scenarios. This paper introduces
a calibrated stochastic gradient descent (CSGD) algorithm for
deep neural network optimization. A theorem is developed to
prove that an unbiased estimator for the network variables
can be obtained in a probabilistic way based on the Lipschitz hypothesis. Our work is significantly distinct from existing gradient optimization methods, by providing a theoretical
framework for unbiased variable estimation in the deep learning paradigm to optimize the model parameter calculation.
In particular, we develop a generic gradient calibration layer
which can be easily used to build convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Experimental results demonstrate that CNNs
with our CSGD optimization scheme can improve the stateof-the-art performance for natural image classification, digit
recognition, ImageNet object classification, and object detection tasks. This work opens new research directions for developing more efficient SGD updates and analyzing the backpropagation algorithm.

Introduction
Back-propagation (BP) is one of the most popular algorithms for optimization and by far the most important way to
train neural networks. The essence of BP is that the gradient
descent algorithm optimizes the neural network parameters
by calculating the minimum value of a loss function. Previous studies have focused on optimizing the gradient descent algorithm to make the loss decrease faster and more
stable (Kingma and Ba 2014) (Dozat 2016) (Zeiler 2012).
These algorithms, however, are often used as black-box optimizers, so a theoretical explanation of their strengths and
weaknesses is hard to quantify (Bau et al. 2017).
∗

The work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation
of China under Contract 61672079 and 61473086, and Shenzhen
Peacock Plan KQTD2016112515134654. This work is supported
by the Open Projects Program of National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition. Baochang Zhang and Qixiang Ye are the corresponding authors. Beijing Municipal Science & Technology Commission under Grant Z181100008918014 and NSFC under Grant
61836012. Baochang Zhang is also with Shenzhen Academy of
Aerospace Technology, Shenzhen, China.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9348

