The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Forgetting in Modular Answer Set Programming
Ricardo Gonçalves,1 Tomi Janhunen,2 Matthias Knorr,1 João Leite,1 Stefan Woltran3
1

Universidade Nova de Lisboa
2
Aalto University
3
Vienna University of Technology

Abstract

e.g., as a means to deal with privacy and legal issues such as
to eliminate illegally obtained data, or to comply with the recently enacted right to be forgotten (European Union 2016).
Whereas forgetting in the context of classical logic is
essentially a solved problem (Bledsoe and Hines 1980;
Weber 1986; Middeldorp, Okui, and Ida 1996; Lang, Liberatore, and Marquis 2003; Moinard 2007; Gabbay, Schmidt,
and Szalas 2008), new challenging issues arise when it is
considered in the context of a non-monotonic logic based
language such as ASP (Zhang and Foo 2006; Eiter and
Wang 2008; Wong 2009; Wang, Wang, and Zhang 2013;
Knorr and Alferes 2014; Wang et al. 2014; Delgrande and
Wang 2015; Gonçalves, Knorr, and Leite 2016b). According
to (Goncalves, Knorr, and Leite 2016a), forgetting in ASP
is best captured by strong persistence (Knorr and Alferes
2014), a property inspired by strong equivalence, which requires that there be a correspondence between the answer
sets of a program before and after forgetting a set of atoms,
and that such correspondence be preserved in the presence
of additional rules not containing the atoms to be forgotten.
However, it has also been shown that, in ASP, it is not always
possible to forget and satisfy strong persistence (Gonçalves,
Knorr, and Leite 2016b).
What about forgetting in Modular ASP? Do the same negative results hold, and sometimes it is simply impossible to
forget while satisfying strong persistence? Is strong persistence an adequate requirement in the case of Modular ASP?
Can forgetting be reconciled with the module theorem?
Investigating forgetting in the context of Modular ASP is
the central topic of this paper. Our main contributions are:

Modular programming facilitates the creation and reuse of
large software, and has recently gathered considerable interest in the context of Answer Set Programming (ASP). In this
setting, forgetting, or the elimination of middle variables no
longer deemed relevant, is of importance as it allows one to,
e.g., simplify a program, make it more declarative, or even
hide some of its parts without affecting the consequences for
those parts that are relevant. While forgetting in the context
of ASP has been extensively studied, its known limitations
make it unsuitable to be used in Modular ASP. In this paper,
we present a novel class of forgetting operators and show that
such operators can always be successfully applied in Modular
ASP to forget all kinds of atoms – input, output and hidden
– overcoming the impossibility results that exist for general
ASP. Additionally, we investigate conditions under which this
class of operators preserves the module theorem in Modular
ASP, thus ensuring that answer sets of modules can still be
composed, and how the module theorem can always be preserved if we further allow the reconfiguration of modules.

1

Introduction

Modularity in Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Dao-Tran
et al. 2009; Harrison and Lierler 2016; Baral, Dzifcak, and
Takahashi 2006; Janhunen et al. 2009; Oikarinen and Janhunen 2008), just as in many other programming paradigms,
is a fundamental concept to ease the creation and reuse of
large programs. In one of the most significant general approaches to modularity – the so-called programming-in-thelarge – compositional operators are provided for combining
separate and independent modules, i.e., essentially answer
set programs extended with well-defined input/output interfaces, based on standard semantics. The compositionality of
the semantics of individual modules is ensured by the socalled module theorem (Janhunen et al. 2009).
The operation of forgetting, which aims at eliminating a
set of variables from a knowledge base while preserving
all relationships (direct and indirect) between the remaining variables, has recently gained a lot of attention, not only
because it is useful, e.g., as a means to clean up a theory
by eliminating all auxiliary variables that have no relevant
declarative meaning, but also because it may be necessary,

• We argue that, given that the input of a module is just a set
of facts, strong persistence is too strong when forgetting
in Modular ASP, and that it is more suitable to rely on
uniform equivalence (Sagiv 1988; Eiter and Fink 2003)
for a weaker form of persistence, say uniform persistence,
which has not been considered before.
• We thoroughly investigate forgetting in ASP under uniform equivalence, including formalizing uniform persistence and showing that, unlike with strong persistence, it
is always possible to forget under this new property.
• We show that no previously known class of forgetting operators satisfies uniform persistence, which leads us to introduce a new class of forgetting operators that satisfies

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2843

