The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Joint Domain Alignment and Discriminative Feature
Learning for Unsupervised Deep Domain Adaptation∗
Chao Chen,† Zhihong Chen, Boyuan Jiang, Xinyu Jin
Institute of Information Science and Electronic Engineering
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{chench,zhihongchen,byjiang,jinxy}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, considerable effort has been devoted to deep domain adaptation in computer vision and machine learning
communities. However, most of existing work only concentrates on learning shared feature representation by minimizing the distribution discrepancy across different domains.
Due to the fact that all the domain alignment approaches can
only reduce, but not remove the domain shift, target domain
samples distributed near the edge of the clusters, or far from
their corresponding class centers are easily to be misclassified by the hyperplane learned from the source domain. To
alleviate this issue, we propose to joint domain alignment
and discriminative feature learning, which could benefit both
domain alignment and final classification. Specifically, an
instance-based discriminative feature learning method and a
center-based discriminative feature learning method are proposed, both of which guarantee the domain invariant features
with better intra-class compactness and inter-class separability. Extensive experiments show that learning the discriminative features in the shared feature space can significantly
boost the performance of deep domain adaptation methods.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: The necessity of joint domain alignment and discriminant features learning. Red: Source samples; Blue: Target samples; Black line: Hyperplane learned from the source
domain; Circle, Square and Star indicate three different categories, respectively. (a) Source Only, due to the domain shift,
the hyperplane learned from the source samples will misclassify a large amount of target samples. (b) Domain Alignment Only, the domain shift has been greatly reduced, but
not removed, by the domain alignment. Therefore, the hyperplane learned from the source will still misclassify a few
target samples which are almost distributed near the edge of
the clusters, or far from their corresponding class centers. (c)
Joint Domain Alignment and Discriminative Feature Learning, the hyperplane learned from the source can perfectly
classify the target samples due to the discriminative-ness of
the domain invariant features. (Best Viewed in Color)

Introduction
Domain adaptation, which focuses on the issues of how to
adapt the learned classifier from a source domain with a
large amount of labeled samples to a target domain with limited or no labeled target samples even though the source and
target domains have different, but related distributions, has
received more and more attention in recent years. According
to (Pan and Yang 2010; Csurka 2017), there are three commonly used domain adaptation approaches: feature-based
domain adaptation, instance-based domain adaptation and
classifier-based domain adaptation. The feature-based methods, which aim to learn a shared feature representation by
minimizing the distribution discrepancy across different domains, can be further distinguished by: (a) the considered
class of transformations (Gong et al. 2012; Hoffman et al.
2013; Sun, Feng, and Saenko 2016), (b) the types of discrepancy metrics, such as Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD)

(Long et al. 2014; Tzeng et al. 2014; Long et al. 2017), Correlation Alignment (CORAL) (Sun, Feng, and Saenko 2016;
Sun and Saenko 2016), Center Moment Discrepancy (CMD)
(Zellinger et al. 2017), etc. The instance reweighting (also
called landmarks selection) is another typical strategy for
domain adaptation (Chu, De la Torre, and Cohn 2013;
Hubert Tsai, Yeh, and Frank Wang 2016), which considers
that some source instances may not be relevant to the target even in the shared subspace. Therefore, it minimizes the
distribution divergence by reweighting the source samples
or selecting the landmarks, and then learns from those samples that are more similar to the target samples. Apart of this,
the classifier-based domain adaptation represents another independent line of work (Yang, Yan, and Hauptmann 2007;
Rozantsev, Salzmann, and Fua 2018a; 2018b), which adapts
the source model to the target by regularizing the difference
between the source and target model parameters.

∗
This work was supported by the opening foundation of the
State Key Laboratory (No. 2014KF06), and the National Science
and Technology Major Project (No. 2013ZX03005013).
†
Chao Chen and Zhihong Chen contributed equally.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3296

