The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exploring Answer Stance Detection with Recurrent Conditional Attention
Jianhua Yuan,1 Yanyan Zhao,2 Jingfang Xu,3 Bing Qin1∗
1

Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Department of Media Technology and Art, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
3
Sogou Technology Inc, Beijing, China
{jhyuan, yyzhao, qinb}@ir.hit.edu.cn, xujingfang@sogou-inc.com

Abstract
Detecting stance from certain types of question-answer pairs
is an interesting problem which has not been carefully explored. Unlike previous stance detection tasks, targets here
are not given entities or claims but entire questions, which
makes it difficult to capture the semantics of targets and
build target-dependent representations of answers. To address them, we introduce the Recurrent Conditional Attention (RCA) model which incorporates a conditional attention
structure into the recurrent reading process. RCA iteratively
guides the distillation of question semantic with answer information and collects stance-oriented text relating to question, further revealing mutual relationship among stance, answer and question. Experiments on a manually labeled Chinese community QA stance dataset show that RCA outperforms four strong baselines by average 2.90% on macro-F1
and 2.66% on micro-F1 respectively.

Introduction

Figure 1: Two types of example from answer stance detection task.

The goal of stance detection is to classify the attitude expressed in a text towards a given target, as favor, against,
or neutral. Most previous work focused on stance detection problems in corpus including online debates (Hasan
and Ng 2013; Sridhar et al. 2015), news articles (Ferreira
and Vlachos 2016), tweets (Mohammad et al. 2016), fake
news (Bhatt et al. 2018), and rumors (Qazvinian et al. 2011).
To our best knowledge, few has noticed that in certain
types of QA pairs, answerers usually express their opinions
about/towards entities or claims hold by the questions. Mining these QA pairs and detecting people’s stances embedded in them will benefit a variety of tasks including opinionoriented question answering and opinion summarization of
QA pairs.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of answer stance
detection in community QA (AnswerStance). As shown in
Figure 1, given a question and an answer, the task aims to determine whether the answer holds a favor, against or neutral
attitude towards the entity or claim in that question. Apart
from Yes/No type questions in QA tasks, we also deal with
questions asking for viewpoint, such as the example 2 in
Figure 1. Moreover, this task differs from traditional stance

detection task, e.g. stance classification in tweets and fake
news, in that: targets here are not given entities or claims but
the whole questions. Such difference requires abstracting the
semantic meanings of questions before inferring the stance.
Various models have been proposed to solve stance detection problems. Some apply traditional machine learning models with manually collected rich features (Sobhani, Mohammad, and Kiritchenko 2016). Others implement deep learning models such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Augenstein et al. 2016; Du et al. 2017) and
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Wei et al. 2016;
Vijayaraghavan et al. 2016). While these methods deal with
given targets including either entities like “Donald Trump”
or entire claims like tweets and news, none has tackled targets in question forms. More importantly, in AnswerStance
task, semantic representations of the question (target) should
be further improved with the answer (text) information in order to get better understand of the stance, which so far has
been neglected by most of these methods.
Therefore, we introduce the recurrent conditional attention (RCA) network, which repeatedly employs the conditional attention structure to model the relationship be-

∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7426

