The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Personalized End-to-End Goal-Oriented Dialog
Liangchen Luo,†,∗ Wenhao Huang,‡ Qi Zeng,† Zaiqing Nie,§ Xu Sun†
†

MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China
‡
Shanghai Discovering Investment, Shanghai, China § Alibaba AI Labs, Beijing, China
†
{luolc,pkuzengqi,xusun}@pku.edu.cn
‡
huangwh@discoveringgroup.com § zaiqing.nzq@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

can change recommendation policy dynamically, and in this
case, match the user dietary. Third, the word “contact” can
be interpreted into “phone” or “social media” contact information in the knowledge base. Instead of choosing one randomly, the personalized model handles this ambiguity based
on the learned fact that young people prefer social media
account while the elders prefer phone number.

Most existing works on dialog systems only consider conversation content while neglecting the personality of the user the
bot is interacting with, which begets several unsolved issues.
In this paper, we present a personalized end-to-end model
in an attempt to leverage personalization in goal-oriented dialogs. We first introduce a P ROFILE M ODEL which encodes
user profiles into distributed embeddings and refers to conversation history from other similar users. Then a P REFERENCE
M ODEL captures user preferences over knowledge base entities to handle the ambiguity in user requests. The two models are combined into the P ERSONALIZED M EM N2N. Experiments show that the proposed model achieves qualitative
performance improvements over state-of-the-art methods. As
for human evaluation, it also outperforms other approaches in
terms of task completion rate and user satisfaction.

1

Psychologists have proven that during a dialog humans
tend to adapt to their interlocutor to facilitate understanding, which enhances conversational efficiency (Brown 1965;
1987; Kroger and Wood 1992). To improve agent intelligence, we may polish our model to learn such human behaviors in conversations. A big challenge in building personalized dialog systems is how to utilize the user profile and generate personalized responses correspondingly. To overcome
it, existing works (Qian et al. 2017; Herzig et al. 2017) often
conduct extra procedures to incorporate personalization in
training, such as intermediate supervision and pre-training
of user profiles, which are complex and time-consuming. In
contrast, our work is totally end-to-end.

Introduction

There has been growing research interest in training dialog systems with end-to-end models (Vinyals and Le 2015;
Sordoni et al. 2015; Sukhbaatar et al. 2015) in recent years.
These models are directly trained on past dialogs, without
assumptions on the domain or dialog state structure (Bordes, Boureau, and Weston 2017). One of their limitations
is that they select responses only according to the content
of the conversation and are thus incapable of adapting to
users with different personalities. Specifically, common issues with such content-based models include: (i) the inability to adjust language style flexibly (Herzig et al. 2017);
(ii) the lack of a dynamic conversation policy based on the
interlocutor’s profile (Joshi, Mi, and Faltings 2017); and (iii)
the incapability of handling ambiguities in user requests.
Figure 1 illustrates these problems with an example. The
conversation happens in a restaurant reservation scenario.
First, the responses from the content-based model are plain
and boring, and not able to adjust appellations and language
styles like the personalized model. Second, in the recommendation phase, the content-based model can only provide
candidates in a random order, while a personalized model

In this paper, we propose a P ROFILE M ODEL and a
P REFERENCE M ODEL to leverage user profiles and preferences. The P ROFILE M ODEL learns user personalities with
distributed profile representation, and uses a global memory
to store conversation context from other users with similar
profiles. In this way, it can choose a proper language style
and change recommendation policy based on the user profile. To address the problem of ambiguity, the P REFERENCE
M ODEL learns user preferences among ambiguous candidates by building a connection between the user profile and
the knowledge base. Since these two models are both under
the M EM N2N framework and make contributions to personalization in different aspects, we combine them into the
P ERSONALIZED M EM N2N.
Our experiments on a goal-oriented dialog corpus, the
personalized bAbI dialog dataset, show that leveraging personal information can significantly improve the performance
of dialog systems. The P ERSONALIZED M EM N2N outperforms current state-of-the-art methods with over 7% improvement in terms of per-response accuracy. A test with
real human users also illustrates that the proposed model
leads to better outcomes, including higher task completion
rate and user satisfaction.

∗

This work was done when the first author was on an internship and the second author was a full-time employee researcher at
Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6794

