The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MFBO-SSM: Multi-Fidelity Bayesian
Optimization for Fast Inference in State-Space Models
Mahdi Imani

Seyede Fatemeh Ghoreishi

Texas A&M University
m.imani88@tamu.edu

Texas A&M University
f.ghoreishi88@tamu.edu

Douglas Allaire

Ulisses M. Braga-Neto

Texas A&M University
dallaire@tamu.edu

Texas A&M University
ulisses@ece.tamu.edu

Abstract

they are known as expectation maximization (EM) techniques (Schön, Wills, and Ninness 2011; Wills et al. 2013).
Bayesian techniques include particle marginal MetropolisHastings (PMMH) and particle-based Gibbs samplers (Andrieu, Doucet, and Holenstein 2010). All aforementioned
methods rely on excessive sampling of the parameter space
to avoid local optimum traps. However, for large systems
and tall data sets, the cost of approximation of the inference
function per parameter sample point can be computationally
expensive, rendering intractable the computation of existing
particle-based techniques.
Several techniques employ Bayesian optimization to cope
with intractable likelihood functions, mostly in the context of approximate Bayesian computing (ABC) (Dahlin,
Schon, and Villani 2015). The idea of these techniques is to
construct a surrogate model representing the log-likelihood
function over the parameter space, and efficiently search for
its maximum through a single approximator (e.g., a particle filter). The speed and accuracy of these methods are directly impacted by the particle sample size used by the SMC
approximator. Large particle sample sizes produce more accurate (high-fidelity) approximators at larger computational
time/cost, while small particle sample sizes result in fast but
less accurate (low-fidelity) approximators.
In this paper, we introduce the MFBO-SSM algorithm,
a multi-fidelity Bayesian optimization method for the inference of general nonlinear state-space models. The proposed algorithm employs the knowledge gradient (KG) policy (Frazier, Powell, and Dayanik 2008, 2009; Powell and
Ryzhov 2012) for the simultaneous sequential selection of
parameters and approximators, in such a way to achieve the
largest single-period expected increase in the maximum of
the inference function per unit cost.
The MFBO-SSM algorithm offers several benefits:

Nonlinear state-space models are ubiquitous in modeling real-world dynamical systems. Sequential Monte Carlo
(SMC) techniques, also known as particle methods, are a
well-known class of parameter estimation methods for this
general class of state-space models. Existing SMC-based
techniques rely on excessive sampling of the parameter space,
which makes their computation intractable for large systems
or tall data sets. Bayesian optimization techniques have been
used for fast inference in state-space models with intractable
likelihoods. These techniques aim to find the maximum of the
likelihood function by sequential sampling of the parameter
space through a single SMC approximator. Various SMC approximators with different fidelities and computational costs
are often available for sample-based likelihood approximation. In this paper, we propose a multi-fidelity Bayesian optimization algorithm for the inference of general nonlinear
state-space models (MFBO-SSM), which enables simultaneous sequential selection of parameters and approximators.
The accuracy and speed of the algorithm are demonstrated by
numerical experiments using synthetic gene expression data
from a gene regulatory network model and real data from the
VIX stock price index.

Introduction
Nonlinear state-space models are a popular class of time
series models with numerous applications in fields such as
statistics, economics, biology and more (Arnaud, Freitas,
and Gordon 2001;Elliott, Aggoun, and Moore 2008; Cappé,
Moulines, and Ryden 2005). Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC)
techniques, also known as particle methods (Arnaud, Freitas, and Gordon 2001; Kantas et al. 2015), are the most
well-known class of techniques for estimation of parameters of general nonlinear state space models from data.
Several particle-based inference methodologies have been
developed in recent years. The methods can be divided
into two main categories: maximum-likelihood (ML) and
Bayesian approaches. The techniques based on the ML perspective either try to maximize the regular (“incomplete”)
log-likelihood function (Johansen, Doucet, and Davy 2008)
or the “complete” log-likelihood function; in the latter case,

• Fast and accurate inference due to the efficient simultaneous sequential selection of parameters and approximators;
• Applicability to arbitrary point-based estimators, such as
ML and MAP techniques;
• Possibility of considering risk in the inference process;
• Scalability to high-dimensional parameter spaces, due to
the closed-form solution provided by the KG policy.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7858

