The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fast and Simple Mixture of Softmaxes with
BPE and Hybrid-LightRNN for Language Generation
Xiang Kong, Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, Eduard Hovy
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
{xiangk, qizhex, dzihang, hovy}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

a huge dot-product between the hidden state and the embedding matrix, costing a considerable amount of time and
memory.
To address the aforementioned drawbacks, a natural idea
is to improve the time- and memory-efficiency of computing each Softmax. On a high level, we aim at an encoding
mechanism of the vocabulary so that each word can be represented as a code sequence. Then, computing a single Softmax reduces to the product of a sequence of conditional code
distributions. Given a code dictionary size, the number of
possible words that can be represented increases exponentially w.r.t. the code sequence length, while the computation and memory cost only increases linearly. Hence, such
an encoding scheme can theoretically reduce the time and
memory consumption exponentially. Clearly, some encoding schemes must have better statistical properties than others and thus lead to better empirical performances. Ideally,
the encoding could be learned directly from the data.
In this work, we investigate two algorithms for these
purposes: The first one is called Hybrid-LightRNN, which
learns a encoding mechanism from the data based on the
language modeling objective. The other one is Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) (Gage 1994; Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch
2016), which was originally proposed to help with translating rare words. When evaluated on machine translation
(MT) and image captioning, both of these approaches can
effectively reduce the time and memory consumption of
MoS with no performance losses. Specifically, utilizing MoS
brings a performance gain of up to 1.5 BLEU scores on
IWSLT 2014 German to English and 0.76 CIDEr scores
on image captioning. On WMT 2014 machine translation
benchmarks, we achieve a BLEU score of 29.6 on Englishto-German and 42.1 on English-to-French, leading to a stateof-the-art result on the WMT 2014 English-to-German task.
Our contribution is two-fold. Firstly, we propose to
use Hybrid-LightRNN and BPE to make MoS time- and
memory-efficient. Secondly, we demonstrate the empirical
effectiveness of MoS on sentence generation by improved
results on machine translation and image captioning.

Mixture of Softmaxes (MoS) has been shown to be effective
at addressing the expressiveness limitation of Softmax-based
models. Despite the known advantage, MoS is practically
sealed by its large consumption of memory and computational time due to the need of computing multiple Softmaxes.
In this work, we set out to unleash the power of MoS in
practical applications by investigating improved word coding
schemes, which could effectively reduce the vocabulary size
and hence relieve the memory and computation burden. We
show both BPE and our proposed Hybrid-LightRNN lead to
improved encoding mechanisms that can halve the time and
memory consumption of MoS without performance losses.
With MoS, we achieve an improvement of 1.5 BLEU scores
on IWSLT 2014 German-to-English corpus and an improvement of 0.76 CIDEr score on image captioning. Moreover, on
the larger WMT 2014 machine translation dataset, our MoSboosted Transformer yields 29.6 BLEU score for English-toGerman and 42.1 BLEU score for English-to-French, outperforming the single-Softmax Transformer by 0.9 and 0.4
BLEU scores respectively and achieving the state-of-the-art
result on WMT 2014 English-to-German task.

Introduction
Sequence-to-Sequence model (seq2seq) (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) has led to
significant research progress on language generation over
the last few years. A typical seq2seq model employs an autoregressive factorization of the joint distribution and outputs
the conditional probability of each token given the previous tokens. A standard approach to calculate the conditional
probability is to apply the Softmax function over the logits.
Though seq2seq models with a standard Softmax output
function are largely effective, Yang et al. (2018) show that
the standard Softmax formulation limits the expressiveness
of the generation model and results in the Softmax bottleneck. They propose Mixture of Softmaxes (MoS) to address
this issue and demonstrate improved performances on language modeling. However, MoS poses a non-negligible burden on the computation time and the memory consumption.
Specifically, MoS outputs a weighted average of K Softmax components, where computing each Softmax involves

Background: Mixture of Softmaxes
Mixture of Softmaxes (MoS) (Yang et al. 2018) is introduced to address the expressiveness limitations of Softmaxbased models. In this section, we briefly review the motiva-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6626

