The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DeepETA: A Spatial-Temporal Sequential Neural Network Model for
Estimating Time of Arrival in Package Delivery System
Fan Wu, Lixia Wu
Artificial Intelligence Department, Zhejiang Cainiao Supply Chain Management Co., Ltd., Hangzhou, China
wf118503@cainiao.com, wallace.wulx@cainiao.com

Abstract

couriers, which are key parameters in the last mile pickup
and delivery system. With the efforts made by the logistics
companies

Over 100 million packages are delivered every day in China
due to the fast development of e-commerce. Precisely estimating the time of packages’ arrival (ETA) is significantly
important to improving customers’ experience and raising
the efficiency of package dispatching. Existing methods
mainly focus on predicting the time from an origin to a destination. However, in package delivery problem, one trip
contains multiple destinations and the delivery time of all
destinations should be predicted at any time. Furthermore,
the ETA is affected by many factors especially the sequence
of the latest route, the regularity of the delivery pattern and
the sequence of packages to be delivered, which are difficult
to learn by traditional models. This paper proposed a novel
spatial-temporal sequential neural network model (DeepETA) to take fully advantages of the above factors. DeepETA is an end-to-end network that mainly consists of three
parts. First, the spatial encoding and the recurrent cells are
proposed to capture the spatial-temporal and sequential features of the latest delivery route. Then, two attention-based
layers are designed to indicate the most possible ETA from
historical frequent and relative delivery routes based on the
similarity of the latest route and the future destinations. Finally, a fully connected layer is utilized to jointly learn the
delivery time. Experiments on real logistics dataset demonstrate that the proposed approach has outperforming results.

Figure 1: The delivery times of all packages at any time are affected by the latest route, the delivered pattern and the to-bedelivered pattern.

such as the Cainiao Ltd., the traditional package delivery
process is digitized and massive amount of delivery data
are collected. The problem of how to precisely predict the
ETA of packages has gained increasing attention in logistics research communities.
In the real scene, each courier should deliver nearly 100
packages per day. When customers demand, the delivery
time of all undelivered packages should be predicted at the
same time, which is a multi-destination prediction problem. However, the problem can be referred from similar
scenes, such as the car sharing and the free rider problem,
where the travel time on the road and the sequence of the
route are important. There exists valuable researches that
can be referred, such as predicting the next location (Feng
et al. 2018), mining delivery pattern (Ying, Lee, and Tseng
2013), and estimating time on the road (Jindal et al. 2018).
Furthermore, the ETA of package delivery should consider
both spatial and temporal features of the delivery route and
researches can be found that propose spatial-temporal
models in solving similar problems (Liang et al. 2018).
However, predicting the package delivering time is challenging mainly of the following reasons:

Introduction
Due to the fast development of the e-commerce, over 100
million packages are delivered each day in China. Estimating time of arrival (ETA) of package is important. On one
hand, informing the arrival time of packages to customers
will help them better arrange when and how to receive
their packages, reducing the anxiety of customers and improving the customer experience. More importantly, the
ETA will help measuring the service ability and quality of
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

774

