The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Amalgamating Knowledge towards Comprehensive Classification
Chengchao Shen,1 Xinchao Wang,2 Jie Song,1 Li Sun,1 Mingli Song1
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Stevens Institute of Technology
{chengchaoshen,sjie,lsun,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, xinchao.wang@stevens.edu

Abstract

the annotations used to train the original models may not be
publicly available.
To this end, researchers have started to look at prospective approaches to reuse trained deep models. For example,
(Buciluǎ, Caruana, and Niculescu-Mizil 2006) proposes a
model compression approach that trains a neural network
using the predictions of an ensemble of heterogeneous models trained a priori. (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) introduces the concept of Knowledge Distillation (KD), whose
goal is to derive a compact student model that imitates the
teacher by learning from the teacher’s outputs. (Romero et
al. 2014) makes one step further by learning a student model
that is deeper and thinner than the teacher so as to improve
the performance. These model-reusing approaches, despite
their very promising results, focus on tackling the same task
as the trained teacher models.
In this paper, we propose to investigate a new modelreusing task, which we term as knowledge amalgamation.
Given multiple trained teacher models, each of which specializes in a different classification problem, knowledge
amalgamation aims to learn a compact student model capable of handling the comprehensive classification problem.
In other words, the classification problem addressed by the
student is the superset of those by all the teachers. For example, say we have two teacher classifiers, the first one classifies sedan cars and SUVs while the second classifies pickups
and vans. The student model is expected to be able to classify all the four types of cars simultaneously. Note that, here
we assume no human annotations and only the predictions
from the teacher models are available.
The proposed knowledge amalgamation task is, to our
best knowledge, both novel and valuable. It is novel because, in contrast to prior model-reusing tasks that restrict
the student model to handle the same problem as the teachers
do, knowledge amalgamation learns the “super knowledge”
covering the specialties from all the teachers. It is valuable
because, it allows reusing the trained models, without any
human annotation, to learn a compact student model that approximates or even outperforms the teacher models.
We also propose a pilot strategy towards solving the
knowledge amalgamation task. Our approach comprises two
steps, feature amalgamation and parameter learning. The
feature amalgamation step first extracts features of the multiple teachers, obtained by feeding input samples to the teach-

With the rapid development of deep learning, there have been
an unprecedentedly large number of trained deep network
models available online. Reusing such trained models can
significantly reduce the cost of training the new models from
scratch, if not infeasible at all as the annotations used for
the training original networks are often unavailable to public.
We propose in this paper to study a new model-reusing task,
which we term as knowledge amalgamation. Given multiple
trained teacher networks, each of which specializes in a different classification problem, the goal of knowledge amalgamation is to learn a lightweight student model capable of handling the comprehensive classification. We assume no other
annotations except the outputs from the teacher models are
available, and thus focus on extracting and amalgamating
knowledge from the multiple teachers. To this end, we propose a pilot two-step strategy to tackle the knowledge amalgamation task, by learning first the compact feature representations from teachers and then the network parameters in a
layer-wise manner so as to build the student model. We apply this approach to four public datasets and obtain very encouraging results: even without any human annotation, the
obtained student model is competent to handle the comprehensive classification task and in most cases outperforms the
teachers in individual sub-tasks.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the unprecedented
progress of deep learning. Many deep models, such as
AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), VGG
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), GoogLeNet (Szegedy
et al. 2015), and ResNet (He et al. 2016), have been proposed and applied to almost every single computer vision
task, yielding state-of-the-art performances. However, the
promising results come with the costs of the huge amount of
annotations required and the resource-consuming training
process, which may take up to weeks on multiple GPUs.
Yet encouragingly, many researchers have published online their trained models, tailored for various tasks like
classification, detection, and segmentation. Reusing these
trained models, either for the primary task or novel ones,
can significantly reduce the effort to retrain the new models
from scratch, which is in many cases not feasible at all as
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3068

