The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Transformation Method for
Discriminant Analysis of Multi-Channel Resting State fMRI
Abhay M S Aradhya

Aditya Joglekar

School of Computer Engineering
NTU, Singapore
abhay003@e.ntu.edu.sg

Computer Science Department
UCLA, USA
adivj123@gmail.com

Sundaram Suresh

M. Pratama

Department Of Aerospace
IISC, India
sureshsundaram@iisc.ac.in

School of Computer Engineering
NTU, Singapore
mpratama@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

between the various regions of the brain (Yousefnezhad and
Zhang 2017). fMRI data have been used to understand the
etiopathogenesis of neurological disorders such as Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) (Mahanand,
Savitha, and Suresh 2013), autism (Subbaraju et al. 2017)
and epilepsy (Gill, Mirsattari, and Leung 2017). Studies on
the automatic diagnosis of neurological disorders from fMRI
data have focused on analyzing the correlations between the
regions to find discriminant activities. Among them, Spatial
Filtering Method (SFM) (Subbaraju et al. 2017) proposed a
spatial transformation method to obtain discriminatory features by projecting the fMRI data into a new dimension,
such that the two classes are highly separable. Their results
represent the state of the art diagnostic performance on the
Autism dataset. Recently, (Aradhya et al. 2018) utilized a
regularized SFM based technique to improve the accuracy
in the automatic detection of accuracy of ADHD from rsfMRI data. SFM and its deravative techniques have adopted
the ‘Fukunaga-Koontz ‘transform (Fukunaga 2013) to mathematically derive the spatial transformation filter which is
greatly dependent on the mean distribution of the training
data. Further, the mean co-variance based spatial transformation methodologies such as SFM overlooks the temporal
information of the data, resulting in plausible loss of discriminative information.
Deep learning algorithms have recently gained importance due to their ability to extract ingenious discriminatory information from highly homogeneous data. With rapid
advancements in computational power and parallelization
techniques along with the increasing availability of largescale dataset, there has been an increased effort to better understand the human body using deep learning methodologies. (Ravı̀ et al. 2017), provided a brief overview of recent
works utilizing deep learning approaches in health informatics. Deep learning methodologies have especially been
advantageous in investigating neurological and psycholog-

Analysis of resting state - functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (rs-fMRI) data has been a challenging problem
due to a high homogeneity, large intra-class variability,
limited samples and difference in acquisition technologies/techniques. These issues are predominant in the case of
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). In this paper, we propose a new Deep Transformation Method (DTM)
that extracts the discriminant latent feature space from rsfMRI and projects it in the subsequent layer for classification
of rs-fMRI data. The hidden transformation layer in DTM
projects the original rs-fMRI data into a new space using the
learning policy and extracts the spatio-temporal correlations
of the functional activities as a latent feature space. The subsequent convolution and decision layers transform the latent
feature space into high-level features and provide accurate
classification. The performance of DTM has been evaluated
using the ADHD200 rs-fMRI benchmark data with crossvalidation. The results show that the proposed DTM achieves
a mean classification accuracy of 70.36% and an improvement of 8.25% on the state of the art methodologies was observed. The improvement is due to concurrent analysis of the
spatio-temporal correlations between the different regions of
the brain and can be easily extended to study other cognitive
disorders using rs-fMRI. Further, brain network analysis has
been studied to identify the difference in functional activities
and the corresponding regions behind cognitive symptoms in
ADHD.

Introduction
Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) fMRI is widely
used to map the brain functional activities (Song and Lu
2017). The correlations between the regional functional activities during a cognitive task are studied using the multichannel time series fMRI data to evaluate the interactions
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2556

