The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Optimal Fine Grained Retrieval via
Decorrelated Centralized Loss with Normalize-Scale Layer
Xiawu Zheng,1 Rongrong Ji,1,2∗ Xiaoshuai Sun,1 Baochang Zhang,3 Yongjian Wu,4 Feiyue Huang4
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Department of Cognitive Science,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
Beihang University, 4 Tencent Youtu Lab, Tencent Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd

Abstract

to distinguish among fine-grained categories, due to various pose, illumination and occlusion. Therefore, FGIR is
more challenging comparing with content based image retrieval (CBIR). In order to distinguish the subtle differences
among fine-grained categories, a discriminative feature representation is demanded. To this end, a recent trend is to
adopt convolutional neural network (CNN) with a distance
metric learning (Huang, Loy, and Tang 2016; Oh Song et al.
2016; Bell and Bala 2015; Ustinova and Lempitsky 2016;
Wang et al. 2014) to extract the discriminative and generative features, which aim to distinguish high-dimensional features within/outside fine-grained categories.
Despite the recent progress, fine-grained image retrieval
remains as an open problem. The key challenge lies in designing a good loss to efficiently learn a robust metric,
which measures similarity of features extracted from deep
neural networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Szegedy et al. 2015; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et
al. 2016). However, the existing loss functions in FGIR are
still far from satisfactory, which are defected in terms of local structure and slow training. The former refers to encoding the example relationship locally, i.e., pairwise, triplet,
which results in low accuracy. The latter refers to establishing the loss with mean square error (MSE), which causes
low efficiency, since the MSE will theoretically get stuck
in local optimum (Golik, Doetsch, and Ney 2013). More
specifically, most existing loss functions in FGIR are defined in terms of pairs (Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006)
or triplets (Wang et al. 2014) inside the training mini-batch.
This contradicts from the optimal loss that should maximize intra-class compactness and inter-class separability.
And since the existing loss in FGIR did not consider the embedding space globally, the resulting weak features will degenerate the retrieval performance. Besides, the computation
complexity for pairwise and triplet loss can go up to O(N 2 ),
where N denotes the total number of training samples.
The local Structure Challenge. Learning with global
structure has been well addressed in image categorization/recognition/segmentation (He et al. 2016; Ren et al.
2015; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), which typically
follows a cross-entropy + softmax loss setting i.e. the weight
of last fully-connected layer can be considered as a global
class center. Such a global optimization mechanism cannot
be directly implemented in FGIR, as its inner-product opera-

Recent advances on fine-grained image retrieval prefer learning convolutional neural network (CNN) with specific fullyconnect layer designed loss function for discriminative feature representation. Essentially, such loss should establish a
robust metric to efficiently distinguish high-dimensional features within and outside fine-grained categories. To this end,
the existing loss functions are defected in two aspects: (a)
The feature relationship is encoded inside the training batch.
Such a local scope leads to low accuracy. (b) The error is
established by the mean square, which needs pairwise distance computation in training set and results in low efficiency.
In this paper, we propose a novel metric learning scheme,
termed Normalize-Scale Layer and Decorrelated Global Centralized Ranking Loss, which achieves extremely efficient
and discriminative learning, i.e., 5× speedup over triplet loss
and 12% recall boost on CARS196. Our method originates
from the classic softmax loss, which has a global structure
but does not directly optimize the distance metric as well as
the inter/intra class distance. We tackle this issue through a
hypersphere layer and a global centralized ranking loss with a
pairwise decorrelated learning. In particular, we first propose
a Normalize-Scale Layer to eliminate the gap between metric
distance (for measuring distance in retrieval) and dot product (for dimension reduction in classification). Second, the
relationship between features is encoded under a global centralized ranking loss, which targets at optimizing metric distance globally and accelerating learning procedure. Finally,
the centers are further decorrelated by Gram-Schmidt process, leading to extreme efficiency (with 20 epochs in training procedure) and discriminability in feature learning. We
have conducted quantitative evaluations on two fine-grained
retrieval benchmark. The superior performance demonstrates
the merits of the proposed approach over the state-of-the-arts.

Introduction
Fine-grained image retrieval (FGIR) is to search image
through subordinate in the same visual category, e.g., birds
(Wah et al. 2011), cars (Krause et al. 2013) and products
(Oh Song et al. 2016), which has attracted increasing research focus recently. In such a setting, instances are similar to each other within a general class and are difficult
∗

corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9291

