The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Utilizing Class Information for Deep Network Representation Shaping
Daeyoung Choi,∗ Wonjong Rhee∗
Department of Transdisciplinary Studies
Seoul National University
Seoul, 08826, South Korea
{choid, wrhee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Statistical characteristics of deep network representations,
such as sparsity and correlation, are known to be relevant to
the performance and interpretability of deep learning. When a
statistical characteristic is desired, often an adequate regularizer can be designed and applied during the training phase.
Typically, such a regularizer aims to manipulate a statistical characteristic over all classes together. For classification
tasks, however, it might be advantageous to enforce the desired characteristic per class such that different classes can
be better distinguished. Motivated by the idea, we design two
class-wise regularizers that explicitly utilize class information: class-wise Covariance Regularizer (cw-CR) and classwise Variance Regularizer (cw-VR). cw-CR targets to reduce
the covariance of representations calculated from the same
class samples for encouraging feature independence. cw-VR
is similar, but variance instead of covariance is targeted to
improve feature compactness. For the sake of completeness,
their counterparts without using class information, Covariance Regularizer (CR) and Variance Regularizer (VR), are
considered together. The four regularizers are conceptually
simple and computationally very efficient, and the visualization shows that the regularizers indeed perform distinct representation shaping. In terms of classification performance,
significant improvements over the baseline and L1/L2 weight
regularization methods were found for 21 out of 22 tasks over
popular benchmark datasets. In particular, cw-VR achieved
the best performance for 13 tasks including ResNet-32/110.

Figure 1: A single unit’s activation histogram (upper three
plots) and two randomly chosen units’ activation scatter
plots (lower three plots) for MNIST. For a 6-layer Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), the fifth layer’s representation vectors calculated using 10,000 test samples were used to generate the plots. For the baseline model, a substantial overlap
among different classes can be observed at the time of initialization as shown in (a). Even after 50 epochs of training,
still, a substantial overlap can be observed as shown in (b).
When class information is used to regularize the representation shapes, the overlap is significantly reduced as shown
in (c). Note that a slight correlation between each pair of
classes can be observed in the scatter plot of (b), but not
in that of (c) due to the use of cw-CR. The figures are best
viewed in color.

Introduction
For deep learning, a variety of regularization techniques
have been developed by focusing on the weight parameters. A classic example is the use of L2 (Hoerl and Kennard
1970) and L1 (Tibshirani 1996) weight regularizers. They
have been popular because they are easy to use, computationally light, and often result in performance enhancements.
Another example is the parameter sharing technique that enforces the same weight values as in the Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs). Regularization techniques that focus on
the representation (the activations of the units in a deep network), however, have been less popular even though the performance of deep learning is known to depend on the learned

representation heavily.
For representation shaping (regularization), some of the
promising methods for performance and interpretability include (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011; Cogswell et al.
2015; Liao et al. 2016). (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011)
considers increasing representational sparsity, (Cogswell et
al. 2015) focuses on reducing covariance among hidden
units, and (Liao et al. 2016) forces parsimonious representations using k-means style clustering. While all of them
are effective representation regularizers, none of them explicitly use class information for the regularization. A few
recent works (Wen et al. 2016b; Belharbi et al. 2017;
Yang et al. 2018) do utilize class information, and their approaches are based on hidden layer activation vectors. The
method of (Belharbi et al. 2017) is computationally expen-

∗

Authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3396

