The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Memetic Approach for Sequential Security Games on a Plane with Moving
Targets
Jan Karwowski,1 Jacek Mańdziuk,1 Adam Żychowski,1 Filip Grajek,1 Bo An2
1

Warsaw University of Technology, Faculty of Mathematics and Information Science, Koszykowa 75, 00-662 Warsaw, Poland
2
Nanyang Technlogical University School of Computer Science and Engineering, Singapore 639798
{j.karwowski, j.mandziuk, a.zychowski}@mini.pw.edu.pl, boan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

involving passenger or cargo ships cruising according to a
fixed schedule. Two methods for solving the game are proposed. The first one utilizes an MILP formulation and is
solved by professional solver. In order to make the game
tractable by the solver, a game discretization procedure,
which transforms a continuous strategy space game into its
discretized form, equivalent in terms of Stackelberg Equilibrium (SE) strategies, is proposed. This discretization procedure together with specific looseless game compression are
applied prior to using the solver.
Due to limited scalability of the MILP approach, an alternative metaheuristic algorithm for solving larger game instances is proposed. The method relies on a Memetic Algorithm (MA) with specifically designed chromosome based
game representation and efficient local optimization heuristic, and is applied directly to continuous strategy space
games, with no need for game discretization.
Related Work. While the mainstream SG research considers static target settings there are several recent papers addressing the moving target scenarios:

This paper introduces a new type of Security Games (SG)
played on a plane with targets moving along predefined
straight line trajectories and its respective Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) formulation. Three approaches for
solving the game are proposed and experimentally evaluated: application of an MILP solver to finding exact solutions for small-size games, MILP-based extension of recently
published zero-sum SG approach to the case of generalsum games for finding approximate solutions of medium-size
games, and the use of Memetic Algorithm (MA) for mediumsize and large-size game instances, which are beyond MILP’s
scalability. Utilization of MA is, to the best of our knowledge, a new idea in the field of SG. The novelty of proposed
solution lies specifically in efficient chromosome-based game
encoding and dedicated local improvement heuristics. In vast
majority of test cases with known equilibrium profiles, the
method leads to optimal solutions with high stability and approximately linear time scalability. Another advantage is an
iteration-based construction of the system, which makes the
approach essentially an anytime method. This property is of
paramount importance in case of restrictive time limits, which
could hinder the possibility of calculating an exact solution.
On a general note, we believe that MA-based methods may
offer a viable alternative to MILP solvers for complex games
that require application of approximate solving methods.

1

• MRMTsg and CASS approaches (Fang, Jiang, and Tambe
2013), which model continuous Defender’s strategy (similar to our problem), but in 1-dimensional space. Their
solution considers only Markovian strategies for the Defender.

Introduction

• Games played on a graph where targets and defenders
move in discrete space of graph nodes (Bosansky et al.
2011). That work also considers only Markovian policies
for the Defender.

Security Games (SG) are a research area focusing on applying tools that originated in game theory to the task of building patrol strategies and schedules for security forces in certain real-life situations, modeled as games, specifically the
Stackelberg Game model (Leitmann 1978). SG research encompasses broad spectrum of game settings (e.g. (Xu et al.
2017; Guo et al. 2016; Gholami et al. 2016; Karwowski and
Mańdziuk 2016; Cermak et al. 2016; Gan, An, and Vorobeychik 2015)) and has been applied in various domains (An,
Tambe, and Sinha 2017).
While majority of SG papers address discrete game
spaces (Dickerson et al. 2010; Gutierrez, Juett, and Kiekintveld 2013), an important property of our model is continuous space of target and defender locations, which can
be used to model a class of real-life protection situations

• A model called Security Games on a Plane (Gan et al.
2017) is the closest to ours, with a major difference of being a single step game. Our approach directly extends the
game model proposed in (Gan et al. 2017) by considering
sequential game formulation.
• In (Wang et al. 2018) a game model similar to our discretized game version was considered and solved using compact game representation, game abstraction and
constraint-generation approach. The method requires the
game to be zero-sum and additionally simplifies calculation of independent events to a sum of probabilities in a
Linear Program (LP), what may lead to overoptimistic results if the probability of catching is high.

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

970

