The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

I Know the Relationships: Zero-Shot Action Recognition via
Two-Stream Graph Convolutional Networks and Knowledge Graphs
Junyu Gao, Tianzhu Zhang, Changsheng Xu
National Lab of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
gaojunyu2015@ia.ac.cn, tzzhang10@gmail.com, csxu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Attributes:
Indoor related?
Outdoor related?
Translation motion?
Having stick-like tool?

Abstract
Recently, with the ever-growing action categories, zero-shot
action recognition (ZSAR) has been achieved by automatically mining the underlying concepts (e.g., actions, attributes) in videos. However, most existing methods only exploit the visual cues of these concepts but ignore external
knowledge information for modeling explicit relationships
between them. In fact, humans have remarkable ability to
transfer knowledge learned from familiar classes to recognize
unfamiliar classes. To narrow the knowledge gap between existing methods and humans, we propose an end-to-end ZSAR
framework based on a structured knowledge graph, which
can jointly model the relationships between action-attribute,
action-action, and attribute-attribute. To effectively leverage
the knowledge graph, we design a novel Two-Stream Graph
Convolutional Network (TS-GCN) consisting of a classifier
branch and an instance branch. Specifically, the classifier
branch takes the semantic-embedding vectors of all the concepts as input, then generates the classifiers for action categories. The instance branch maps the attribute embeddings
and scores of each video instance into an attribute-feature
space. Finally, the generated classifiers are evaluated on the
attribute features of each video, and a classification loss is
adopted for optimizing the whole network. In addition, a
self-attention module is utilized to model the temporal information of videos. Extensive experimental results on three
realistic action benchmarks Olympic Sports, HMDB51 and
UCF101 demonstrate the favorable performance of our proposed framework.

Word Embedding:
KG
+GCN

Action-Attribute

Action-Action
(Implicit)

Action:

Action:

Biking

Skiing
(a)

Biking

Attributes
(Objects):

Action:

Skiing
(b)

Action-Attribute
Attribute-Attribute
Action-Action

Biking
Skiing

Ski
Bike
(c)

Figure 1: Three ZASR frameworks. (a) Attribute-based
framework only considers the action-attribute relationships.
(b) Word embedding-based framework which implicitly
models the action-action relationships. (c) Our framework
can directly and collectively consider all the three types of
relationships.

require any positive exemplars for classifying novel categories (Liu, Kuipers, and Savarese 2011; Xu, Hospedales,
and Gong 2016; Qin et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2018).
Existing work on ZSAR generally follows two research
lines: (1) As shown in Figure 1 (a), some methods utilize
human-defined attributes for classification (Liu, Kuipers,
and Savarese 2011), which only leverage the action-attribute
relationships to distinguish novel action categories. Moreover, these attribute-based methods are hard to generalize
to arbitrary zero-shot categories in a practical scenario due
to the difficulties in attribute definition. (2) Other methods adopt semantic representations (e.g., word embeddings)
of action names to model action-action relationship in a
semantic space (Xu, Hospedales, and Gong 2016; 2017;
Qin et al. 2017), as shown in Figure 1 (b). Although these
approaches are simple and effective, the word embedding
space can only represent action-action relationships in an
implicit way. Moreover, these methods can hardly get benefit from the other side information of videos. Recently, inspired by the strong relationships between objects and actions, (Jain et al. 2015; Mettes and Snoek 2017) employ objects as attributes for ZSAR and achieve favorable perfor-

Introduction
Recent studies on supervised action recognition have advanced rapidly because of the development of deep learning techniques and large-scale labeled datasets. However, with the growing number of action categories, traditional approaches suffer from the scalability problem (Xu,
Hospedales, and Gong 2016). These methods require large
numbers of costly and laboriously annotated videos per action class, making them not generalized for unseen categories. To overcome such an issue, Zero-Shot Action Recognition (ZSAR) has recently drawn considerable attention
since it provides an alternative methodology that does not
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8303

