The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Better Interpretability in Deep Q-Networks
Raghuram Mandyam Annasamy

Katia Sycara

Carnegie Mellon University
rannasam@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
katia@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

and are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Zhang et al. 2018;
Zhang, Ballas, and Pineau 2018; Huang et al. 2017).
In this paper, we propose a neural network architecture for
Q-learning using key-value stores, attention and constrained
embeddings, that is easier to study than the traditional deep
Q-network architectures. This is inspired by some of the
recent work on Neural Episodic Control (NEC) (Pritzel et
al. 2017) and distributional perspectives on RL (Bellemare,
Dabney, and Munos 2017). We call this model i-DQN for
Interpretable DQN and study latent representations learned
by the model on standard Atari environments from Open AI
gym (Brockman et al. 2016). Most current work around interpretability in deep learning is based on local explanations
i.e. explaining network predictions for specific input examples (Lipton 2016). For example, saliency maps can highlight
important regions of the input that influence the output of
the neural network. In contrast, global explanations attempt
to understand the mapping learned by a neural network regardless of the input. We achieve this by constraining the
latent space to be reconstructible and inverting embeddings
of representative elements in the latent space (keys). This
helps us understand aspects of the input space (images) that
are captured in the latent space across inputs. Our visualizations suggest that the features extracted by the convolutional
layers are extremely shallow and can easily overfit to trajectories seen during training. This is in line with the results of
(Zhang et al. 2018) and (Zhang, Ballas, and Pineau 2018).
Although our main focus is to understand learned models,
it is important that the models we analyze perform well on
the task at hand. To this end, we show our model achieves
training rewards comparable to Q-learning models like Distributional DQN (Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos 2017). Our
contribution in this work is threefold:

Deep reinforcement learning techniques have demonstrated
superior performance in a wide variety of environments. As improvements in training algorithms continue at a brisk pace, theoretical or empirical studies on understanding what these networks seem to learn, are far behind. In this paper we propose
an interpretable neural network architecture for Q-learning
which provides a global explanation of the model’s behavior
using key-value memories, attention and reconstructible embeddings. With a directed exploration strategy, our model can
reach training rewards comparable to the state-of-the-art deep
Q-learning models. However, results suggest that the features
extracted by the neural network are extremely shallow and
subsequent testing using out-of-sample examples shows that
the agent can easily overfit to trajectories seen during training.

Introduction
The last few years have witnessed a rapid growth of research
and interest in the domain of deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) due to the significant progress in solving RL problems (Arulkumaran et al. 2017). Deep RL has been applied
to a wide variety of disciplines ranging from game playing, robotics, systems to natural language processing and
even biological data (Silver et al. 2017; Mnih et al. 2015;
Levine et al. 2016; Kraska et al. 2018; Williams, Asadi, and
Zweig 2017; Choi et al. 2017). However, most applications
treat neural networks as a black-box and the problem of understanding and interpreting deep learning models remains a
hard problem. This is even more understudied in the context
of deep reinforcement learning and only recently has started
to receive attention. Commonly used visualization methods
for deep learning such as saliency maps and t-SNE plots of
embeddings have been applied to deep RL models (Greydanus et al. 2017; Zahavy, Ben-Zrihem, and Mannor 2016;
Mnih et al. 2015). However, there are a few questions over the
reliability of saliency methods including, as an example, sensitivity to simple transformations of the input (Kindermans et
al. 2017). The problem of generalization and memorization
with deep RL models is also important. Recent findings suggest that deep RL agents can easily memorize large amounts
of training data with drastically varying test performance

• We explore a different neural network architecture with
key-value stores, constrained embeddings and an explicit
soft-assignment step that separates representation learning
and Q-value learning (state aggregation).
• We show that such a model can improve interpretability
in terms of visualizations of the learned keys (cluster),
attention maps and saliency maps. Our method attempts
to provide a global explanation of the model’s behavior
instead of explaining specific input examples (local explanations). We also develop a few examples to test the

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4561

