The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Concept Extraction and Prerequisite
Relation Learning from Educational Data
Weiming Lu, Yangfan Zhou, Jiale Yu, Chenhao Jia

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{luwm, 21621119, 21721115, 21821117}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

methods, learning based methods and recovery based methods. For the local statistical information, reference distance and cross-entropy were proposed (Liang et al. 2015;
Gordon et al. 2016) to measure prerequisite relations among
concepts. For the learning based methods, several features
were proposed for the prerequisite classification. For example, Pan et al. (2017a) proposed contextual, structural and semantic features, and Liang et al. (2018) utilized graph-based
and text-based features. In contrast, recovery based methods
do not need to extract features to learn a prerequisite classifier. For example, Liang et al. (2017) can recover concept
prerequisite relations from course dependencies directly.
However, there are still many challenges to automatically mine prerequisite relations among domain-specific
concepts. (1) It is difficult to extract fine-grained concepts
for each domain. (2) It is time-consuming to label the prerequisite relations in the learning based methods. (3) The
recovery based methods only rely on the dependency among
educational data, but neglect the contextual, structural and
semantic features.
In order to address these challenges, we propose a
domain-specific concept extraction approach, called DsCE,
and an iterative prerequisite relation learning approach,
called iPRL. DsCE can extract high-quality phrases from
documents firstly, and then identifying domain-specific concepts with a graph based ranking method. While iPRL can
utilize both the advantage of the learning based model and
the recovery based model. It can learn the prerequisite relations among concepts without human labeled data, and
improve the performance gradually with the interaction between two models.
We conduct extensive experiments on two real-world
datasets: Textbook and MOOC datasets. The results show
that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Prerequisite relations among concepts are crucial for educational applications. However, it is difficult to automatically
extract domain-specific concepts and learn the prerequisite
relations among them without labeled data.
In this paper, we first extract high-quality phrases from a set
of educational data, and identify the domain-specific concepts by a graph based ranking method. Then, we propose
an iterative prerequisite relation learning framework, called
iPRL, which combines a learning based model and recovery based model to leverage both concept pair features and
dependencies among learning materials. In experiments, we
evaluated our approach on two real-world datasets Textbook
Dataset and MOOC Dataset, and validated that our approach
can achieve better performance than existing methods. Finally, we also illustrate some examples of our approach.

Introduction
Domain-specific concepts and their prerequisite relations are
the core of knowledge space and personalized learning theory (Falmagne et al. 2006). Prerequisite relations can be
essentially considered as the dependency among concepts,
and they are crucial for people to learn, organize, apply and
generate knowledge (Margolis and Laurence 1999). For example, the prerequisite knowledge of ”Conditional Random
Fields” is ”Hidden Markov Model”. Thus, organizing the
knowledge in prerequisite relations can improve the educational tasks, such as curriculum planning (Liu et al. 2016)
and intelligent tutoring (Wang and Liu 2016).
However, recent researches mainly focus on keyword extraction (Mihalcea and Tarau 2004; Liu, Chen, and Sun
2011; Tixier, Malliaros, and Vazirgiannis 2016) or highquality phrase mining (Liu et al. 2015; Shang et al. 2018),
and there are only a few efforts aiming to extract domainspecific concepts and learn prerequisite relations from educational data, such as courses (Yang et al. 2015; Liang et al.
2015; Liu et al. 2016; Liang et al. 2017), MOOCs (Massive
Open Online Courses) (Pan et al. 2017a), textbooks (Wang
et al. 2016; Liang et al. 2018) and scientific papers(Gordon
et al. 2016).
The prerequisite relation learning methods can be classified into three categories: local statistical information based

Our Approach
Problem Formulation
As shown in Figure 1, given a set of educational data in
one domain, which is modeled as a set of sequential learning materials (denoted as LMs for short) such as textbook
chapters and MOOC videos, we want to extract the domainspecific concepts and the prerequisite relations among them
from these data.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9678

