The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bidirectional Inference Networks:
A Class of Deep Bayesian Networks for Health Profiling
Hao Wang,1 Chengzhi Mao,2 Hao He,1 Mingmin Zhao,1 Tommi S. Jaakkola,1 Dina Katabi1
1

MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA 2 Columbia University, New York, NY
{hwang87, haohe, mingmin}@mit.edu, cm3797@columbia.edu, {tommi, dina}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract

to process such high-dimensional signals. Recently, there
has been work that combines structured prediction and NN
(Belanger and McCallum 2016; Belanger, Yang, and McCallum 2017) to take into account the relationship among
variables of interest during prediction. However, (1) they are
designed to predict all variables at once without the ability
to infer an arbitrary subset of variables given others; (2) they
do not model conditional dependencies among variables.
In this paper, we propose bidirectional inference networks
(BIN) as a kind of probabilistic NN that can get the best
of all worlds: (1) it can handle high-dimensional data (e.g.,
EEG, CT); (2) it can infer an arbitrary subset VS of variables
in V given V \ VS ; (3) it can capture complex conditional
dependencies among variables of interest.
Note that a naive way to infer arbitrary VS is to train different NNs for different VS . However, this needs O(2N )
NNs when |V | = N and ignores the relationship among
variables to be predicted. Instead, BIN tries to model the factorized joint distribution of V by connecting multiple probabilistic NNs, each modeling a factor (conditional distribution). After it is jointly trained, predictions are made via first
initializing VS with a feedforward (FF) pass and then iteratively updating variables using backpropagation (BP) to
maximize corresponding posterior probability. BIN is then
extended to CBIN, which involves the iterative prediction
process in the training stage, consequently alleviating the
problem of local optima and improving the performance.
We evaluate our model on two datasets (a large-scale sleep
study (Quan et al. 1997) and a dermatology dataset (Lichman 2013)). Experiments show that a single BIN can predict
VS given V \ VS with performance comparable to or better
than training O(2N ) separate models for O(2N ) different
VS when there are N variables in V . We can also outperform state-of-the-art structured prediction models (Belanger
and McCallum 2016; Belanger, Yang, and McCallum 2017)
adapted for our task.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We propose BIN, a probabilistic neural network model
that can perform bidirectional inference, handle highdimensional data, and effectively predict an arbitrary subset VS of variables in V given V \ VS .
• We enhance BIN with composite likelihood to derive
composite BIN (CBIN), which not only improves the inference accuracy but also reduces the number of iterations

We consider the problem of inferring the values of an arbitrary set of variables (e.g., risk of diseases) given other observed variables (e.g., symptoms and diagnosed diseases) and
high-dimensional signals (e.g., MRI images or EEG). This
is a common problem in healthcare since variables of interest often differ for different patients. Existing methods including Bayesian networks and structured prediction either
do not incorporate high-dimensional signals or fail to model
conditional dependencies among variables. To address these
issues, we propose bidirectional inference networks (BIN),
which stich together multiple probabilistic neural networks,
each modeling a conditional dependency. Predictions are
then made via iteratively updating variables using backpropagation (BP) to maximize corresponding posterior probability. Furthermore, we extend BIN to composite BIN (CBIN),
which involves the iterative prediction process in the training stage and improves both accuracy and computational efficiency by adaptively smoothing the optimization landscape.
Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets (a sleep
study and a dermatology dataset) show that CBIN is a single model that can achieve state-of-the-art performance and
obtain better accuracy in most inference tasks than multiple
models each specifically trained for a different task.

Introduction
In healthcare, it is often desirable to infer an arbitrary set
of variables (e.g., the probability of having a particular
disease) given other known or observable variables (e.g.,
coughing, itching, or already diagnosed diseases) and highdimensional signals (e.g., ECG, EEG or CT) (Sesen et al.
2013). Which variables are known and which need to be inferred typically vary across patients. Such inference problems are important to assist clinicians in making more informed treatment decisions in clinical settings where uncertainty is ubiquitous.
Traditionally, Baysian networks (BN) are used for this
task since they naturally reason with uncertain domain
knowledge. However, although BN can model relationship
among variables of interest, they do not model complex
high-dimensional data such as MRI images or EEG time series. Deep neural networks (NN), on the other hand, are able
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

766

