The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation by Matching Distributions
Based on the Maximum Mean Discrepancy via Unilateral Transformations
Atsutoshi Kumagai

Tomoharu Iwata

NTT Software Innovation Center
NTT Secure Platform Laboratories
atsutoshi.kumagai.ht@hco.ntt.co.jp

NTT Communication Science Laboratories
tomoharu.iwata.gy@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

Although large labeled data drawn from the test distribution can alleviate this problem, such data are often timeconsuming and impractical to collect in real-world applications since labels need to be manually annotated by domain
experts. Domain adaptation is a technique that aims at solving a learning problem in a domain, called a target domain,
by using data in a related domain, called a source domain.
Existing domain adaptation methods can be divided into two
categories. The first is semi-supervised domain adaptation
which requires labeled data in the source domain and a small
number of labeled data in the target domain (Saenko et al.
2010). Although semi-supervised domain adaptation is effective, it cannot be used in situations where all data in the
target domain are unlabeled, which are quite common in
practice. The other is unsupervised domain adaptation which
uses labeled data in the source domain and unlabeled data
in the target domain. Since unsupervised domain adaptation
does not require labeled data in the target domain, it can be
used in a wider range of situations than semi-supervised domain adaptation. Thus, we focus on unsupervised domain
adaptation in this paper.
The core idea of recent unsupervised domain adaptation is to find the domain-invariant representations where
the two domains are close and to learn supervised models
on this representation. These methods usually incorporate
the dimensionality reduction to find good representations
(Pan et al. 2011; Long et al. 2015; Sun and Saenko 2015;
Baktashmotlagh, Harandi, and Salzmann 2016). However,
as pointed out in (Sun, Feng, and Saenko 2016), the dimensionality reduction process risks losing important information to be transfered. If this information disappears, the
model performs poorly in the target domain.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective method
for unsupervised domain adaptation. The proposed method
reduces the discrepancy between the source and target distributions of input features by transforming the feature space
of the source domain. Since such unilateral transformations match two distributions without reducing dimensionality while referring to the original data structure of the target domain, the proposed method can transfer knowledge in
the source domain to the target one without losing information to be transfered. With regard to the transformations, the
transformed features and the original features are assumed
to differ by a small residual function. Since this assump-

We propose a simple yet effective method for unsupervised domain adaptation. When training and test distributions
are different, standard supervised learning methods perform
poorly. Semi-supervised domain adaptation methods have
been developed for the case where labeled data in the target domain are available. However, the target data are often
unlabeled in practice. Therefore, unsupervised domain adaptation, which does not require labels for target data, is receiving a lot of attention. The proposed method minimizes
the discrepancy between the source and target distributions
of input features by transforming the feature space of the
source domain. Since such unilateral transformations transfer knowledge in the source domain to the target one without reducing dimensionality, the proposed method can effectively perform domain adaptation without losing information
to be transfered. With the proposed method, it is assumed
that the transformed features and the original features differ
by a small residual to preserve the relationship between features and labels. This transformation is learned by aligning
the higher-order moments of the source and target feature distributions based on the maximum mean discrepancy, which
enables to compare two distributions without density estimation. Once the transformation is found, we learn supervised
models by using the transformed source data and their labels.
We use two real-world datasets to demonstrate experimentally that the proposed method achieves better classification
performance than existing methods for unsupervised domain
adaptation.

1

Introduction

Many supervised learning methods rely heavily on the assumption that training and test data follow the same distribution. However, this assumption is often violated in realword applications. For example, in computer vision, images
taken with different cameras or in different conditions follow different distributions (Torralba and Efros 2011). In sentiment analysis, reviews on different product categories follow different distributions (Blitzer et al. 2007). When the
training and test distributions are different, standard supervised learning methods perform significantly worse (BenDavid et al. 2007; Saenko et al. 2010).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4106

