The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Abstraction-Based Method for Verifying Strategic
Properties in Multi-Agent Systems with Imperfect Information
Francesco Belardinelli

Alessio Lomuscio

Vadim Malvone

Imperial College London, UK
Laboratoire IBISC,
Université d’Evry, France

Imperial College London
UK

Laboratoire IBISC,
Université d’Evry
France

valued variant of AT L∗ . As we show, if the AT L∗ specification is true (resp. false) in the (perfect information) abstraction, then it is also true (resp. false) in the original iCGS with
imperfect information. On the other hand, if the specification
is undefined, we can proceed to refining the abstraction in
an attempt to give a defined truth value to the specification.
The original problem is undecidable; so no guarantee can be
given that by succesive refinements, the property’s truth or
falsity can ever be established. However, the procedure provides a constructive method to partially model check AT L∗
under imperfect information and perfect recall.
Related work. Several approaches for the verification of
specifications in AT L and AT L∗ under imperfect information and perfect recall have been recently put forward. In
one line, restrictions are made on how information is shared
amongst the agents, so as to retain decidability (Berthon
et al. 2017). In a related line, interactions amongst agents
are limited to public actions only (Belardinelli et al. 2017b;
2017a). These approaches are markedly different from ours
as they seek to identify classes for which verification is decidable. Instead, we consider the whole class of iCGS and
define a general verification procedure. In this sense, our
approach is closely related to (Belardinelli, Lomuscio, and
Malvone 2018) where a bounded recall method, also incomplete, is defined. However, while in that work perfect recall
is approximated, here abstraction is carried out on the levels
of information.
At the heart of the method we describe is the notion
of abstraction and refinement of MAS models, as well as
three-valued semantics in modal languages. An abstractionrefinement framework for CTL over the 3-valued semantics was studied in (Shoham and Grumberg 2004; 2007) and
the case of hierarchical systems is considered in (Aminof,
Kupferman, and Murano 2012). Moreover, in (Grumberg
et al. 2007) an abstraction-refinement technique for full
µ-calculus is introduced. An abstraction-refinement procedure for network games with perfect information was introduced in (Avni, Guha, and Kupferman 2017) and a symbolic abstraction-refinement approach to the solution of twoplayer games with reachability or safety goals is shown
in (de Alfaro and Roy 2010). Games with incomplete information are studied in (Dimitrova and Finkbeiner 2008)
by considering only safety goals and, as we do in this paper, abstraction and refinement are used to generate from

Abstract
We investigate the verification of Multi-agent Systems
against strategic properties expressed in Alternating-time
Temporal Logic under the assumptions of imperfect information and perfect recall. To this end, we develop a three-valued
semantics for concurrent game structures upon which we define an abstraction method. We prove that concurrent game
structures with imperfect information admit perfect information abstractions that preserve three-valued satisfaction. Further, we present a refinement procedure to deal with cases
where the value of a specification is undefined. We illustrate
the overall procedure in a variant of the Train Gate Controller
scenario under imperfect information and perfect recall.

1

Introduction

Alternating-time Temporal Logic (AT L) and its extension AT L∗ are well-known formalisms for reasoning about
strategic bahaviours in Multi-agent Systems (Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002). An attractive feature of AT L
is the computational complexity of its model checking problem, which is PTIME-complete under the assumption of perfect information. Multi-agent systems (MAS), however, typically exhibit imperfect information, and model checking
MAS against AT L specifications under imperfect information and perfect recall is known to be undecidable (Dima and
Tiplea 2011). Given the practical and theoretical importance
of the imperfect information setting, even partial solutions to
the problem can be useful. Previous approaches (see related
work below) have either focused on how the information is
shared amongst the agents in the system (Belardinelli et al.
2017b; 2017a), or developed notions of bounded recall (Belardinelli, Lomuscio, and Malvone 2018).
Instead, at the heart of the present contribution is the idea
that, under a three-valued semantics, MAS with imperfect
information can be approximated (or abstracted) by perfect
information variants. This enables us to derive a sound, albeit incomplete, verification procedure for AT L and AT L∗
under imperfect information and perfect recall. In more detail, given a concurrent game structure with imperfect information (iCGS) representing a MAS, we build a perfect information abstraction that preserves satisfaction for a threeCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6030

