The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Zero Shot Learning for Code Education:
Rubric Sampling with Deep Learning Inference
Mike Wu,1 Milan Mosse,1 Noah Goodman,1,2 Chris Piech1
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
2
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
{wumike,mmosse19,ngoodman,piech}@stanford.edu

Abstract

dozens of projects to combine massive datasets with cutting
edge deep learning, current approaches fall short. Three issues emerge: (1) for even basic computer science education,
homework datasets have statistical distributions with heavy
tails similar to natural language; (2) hand labeling feedback
is expensive, rendering supervised solutions infeasible; (3)
in real world contexts feedback is needed for assignments
with small (or zero) historical records of student learning.
For the billions of learners around the world, most education
and assessments have at most hundreds of records. Even if
students use Code.org, assignments are constantly changing,
making the small-data context perennial. It is a zero-shot solution that has potential to deliver enormous social impact.
We build upon a simple insight that enables us to move beyond the supervised paradigm: When experts give feedback,
they are asked to perform the hard task of predicting misconception (y) given program (x). When breaking down the
cognitive steps that experts go through, they often solve the
inference by first thinking generatively p(x, y). They imagine, “if a student were to have a particular set of misconceptions, what sorts of programs is he or she likely to produce.”
Thinking generatively is much easier: while there are a finite set of decomposable misconceptions, they combine into
exponential amounts of unique solutions.
We formalize this intuition into a technique we call
“rubric sampling” to elicit samples from an expert prior of
the joint distribution p(x, y) and use deep learning for inference p(y|x). With no historical examples, rubric sampling
enables feedback with accuracy close to the fidelity of human teachers, outperforming data-intensive state of the art
algorithms. We case study this technique on Code.org, an
online programming platform that has been used by 610 million students and has provided a full curriculum to 29 million students, equivalent to 39% of the US K12 population.

In modern computer science education, massive open online
courses (MOOCs) log thousands of hours of data about how
students solve coding challenges. Being so rich in data, these
platforms have garnered the interest of the machine learning community, with many new algorithms attempting to autonomously provide feedback to help future students learn.
But what about those first hundred thousand students? In
most educational contexts (i.e. classrooms), assignments do
not have enough historical data for supervised learning. In
this paper, we introduce a human-in-the-loop “rubric sampling” approach to tackle the “zero shot” feedback challenge.
We are able to provide autonomous feedback for the first students working on an introductory programming assignment
with accuracy that substantially outperforms data-hungry algorithms and approaches human level fidelity. Rubric sampling requires minimal teacher effort, can associate feedback
with specific parts of a student’s solution and can articulate
a student’s misconceptions in the language of the instructor.
Deep learning inference enables rubric sampling to further
improve as more assignment specific student data is acquired.
We demonstrate our results on a novel dataset from Code.org,
the world’s largest programming education platform.

Introduction
The need for high quality education at scale poses a difficult challenge. The price of education per student is growing faster than economy-wide costs (Bowen 2012), limiting
the resources available to support student learning. When
also considering the rising need to provide adult retraining,
the gap between the demand for education and our ability to
provide is especially large. In recent years, massively open
online courses (MOOCs) from platforms like Coursera and
Code.org have made progress by scaling the delivery of content. However, MOOCs largely ignore an equally important
ingredient for learning: high quality feedback. The clear societal need, alongside massive amounts of data has led to
a machine learning grand challenge: learn how to provide
feedback for education at scale, especially in computer science due to its apparent structure and high demand.
Scaling feedback (a.k.a. “feedback” challenge) has
proven to be a hard machine learning problem. Despite

Specific contributions in this paper:
1. We introduce the Zero Shot Feedback Challenge on a
dataset from 8 assignments from Code.org along with an
evaluation set of 800 labels.
2. We articulate a novel solution: rubric sampling with deep
learning inference which sets the new state of the art in
code feedback prediction: F1 score doubled over baseline,
approaching human level accuracy.

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

782

