The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Searching with Consistent Prioritization for Multi-Agent Path Finding∗
Hang Ma,1 Daniel Harabor,2 Peter J. Stuckey,2 Jiaoyang Li,1 Sven Koenig1
1

University of Southern California
2
Monash University
hangma@usc.edu, {daniel.harabor,peter.stuckey}@monash.edu, {jiaoyanl,skoenig}@usc.edu

Abstract

Prioritized MAPF algorithms (Silver 2005; Sturtevant and
Buro 2006) are among the most efficient ones for solving
MAPF. They are based on the following simple prioritizedplanning scheme (Erdmann and Lozano-Pérez 1987): Each
agent is given a unique priority and computes, in priority
order, a minimum-cost path from its start vertex to its
target vertex that does not collide with the (already planned)
paths of all agents with higher priorities. Existing (standard)
prioritized MAPF algorithms are well known for their small
runtimes and are often used as parts of MAPF solvers (Velagapudi, Sycara, and Scerri 2010; Wang and Botea 2011;
Cáp, Vokrı́nek, and Kleiner 2015). However, they determine
a predefined total priority ordering of the agents a priori
and can thus result in solutions of bad quality or even fail
to find any solutions for solvable MAPF instances, where
a different total priority ordering could have resulted in
solutions of higher quality.

We study prioritized planning for Multi-Agent Path Finding
(MAPF). Existing prioritized MAPF algorithms depend on
rule-of-thumb heuristics and random assignment to determine
a fixed total priority ordering of all agents a priori. We instead
explore the space of all possible partial priority orderings as
part of a novel systematic and conflict-driven combinatorial
search framework. In a variety of empirical comparisons,
we demonstrate state-of-the-art solution qualities and success
rates, often with similar runtimes to existing algorithms.
We also develop new theoretical results that explore the
limitations of prioritized planning, in terms of completeness
and optimality, for the first time.

Introduction
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is a coordination problem that arises in many applications, such as for aircrafttowing vehicles (Morris et al. 2016), warehouse and office
robots (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008; Veloso et al.
2015), game characters (Ma et al. 2017c), and other multiagent systems (Ma et al. 2017a). The problem is to plan
collision-free paths for multiple agents on a given graph
from their given start vertices to their given target vertices
(Ma and Koenig 2017). The quality of a solution is measured
by the flowtime (the sum of the arrival times of all agents at
their target vertices) or the makespan (the maximum of the
arrival times of all agents at their target vertices). MAPF
is NP-hard to solve optimally (Yu and LaValle 2013b;
Ma et al. 2016b). It can be solved with reductions to other
well-studied combinatorial problems (Surynek 2015; Yu and
LaValle 2013a; Erdem et al. 2013) and dedicated MAPF
algorithms (Standley and Korf 2011; Luna and Bekris 2011;
Goldenberg et al. 2014; Sharon et al. 2013; Wagner and
Choset 2015; Sharon et al. 2015), as described in several
surveys (Ma et al. 2016a; Felner et al. 2017).

In this paper, we thus generalize the notion of prioritized
planning from planning with a fixed total priority ordering
on the agents to planning with all possible total priority
orderings. Theoretically, we establish, for the first time,
a conceptual framework for discussing the limitations of
prioritized planning. For example, we identify the set of
solutions resulting from prioritized MAPF algorithms and
characterize classes of MAPF instances with respect to
the completeness and optimality guarantees for different
priority orderings. We also develop two prioritized MAPF
algorithms that improve the practicality of prioritized planning by systematically exploring “good” priority orderings.
Our first algorithm, Conflict-Based Search with Priorities
(CBSw/P), is an adaptation of Conflict-Based Search (CBS)
(Sharon et al. 2015). It explores the space of all total
priority orderings lazily using a systematic best-first search
and introduces an ordered pair of agents only when their
paths collide. Our second algorithm, Priority-Based Search
(PBS), explores the space of all total priority orderings
lazily using a systematic depth-first search. It can take a
user-specified partial priority ordering as input, dynamically
adds new ordered pairs of agents to it, and plans paths
that are consistent with the resulting partial priority ordering. We show that standard prioritized MAPF algorithms
are a special case of PBS. Empirically, we evaluate our
prioritized MAPF algorithms on a large number of MAPF
instances. We find that CBSw/P often computes optimal or

∗

The research at the University of Southern California was
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grant
numbers 1409987, 1724392, 1817189 and 1837779 as well as a
gift from Amazon. The views and conclusions contained in this
document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the
sponsoring organizations, agencies or the U.S. government.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7643

