The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

How Does Knowledge of the AUC
Constrain the Set of Possible Ground-Truth Labelings?
Jacob Whitehill
Department of Computer Science
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
Worcester, MA, USA
jrwhitehill@wpi.edu
Abstract

accuracy information to improve (hopefully) the classifier
design and then re-submit.
AUC: For binary classification problems, one of the most
commonly used accuracy metrics is the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristics Curve (AUC). In contrast to
other accuracy metrics such as log-loss and 0/1 loss, which
can be computed as the sum of example-wise losses over each
example in the test set, the AUC statistic is computed over all
possible pairs of test examples, such that each pair contains
one example from each class. In a recent paper (Whitehill
2016), we showed that an oracle that provides contestants
with information on the AUC of their guesses can inadvertently divulge information on the ground-truth labels of the
test examples. The AUC can help the contestant to deduce
the labels of particular examples, as well as the number of
negative and positive examples; we provide examples below.
Labels of specific examples: Suppose that a tiny test set
contains just 4 examples; a contestant’s real-valued guesses
for these labels is ŷ = (0.2, 0.5, 0.9, 0.1); and an oracle
informs the contestant that her/his guesses have achieved an
AUC of exactly 0.75 = 3/4. How does perfect knowledge of
the AUC (i.e., no noise added) constrain the set of possible
binary ground-truth vectors for the test set? In this example,
it turns out that there is exactly one possible ground-truth
vector – namely y = (1, 0, 1, 0) – for which the AUC of the
contestant’s guesses is exactly 0.75. Hence, based on a single
oracle query, the contestant has managed to deduce the test
labels with complete certainty.
Number of negative and positive examples: Suppose
that the oracle reports an AUC of c = p/q, where p/q is a reduced fraction, i.e., p and q are relatively prime. If n0 and n1
are the numbers of negative and positive examples in the test
set (respectively), then q must divide the total number (n0 n1 )
of pairs containing one example from each class. Knowledge
of q thus constrains the set {(n0 , n1 ) | n0 + n1 = n} of
possibilities for n0 and n1 . For instance, if n = 1000 and
c = p/q = 450/479 ≈ 0.939, then (n0 , n1 ) must be in the
set {(42, 958), (479, 521), (521, 479), (958, 42)} – i.e., only
4 choices instead of 999.
These simple examples raise more general questions: For a
test set with n examples and a fixed AUC of c = p/q (where
p, q ∈ Z), how many compatible binary ground-truth vectors
are there? Does this number grow monotonically in n, or
might there exist some “pathological” combinations of the

Recent work on privacy-preserving machine learning has
considered how datamining competitions such as Kaggle
could potentially be “hacked”, either intentionally or inadvertently, by using information from an oracle that reports a
classifier’s accuracy on the test set (Blum and Hardt 2015;
Hardt and Ullman 2014; Zheng 2015; Whitehill 2016). For binary classification tasks in particular, one of the most common
accuracy metrics is the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC),
and in this paper we explore the mathematical structure of
how the AUC is computed from an n-vector of real-valued
“guesses” with respect to the ground-truth labels. Under the
assumption of perfect knowledge of the test set AUC c = p/q,
we show how knowing c constrains the set W of possible
ground-truth labelings, and we derive an algorithm both to
compute the exact number of such labelings and to enumerate
efficiently over them. We also provide empirical evidence that,
surprisingly, the number of compatible labelings can actually
decrease as n grows, until a test set-dependent threshold is
reached. Finally, we show how W can be efficiently whittled
down, through pairs of oracle queries, to infer all the groundtruth test labels with complete certainty.

Introduction and Related Work
Datamining contests such as Kaggle and KDDCup can
accelerate progress in many application domains by providing standardized datasets and a fair basis of comparing multiple algorithmic approaches. However, their utility will diminish if the integrity of leaderboard rankings
is called into question due to either intentional or accidental overfitting to the test data. Recent research on
privacy-preserving machine learning (Blum and Hardt 2015;
Zheng 2015) has shown how information on the accuracy
of a contestant’s guesses, returned to the contestant by an
oracle, can divulge information about the test data’s true labels. Such oracles are often provided by the organizers of
the competition themselves. For example, in the 2017 Intel &
MobileODT Cervical Cancer Screening competition (Kaggle
2017), every contestant can submit her/his guesses up to 5
times per day, and for each submission the oracle returns the
log-loss of the guesses with respect to the ground-truth values
of the entire 512-element test set. The contestant can use the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5425

