The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Spell Once, Summon Anywhere:
A Two-Level Open-Vocabulary Language Model
Sebastian J. Mielke, Jason Eisner
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
sjmielke@jhu.edu, jason@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract

an impoverished model of sequential structure (essentially,
n-gram models with backoff). We instead employ recurrent
neural networks to model both the sequence of words in a
sentence and the sequence of characters in a word type, where
the latter sequence is conditioned on the word’s embedding.
The resulting model achieves state-of-the-art on multiple
datasets. It is well-founded in linguistics and Bayesian modeling, but we can easily use it in the traditional non-Bayesian
language modeling setting by performing MAP estimation.
We begin by concisely stating a first, closed-vocabulary,
version of our model in §2, before explaining our motivations from various perspectives in §3. Then §4 motivates
and describes a simple way to extend the model to the openvocabulary setting. §5 contains quantitative and qualitative
experiments on multiple language modeling datasets, with
implementation details provided in supplementary material.
Finally, we clarify the relation of this model to previous work
in §6 and summarize our contribution in §7.

We show how the spellings of known words can help us
deal with unknown words in open-vocabulary NLP tasks.
The method we propose can be used to extend any closedvocabulary generative model, but in this paper we specifically
consider the case of neural language modeling. Our Bayesian
generative story combines a standard RNN language model
(generating the word tokens in each sentence) with an RNNbased spelling model (generating the letters in each word type).
These two RNNs respectively capture sentence structure and
word structure, and are kept separate as in linguistics. By invoking the second RNN to generate spellings for novel words
in context, we obtain an open-vocabulary language model. For
known words, embeddings are naturally inferred by combining
evidence from type spelling and token context. Comparing to
baselines (including a novel strong baseline), we beat previous
work and establish state-of-the-art results on multiple datasets.

1

Introduction
2

In this paper, we propose a neural language model that incorporates a generative model of word spelling. That is, we
aim to explain the training corpus as resulting from a process that first generated a lexicon of word types—the language’s vocabulary—and then generated the corpus of tokens
by “summoning” those types.
Each entry in the lexicon specifies both a syntactic/semantic embedding vector and an orthographic spelling. Our
model captures the correlation between these, so it can extrapolate to predict the spellings of unknown words in any
syntactic/semantic context. In this sample from our trained
English model, the words in this font were unobserved
in training data, yet have contextually appropriate spellings:
Following the death of Edward McCartney in 1060
, the new definition was transferred to the WDIC
of Fullett .
While the fully generative approach is shared by previous
Bayesian models of language (e.g., Goldwater, Griffiths, and
Johnson (2006)), even those that model characters and words
at different levels (Mochihashi, Yamada, and Ueda 2009;
Goldwater, Griffiths, and Johnson 2011) have no embeddings
and hence no way to relate spelling to usage. They also have

2.1

A joint model of lexicon and text

Lexemes have embeddings and spellings

We will model text that has already been tokenized, i.e., it is
presented as a sequence of word tokens w1 , w2 , . . ..
We assume that a language’s word types, which we henceforth call lexemes to avoid confusion, are discrete elements
w of the vocabulary V = { 1 , 2 , . . . v }. In our model, the
observable behavior of the lexeme w is determined by two
properties: a latent real-valued embedding e(w) ∈ Rd , which
governs where w tends to appear, and w’s spelling σ (w) ∈ Σ∗
(for some alphabet of characters Σ), which governs how it
looks orthographically when it does appear.
We will use e and σ to refer to the functions that map each
lexeme w to its embedding and spelling. Thus the lexicon is
specified by (e, σ). Our model1 (given fixed v and n) specifies
a joint distribution over the lexicon and corpus:
h

∏

w∈V

p(θ, e, σ, w1 , . . . , wn ) = p(θ) ·
(1)
i n
p(e(w)) · pspell (σ (w) | e(w)) ·∏ pLM (wi |~w<i , e)
| {z } |
{z
} i=1
|
{z
}
prior on
spelling model

embeddings

|

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

for all types

{z

lexicon generation

lexeme-level

} recurrent language model
for all tokens

1 Before extension to the open-vocabulary case, found in Eq. (3).

6843

