The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Lifelong Path Planning with Kinematic
Constraints for Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery∗
Hang Ma, Wolfgang Hönig, T. K. Satish Kumar, Nora Ayanian, Sven Koenig
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
{hangma, whoenig}@usc.edu, tkskwork@gmail.com, {ayanian, skoenig}@usc.edu

it arrives at cell gj , it has executed task τj and becomes a
free agent again. A MAPD instance is solved iff all tasks are
executed in a bounded amount of time after they have been
inserted into the system. The MAPD problem models applications such as warehouse robots that move shelves (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008), aircraft towing robots
that move planes (Morris et al. 2016), and office delivery
robots that move packages (Veloso et al. 2015).

Abstract
The Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery (MAPD) problem
models applications where a large number of agents attend
to a stream of incoming pickup-and-delivery tasks. Token
Passing (TP) is a recent MAPD algorithm that is efficient
and effective. We make TP even more efficient and effective by using a novel combinatorial search algorithm, called
Safe Interval Path Planning with Reservation Table (SIPPwRT), for single-agent path planning. SIPPwRT uses an advanced data structure that allows for fast updates and lookups
of the current paths of all agents in an online setting. The resulting MAPD algorithm TP-SIPPwRT takes kinematic constraints of real robots into account directly during planning,
computes continuous agent movements with given velocities
that work on non-holonomic robots rather than discrete agent
movements with uniform velocity, and is complete for wellformed MAPD instances. We demonstrate its benefits for automated warehouses using both an agent simulator and a standard robot simulator. For example, we demonstrate that it can
compute paths for hundreds of agents and thousands of tasks
in seconds and is more efficient and effective than existing
MAPD algorithms that use a post-processing step to adapt
their paths to continuous agent movements with given velocities.

Most MAPD algorithms solve the multi-agent pathfinding problem (Ma and Koenig 2017) in an inner loop. The
multi-agent pathfinding problem is to compute collision-free
paths for multiple agents and is NP-hard to solve optimally
(Yu and LaValle 2013b; Ma et al. 2016b). Ways of solving
it (and its variants) include reductions to other well-studied
combinatorial problems (Yu and LaValle 2013a; Erdem et
al. 2013; Surynek 2015) and dedicated algorithms based on
search and other techniques (Silver 2005; Standley 2010;
Wang and Botea 2011; Luna and Bekris 2011; Sharon et
al. 2013; Goldenberg et al. 2014; Wagner and Choset 2015;
Sharon et al. 2015; Cohen et al. 2016; Ma and Koenig 2016;
Ma, Kumar, and Koenig 2017; Nguyen et al. 2017). See (Ma
et al. 2016a; Felner et al. 2017) for complete surveys.
Token Passing (TP) (Ma et al. 2017) is a recent MAPD
algorithm that is efficient and effective. It assumes, like
many multi-agent pathfinding algorithms, discrete agent
movements in the main compass directions with uniform
velocity but can use MAPF-POST (Hönig et al. 2016a;
2016b) in a post-processing step to adapt its paths to continuous forward movements with given translational velocities
and point turns with given rotational velocities. However,
the resulting paths might then not be effective since planning is oblivious to this transformation. TP needs to repeatedly plan time-minimal paths for agents that avoid collisions
with the paths of the other agents. We show how TP can be
made even more efficient by using Safe Interval Path Planning with Reservation Table (SIPPwRT), our contribution
to improve SIPP (Phillips and Likhachev 2011) for this and
many other applications. We also show how TP can be made
more general by letting SIPPwRT directly compute continuous forward movements and point turns with given velocities. The resulting MAPD algorithm TP-SIPPwRT guarantees a safety distance between agents and solves all wellformed MAPD instances.

Introduction
In the Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery (MAPD) problem
(Ma et al. 2017), m agents a1 . . . am attend to a stream of incoming pickup-and-delivery tasks in a given 2-dimensional
4-neighbor grid with blocked and unblocked cells of size
L × L each. Agents have to avoid collisions with each other.
A task τj is characterized by a pickup cell sj and a delivery
cell gj . The task is inserted into the system at an unknown
time. The task set T contains the unassigned tasks in the system. An agent not executing a task is called a free agent. It
can be assigned any one task τj ∈ T at a time and then has
to move from its current cell via cell sj to cell gj , implying
that it has to move an object from cell sj to cell gj and can
carry at most one object at a time. Once it arrives at cell sj , it
starts to execute task τj and is called a task agent. Later, once
∗

Our research was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grant numbers 1409987, 1724392, 1817189 and
1837779 as well as a gift from Amazon.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7651

