The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient and Effective Incomplete Multi-View Clustering
Xinwang Liu,1 Xinzhong Zhu,2,3 Miaomiao Li,1 Chang Tang,4 En Zhu,1 Jianping Yin,5 Wen Gao6
2

1
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, 410073
College of Mathematics, Physics and Information Engineering, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, Zhengjiang, China, 321004
3
Research Institute of Ningbo Cixing Co., Ltd, Ningbo, China, 315336
4
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China, 430074
5
Dongguan University of Technology, Guangdong, China
6
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China, 100871

Abstract

makes the aforementioned MVC algorithms not applicable
to handle incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) tasks.
Many efforts have been devoted to addressing IMVC,
which can roughly be grouped into two categories. In the
first category, the incomplete views are firstly filled with
an imputation algorithm such as zero-filling, mean value
filling, k-nearest-neighbor filling, expectation-maximization
(EM) filling (Ghahramani and Jordan 1993) and other advanced ones (Trivedi et al. 2010; Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015;
Shao, He, and Yu 2015; Bhadra, Kaski, and Rousu 2016;
Yin, Wu, and Wang 2015). A standard MVC algorithm is
subsequently applied into these imputed views to perform
clustering tasks. This kind of algorithms are termed “twostage” ones, where the imputation and clustering processes
are separately carried out. By observing that the abovementioned “two-stage” algorithms disconnect the processes
of imputation and clustering, the other category, termed as
“one-stage”, puts forward to unify imputation and clustering into a single optimization procedure and instantiate a
clustering-oriented algorithm termed as multiple kernel kmeans with incomplete kernels (MKKM-IK) algorithm (Liu
et al. 2017a). Specifically, the clustering result at the last iteration guides the imputation of absent kernel elements, and
the latter is used in turn to conduct the subsequent clustering.
By this way, these two procedures are seamlessly connected,
with the aim to achieve better clustering performance.
Of the above-mentioned IMVC algorithms, the “onestage” methods form a benchmark, where the incomplete
views are optimized to best serve clustering. The main contribution of these methods is the unification of imputation
and clustering, so that the imputation would be meaningful and beneficial for clustering. It has been demonstrated
that the “one-stage” methods can achieve promissing clustering performance in various applications (Liu et al. 2017a;
Zhu et al. 2018), but they also suffer from the following nonignorable drawbacks. i) High computational and storage
complexities. Its computational and storage complexities are
O(n3 ) and O(mn2 ) per iteration, respectively, where n and
m are the number of samples and views. It prevents them
from being applied to large-scale clustering tasks. ii) Overcomplicated imputation. Existing “one-stage” methods directly impute multiple incomplete similarity matrices, in
which the number of variables increases quadratically with
the number of samples for each view. This could make the

Incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) optimally fuses
multiple pre-specified incomplete views to improve clustering performance. Among various excellent solutions, the recently proposed multiple kernel k-means with incomplete
kernels (MKKM-IK) forms a benchmark, which redefines
IMVC as a joint optimization problem where the clustering and kernel matrix imputation tasks are alternately performed until convergence. Though demonstrating promising performance in various applications, we observe that the
manner of kernel matrix imputation in MKKM-IK would incur intensive computational and storage complexities, overcomplicated optimization and limitedly improved clustering
performance. In this paper, we propose an Efficient and Effective Incomplete Multi-view Clustering (EE-IMVC) algorithm to address these issues. Instead of completing the incomplete kernel matrices, EE-IMVC proposes to impute each
incomplete base matrix generated by incomplete views with
a learned consensus clustering matrix. We carefully develop a
three-step iterative algorithm to solve the resultant optimization problem with linear computational complexity and theoretically prove its convergence. Further, we conduct comprehensive experiments to study the proposed EE-IMVC in
terms of clustering accuracy, running time, evolution of the
learned consensus clustering matrix and the convergence. As
indicated, our algorithm significantly and consistently outperforms some state-of-the-art algorithms with much less running time and memory.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) optimally integrates features
from different views to improve clustering performance
(Bickel and Scheffer 2004). It has been intensively studied and widely applied into various applications during
the last few decade (Yu et al. 2012; Li, Jiang, and Zhou
2014; Du et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2017b; Li et al. 2015; Cai, Nie, and Huang 2013;
Tao, Liu, and Fu 2017; Liu et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2015;
Tao et al. 2017). All these MVC algorithms assume that the
views of samples are observable. However, in some practical applications (Kumar et al. 2013; Xiang et al. 2013), this
assumption may not hold anymore due to the absence of partial views among samples. The violation on this assumption
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4392

