The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dirichlet Multinomial Mixture with Variational
Manifold Regularization: Topic Modeling over Short Texts
Ximing Li, Jiaojiao Zhang, Jihong Ouyang
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
liximing86@gmail.com

Abstract

cal methods, the topic inference is mainly depended on the
document-level word co-occurrence information (Wang and
McCallum 2006) that the short texts lack. This raises up a
significant challenge to topic modeling of short texts.

Conventional topic models suffer from a severe sparsity problem when facing extremely short texts such as social media
posts. The family of Dirichlet multinomial mixture (DMM)
can handle the sparsity problem, however, they are still very
sensitive to ordinary and noisy words, resulting in inaccurate topic representations at the document level. In this paper,
we alleviate this problem by preserving local neighborhood
structure of short texts, enabling to spread topical signals
among neighboring documents, so as to correct the inaccurate
topic representations. This is achieved by using variational
manifold regularization, constraining the close short texts
should have similar variational topic representations. Upon
this idea, we propose a novel Laplacian DMM (LapDMM)
topic model. During the document graph construction, we
further use the word mover’s distance with word embeddings
to measure document similarities at the semantic level. To
evaluate LapDMM, we compare it against the state-of-theart short text topic models on several traditional tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that our LapDMM achieves
very significant performance gains over baseline models, e.g.,
achieving even about 0.2 higher scores on clustering and classification tasks in many cases.

Recently, many efforts have been made to handle the
sparsity problem. Borrowing the taxonomic hierarchy from
multi-label learning (Zhang and Zhou 2014), we organize
the existing works on topic modeling of short texts into
two categories, i.e., problem transformation method and
adaptation method. The problem transformation method
(Mehrotra et al. 2013; Quan et al. 2015; Zuo et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2018b) tackles the task by aggregating short texts
into long pseudo-documents and then applying a wellestablished topic model, e.g., LDA. For this category of
methods, the short texts can be aggregated using side information, e.g., user ID (Mehrotra et al. 2013), or adaptive scenarios (Quan et al. 2015; Zuo et al. 2016; Li et
al. 2018b). However, a drawback of them is that any long
pseudo-document may consist of many irrelevant short texts,
making the topic inference less effective. The adaptation
method (Nigam et al. 2000; Cheng et al. 2014; Sridhar 2015;
Zuo, Zhao, and Xu 2016; Xin et al. 2011; Yin and Wang
2014; Li et al. 2016; 2017; 2018c; 2018d) directly modifies
traditional topic models by enriching word co-occurrences,
so as to remedy the sparsity problem. A straightforward
methodology is to model the global word co-occurrences
at the corpus level (Cheng et al. 2014; Sridhar 2015;
Zuo, Zhao, and Xu 2016). For example, the biterm topic
model (BTM) (Cheng et al. 2014) learns topics by modeling word co-occurrence pairs over the entire corpus; the
word network topic model (WNTM) (Zuo, Zhao, and Xu
2016) refers to each word type as a pseudo-document following a global word co-occurrence network. These models
can alleviate the sparsity problem to some extent. However,
they may create many meaningless word co-occurrences
without any word pair filtering process, and more importantly they lose document-specific topic structure. Additionally, another methodology indirectly enriches documentlevel word co-occurrences by supposing that each short text
covers a small subset of topics. The representative methods
include Dirichlet multinomial mixture (DMM) (Nigam et al.
2000; Yin and Wang 2014) and its variants (Li et al. 2016;

Introduction
Short texts, such as text advertisements and social media
posts, are becoming more and more prevalent on the Internet. With the emerging large-scale collections of short
texts, discovering the hidden topic structure from them is
important for many content analysis applications. However,
short texts, as suggested by the name, often contain very few
words. For example, in StackOverFlow of question titles,
each title sample has only about 4.9 word tokens averagely
after a removal of the meaningless stopwords. Therefore,
there must be very limited valuable information for short text
collections at the document level, resulting in the so-called
sparsity problem.
Conventional topic models, such as probabilistic latent semantic indexing (PLSI) (Hofmann 1999) and latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003), also suffer from the sparsity problem. That is because with statistiCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7884

