The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hybrid Attention-Based Prototypical
Networks for Noisy Few-Shot Relation Classification
Tianyu Gao,∗ Xu Han,∗ Zhiyuan Liu,† Maosong Sun
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{gty16,hanxu17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{liuzy,sms}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

To construct large-scale data, Mintz et al. (2009) propose
a novel distant supervision (DS) mechanism to automatically label training instances by aligning existing knowledge
graphs (KGs) with text. DS is a heuristic rule: for an entity pair in KGs, those sentences mentioning both the entities will be labeled with their relations in KGs. DS enables RC models to work on large-scale training corpora and
thus becomes a primary approach for RC recently. Because
DS brings inevitable noise in itself, many efforts are devoted to further reducing noise (Wu, Bamman, and Russell
2017; Feng et al. 2018). Although these DS models achieve
promising results on common relations, their classification
performance still drops dramatically when there are only few
training instances for some relations. Empirically, adopting
DS can automatically annotate adequate amounts of training
data. However, this data usually just covers a limited part of
relations. Many relations are long-tail and still suffer from
data deficiency. The current DS models ignore the problem
of long-tail relations, which makes these models hard to extract comprehensive information from plain text.
It is intuitive that people can learn new knowledge after
being taught just few instances. Hence, we provide a different view to formulate RC in a few-shot learning (FSL) scenario, which requires models to handle classification tasks
with a handful of training instances. Note that there are also
some works attempting to handle RC in a zero-shot scenario (Levy et al. 2017), incorporating extra information to
classify relations never appearing in training sets. Although
zero-shot RC is meaningful and has a strong academic exploring value, it is a little far away from real-world scenes.
In fact, even for people, it is hard to grasp new knowledge
without any examples but limited extra information.
Some efforts have also been devoted to FSL. The early
works (Caruana 1995; Bengio 2012) mainly focus on applying transfer learning methods to fine-tune pre-trained
models, which adopt latent information from the common
classes containing adequate instances. Then, metric learning methods (Koch, Zemel, and Salakhutdinov 2015) have
been proposed to learn the distance distributions among
classes. Recently, meta learning is proposed, which encourages models to learn fast-learning abilities from previous experience and rapidly generalize to new concepts (Ravi and
Larochelle 2017; Munkhdalai and Yu 2017). Among these
models, prototypical networks (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel

The existing methods for relation classification (RC) primarily rely on distant supervision (DS) because large-scale
supervised training datasets are not readily available. Although DS automatically annotates adequate amounts of data
for model training, the coverage of this data is still quite
limited, and meanwhile many long-tail relations still suffer
from data sparsity. Intuitively, people can grasp new knowledge by learning few instances. We thus provide a different view on RC by formalizing RC as a few-shot learning
(FSL) problem. However, the current FSL models mainly focus on low-noise vision tasks, which makes them hard to directly deal with the diversity and noise of text. In this paper, we propose hybrid attention-based prototypical networks
for the problem of noisy few-shot RC. We design instancelevel and feature-level attention schemes based on prototypical networks to highlight the crucial instances and features
respectively, which significantly enhances the performance
and robustness of RC models in a noisy FSL scenario. Besides, our attention schemes accelerate the convergence speed
of RC models. Experimental results demonstrate that our
hybrid attention-based models require fewer training iterations and outperform the state-of-the-art baseline models. The
code and datasets are released on https://github.com/thunlp/
HATT-Proto.

Introduction
Relation classification (RC) is an import task in information
extraction, aiming to classify the relation between two given
entities based on their related context. Due to the capability
of extracting textual information and benefiting many NLP
applications (e.g., information retrieval, dialog generation,
and question answering), RC appeals to many researchers.
Conventional supervised models have been widely explored
in this task (Zelenko, Aone, and Richardella 2003; Zeng et
al. 2014; Gormley, Yu, and Dredze 2015), however, their
performance heavily depends on the scale and quality of
training data. In practice, manual labeling of high-quality
data is time-consuming and human-intensive, which means
these supervised models usually suffer from scarce data and
are thus hard to generalize well.
∗

indicates equal contribution
Corresponding author: Z.Liu(liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6407

