The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Reinforcement Learning for Improved Low Resource Dialogue Generation
Ana V. González-Garduño
University of Copenhagen, Department of Computer Science
ana@di.ku.dk

Introduction

lack the ability to encode the context in which the current
utterance is occurring in. This can lead to repetitive and
meaningless responses, therefore it is important to encode
the long term context of a conversation in order to make a
more accurate prediction.
This has led to work that extends simple encoder-decoder
models to deal with generation of larger structured texts
such as paragraphs and documents (Li, Luong, and Jurafsky
2015; Serban et al. 2016; 2017). Many of these models work
by encoding information at multiple levels i.e. a context encoder, an utterance encoder and a decoder that predicts the
next utterance in a conversation.

Dialogue systems have become a very popular topic in recent years with the rapid improvement of personal assistants like Cortana, Siri, Alexa, among many others. Open
ended conversational systems tend to work better for languages like English or Spanish, where a great amount of
text and speech data is available. As the problem of data
sparsity is one of the many barriers towards creating robust
and accurate dialogue systems, conversational agents in low
resource languages are not nearly as developed. In addition,
goal oriented dialogue systems pose a different kind of challenge. These systems require tracking of states during the
course of a conversation in order to make the next action.
Generally, these two types of conversational systems have
been approached separately which has led to improvements
in both directions, however recent work has attempted to
create systems that try to bridge the gap between the two
(Weston, Dinan, and Miller 2018). In this thesis, I focus on
language independent methods of improving utterance understanding and response generation and attempt to tackle
some of the issues surrounding current systems. The aim is
to create a unified approach to dialogue generation inspired
by developments in both goal oriented and open ended dialogue systems. The main contributions in this thesis are: 1)
Introducing hybrid approaches to dialogue generation using
retrieval and encoder-decoder architectures to produce fluent but precise utterances in dialogues, 2) Proposing supervised, semi-supervised and Reinforcement Learning methods for domain adaptation in goal oriented dialogue and 3)
Introducing models that can adapt cross lingually.

Dialogue State Tracking Dialogue state tracking (DST),
which consists of tracking the user’s goal at each turn of
the conversation, has seen rapid developments since the Dialog State Tracking Challenge (Henderson, Thomson, and
Williams 2014). In DST, the goal of the user is typically
represented using slot-value pairs, which are typically fixed.
This limits the way that many models can be used in a practical setting. Some newer models have looked at how to dynamically add slots into DST models however, most works
have focused on tracking states for single domains (Ren et
al. 2018; Zhong, Xiong, and Socher 2018).

Current status of the project
Hybrid Hierarchical Dialogue Generation model One
problem with end-to-end open domain dialogue systems is
the fact that these tend to generate fluent but meaningless
responses. On the other hand, retrieval based methods to
question-answering tend to return snippets with precise information that do not really follow a flow of conversation.
Early in the project, I experimented with simple baselines for relevancy ranking that are language independent. The model presented in Gonzalez, Augenstein, and
Søgaard (2018) is a very simple multi-layer perceptron
model that has a low computational cost compared to other
more expressive recurrent models (Bowman et al. ) due to
the lower number of parameters. The first attempt at investigating the grey area between open ended chitchat and
goal oriented dialog has been by combining the benefits of
a hierarchical encoder-decoder model (Serban et al. 2017)
with exemplar-based retrieval. More specifically, we condition our decoder on the answer of the most similar dialogue

Related Work
Hierarchical Encoder-Decoder Models Neural generation models such as Machine translation (MT) approaches
(Cho et al. 2014) to dialogue generation and questionanswering systems became of interest because of their ability to encode an utterance or question into a fixed sized vector representation, feed it into a decoder and decode it into a
variable length sequence. These models are trained to maximize the conditional probability of a target sequence given
a source sequence. However, MT based approaches like this
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9884

