The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Counting Complexity for Reasoning in Abstract Argumentation∗
Johannes K. Fichte

Markus Hecher

Arne Meier

TU Dresden
01062 Dresden, Germany
johannes.fichte@tu-dresden.de

TU Wien
Institute of Logic and Computation
Favoritenstraße 9-11 / E192
1040 Vienna, Austria
hecher@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Leibniz Universität Hannover
Institut für Theoretische Informatik
Appelstraße 4
30167 Hannover, Germany
meier@thi.uni-hannover.de

Abstract

questions such as how many extensions are available containing certain arguments. An even more interesting question
is how many extensions containing certain arguments exist
when restricted to a certain subset of the arguments which
asks for outputting the number of projected extensions.
Interestingly, the computational complexity of the decision problem is already quite hard. More precisely, the problem of credulous acceptance, which asks whether a given
argument is contained in at least one extension, is NPcomplete for the stable semantics and even Σp2 -complete for
the semi-stable semantics (Dunne and Bench-Capon 2002;
Dvořák and Woltran 2010; Dvořák 2012). The high worstcase complexity is often a major issue to establish algorithms
for frameworks of abstract argumentation. A classical way
in parameterized complexity and algorithmics is to identify
structural properties of an instance and establish efficient
algorithms under certain structural restrictions (Cygan et al.
2015). Usually, we aim for algorithms that run in time polynomial in the input size and exponential in a measure of
the structure, so-called fixed-parameter tractable algorithms.
Such runtime results require more fine-grained runtime analyses and more evolved reductions than in classical complexity
theory where one considers only the size of the input. Here,
we take a graph-theoretical measure of the undirected graph
of the given argumentation framework into account. As measure we take treewidth, which is arguably the most prominent
graph invariant in combinatorics of graph theory and renders
various graph problems easier if the input graph is of bounded
treewidth.
Our results are as follows:

In this paper, we consider counting and projected model counting of extensions in abstract argumentation for various semantics. When asking for projected counts we are interested
in counting the number of extensions of a given argumentation framework while multiple extensions that are identical when restricted to the projected arguments count as only
one projected extension. We establish classical complexity results and parameterized complexity results when the problems
are parameterized by treewidth of the undirected argumentation graph. To obtain upper bounds for counting projected
extensions, we introduce novel algorithms that exploit small
treewidth of the undirected argumentation graph of the input instance by dynamic programming (DP). Our algorithms
run in time double or triple exponential in the treewidth depending on the considered semantics. Finally, we take the
exponential time hypothesis (ETH) into account and establish
lower bounds of bounded treewidth algorithms for counting
extensions and projected extension.

Introduction
Abstract argumentation (Dung 1995; Rahwan 2007) is a
central framework for modeling and the evaluation of arguments and its reasoning with applications to various areas in artificial intelligence (AI) (Amgoud and Prade 2009;
Rago, Cocarascu, and Toni 2018). The semantics of argumentation is described in terms of arguments that are acceptable
with respect to an abstract framework, such as stable or admissible. Such arguments are then called extensions of a
framework. In argumentation, one is particularly interested
in the credulous or skeptical reasoning problem, which asks,
given an argumentation framework and an argument, whether
the argument is contained in some or all extension(s) of the
framework, respectively. A very interesting, but yet entirely
unstudied question in abstract argumentation is the computation and the computational complexity of counting, which
asks for outputting the number of extensions with respect to
a certain semantics. By counting extensions, we can answer

• We establish the classical complexity of counting extensions and counting projected extensions for various semantics in abstract argumentation.
• We present an algorithm that solves counting projected
extensions by exploiting treewidth in runtime double exponential in the treewidth or triple exponential in the
treewidth depending on the considered semantics.

∗
Funded by Austrian Science Fund FWF grants I2854, Y698,
and P30168-N31, as well as the German Research Fund DFG grants
HO 1294/11-1 and ME 4279/1-2. The second author is also affiliated
with the University of Potsdam, Germany.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Assuming the exponential time hypothesis (ETH), which
states that there is some real s > 0 such that we cannot decide satisfiability of a given 3-CNF formula ϕ in
time 2s·|ϕ| · kϕkO(1) , we show that one cannot count projected extensions double exponentially in the treewidth.
2827

