The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

BLOCK: Bilinear Superdiagonal Fusion for Visual
Question Answering and Visual Relationship Detection
Hedi Ben-younes,1,2 Remi Cadene,1 Nicolas Thome,3 Matthieu Cord1
1

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, F-75005 Paris, France
2
Heuritech
3
CEDRIC - Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, 75003 Paris, France

Abstract

two inputs are bilinear models. However, the number of parameters of a bilinear model is quadratic in the input dimensions: as a linear model is characterized by a matrix
W ∈ Rdim(x)×dim(y) , a bilinear model is defined by a tensor T ∈ Rdim(x1 )×dim(x2 )×dim(y) . When the input dimensions grow (thousand or more), learning a full tensor T becomes quickly intractable. The main issue is to reduce and
control the numbers of parameters representing T . Usually,
when working with linear models, restricting the complexity is done by constraining the rank of the matrix W . Unfortunately, it is much more complicated when it comes to
bilinear models, since it requires notions of multi-linear algebra. While a lot of work has been done in extending the
notion of complexity to higher-order tensors (Harshman et
al. 2001), (Carroll and Chang 1970), (Tucker 1966), it is not
clear whether the simple extension of rank should be used
to constrain a bilinear model.
In this paper, we tackle the general problem of learning end-to-end bilinear models. We propose BLOCK, a
Block Superdiagonal Fusion framework for multimodal representation based on the block-term tensor decomposition
(De Lathauwer 2008). As it has been studied in the signal
processing literature (Cichocki et al. 2015), the focus was
on having uniqueness properties to ensure a physically interpretable decomposition. We study here this decomposition
under a machine learning perspective instead, and use it as
a fully learnable tensor of parameters. Interestingly, this decomposition leverages the notion of block-term ranks to define a tensor’s complexity. It encapsulates both concepts of
rank and mode ranks, at the basis of Candecomp/PARAFAC
(Harshman et al. 2001) and Tucker decomposition (Tucker
1966). This complexity analysis is capitalized on to provides
a new way to control the tradeoff between the expressiveness and complexity of the fusion model. More precisely,
BLOCK enables to model very rich (i.e. full bilinear) interactions between groups of features, while the block structure
limits the whole complexity of the model, which enables to
keep expressive (i.e. high dimensional) mono-moodal representations.
The BLOCK model is used for solving two challenging
applications: Visual Question Answering (VQA) and Visual
Relationship Detection (VRD). For both tasks, the number
of blocks and the size of each projection in the BLOCK
fusion will be adapted to balance between fine interaction

Multimodal representation learning is gaining more and more
interest within the deep learning community. While bilinear models provide an interesting framework to find subtle
combination of modalities, their number of parameters grows
quadratically with the input dimensions, making their practical implementation within classical deep learning pipelines
challenging. In this paper, we introduce BLOCK, a new multimodal fusion based on the block-superdiagonal tensor decomposition. It leverages the notion of block-term ranks,
which generalizes both concepts of rank and mode ranks
for tensors, already used for multimodal fusion. It allows
to define new ways for optimizing the tradeoff between the
expressiveness and complexity of the fusion model, and is
able to represent very fine interactions between modalities
while maintaining powerful mono-modal representations. We
demonstrate the practical interest of our fusion model by using BLOCK for two challenging tasks: Visual Question Answering (VQA) and Visual Relationship Detection (VRD),
where we design end-to-end learnable architectures for representing relevant interactions between modalities. Through extensive experiments, we show that BLOCK compares favorably with respect to state-of-the-art multimodal fusion models for both VQA and VRD tasks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Cadene/block.bootstrap.pytorch.

1

Introduction

In many of the most recent tasks tackled by artificial intelligence, multiple sources of information need to be taken into
account for decision making. Problems such as visual question answering (Goyal et al. 2017), visual relationship detection (Lu et al. 2016), cross-modal retrieval (Kiros, Salakhutdinov, and Zemel 2015) or social-media post classification
(Duong, Lebret, and Aberer 2017) require, at a certain level
and to some extent, the fusion between multiple modalities.
For classical mono-modal tasks, linear models constitute
a handful building block to transform the input x and to
match it with the desired output y. When dealing with two
modalities, not only do we need to properly transform each
input x1 and x2 into a representation that fits the problem, we also want to model the interactions between these
modalities. A natural candidate to extend linear models for
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8102

