The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

UGSD: User Generated Sentiment Dictionaries from Online Customer Reviews
Chun-Hsiang Wang,1 Kang-Chun Fan,2 Chuan-Ju Wang,2 Ming-Feng Tsai1,3
1

Department of Computer Science, National Chengchi University, Taiwan
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
3
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare, Taiwan
{ch_wang, mftsai}@nccu.edu.tw, {kcfan, cjwang}@citi.sinica.edu.tw

2

Abstract

Amazon, sentiment analysis on the reviews posted on these
platforms is crucial since it has been confirmed that they
have a direct influence on commercial revenue and reputation for businesses (Luca 2011; Luca and Zervas 2016;
Guzman and Maalej 2014).
For sentiment analysis, the dictionary is one of the most
vital resources and generally has a great influence on results
and the corresponding analyses (Feldman 2013). However, it
is difficult to construct a universal sentiment dictionary that
fits all domains because word sentiment in general depends
on the domain it is being used for. In particular, dictionaries
of one domain cannot easily be applied to other domains,
because words can have opposite sentiments when used in
different situations (Lu et al. 2011; Balahur et al. 2010;
Hamilton et al. 2016). For instance, the word “soft” has a
positive meaning for burgers, but conveys a negative attitude
toward basketball players. Consequently, one important task
in the fields of natural language processing and text mining
is constructing domain-specific sentiment dictionaries.
There have been many studies on automatic methods
for building the dictionaries for various domains (Hamilton et al. 2016; Labille, Gauch, and Alfarhood 2017). Most
proposed approaches either manually or semi-automatically
leverage other resources and calculate the scores of new
words via the proximity to one or more seed words, i.e.,
a small set of words with strong positive or negative associations (Taboada et al. 2011). For example, (Hamilton et
al. 2016) induce domain-specific sentiment dictionaries by
building high-quality semantic representations and propagating the polarity score of each word from a seed set with
random walks. Another study utilizes online reviews to construct context-aware dictionaries, applying a generic sentiment dictionary and synonym-antonym dictionary, and exploiting linguistic heuristics for overall review ratings (Lu
et al. 2011). In sum, most previous studies require general
sentiment dictionaries, annotated seed words, or linguistic
heuristics; clearly, these external resources greatly impact
the results of dictionary construction. One recent study does
not use a generic dictionary (Labille, Gauch, and Alfarhood
2017), which however considers binary sentiments only and
ignores all reviews with medium ratings.
The explosion of user-generated data on the web, including customer reviews on platforms like TripAdvisor and ecommerce websites like Amazon, constitutes a great oppor-

Customer reviews on platforms such as TripAdvisor and
Amazon provide rich information about the ways that people convey sentiment on certain domains. Given these kinds
of user reviews, this paper proposes UGSD, a representation
learning framework for constructing domain-specific sentiment dictionaries from online customer reviews, in which we
leverage the relationship between user-generated reviews and
the ratings of the reviews to associate the reviewer sentiment
with certain entities. The proposed framework has the following three main advantages. First, no additional annotations of
words or external dictionaries are needed for the proposed
framework; the only resources needed are the review texts
and entity ratings. Second, the framework is applicable across
a variety of user-generated content from different domains
to construct domain-specific sentiment dictionaries. Finally,
each word in the constructed dictionary is associated with a
low-dimensional dense representation and a degree of relatedness to a certain rating, which enable us to obtain more
fine-grained dictionaries and enhance the application scalability of the constructed dictionaries as the word representations can be adopted for various tasks or applications, such
as entity ranking and dictionary expansion. The experimental
results on three real-world datasets show that the framework
is effective in constructing high-quality domain-specific sentiment dictionaries from customer reviews.

Introduction
As more and more people share their experience and
thoughts on platforms including forums, review websites,
and microblogs, there has been a surge of research on sentiment analysis. Sentiment analysis, the goal of which is to
identify the sentiment of a text, has been applied to a variety of data sources. For example, one study uses Twitter
as their corpus to build a sentiment classifier to determine
positive, negative, and neutral sentiments (Pak and Paroubek
2010), while another line of research mines opinions about
entities in the news, which are different from subjective
text types (Balahur et al. 2010). Due to these studies, sentiment analysis can be adopted in various applications, including real-world event monitoring and public opinion mining.
In addition, with the growing popularity of online reviews
and e-commerce websites such as TripAdvisor, Yelp, and
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

313

