The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Congestion Graphs for Automated Time Predictions
Arik Senderovich, J. Christopher Beck

Avigdor Gal

Mechanical and Industrial Engineering
University of Toronto
Canada
sariks@mie.utoronto.ca
jcb@mie.utoronto.ca

Industrial Engineering and Management
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology
Israel
avigal@technion.ac.il

Matthias Weidlich
Dept. of Computer Science
Humboldt University zu Berlin
Germany
matthias.weidlich@hu-berlin.de
Abstract

Wilkie et al. 2011). In manufacturing, in turn, predictions of
cycle times for a product are used to set customer due dates
and anticipate job completion times (Backus et al. 2006).
An effective approach to solve a time prediction problem is to formulate it as a supervised learning task,
where future time points are predicted based on raw event
data (Senderovich et al. 2015). This data is commonly available in the form of event logs, recordings of the behavior of
a system, which contain temporal information. For example,
every visit to the emergency department is associated with a
sequence of timestamped events that the patient experienced
(e.g., start of triage and end of treatment).
Previous work has shown that congestion has a substantial impact on the total time spent in a system (Gal et al.
2017) and hence on the quality of time prediction. However,
event logs lack explicit information on the load imposed by
arriving entities that are processed by shared (and scarce)
resources. State-of-the-art methods, therefore, consider additional features that capture congestion of shared resources.
These features are elicited by gathering extensive knowledge about the underlying process (e.g., by conducting interviews with stakeholders) and subsequently computed from
the event logs (Ang et al. 2015). However, process knowledge is expensive to gather and not always easy to elicit as
stakeholders often lack a global view of the process. It is wellknown that elicitation of process knowledge is hindered by its
fragmentation across stakeholders, their focus on individual
entities, and a general lack of conceptualization capabilities (Rosemann 2006; Frederiks and van der Weide 2006;
Dumas et al. 2018). In addition, manual feature elicitation
is often time consuming and prone to biases and errors. The
process of feature generation is considered an art, making
it difficult to automate (Khurana, Samulowitz, and Turaga
2018).
In this work, we address the challenge of automatically
generating congestion features based on the information available in event logs, thus removing the need for prior process
knowledge. To this end, we propose a data-driven method
rooted in queueing theory, a sub-field in Operations Research

Time prediction is an essential component of decision making
in various Artificial Intelligence application areas, including
transportation systems, healthcare, and manufacturing. Predictions are required for efficient resource allocation and scheduling, optimized routing, and temporal action planning. In this
work, we focus on time prediction in congested systems, where
entities share scarce resources. To achieve accurate and explainable time prediction in this setting, features describing
system congestion (e.g., workload and resource availability),
must be considered. These features are typically gathered
using process knowledge, (i.e., insights on the interplay of
a system’s entities). Such knowledge is expensive to gather
and may be completely unavailable. In order to automatically
extract such features from data without prior process knowledge, we propose the model of congestion graphs, which are
grounded in queueing theory. We show how congestion graphs
are mined from raw event data using queueing theory based
assumptions on the information contained in these logs. We
evaluate our approach on two real-world datasets from healthcare systems where scarce resources prevail: an emergency
department and an outpatient cancer clinic. Our experimental
results show that using automatic generation of congestion
features, we get an up to 23% improvement in terms of relative error in time prediction, compared to common baseline
methods. We also detail how congestion graphs can be used to
explain delays in the system.

Introduction
Accurate time prediction is important in domains where having an accurate estimate of resource availability and the duration of tasks is critical for planning, scheduling, resource
allocation, and coordination. In healthcare, the time until a
patient sees a provider in an emergency department is crucial for ambulance routing and provider scheduling (Ang
et al. 2015). Similarly, in smart cities, predicted travel and
arrival times of public transportation feed directly into routing and dispatching (Botea, Nikolova, and Berlingerio 2013;
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4854

