The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Solving Partially Observable Stochastic Games with Public Observations
Karel Horák, Branislav Bošanský
Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague
{horak,bosansky}@agents.fel.cvut.cz

Abstract

or search games, where a defender is trying to find and capture an attacker.
We focus on two-player zero-sum POSGs, and even with
this restriction it is intractable to compute optimal strategies in the most general case. Since the players do not perfectly observe the environment, each player has a belief over
possible states of the environment. However, the reward the
player receives for choosing some action(s) also depends on
the action of the other player who decides based on their
belief. Therefore, player 1 has to consider also the belief of
player 2 and belief that player 2 has about player 1, and so
on. This reasoning is called nested beliefs (e.g., in (MacDermed 2013)) and it causes a doubly-exponential number
of histories to consider for each agent.
However, real-world security scenarios require partial observability without a strictly defined horizon. Therefore,
one can restrict to subclasses of POSGs where games have
a value (i.e., the value of the game exists) and (approximate) optimal algorithms can be designed. Examples of
such works are stochastic games in which both the players’ actions and observations are public (Ghosh, McDonald, and Sinha 2004), games in which the support of private/public observations does not depend on states and actions (Cole and Kocherlakota 2001), or games where only
one player has imperfect information (also called OneSided) (Chatterjee and Doyen 2014; Basu and Stettner 2015;
Horak, Bosansky, and Pechoucek 2017). The practical motivation for such subclasses is to compute robust strategies for
the defender assuming the worst case scenario where the attacker has additional information (Vorobeychik et al. 2014;
Horak and Bosansky 2016).
In this paper, we propose a new subclass of POSGs
in which we avoid the problem of nested beliefs, called
POSGs with public observations (PO-POSGs), that generalizes previous subclasses. In this model, each player is able
to exactly reconstruct the belief of the opponent. The key
characteristics are: (1) the state space is factored – each
player observes his private state, but the state of the other
player is not observed; (2) each observation that modifies
belief about the state of the other player is public (both
players are aware of this observation); (3) the true state
of the player is observed privately by that player. We restrict to two-players zero-sum games with discounted future rewards and give the following contributions: (1) We

In many real-world problems, there is a dynamic interaction
between competitive agents. Partially observable stochastic
games (POSGs) are among the most general formal models that capture such dynamic scenarios. The model captures
stochastic events, partial information of players about the environment, and the scenario does not have a fixed horizon.
Solving POSGs in the most general setting is intractable.
Therefore, the research has been focused on subclasses of
POSGs that have a value of the game and admit designing
(approximate) optimal algorithms. We propose such a subclass for two-player zero-sum games with discounted-sum
objective function—POSGs with public observations (POPOSGs)—where each player is able to reconstruct beliefs of
the other player over the unobserved states. Our results include: (1) theoretical analysis of PO-POSGs and their value
functions showing convexity (concavity) in beliefs of maximizing (minimizing) player, (2) a novel algorithm for approximating the value of the game, and (3) a practical demonstration of scalability of our algorithm. Experimental results
show that our algorithm can closely approximate the value of
non-trivial games with hundreds of states.

Introduction
Game theory describes the optimal behavior of rational
agents and is recently widely applied to solving security
problems. Game-theoretic strategies are used to protect critical infrastructures (Pita et al. 2008; Kiekintveld et al. 2009;
Shieh et al. 2012), secure computer networks (Vanek et
al. 2012; Nguyen, Wellman, and Singh 2017; Durkota et
al. 2017) or wildlife (Fang, Stone, and Tambe 2015; Fang
et al. 2016). In many real-world situations, there is a dynamic strategic interaction between the players, and the
players do not have perfect information about the environment. Moreover, a pre-defined horizon (number of moves in
the scenario) is only rarely given in practice and thus these
games belong to the class of partially observable stochastic
games (POSGs). Examples include patrolling games (Basilico, Gatti, and Amigoni 2009; Vorobeychik et al. 2014;
Basilico, Nittis, and Gatti 2016; Brazdil, Kucera, and Rehak
2018), where a defender protects a set of targets against an
attacker, pursuit-evasion (Chung, Hollinger, and Isler 2011),
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2029

