The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adaptation Strategies for Applying AWGN-Based Denoiser to Realistic Noise
Yuqian Zhou,† Jianbo Jiao,† Haibin Huang,‡ Jue Wang,‡ Thomas Huang†
†

Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
‡
Megvii (Face++), Redmond, WA 98052, USA
zhouyuqian133@gmail.com

Proposed Model

Abstract

The model consists of a noise estimator Nes and an adaptive non-blind denoiser Res . Noise levels Nes (xn ) are represented by six noise level maps corresponding to levels of
AWGN and RVIN across three channels. Then the noisy
images xn are concatenated with the estimated noise maps
Nes (xn ) and input to the denoiser Res which is a 20-layer
DnCNN. The model will output a residual Res (xn , Nes (xn ))
to be matched with the true noise rtr . In addition to the estimated noise maps, the true levels ntr are also concatenated to
the noisy image xn for residual learning. This is used to make
the denoiser work for both non-blind and blind denoising.
The full objectives then can be represented as,

Discriminative learning based denoising model trained with
Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) performs well on
synthesized noise. However, realistic noise can be spatialvariant, signal-dependent and a mixture of complicated noises.
In this paper, we explore multiple strategies for applying
an AWGN-based denoiser to realistic noise. Specifically, we
trained a deep network integrating noise estimating and denoiser with mixed Gaussian (AWGN) and Random Value Impulse Noise (RVIN). To adapt the model to realistic noises, we
investigated multi-channel, multi-scale and super-resolution
approaches. Our preliminary results demonstrated the effectiveness of the newly-proposed noise model and adaptation
strategies.

Introduction
Discriminative learning based methods like DnCNN(Zhang
et al. 2017) have achieved state-of-the-art performance on
image blind denoising. However, there are some problems
of the black-box methods, including lacking the flexibility
of noise level and type changes, and not working on spatialvariant noise. Always trained on paired synthesized data, it
lacks the capability of denoising realistic noises.
In this work, we proposed an image blind denoising
method by concatenating an explicit noise estimator and
an adaptive denoiser. To improve the generalization of the
system, we considered AWGN and RVIN as our basic noise
types. The estimator will be used to estimate the level of
different noises across RGB channels, and the estimated level
with the noisy image will be fed in to the denoiser. Specifically, we use the maps of the same size as the image to
represent pixel-wise noise levels, thus the model is efficient
in processing spacial-variant and type-variant noise, even
mixture of noises. We investigated the difference between
synthesized noise and real noise, and utilized multi-scale,
multi-channel and super-resolution strategies to improve the
model robustness for real noise. Our results demonstrate that
our model is more powerful in processing mixed noise and
real noise.

L =αLres (rtr , Res (xn , Nes (xn ))
+ βLnl (ntr , Nes (xn )) + γLgres (rtr , Res (xn , ntr )),
(1)
here all the L are l2-norm, and α, β, and γ are set to be equal
in our experiment.
For each type of noise, we set up a pre-defined noise range.
Specifically, for AWGN, the range of the σ is from 0 to 75.
For RVIN, the levels are represented by the mix ratio rk
which are mostly 0.3 for channel k . To cope with mixed
noise types, we also synthesize mixed AWGN with RVIN by,

nk (i, j) =

unif orm(0, 255),
x(i, j, k) + AW GN (0, stdk ),

if pk (i, j) < rk
otherwise

(2)

where p is the random map following uniform distribution
from 0 to 1. All the levels are normalized to [0, 1], and will
be clamped and refined before inputting to the denoiser.

Experiments
We followed the training data sampling of DnCNN(Zhang et
al. 2017) to crop 50 × 50 patches from 500 color images of
size 180×180. For testing dataset, we utilized the benchmark
data from the widely used 20 images as in PGB (Xu et al.
2016). For real noise, we tested it on DND Benchmark(Plötz
and Roth 2017). We evaluated the performance of the algorithm in terms of PSNR and SSIM, as well as the visual
quality.

Mixed Synthesized AWGN and RVIN Noise
We evaluated our model on eliminating mixed AWGN and
RVIN as in PGB (Xu et al. 2016). We compared our methods

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10085

