The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On the Persistence of Clustering
Solutions and True Number of Clusters in a Dataset
Amber Srivastava,1 Mayank Baranwal,2 Srinivasa Salapaka1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
asrvstv6@illinois.edu, mayankb@umich.edu, salapaka@illinois.edu

Abstract

of clusters in a dataset. In this context, it should be noted
that there is no single agreed-upon notion of natural clusters or true number of clusters; typically existing algorithms
make assumptions on the datasets (e.g. generated from a
mixture of Gaussian distributions) and validate their results
on datasets that satisfy the assumptions.
There are various measures developed to characterize the
clustering solutions resulting from a clustering algorithm
with different number (k) of clusters. One of the popular
methods for determining the number of clusters is based
on computing gap statistic (Tibshirani, Walther, and Hastie
2001). It compares the total intracluster variation for different values of k (number of clusters) with their expected values under null reference distribution of the data. The number of clusters k is ascribed to the case where the gap is
largest. However, as remarked in (Feng and Hamerly 2007),
this method works well for finding a small number of clusters, but has difficulty as the true k increases.
Some of the recent methods that determine the number
of clusters under some assumptions on datasets include X-means algorithm (Pelleg, Moore, and others 2000), where
clustering using k-means is performed for a range of number k of clusters, and the value kt := k that yields the best
Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) (Kass and Wasserman
1995) score is chosen as an estimate for the true number of
clusters. Other related algorithms use criteria such as Akaike
information criteria (Akaike 2011) or minimum description
length (Rissanen 1978) instead of BIC. The X-means algorithm works well for well-separated spherical clusters but
tends to overfit in the case of non-spherical clusters (Feng
and Hamerly 2007).
The information-theoretic approach (Sugar and James
2003) where it estimates the number of true clusters kt
by detecting a significant jump in the modified distortion
Dγ vs k plot; here D is the clustering distortion objective, k is the number of clusters, γ ≈ −d/2, and the data
points are in Rd . Although the choice γ ≈ −d/2 works
well for certain datasets, one can find examples where this
choice fails (Sugar and James 2003). G-means (Hamerly
and Elkan 2004) algorithm identifies the number of clusters in a dataset under the assumption that each cluster is
a Gaussian distribution. It is a hierarchical algorithm that
increases the number of clusters k until the hypothesis that
each cluster comes from a single Gaussian distribution is

Typically clustering algorithms provide clustering solutions
with prespecified number of clusters. The lack of a priori
knowledge on the true number of underlying clusters in the
dataset makes it important to have a metric to compare the
clustering solutions with different number of clusters. This
article quantifies a notion of persistence of clustering solutions that enables comparing solutions with different number of clusters. The persistence relates to the range of dataresolution scales over which a clustering solution persists; it
is quantified in terms of the maximum over two-norms of all
the associated cluster-covariance matrices. Thus we associate
a persistence value for each element in a set of clustering solutions with different number of clusters. We show that the
datasets where natural clusters are a priori known, the clustering solutions that identify the natural clusters are most persistent - in this way, this notion can be used to identify solutions
with true number of clusters. Detailed experiments on a variety of standard and synthetic datasets demonstrate that the
proposed persistence-based indicator outperforms the existing approaches, such as, gap-statistic method, X-means, Gmeans, P G-means, dip-means algorithms and informationtheoretic method, in accurately identifying the clustering solutions with true number of clusters. Interestingly, our method
can be explained in terms of the phase-transition phenomenon
in the deterministic annealing algorithm, where the number of
distinct cluster centers changes (bifurcates) with respect to an
annealing parameter.

Introduction and Related Work
Many high-impact application areas such as bio-informatics
(Andreopoulos et al. 2009), (Di Nuovo and Catania 2008),
exploratory data mining (Larose and Larose 2014), combinatorial drug discovery (Sharma, Salapaka, and Beck 2008),
data and network aggregation (Yuan, Zhan, and Wang 2014),
medical imaging (Huang et al. 2015) and many other information processing fields have fueled significant work on
clustering algorithms. Most of these algorithms such as kmeans (Hartigan and Wong 1979), k-medoids (Park and Jun
2009), and expectation-maximization (Dempster, Laird, and
Rubin 1977) require the number of clusters to be prespecified. Despite substantial work on clustering algorithms, there
is relatively scant literature on determining the true number
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5000

