The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Steer by Mimicking Features from Heterogeneous Auxiliary Networks
Yuenan Hou,1 Zheng Ma,2 Chunxiao Liu,2 Chen Change Loy3
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Group Limited 3 Nanyang Technological University
hy117@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {mazheng, liuchunxiao}@sensetime.com, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

The training of many existing end-to-end steering angle
prediction models heavily relies on steering angles as the
supervisory signal. Without learning from much richer contexts, these methods are susceptible to the presence of sharp
road curves, challenging traffic conditions, strong shadows,
and severe lighting changes. In this paper, we considerably improve the accuracy and robustness of predictions
through heterogeneous auxiliary networks feature mimicking, a new and effective training method that provides us
with much richer contextual signals apart from steering direction. Specifically, we train our steering angle predictive
model by distilling multi-layer knowledge from multiple
heterogeneous auxiliary networks that perform related but
different tasks, e.g., image segmentation or optical flow estimation. As opposed to multi-task learning, our method does
not require expensive annotations of related tasks on the target set. This is made possible by applying contemporary
off-the-shelf networks on the target set and mimicking their
features in different layers after transformation. The auxiliary networks are discarded after training without affecting
the runtime efficiency of our model. Our approach achieves
a new state-of-the-art on Udacity and Comma.ai, outperforming the previous best by a large margin of 12.8% and
52.1%1 , respectively. Encouraging results are also shown on
Berkeley Deep Drive (BDD) dataset.

2018), i.e., requiring the network to predict additional labels
such as vehicle speed and steering torque. These supervisory
signals are informative but do not ensure effective representation learning to capture rich environmental contexts, e.g.,
physical scene constraints or coexistence of scene objects,
which are crucial for driving. Without such spatial and object awareness, existing methods often fail in challenging
cases that involve severe lighting changes, strong shadows,
sharp turns, or busy traffic. In Fig. 1(a), we show some of
the challenging cases on which a baseline fails.
A plausible way to solve the problem above is by widening the scope of multi-task learning from speed or torque to
more complex tasks such as scene segmentation, lane detection, or optical flow estimation. These tasks capture scene
structure and object motion that likely benefit steering angle prediction. However, introducing side tasks for multitask learning requires one to collect extra task-specific annotations for the target scene, a process that is both laborious and expensive. An alternative approach is to pre-train a
network with related tasks such as scene segmentation and
fine-tune the model to the steering angle prediction task.
This method relaxes the need of target scene annotations
since pre-training can exploit data collected from a different
scene. Our experiments, however, show that this indirect approach only improves steering angle prediction marginally.
In this study, we train our model, FM-Net, with a new and
effective technique that brings drastic improvement to the
performance of end-to-end steering angle prediction. Unlike
multi-task learning, our method does not require additional
annotations of side tasks on target scene. This is made possible by drawing inspiration from Hinton et al.’s seminal work
on knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015).
In contrast to (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) that distils knowledge in an ensemble of large models into a single
small model, we propose ‘heterogeneous auxiliary networks
feature mimicking’, which allows the learning of a steering
angle predictive model by distilling knowledge from heterogeneous off-the-shelf networks. Specifically, there are many
strong and state-of-the-art networks such as PSPNet (Zhao
et al. 2017) for segmentation, and FlowNet2 (Ilg et al. 2017)
for optical flow estimation. Applying these networks on the
target data can generate features that are highly indicative of
the final prediction of steering angles. This is evident from
the embedding of these features shown in Fig. 1(b). As can

Introduction
Autonomous driving is conventionally formulated and
solved as a collection of sub-problems, including perception, decision, path planning, and control (Paden et al. 2016).
Recent approaches address the problem in an end-to-end
manner, in which a convolutional neural network (CNN) is
trained end-to-end to map raw visual observations (e.g., images or videos) obtained from a single front-facing camera
directly to steering commands (Bojarski et al. 2016).
Steering angle is often used as the sole supervisory signal for training a network (Bojarski et al. 2016; Pomerleau 1989). Some studies improve the training by multi-task
learning (Chowdhuri, Pankaj, and Zipser 2017; Yang et al.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We compare the mean absolute error against the top entry ‘komanda’ on Udacity leaderboard (Udacity 2018), which uses a 3D
CNN with LSTM.

8433

