The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving Domain-Specific Classification by
Collaborative Learning with Adaptation Networks
Si Wu,1,2 Jian Zhong,1 Wenming Cao,2 Rui Li,2 Zhiwen Yu,1 Hau-San Wong2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong
cswusi@scut.edu.cn, cszj@mail.scut.edu.cn, {wenmincao2-c, ruili52-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk,
zhwyu@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract

For unsupervised domain adaptation, the process of learning
domain-invariant representations could be dominated by the
labeled source data, such that the specific characteristics of
the target domain may be ignored. In order to improve the
performance in inferring target labels, we propose a targetspecific network which is capable of learning collaboratively
with a domain adaptation network, instead of directly minimizing domain discrepancy. A clustering regularization is
also utilized to improve the generalization capability of the
target-specific network by forcing target data points to be
close to accumulated class centers. As this network learns
and specializes to the target domain, its performance in inferring target labels improves, which in turn facilitates the
learning process of the adaptation network. Therefore, there
is a mutually beneficial relationship between these two networks. We perform extensive experiments on multiple digit
and object datasets, and the effectiveness and superiority of
the proposed approach is presented and verified on multiple
visual adaptation benchmarks, e.g., we improve the state-ofthe-art on the task of MNIST→SVHN from 76.5% to 84.9%
without specific augmentation.

Figure 1: An example which illustrates that the training
process of unsupervised domain adaptation on VisDA-2017
may be dominated by the labeled source data. The learnt
representation is indiscriminative, and the resulting classifier performs unsatisfactorily on the target data, although the
source samples of classes ‘bicycle’ and ’motorcycle’ can be
well distinguished.

crepancy can be effectively alleviated by optimizing the networks. Another way is to utilize adversarial training (Ganin
and Lempitsky 2015) in the form of a minimax game between domain classification and representation learning to
make domain labels as indistinguishable as possible. As a result, the classification model trained under supervision from
the source can also be applied to the target domain.
Most domain adaptation methods focus either on learning projection from one domain to the other, or on learning
representations that are invariant to different domains. The
methods are able to reduce, but not remove the discrepancy
between domains. On one hand, the distribution matching
constraint may become less useful when the networks for
domain-invariant feature learning have high capacities. On
the other hand, it is difficult to train a single classifier having
low generalization error in the target domain as well as the
source domain on challenging adaptation tasks (Shu et al.
2018). In this case, the specific characteristics of the target
domain is ignored due to the reason that the label information available in the source domain only leads to its associated data dominating the process of learning the projection
or shared representation as illustrated in Figure 1. Since the

Introduction
Sufficient amount of labeled data is vital for machine learning applications. However, it may not always be feasible to
expend significant human effort for collecting and labeling
data in many tasks. The objective of domain adaptation is
to utilize the data in a label-rich (source) domain for inferring the class labels in a label-scarce (target) domain. In
this domain adaptation setting, the source data may be sampled from a related but different distribution. How to effectively transfer knowledge learnt from source data is crucial
for facilitating learning tasks in the target domain. A successful domain adaptation strategy is to learn cross-domain
representations in a common space, such that the instances
from different domains cannot be distinguished in the feature space. Impressive progress has been achieved, especially the adoption of deep convolutional neural networks
in recent years. To guide network learning, some measures
of distribution variance, e.g., Maximum Mean Discrepancy
(MMD) (Long et al. 2015), are used, and the domain disCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5450

