The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Linking Educational Resources on Data Science
José Luis Ambite,1 Jonathan Gordon,2∗ Lily Fierro,1 Gully Burns,1 Joel Mathew1
1 USC Information Sciences Institute, 4676 Admiralty Way, Marina del Rey, California 90292, USA
2 Department of Computer Science, Vassar College, 124 Raymond Ave, Poughkeepsie, New York 12604, USA

ambite@isi.edu, jgordon@vassar.edu, {lfierro, burns, joel}@isi.edu

Abstract

linked data (Heath and Bizer 2011) with references to wellknown entities in DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007), DBLP (Ley
2002), and ORCID (orcid.org). Here, we detail the methods applied to specific problems in building ERuDIte. First,
we provide an overview of our project. In later sections, we
describe our resource collection effort, the resource schema,
the topic ontology, our linkage approach, and the linked data
resource provided.
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) launched the Big
Data to Knowledge (BD2K) initiative to fulfill the promise
of biomedical “big data” (Ohno-Machado 2014). The NIH
BD2K program funded 15 major centers to investigate how
data science can benefit diverse fields of biomedical research
including genetics, neuroimaging, mobile health, and precision medicine. Ensuring that the advances produced by these
centers and other research efforts yield the expected benefits for human health requires a significant increase in the
number of biomedical researchers trained in data science.
To address this need, the NIH has funded the BD2K Training Coordinating Center (TCC).
Data science is a rapidly evolving, interdisciplinary
field that draws from statistics, machine learning, highperformance computing, databases, and knowledge from
specific scientific domains. Given the growing popularity of
data science, many open learning resources have been published on the Web. However, these resources vary greatly
in quality, topic coverage, difficulty, and presentation formats, which may be confusing and daunting for learners.
To address these challenges, the BD2K TCC is developing a web portal, BigDataU.org, powered by ERuDIte, to
provide a dynamic, personalized educational experience for
biomedical researchers interested in learning about data science. To build ERuDIte, we are developing novel, automated
methods to identify, collect, integrate, describe, and organize
learning resources (Ambite et al. 2017). Automated methods
are critical for scalability and to track new developments in
this rapidly changing field. Essentially, we are using data
science to build our index of data science resources.

The availability of massive datasets in genetics, neuroimaging, mobile health, and other subfields of biology and
medicine promises new insights but also poses significant
challenges. To realize the potential of big data in biomedicine,
the National Institutes of Health launched the Big Data to
Knowledge (BD2K) initiative, funding several centers of excellence in biomedical data analysis and a Training Coordinating Center (TCC) tasked with facilitating online and inperson training of biomedical researchers in data science. A
major initiative of the BD2K TCC is to automatically identify,
describe, and organize data science training resources available on the Web and provide personalized training paths for
users. In this paper, we describe the construction of ERuDIte,
the Educational Resource Discovery Index for Data Science,
and its release as linked data. ERuDIte contains over 11,000
training resources including courses, video tutorials, conference talks, and other materials. The metadata for these resources is described uniformly using Schema.org. We use machine learning techniques to tag each resource with concepts
from the Data Science Education Ontology, which we developed to further describe resource content. Finally, we map
references to people and organizations in learning resources
to entities in DBpedia, DBLP, and ORCID, embedding our
collection in the web of linked data. We hope that ERuDIte
will provide a framework to foster open linked educational
resources on the Web.

1

Introduction

We have embarked on an ambitious program to identify, describe, and organize web-based learning resources
on data science. Our current collection contains over
11,000 resources, described under a uniform schema (using
Schema.org terminology) and an openly available topic ontology (DSEO, cf. Sect. 3). To create this collection, known
as the Educational Resource Discovery Index for Data Science (ERuDIte), we have developed and applied methods
from machine learning, knowledge representation, information retrieval, and natural language processing. To make
our collection available, reusable, and human- and machinereadable, we have released our collection of resources as

2

Identifying/Collecting Learning Resources

For our purposes, we define a learning resource as any
online material useful in learning about data science. Our
core criteria for resource selection are relevance to data science, quality, and pedagogical value. Initially, we focused

∗ This work was primarily performed while JG was at USC/ISI.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9404

