The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Realtime Generation of Audible Textures Inspired by a Video Stream
Simone Mellace, Jérôme Guzzi, Alessandro Giusti, Luca M. Gambardella
Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial Intelligence, USI-SUPSI, Lugano (Switzerland)

Abstract

We propose an interactive demo in which the user points a
camera to various objects in the environment (people, computers, cellphones, fans) or pictures (from printed postcards
or screens) and hears how the generated sound changes in
real time. The demo also visualizes the internal state of the
system and the audio generation process, and serves as a
captivating illustration of the inner workings of the neural
network and the granular synthesis techniques.

We showcase a model to generate a soundscape from a camera stream in real time. The approach relies on a training
video with an associated meaningful audio track; a granular synthesizer generates a novel sound by randomly sampling and mixing audio data from such video, favoring timestamps whose frame is similar to the current camera frame;
the semantic similarity between frames is computed by a pretrained neural network. The demo is interactive: a user points
a mobile phone to different objects and hears how the generated sound changes.

Granular Synthesis
A granular synthesizer (Roads 1988) produces a continuous
soundscape by randomly overlaying many short sound samples (granules) with a length between 1 and 100 ms; each
granule is too short to be perceived as an individual entity,
but long enough to meaningfully contribute to the resulting
sound (microsounds (Roads 2004)). Granules are sampled at
random times from a source audio and played with soft attack and release transients, in order to better blend them in
the overall texture. In our demo, we use a granule length in
the range between 50 and 100 ms, and we start the playback
of new granules at approximately 100 Hz (so that about 5
to 10 granules are overlayed at any given time): at these settings, the character of the resulting sound is pleasant and
reminds the character of the audio from which the granules
are sampled from, without the source being recognizable.
To affect the sound character, we manipulate in real time the
probability distribution from which the synthesizer samples
the starting points of the granules to be played next.

Introduction
Our goal is to generate an audible texture (i.e., an immersive
sound with a temporally uniform character, sometimes defined soundscape) using a video-only stream as input (e.g.,
from a webcam). The resulting audio should not necessarily be realistic or plausible for the given input, but instead
it should evoke, in the listener, a similar scenario as the one
visible in the input frames. Potential applications include:
artistic performances; sonification of museum exhibitions;
generation of relaxing soundscapes during travelling; assistance to visually impaired people.
Several deep learning approaches generate sounds from
images. They differ for the audio representation used:
from cochleagrams to generate sounds of materials hit or
scratched with a stick (Owens et al. 2016), to raw waveforms to generate very realistic sounds associated with more
general actions (Zhou et al. 2017).
We present a simpler and faster approach that combines
deep learning for image analysis with more traditional audio synthesizers; in particular, we integrate two components:
1) a pre-trained deep convolutional neural networks for extracting high-level semantic features from video frames; 2)
a granular audio synthesizer to procedurally generate coherent, continuous, non-looping soundscapes.
The approach relies on a dataset of aligned video and audio tracks, which are used as source data; in particular, for
each input frame, the granular synthesizer is reprogrammed
in order to generate a signal reminiscent of the audio corresponding to the dataset frames that are semantically most
similar to the input frame.

Model
We consider a pre-built reference dataset consisting of a
long video track with a corresponding audio track (green
track in Figure 1a). The basic assumption is that the audio playing at a given time is somewhat associated to the
corresponding frames, which is the case for many YouTube
videos, but not for all, which often feature voice-overs or
background music unrelated to the video track; for this reason, our reference dataset is composed by a concatenation of
several hand-selected YouTube videos. Let It be the image
frame at time t in the reference videos. We generate audio
with a given character by sampling granules from the reference audio track according to a probability distribution p(t)
(Figure 1b) updated at runtime as illustrated in Figure 1a.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9865

