The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multigrid Backprojection
Super–Resolution and Deep Filter Visualization
Pablo Navarrete Michelini, Hanwen Liu, Dan Zhu
BOE Technology Group Inc., Ltd.
Beijing, China

Abstract

bandlet methods use both adaptive upsampling and filtering
(Mallat and Peyre 2007). More recently, machine learning
has been able to use examples pairs of high and low resolution images to estimate the parameters of upscaling systems (Park, Park, and Kang 2003). In some cases, the optimization approach of machine learning hides the connection
with classical interpolation theory, e.g. sparse representation
with dictionaries (Yang et al. 2008; 2010). In other cases, the
adaptive filter approach is explicit, e.g. RAISR (Romano,
Isidoro, and Milanfar 2016).
Upscaling using convolutional networks started with SRCNN (Dong et al. 2014a; 2015) motivated by the success of deep–learning methods in image classification tasks
(LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015) and establishing a
strong connection with sparse coding methods (Yang et
al. 2008; 2010). SRCNN has later been improved, most
notably by EDSR (Lim et al. 2017) and DBPN (Haris,
Shakhnarovich, and Ukita 2018). Our system shares the convolutional network approach but follows a different motivation. Namely, we aim to reveal a strong connection between
convolutional–networks and classical image upscaling. By
doing so, we can recover the classic interpretation of upsampling and filter and visualize what is the network doing pixel
by pixel. Thus, we aim to prove that convolutional networks
are a natural and convenient choice for Super–Resolution
(SR) tasks.
Our main contributions are:

We introduce a novel deep–learning architecture for image
upscaling by large factors (e.g. 4×, 8×) based on examples of
pristine high–resolution images. Our target is to reconstruct
high–resolution images from their downscale versions. The
proposed system performs a multi–level progressive upscaling, starting from small factors (2×) and updating for higher
factors (4× and 8×). The system is recursive as it repeats the
same procedure at each level. It is also residual since we use
the network to update the outputs of a classic upscaler. The
network residuals are improved by Iterative Back–Projections
(IBP) computed in the features of a convolutional network.
To work in multiple levels we extend the standard back–
projection algorithm using a recursion analogous to Multi–
Grid algorithms commonly used as solvers of large systems
of linear equations. We finally show how the network can
be interpreted as a standard upsampling–and–filter upscaler
with a space–variant filter that adapts to the geometry. This
approach allows us to visualize how the network learns to upscale. Finally, our system reaches state of the art quality for
models with relatively few number of parameters.

Introduction
In this work, we focus on the problem of image upscaling
using convolutional networks. Upscaling signals by integer
factors (e.g. 2×, 3×) is understood in classical interpolation
theory as two sequential processes: upsample (insert zeros)
and filter (Proakis and Manolakis 2007; Mallat 1998). Standard upscaler algorithms, such as Bicubic or Lanczos, find
high–resolution images with a narrow frequency content by
using fixed low–pass filters. Similar to the classic upscaling
model, the image acquisition can be modeled as low-pass
filtering a high resolution image and then downsample the
result (drop pixels). In test scenarios often used in benchmarks we actually know the exact downscaling model, e.g.
Bicubic downscaler. The Iterative Back–Projection (IBP) algorithm (Irani and Peleg 1991) is often used to enforce the
downscaling model for a given upscaler and get closer to the
original image.
More advanced upscalers follow geometric principles to
improve image quality. For example, edge–directed interpolation uses adaptive filters to improve edge smoothness (Algazi, Ford, and Potharlanka 1991; Li and Orchard 2001), or

• We extend the IBP algorithm to a multi–level IBP.
• We prove that our algorithm works as well as classic IBP,
based on an unrealistic model.
• We introduce a new network architecture that overcomes the unrealistic model and allows us to learn both
upscaling and downscaling.
• We introduce a novel algorithm to analyze the linear
components of the network.
• We show how to interpret the network as a standard upscaler with adaptive filters.

Related Work
We consider the following two architectures as the most similar to our system:

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4642

