The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Bayesian Trust : A Dominant and Fair Incentive Mechanism for Crowd
Naman Goel, Boi Faltings
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland, 1015
{naman.goel, boi.faltings}@epfl.ch

Abstract

Demartini 2018), the gold tasks can be easily leaked because
of their repeated use for all workers. Another technique is
to assign gold tasks to a worker only with a small (constant)
probability and give a fixed reward (independent of the quality of work) otherwise. While it solves many of the problems with the first technique, the scalability of the constant
probability technique remains limited because the number
of workers who need to be assigned gold tasks, grows as the
total number of workers grows. Otherwise, this technique
assumes that the rewards of the workers solving gold tasks
can be made arbitrarily large to compensate for the smaller
probability1 . In many practical settings, this is undesired or
not possible.
In this paper, we introduce a scalable incentive mechanism (the Deep Bayesian Trust Mechanism) which guarantees strong incentive compatibility while assigning gold
tasks only to a small (constant) number of workers and rewarding the rest using the answers provided by peer workers. Since we ensure that gold tasks are assigned to a
constant number of workers and not just with a constant
probability, our mechanism is also suitable for very large
scale settings. Moreover, this mechanism doesn’t suffer from
the problem of arbitrarily large payments discussed earlier.
When there is a non-zero cost of effort for solving the tasks,
the mechanism still ensures the desired theoretical properties if the payments are scaled appropriately only to cover
the cost of effort. This scaling constant doesn’t depend on
the probability of assigning gold tasks. The mechanism is
based on the observation that in large scale crowdsourcing
settings, every worker reports answers to many similar tasks
and hence the joint distribution of the answers of any two
workers can be used to infer the accuracy of one worker
given the accuracy of the other worker. It starts by rewarding
a small set of workers based on gold tasks and then uses the
answers provided by the workers on non-gold tasks as contributed gold tasks to reward more workers. It continues this
deep chain of trust to an arbitrary depth, until all the tasks
have been solved by the required number of workers.
As fairness of algorithms affecting humans is becoming
a critical issue, it is important to justify the fairness of al-

An important class of game-theoretic incentive mechanisms
for eliciting effort from a crowd are the peer based mechanisms, in which workers are paid by matching their answers
with one another. The other classic mechanism is to have the
workers solve some gold standard tasks and pay them according to their accuracy on gold tasks. This mechanism ensures
stronger incentive compatibility than the peer based mechanisms but assigning gold tasks to all workers becomes inefficient at large scale. We propose a novel mechanism that assigns gold tasks to only a few workers and exploits transitivity
to derive accuracy of the rest of the workers from their peers’
accuracy. We show that the resulting mechanism ensures a
dominant notion of incentive compatibility and fairness.

1

Introduction

Crowdsourcing is a popular method for collecting data but
the collected data is often noisy and of low quality. The
quality gets significantly degraded if solving the tasks require some costly effort. The problem can be addressed by
rewarding the workers with a performance based bonus. One
way to reward the workers is to use the peer based mechanisms (Dasgupta and Ghosh 2013; Radanovic, Faltings, and
Jurca 2016). In these mechanisms, the reward of a worker
depends on her own answers and of other workers. The
mechanisms admit honesty as an equilibrium strategy (i.e.
if other workers do high quality work, the best response for
any worker is also to do the same). But the mechanisms also
admit other dishonest equilibria. The other way to reward the
workers is to use gold standard tasks (Oleson et al. 2011). A
common technique is to randomly mix some gold tasks in
the batch of tasks solved by every worker. Workers are then
rewarded based on their performance on the gold tasks. This
incentivizes the workers for performing high quality work
as a dominant strategy (i.e. regardless of other workers’ answers). However, since every worker solves gold tasks and
the requester already knows the correct answers of the gold
tasks, it leads to a waste of the useful task budget of the requester. Moreover, to reduce the variance in the rewards, one
may require a sufficient number of gold tasks to be solved
by every worker. Also, this technique only works if the gold
tasks are not identified but as shown by (Checco, Bates, and

1
This can be understood using the example of penalty mechanism in public transport systems. If tickets are checked very rarely,
then the penalty for being found without ticket has to be made very
high to discourage rational people from traveling without tickets.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1996

