The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Cycle-SUM: Cycle-Consistent Adversarial
LSTM Networks for Unsupervised Video Summarization
Li Yuan,1 Francis EH Tay,1 Ping Li,2 Li Zhou,1 Jiashi Feng1
1

National University of Singapore
2
Hangzhou Dianzi University
{ylustcnus,zhouli2025}@gmail.com, {mpetayeh,elefjia}@nus.edu.sg, lpcs@hdu.edu.cn
Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel unsupervised video summarization model that requires no manual annotation. The
proposed model termed Cycle-SUM adopts a new cycleconsistent adversarial LSTM architecture that can effectively
maximize the information preserving and compactness of
the summary video. It consists of a frame selector and a
cycle-consistent learning based evaluator. The selector is a
bi-direction LSTM network that learns video representations
that embed the long-range relationships among video frames.
The evaluator defines a learnable information preserving metric between original video and summary video and “supervises” the selector to identify the most informative frames
to form the summary video. In particular, the evaluator is
composed of two generative adversarial networks (GANs),
in which the forward GAN is learned to reconstruct original video from summary video while the backward GAN
learns to invert the processing. The consistency between the
output of such cycle learning is adopted as the information
preserving metric for video summarization. We demonstrate
the close relation between mutual information maximization
and such cycle learning procedure. Experiments on two video
summarization benchmark datasets validate the state-of-theart performance and superiority of the Cycle-SUM model
over previous baselines.

Figure 1: Overview of the Cycle-SUM model. The summary video is selected by the selector from the input original
video. To optimize the selector, a cycle-consistent adversarial LSTM evaluator is introduced to evaluate the summary
quality through cycle-consistent learning to measure the mutual information between the original and summary video.

Existing approaches can be roughly grouped into supervised and unsupervised ones. Many supervised approaches (Zhang et al. 2016; Gygli, Grabner, and Van Gool
2015) utilize human-annotated summary as ground truth to
train a model. However, sufficient human-annotated video
summarization examples are not always available or expensive to collect. Thus, unsupervised approaches that do not require human intervention become increasingly attractive due
to their low cost. For these methods, it is very critical to design a proper summary quality metric. For instance, (Mahasseni, Lam, and Todorovic 2017) adopt the GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014) to measure the similarity between summary
and original video and improve the summarization model
by optimizing the induced objective, based on a basic idea
that a good summary video should be able to faithfully reconstruct the original input video. However, this approach
only considers one-direction reconstruction, thus some significant frames may dominate the quality measure, leading
to severe information loss in the summary video.
In this paper, we propose a novel cycle-consistent unsupervised model, motivated by maximizing the mutual information between summary video and original video. Our
model is developed with a new cycle-consistent adversarial

Introduction
With explosion of video data, video summarization technologies (Ma et al. 2002; Pritch et al. 2007; Lu and Grauman 2013) become increasingly attractive to help efficiently
browse, manage and retrieve video contents. With such techniques, a long video can be shortened to different forms, e.g.
key shots (Gygli et al. 2014), key frames (Kim, Sigal, and
Xing 2014) and key objects (Meng et al. 2016). Here, we
aim at selecting key frames for summarizing a video.
Video summarization is usually formulated as a structure
prediction problem (Zhang et al. 2016; Mahasseni, Lam, and
Todorovic 2017). The model takes as input a sequence of
video frames, and outputs a subset of original video frames
containing critical information. Ideally, the summary video
should keep all key information of the original video with
minimal redundancy. Summary completeness and compactness are expected for good video summarization.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9143

