The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Running Time Analysis of MOEA/D with
Crossover on Discrete Optimization Problem
Zhengxin Huang,1 Yuren Zhou,1,2,∗ Zefeng Chen,1 Xiaoyu He1
1

2

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
Engineering Research Institute, Guangzhou College of South China, University of Technology, Guangzhou 510800, China
Email: thenewyi@gmail.com, zhouyuren@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
chzfeng@foxmail.com, hxyokokok@foxmail.com
Abstract

an MOP is first decomposed into some scalar optimization
subproblems according to the decomposition approach and
weight vector. Then all subproblems are solved simultaneously by employing an EA. In the past decade, there are vast
studies that have contributed to improving and developing
MOEAs based on the MOEA/D framework, e.g., studies on
novel weight vector generation methods (Qi et al. 2014; Giagkiozis, Purshouse, and Fleming 2014), improved decomposition approaches (Ishibuchi et al. 2010; Wang, Zhang,
and Zhang 2016) and selection mechanisms (Chiang and
Lai 2011; Li et al. 2017). For further decomposition-based
MOEAs, the readers are advised to (Trivedi et al. 2017).
In (Ishibuchi et al. 2017), the authors conducted an experimental analysis for MOEAs based on the MOEA/D framework on the DTLZ and WFG test problems. Their results
show that the performance of the algorithm strongly depends
on Pareto front shapes. In (Tanabe and Ishibuchi 2018), the
authors presented a parameter study in the MOEA/D framework using the unbounded external archive (UEA). Their experimental results indicate that suitable settings of the three
control parameters (population size, scalarizing functions
and penalty parameter of the penalty-based boundary intersection (PBI) function) significantly depend on the choice of
UEA scenarios. An experimental study on the effect of reference point in the MOEA/D framework for optimizing WFG
test problems is presented in (Wang et al. 2017). Their experimental results show that different reference point specifications lead to different performance of exploitation and exploration, and the strategy of dynamic reference point specifications is recommended to use for unknown problems.
Running time analysis is one of the most powerful theory
tools to understand the performance of EAs. The first theoretical study for decomposition-based MOEAs is presented
in (Li et al. 2016). They presented a running time analysis
of a simple MOEA with only mutation based on MOEA/D
framework, denoted as MOEA/D-M, on four discrete optimization problems. Their analyzed results show that if the
optimally decomposed weight vector is used, the expected
running time of the MOEA/D-M on these problems are better than the simple evolutionary multiobjective optimizer
(SEMO) (Laumanns et al. 2002), which has been theoretically analyzed on many MOPs in the literature. However,
they also show that the optimally decomposed weight vector for an MOP depends on its properties and may not be

Decomposition-based multiobjective evolutionary algorithms
(MOEAs) are a class of popular methods for solving multiobjective optimization problems (MOPs), and have been widely
studied in numerical experiments and successfully applied
in practice. However, we know little about these algorithms
from the theoretical aspect. In this paper, we present a running
time analysis of a simple MOEA with crossover based on
the MOEA/D framework (MOEA/D-C) on four discrete optimization problems. Our rigorous theoretical analysis shows
that the MOEA/D-C can obtain a set of Pareto optimal solutions to cover the Pareto front of these problems in expected running time apparently lower than the one without
crossover. Moreover, the MOEA/D-C only needs to decompose an MOP into a few scalar optimization subproblems according to several simple weight vectors. This result suggests
that the use of crossover in decomposition-based MOEA can
simplify the setting of weight vector for different problems
and make the algorithm more efficient. This study theoretically explains why some decomposition-based MOEAs work
well in computational experiments and provides insights in
design of MOEAs for MOPs in future research.

Introduction
Multiobjective optimization problem (MOP) involves the simultaneous optimization of multiple conflicting objectives.
It exists widely in real-world applications (Zhou et al. 2011).
The goal of multiobjective optimization is to find a set of
the best eclectic solutions called the Pareto optimal solutions. Due to the advantage of population-based nature, evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are able to obtain multiple Pareto
optimal solutions in a single run, and multiobjective EAs
(MOEAs) have been very popular in solving MOPs. MOEAs
are broadly classified into three categories, i.e., dominationbased, indicator-based and decomposition-based (Trivedi et
al. 2017). In this paper, we present a theoretical analysis of a simple decomposition-based MOEA with crossover
(MOEA/D-C) on several discrete optimization problems.
The idea of decomposition for solving MOPs has been
used in (Ishibuchi and Murata 1998; Murata and Gen 2002).
However, it becomes popular after the MOEA/D framework
is presented in (Zhang and Li 2007). In this framework,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2296

