The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bayesian Posterior Approximation via Greedy Particle Optimization∗
Futoshi Futami,1,2 Zhenghang Cui,1,2 Issei Sato,1,2 Masashi Sugiyama2,1
1

The Univiersity of Tokyo 2 RIKEN
futami@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, cui@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, sato@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

(Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliffe 2017). VI approximates the
target distribution with a parametric distribution, from which
we can easily draw samples. In VI, we often consider the mean
field assumption and use parametric models in the exponential
family (Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliffe 2017). Although
these assumptions are used to make optimization computationally tractable, they are often too restrictive to approximate
the target distribution well. Therefore, the approximate distribution never converges to the target distribution in general,
which means that the approximation of Eq.(1) is biased, and
no theoretical guarantee is assured.
An alternative way is a discrete approximation of the target
distribution by using a set of particles (Bishop 2006), p̂(x) =
PN
n=1 δ(x, xn )/N , where N is the number of particles and
δ is the Dirac delta function. Particle approximation is free of
VI assumptions and thus is more expressive. The Monte Carlo
(MC) method is typically used to draw particles randomly
and independently (Bishop 2006). However, the drawbacks
of MC are that vast computational resources are required to
sample from multi-modal and high-dimensional distributions,
and it is hard to estimate when to stop the algorithm.
Recently, methods that optimize particles through iterative
updates have been explored. A representative example is
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) (Liu and Wang
2016), which iteratively updates all particles in the direction
that is characterized by kernelized Stein discrepancy (KSD).
The update is actually implemented by gradient descent and
SVGD empirically works well in high-dimensional problems.
However, theoretical properties of SVGD have not been
clarified and no finite sample bound of the convergence rate
is known (Liu 2017). Another example is the Stein points
(SP) method (Chen et al. 2018), which directly minimizes
KSD. Although this method is assured by a finite sample
convergence bound, it is not practically feasible in highdimensional problems due to the curse of dimensionality,
because gradient descent is not available and sampling or
grid search needs to be used for optimization. Moreover, the
number of evaluations of the gradient of the log probability,
which usually requires vast computation costs, is four times
that of SVGD.
We aim to develop a discrete approximation method that
is computationally efficient, works well in high-dimensional
problems, and also has a theoretical guarantee for the convergence rate. In this paper, we propose maximum mean discrep-

In Bayesian inference, the posterior distributions are difficult to
obtain analytically for complex models such as neural networks.
Variational inference usually uses a parametric distribution
for approximation, from which we can easily draw samples.
Recently discrete approximation by particles has attracted
attention because of its high expression ability. An example is
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD), which iteratively
optimizes particles. Although SVGD has been shown to be
computationally efficient empirically, its theoretical properties
have not been clarified yet and no finite sample bound of the
convergence rate is known. Another example is the Stein points
(SP) method, which minimizes kernelized Stein discrepancy
directly. Although a finite sample bound is assured theoretically,
SP is computationally inefficient empirically, especially in
high-dimensional problems. In this paper, we propose a novel
method named maximum mean discrepancy minimization
by the Frank-Wolfe algorithm (MMD-FW), which minimizes
MMD in a greedy way by the FW algorithm. Our method
is computationally efficient empirically and we show that its
finite sample convergence bound is in a linear order in finite
dimensions.

Introduction
In Bayesian inference, approximating the posterior distribution p(x) over parameter x is the most important task in
general. When we express the prior distribution as p0 (x)
and the likelihood as L(D|x) where D denotes observations,
the posterior distribution can be obtained up to a constant
factor as p(x) ∝ L(D|x)p0 (x). In many cases, analytical
expression of the normalizing constant cannot be obtained;
thus, we need an approximated posterior p̂(x), which can be
used, e.g., for calculating the predictive distribution (Bishop
2006):
Z
ZL,p̂ = L(y|x)p̂(x)dx,
(1)
where L(y|x) is the likelihood function of a new observation
y given parameter x. Variational inference (VI) is widely used
as an approximation method for the posterior distribution
∗
A longer version including Appendix is available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.07912
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3606

