The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Self-Paced Active Learning: Query the Right Thing at the Right Time
Ying-Peng Tang, Sheng-Jun Huang∗
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Nanjing 211106, China
{tangyp, huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Self-paced learning is inspired by the “easy to hard” process of human learning. It learns the easier instances first, and
then gradually adds more complex instances for model into
training. A typical SPL model tries to minimize a weighted
sum of losses for all instances, where the weight reflects
the easiness of an instance to the model. By optimizing the
weights and the model alternately, instances are gradually
involved from easy to hard. It has been well validated by
many studies that this learning paradigm can lead to better
generalization performances (Khan, Mutlu, and Zhu 2011;
Tang, Yang, and Gao 2012; Basu and Christensen 2013;
Zhang et al. 2016).
Based on these observations, it can be implied that at a
specific training stage, over-complex examples may be less
useful than easy ones for improving the model. On the other
hand, while existing active learning methods focus on selecting informative and representative instances, they fail to
query the right thing at the right time. Although the selected
instances have high potential value for model improving, they
may not be fully exploited at the current stage, and thus lead
to waste of labeling cost. As a result, in addition to criteria
estimating the potential value of improving the model, easiness of an instance to the current model should be considered
in active selection.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach called SPAL
(Self-Paced Active Learning) to simultaneously consider potential value and easiness of instances. On one hand, the
selected instances should be informative and representative;
on the other hand, they should not be over-complex for the
current model, and thus can be fully utilized. Specifically,
we maintain two weights for each unlabeled instance, one
estimates the potential value on improving the model, and
the other estimates how easily the model can fully exploit
the potential value. Then by alternately optimizing the two
weights, valuable and easy instances are selected. Further,
when the model becomes stronger after more labels queried,
harder instances can be gradually involved by increasing a
pace parameter.
Experiments are performed on 9 datasets to validate the
proposed approach. Results comparing with state-of-the-art
methods show that considering the easiness of instances can
boost the performance of active learning.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first
review related work in the following section, then the SPAL

Active learning queries labels from the oracle for the most
valuable instances to reduce the labeling cost. In many active learning studies, informative and representative instances
are preferred because they are expected to have higher potential value for improving the model. Recently, the results in
self-paced learning show that training the model with easy
examples first and then gradually with harder examples can
improve the performance. While informative and representative instances could be easy or hard, querying valuable but
hard examples at early stage may lead to waste of labeling cost.
In this paper, we propose a self-paced active learning approach
to simultaneously consider the potential value and easiness
of an instance, and try to train the model with least cost by
querying the right thing at the right time. Experimental results
show that the proposed approach is superior to state-of-the-art
batch mode active learning methods.

Introduction
In many real world applications, the amount of unlabeled data
is far larger than that of labeled data; and label acquisition is
expensive and difficult. It is thus rather important to train an
effective model with fewer labeled examples. Active learning
is one of the main approaches to deal with this challenge.
It expects to reduce the labeling cost by selecting the most
valuable instances to query their labels from the oracle (Settles 2009). During the past decades, many criteria have been
proposed for active selection of instances. Among which,
informativeness and representativeness are most frequently
used, and their integration has been validated to be effective
for selecting the most valuable instances (Wang and Ye 2013;
Huang and Zhou 2013; Huang, Jin, and Zhou 2014).
All these criteria try to estimate the potential value of
an instance on improving the model performance. However,
they neglect the fact that the potential ability of a valuable
instance may not be fully exploited at a specific stage of the
model training. This phenomenon has been well validated in
self-paced learning (SPL) (Kumar, Packer, and Koller 2010).
∗

This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB1004300), NSFC (61503182, 61876081,
61732006).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5117

