The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Source (word):

最终 真善美 彻底 打败 了 假恶丑

Addressing the Under-TranslationSource
Problem
from the
Entropy
Perspective
(sub-word):最终
真@@
善@@ 美 彻底
打败 了 假@@ 恶@@ 丑
Pinyi: (sub-word): zuizhong zhen@@ shan@@ mei@@ chedi dabai le
e@@ chou4
Yang Zhao,
Jiajun Zhang, Chengqing
Zong,1,2,3 jia@@
Zhongjun
He, and Hua Wu4
Reference:
finally , the true , the good and the beautiful completely
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing, China
defeated the false, the bad and the ugly
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
NMT:
eventually
, true , good , and beauty thoroughly defeated
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
the ugly
4
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{yang.zhao, jjzhang, cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {hezhongjun,wu hua} @baidu.com
1,2∗

1,2

source (word): 最终 真善美 彻底 打败 了 假恶丑
source (sub-word): 最终 真@@ 善@@ 美 彻底
打败 了 假@@ 恶@@ 丑
pinyin: (sub-word): zuizhong zhen@@ shan@@ mei
chedi dabai le jia@@ e@@ chou
reference: finally , the true , the good and the beautiful
completely defeated the false, the bad and the ugly
NMT: eventually , true , good , and beauty thoroughly
defeated the ugly

Abstract
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has drawn much attention due to its promising translation performance in recent
years. However, the under-translation problem still remains a
big challenge. In this paper, we focus on the under-translation
problem and attempt to find out what kinds of source words
are more likely to be ignored. Through analysis, we observe
that a source word with a large translation entropy is more
inclined to be dropped. To address this problem, we propose a coarse-to-fine framework. In coarse-grained phase, we
introduce a simple strategy to reduce the entropy of highentropy words through constructing the pseudo target sentences. In fine-grained phase, we propose three methods, including pre-training method, multitask method and two-pass
method, to encourage the neural model to correctly translate these high-entropy words. Experimental results on various translation tasks show that our method can significantly
improve the translation quality and substantially reduce the
under-translation cases of high-entropy words.

Figure 1: Example to show the under-translation in NMT.
The source sub-words (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016)
“jia@@” and “e@@” are missed by the NMT model.
Mi et al. 2016), or ii) optimizing the hidden states of the encoder and decoder, e.g., the reconstructing model (Tu et al.
2017) and the modeling past and future method (Zheng et al.
2018). The above methods study the problem in the model
level. Different from them, we dive into the word level, and
try to answer the following two questions:
1) Why are some source words missed while the others
are not? In the example of Fig. 1, we are curious about the
questions that why the sub-words “jia@@” and “e@@” are
dropped while the sub-word “chou” is not. Semantically,
these three sub-words are coordinate.
2) If we can know that some certain kinds of words are
more likely to be missed by the NMT model, how can we
reduce the risk of under-translations of these words?
To answer the first question, we analyze the NMT translation results by manual analysis and automatic analysis.
Through analysis, we reach the following observation: a
source word with a higher translation entropy (defined in
Section 3) has a larger probability to be dropped by NMT
model (both the analysis procedure and statistical results are
described in Section 3). We define the translation entropy to
measure the translation uncertainty of a source word. The
larger the translation entropy of a source word is, the higher
translation uncertainty this word is.
To address the under-translation problem of high-entropy
words, we propose in this paper a coarse-to-fine framework. We first build pseudo target sentences (coarse-grained

Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) based on the encoderdecoder architecture becomes the new state-of-the-art
method due to distributed representation and end-to-end
learning (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom 2013; Cho et al. 2014;
Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Wu et al. 2016; Gehring
et al. 2017; Vaswani et al. 2017).
However, NMT still has a drawback that some source
words sometimes are mistakenly dropped by the neural
model, referring as under-translation problem (Tu et al.
2016; Mi et al. 2016). Fig. 1 shows an example that the
source sub-words in red “jia(false)@@” and “e(bad)@@”
are missed by the neural model. Actually, the statistics from
our analysis and previous studies (Zheng et al. 2018) both
show that the current neural models suffer heavily from
the under-translation problem even for the state-of-the-art
Transformer model (Vaswani et al. 2017).
Several studies focus on the under-translation problem
and tend to address this problem by i) improving the attention mechanism, e.g., the coverage model (Tu et al. 2016;
∗

Contribution during internship at Baidu.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

451

