The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficiently Combining Human Demonstrations and
Interventions for Safe Training of Autonomous Systems in Real-Time
Vinicius G. Goecks,1,2 Gregory M. Gremillion,1 Vernon J. Lawhern,1
John Valasek,2 Nicholas R. Waytowich1,3
1

US Army Research Laboratory, 2 Texas A&M University, 3 Columbia University
vinicius.goecks@tamu.edu, {gregory.m.gremillion, vernon.j.lawhern}.civ@mail.mil,
valasek@tamu.edu, nicholas.r.waytowich.civ@mail.mil
Abstract

However, in real-world robotic applications, explicit reward
functions are non-existent, and interactions with the hardware are expensive and susceptible to catastrophic failures.
This motivates leveraging human interaction to supply this
reward function and task knowledge, to reduce the amount
of high-risk interactions with the environment, and to safely
shape the behavior of robotic agents.
Learning from evaluation is one such way to leverage human domain knowledge and intent to shape agent behavior
through sparse interactions in the form of evaluative feedback, possibly allowing for the approximation of a reward
function (Knox and Stone 2009; MacGlashan et al. 2017;
Warnell et al. 2018). This technique has the advantage of
minimally tasking the human evaluator and can be used
when training behaviors they themselves cannot perform.
However, it can be slow to converge as the agent can only
identify desired or even stable behaviors through more random exploration or indirect guidance from human negative reinforcement of unwanted actions, rather than through
more explicit examples of desired behaviors.
In such a case, learning from demonstration can be used
to provide a more directed path to these intended behaviors by utilizing examples of the humans performing the
task. This technique has the advantage of quickly converging to more stable behaviors. However, given that it is typically performed offline, it does not provide a mechanism for
corrective or preventative inputs when the learned behavior
results in undesirable or catastrophic outcomes, potentially
due to unseen states. Learning from demonstration also inherently requires the maximal burden on the human, requiring them to perform the task many times until the state space
has been sufficiently explored, so as to generate a robust policy. Also, it necessarily fails when the human is incapable of
performing the task successfully at all.
Learning from interventions, where a human acts as an
overseer while an agent is performing a task and periodically takes over control or intervenes when necessary, can
provide a method to improve the agent policy while preventing or mitigating catastrophic behaviors (Saunders et
al. 2017). This technique can also reduce the amount of direct interactions with the agent, when compared to learning from demonstration. Similar to learning from evaluation, this technique suffers from the disadvantage that desired behaviors must be discovered through more variable

This paper investigates how to utilize different forms of human interaction to safely train autonomous systems in realtime by learning from both human demonstrations and interventions. We implement two components of the Cycle-ofLearning for Autonomous Systems, which is our framework
for combining multiple modalities of human interaction. The
current effort employs human demonstrations to teach a desired behavior via imitation learning, then leverages intervention data to correct for undesired behaviors produced by
the imitation learner to teach novel tasks to an autonomous
agent safely, after only minutes of training. We demonstrate
this method in an autonomous perching task using a quadrotor with continuous roll, pitch, yaw, and throttle commands
and imagery captured from a downward-facing camera in a
high-fidelity simulated environment. Our method improves
task completion performance for the same amount of human interaction when compared to learning from demonstrations alone, while also requiring on average 32% less data to
achieve that performance. This provides evidence that combining multiple modes of human interaction can increase both
the training speed and overall performance of policies for autonomous systems.

Introduction
The primary goal of learning methodologies is to imbue intelligent agents with the capability to autonomously and successfully perform complex tasks, when a priori design of the
necessary behaviors is intractable. Most tasks of interest, especially those with real-world applicability, quickly exceed
the capability of designers to handcraft optimal or even successful policies. It can even be infeasible to construct appropriate objective or reward functions in many cases. Instead,
learning techniques can be used to empirically discover the
underlying objective function for the task and the policy required to satisfy it, typically utilizing state, action, or reward data. Several classes of these techniques have yielded
promising results, including learning from demonstration,
learning from evaluation, and reinforcement learning.
Reinforcement learning has been proven to work on scenarios with well-designed reward functions and easily available interactions with the environment (Mnih et al. 2015).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2462

