The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Knowledge Refinement via Rule Selection
Phokion G. Kolaitis,1,2 Lucian Popa,2 Kun Qian2
1

UC Santa Cruz, 2 IBM Research – Almaden
kolaitis@ucsc.edu, lpopa@us.ibm.com, qian.kun@ibm.com

Abstract

data. Rule selection arises naturally in all aforementioned
contexts and, in fact, in most contexts involving reasoning
about data. Here, we present an example motivated by a reallife application in which we are building a knowledge base
of experts in the medical domain, based on public data, and
where entity resolution is one of the crucial first steps.
In entity resolution, the aim is to identify references of the
same real-world entity across multiple records or datasets.
Consider the scenario depicted in Figure 1, where the aim is
to identify occurrences of the same author across research
publications from PubMed1 . This entity resolution task

In several different applications, including data transformation and entity resolution, rules are used to capture aspects of
knowledge about the application at hand. Often, a large set of
such rules is generated automatically or semi-automatically,
and the challenge is to refine the encapsulated knowledge by
selecting a subset of rules based on the expected operational
behavior of the rules on available data. In this paper, we carry
out a systematic complexity-theoretic investigation of the following rule selection problem: given a set of rules specified
by Horn formulas, and a pair of an input database and an output database, find a subset of the rules that minimizes the total error, that is, the number of false positive and false negative errors arising from the selected rules. We first establish computational hardness results for the decision problems
underlying this minimization problem, as well as upper and
lower bounds for its approximability. We then investigate a
bi-objective optimization version of the rule selection problem in which both the total error and the size of the selected
rules are taken into account. We show that testing for membership in the Pareto front of this bi-objective optimization
problem is DP-complete. Finally, we show that a similar DPcompleteness result holds for a bi-level optimization version
of the rule selection problem, where one minimizes first the
total error and then the size.

Emerg Radiol 2010 Jan;17(1):65-7.
Acute gastric outlet obstruction …

PMID: 19132421
Morgan J 1, Sadler MA.
1 Dept. of Radiology, St Vincent's Hospital
and Medical Center, New York, NY 10011

Clin Imaging 2009, 33(1):67-9
Is Morgan J Paratracheal air collection ...
same author? PMID: 19135934
Morgan J 1, Perone R, Yeghiayan P.
1 St Vincent's Hospital and Medical
YES/NO
Center, New York, NY, USA.

Figure 1: An entity resolution task
can be modeled using a source schema that includes a relation Author and a link schema that consists of a relation
SameAuthor. Sample facts (records) over the source and
the link relations are given in Figure 2. As in the frameworks
of Markov Logic Networks (Singla and Domingos 2006),
Dedupalog (Arasu, Re, and Suciu 2009), and declarative entity linking (Burdick et al. 2016), explicit link relations are
used to represent entity resolution inferences. In particular,
the SameAuthor fact in Figure 2 represents that an inference was made to establish that the author in position 1 of
publication with pmid 19132421 is the same as the author in position 1 of publication with pmid 19135934.
For a given entity resolution task, there is typically a
large set of candidate rules that may apply on the input
data to form matches among the entities. For our concrete
scenario, Figure 3 gives a sample of candidate matching
rules. These rules involve the alignment of relevant attributes
(e.g., lastname with lastname, affiliation with
affiliation) and the subsequent application of similarity predicates, filters, and thresholds. The challenge is to
find a subset of the candidate rules with the “right” combinations of predicates and thresholds that will lead to high

Rules, typically expressed as Horn formulas, are ubiquitous in several different areas of computer science and artificial intelligence. For example, rules are the basic construct of (function-free) logic programs. In data integration
(Lenzerini 2002) and data exchange (Fagin et al. 2005),
rules are known as GAV (global-as-view) constraints and
are used to specify data transformations between a local
(or source) schema and a global (or target) schema. In data
mining, rules have many uses, including the specification of
contextual preferences (Agrawal, Rantzau, and Terzi 2006;
de Amo et al. 2015). In entity resolution, rules have been
used to specify blocking functions (Bilenko, Kamath, and
Mooney 2006) and entity resolution algorithms (Qian, Popa,
and Sen 2017).
Often, a large set of rules is generated automatically or
semi-automatically, and the challenge is to refine the encapsulated knowledge by selecting a subset of rules based on
the expected operational behavior of the rules on available
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2886

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed

