The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Attentive Tensor Product Learning
Qiuyuan Huang

Li Deng

Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA
qihua@microsoft.com

Citadel, USA
deng629@gmail.com

Dapeng Wu

Chang Liu

Xiaodong He

University of Florida
Gainesville, FL, USA
dpwu@ieee.org

Citadel Securities
Chicago, IL, USA
liuchang2005acm@gmail.com

JD AI Research
Beijing, China
xiaohe.ai@outlook.com

rt and each filler associated with a filler
Pvector ft , the TPR
of a sentence can be computed as S = t ft rt> . Comparing
with the popular RNN-based representations of a sentence,
a good property of TPR is that decoding a token of a time
stamp t can be computed directly by providing an unbinding
vector ut . That is, ft = S · ut . Under the TPR theory, encoding and decoding a sentence is equivalent to learning the
role vectors rt or unbinding vectors ut at each position t.

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel neural architecture — Attentive
Tensor Product Learning (ATPL) — to represent grammatical
structures of natural language in deep learning models. ATPL
exploits Tensor Product Representations (TPR), a structured
neural-symbolic model developed in cognitive science, to integrate deep learning with explicit natural language structures
and rules. The key ideas of ATPL are: 1) unsupervised learning of role-unbinding vectors of words via the TPR-based
deep neural network; 2) the use of attention modules to compute TPR; and 3) the integration of TPR with typical deep
learning architectures including long short-term memory and
feedforward neural networks. The novelty of our approach
lies in its ability to extract the grammatical structure of a sentence by using role-unbinding vectors, which are obtained in
an unsupervised manner. Our ATPL approach is applied to
1) image captioning, 2) part of speech (POS) tagging, and
3) constituency parsing of a natural language sentence. The
experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in all these three natural language processing
tasks.

1

We employ the TPR theory to develop a novel attentionbased neural network architecture for learning the unbinding
vectors ut that serve as the core of ATPL. That is, ATPL
employs a form of recurrent neural networks to produce ut
one at a time. In each time, the TPR of the partial prefix of
the sentence up to time t − 1 is leveraged to compute the
attention maps, which are then used to compute the TPR
St as well as the unbinding vector ut at time t. In doing
so, our ATPL can not only be used to generate a sequence
of tokens, but also be used to generate a sequence of roles,
which can in turn interpret the syntactic/semantic structures
of the sentence.

Introduction

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our ATPL architecture, we apply it to three important NLP tasks: 1) image
captioning; 2) POS tagging; and 3) constituency parsing of
a sentence. The first task showcases our ATPL-based generator, while the latter two tasks are used to demonstrate
the power of role vectors in interpreting sentences’ syntactic structures. Our evaluation shows that on both image captioning and POS tagging, our approach can outperform previous state-of-the-art approaches. In particular, on the constituency parsing task, when the structural segmentation is
given as a ground truth, our ATPL approach can beat the
state-of-the-art by 3.5 to 4.4 points on the Penn TreeBank
dataset. These results demonstrate that our ATPL is highly
effective in capturing the syntactic structures of natural language sentences.

Deep learning is an important tool in many speech and natural language processing (NLP) applications (Hinton and others 2012; Deng and Liu 2018). Since natural language is rich
in grammatical structures, there has been an increasing interest in learning a vector representation to capture the grammatical structures of the natural language descriptions using
deep learning models in recent years (Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015; Kumar et al. 2016; Kong et al. 2017).
In this work, we propose a new architecture, called Attentive Tensor Product Learning (ATPL), to address this representation problem by exploiting Tensor Product Representations (TPR) (Smolensky and Legendre 2006; Smolensky
et al. 2016; Palangi et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2017). TPR
is a structured neural-symbolic model developed in cognitive science over 20 years ago. In the TPR theory, a sentence can be considered as a sequence of roles (i.e., grammatical components) where each role is connected to a filler
(i.e., tokens). Given each role associated with a role vector

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related work. In Section 3, we present the design of ATPL.
Section 4 through Section 6 describe three applications of
ATPL, i.e., image captioner, POS tagger, and constituency
parser, respectively. Section 7 concludes the paper.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1344

