The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Complexity of Inconsistency-Tolerant Query
Answering in Datalog+/– under Cardinality-Based Repairs
Thomas Lukasiewicz

Enrico Malizia

Andrius Vaicenavičius

Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK

Department of Computer Science
University of Exeter, UK

Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK

Abstract

semantics are proposed, including the intersection of repairs
(IAR) semantics, in which an answer is considered to be
valid, if it can be inferred from the intersection of the repairs (and the ontology). The intersection of closed repairs
(ICR) (Bienvenu 2012) is another semantics, in which an answer is valid, if it can be inferred from the intersection of the
closure of the repairs (and the ontology).
There are several reasons for the practical relevance of the
IAR and the ICR semantics, and thus for motivating an indepth analysis of their computational properties. First, they
are two natural semantics that identify “surer” answers than
consistent query answering, and so they can also be seen as
under-approximations of the latter. Investigating their complexity helps to understand whether such approximations
have actually lower complexities, which is the case for different languages and one complexity measure considered in
this paper. Second, recent work on explanations in the context of inconsistency-tolerant query answering shows that
explanations are much easier to define and compute for the
IAR semantics (Bienvenu, Bourgaux, and Goasdoué 2016).
Third, a crucial advantage of the IAR and the ICR semantics
is that their intersection of (closed) repairs can be materialized, while the consistent query answering semantics exists only virtually (the intersection of (closed) repairs can be
computed offline, and then standard querying algorithms can
be employed online)—indeed, this has been used to implement the IAR semantics (Lembo et al. 2015), and for ICR, it
has been remarked in (Bienvenu and Bourgaux 2016).
The complexity of consistent query answering when
the ontology is described via one of the main DLs is
well-understood. Rosati (2011) studied the data and combined complexity for a wide spectrum of DLs, while Bienvenu (2012) identified cases for simple ontologies (within
the DL-Lite family) for which tractable data complexity results can be obtained. In (Lukasiewicz, Martinez, and Simari
2012; 2013; Lukasiewicz et al. 2015), the data and different types of combined complexity of consistent query answering have been studied for ontologies described via existential rules and negative constraints, and such investigation
has recently been extended to the IAR and ICR semantics
in (Lukasiewicz, Malizia, and Molinaro 2018a).
Alternative notions of maximality for repairs, however, such as cardinality-maximal repairs (Lopatenko and
Bertossi 2007), rather than subset-maximal ones, have been

Querying inconsistent ontological knowledge bases is an important problem in practice, for which several inconsistencytolerant query answering semantics have been proposed, including query answering relative to all repairs, relative to
the intersection of repairs, and relative to the intersection of
closed repairs. In these semantics, one assumes that the input database is erroneous, and the notion of repair describes a
maximally consistent subset of the input database, where different notions of maximality (such as subset and cardinality
maximality) are considered. In this paper, we give a precise
picture of the computational complexity of inconsistencytolerant (Boolean conjunctive) query answering in a wide
range of Datalog± languages under the cardinality-based versions of the above three repair semantics.

Introduction
In many ontology-based applications in practice, such as
ontology-based data extraction from the Web, or ontologybased integration of different data sources, it is very likely
that the data are inconsistent with the ontology, and thus
inconsistency-tolerant semantics for ontology-based query
answering are urgently needed. Among the most prominent
ontology languages are description logics (DLs) and existential rules from the context of Datalog± .
The most widely accepted semantics for querying inconsistent ontological knowledge bases is perhaps consistent
query answering, which was first developed for relational
databases (Arenas, Bertossi, and Chomicki 1999) and then
generalized as the ABox repair (AR) semantics for several
DLs (Lembo et al. 2010). Consistent query answering is
based on the concept of repair, which is a maximal consistent subset of the input database. A fact/query is entailed
by an ontological knowledge base in consistent query answering, if it is (classically) entailed by all the repairs (under the ontology). Several other repair semantics for querying inconsistent ontological knowledge bases have recently
been developed as alternatives to consistent query answering (Lembo et al. 2010; Bienvenu 2012; Lukasiewicz, Martinez, and Simari 2012; Bienvenu and Rosati 2013). In particular, in (Lembo et al. 2010), besides consistent query answering, three other inconsistency-tolerant query answering
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2962

