The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Lattice CNNs for Matching Based Chinese Question Answering
Yuxuan Lai,1 Yansong Feng,1,* Xiaohan Yu,1
Zheng Wang,2 Kun Xu,3 Dongyan Zhao1
1

2

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, UK 3 Tencent AI Lab
1
{erutan, fengyansong, yuxiaohan, zhaodongyan}@pku.edu.cn
2
z.wang@lancaster.ac.uk 3 syxu828@gmail.com
Abstract

Short text matching often faces the challenges that there are
great word mismatch and expression diversity between the
two texts, which would be further aggravated in languages
like Chinese where there is no natural space to segment words
explicitly. In this paper, we propose a novel lattice based
CNN model (LCNs) to utilize multi-granularity information
inherent in the word lattice while maintaining strong ability
to deal with the introduced noisy information for matching
based question answering in Chinese. We conduct extensive
experiments on both document based question answering and
knowledge based question answering tasks, and experimental
results show that the LCNs models can significantly outperform the state-of-the-art matching models and strong baselines by taking advantages of better ability to distill rich but
discriminative information from the word lattice input.

Figure 1: A word lattice for the phrase “Chinese people have
high quality of life.”
an existing word tokenization, which has to make segmentation choices at one time, e.g., “ZhongGuo”(China)
and “ZhongGuoRen”(Chinese) when processing “ZhongGuoRenMin”(Chinese people). And the blending just conducts at one position in their frameworks.
Specific tasks such as question answering (QA) could
pose further challenges for short text matching. In document based question answering (DBQA), the matching degree is expected to reflect how likely a sentence can answer a given question, where questions and candidate answer sentences usually come from different sources, and
may exhibit significantly different styles or syntactic structures, e.g. queries in web search and sentences in web
pages. This could further aggravate the mismatch problems.
In knowledge based question answering (KBQA), one of
the key tasks is to match relational expressions in questions with knowledge base (KB) predicate phrases2 , such as
“ZhuCeDi”(place of incorporation). Here the diversity between the two kinds of expressions is even more significant,
where there may be dozens of different verbal expressions
in natural language questions corresponding to only one KB
predicate phrase. Those expression problems make KBQA a
further tough task. Previous works (Yih, He, and Meek 2014;
Yih et al. 2015) adopt letter-trigrams for the diverse expressions, which is similar to character level of Chinese. And the
lattices are combinations of words and characters, so with
lattices, we can utilize words information at the same time.
Recent advances have put efforts in modeling multi-

Introduction
Short text matching plays a critical role in many natural
language processing tasks, such as question answering, information retrieval, and so on. However, matching text sequences for Chinese or similar languages often suffers from
word segmentation, where there are often no perfect Chinese word segmentation tools that suit every scenario. Text
matching usually requires to capture the relatedness between
two sequences in multiple granularities. For example, in Figure 1, the example phrase is generally tokenized as “China
– citizen – life – quality – high”, but when we plan to match
it with “Chinese – live – well”, it would be more helpful to
have the example segmented into “Chinese – livelihood –
live” than its common segmentation. 1
Existing efforts use neural network models to improve
the matching based on the fact that distributed representations can generalize discrete word features in traditional
bag-of-words methods. And there are also works fusing
word level and character level information, which, to some
extent, could relieve the mismatch between different segmentations, but these solutions still suffer from the original word sequential structures. They usually depend on
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For clarity, “Italic” are examples organised in Chinese Pinyin
followed by its translation in English, and “–” represents a separator between Chinese words.

2
There are usually not enough training data to build a relation
extractor for each predicate in a KB, thus the task of KB predicate
identification is often formulated as a matching task, which is to select predicates that match the given questions from the candidates.

6634

