The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Options with Interest Functions
Khimya Khetarpal, Doina Precup
Mila - Reasoning and Learning Lab
McGill University, 3480 University St. Montreal, Quebec H3A 0E9
Email: khimya.khetarpal@mail.mcgill.ca, dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca

Introduction

where U is the option-value function upon arrival in a state:

Learning temporal abstractions which are partial solutions to
a task and could be reused for solving other tasks is an ingredient that can help agents to plan and learn efficiently. In this
work, we tackle this problem in the options framework (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999; Precup 2000). We aim to learn
options which are specialized in different state space regions
by proposing a notion of interest functions. We build on the
option-critic framework (Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017) to
derive policy gradient theorems for interest functions leading to a new interest-option-critic architecture.

U (ω, s0 ) = (1 − βω,ν (s0 ))QΩ (s0 , ω) + βω,ν (s0 )VΩ (s0 )

Learning Options with Interest Functions
Recent research has demonstrated that options can be
learned automatically and end-to-end for a given task (Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017; Bacon 2018). Unfortunately,
this can result in degenerate solutions, with either one option
being used for the entire task, or option duration collapsing
to single time steps. This type of degenerate solution is potentially due to a simplifying assumption used in the optioncritic (Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017): that all options are
available in all states. This assumption is not present in the
original options paper, where an option is limited to act in
a subset of states. However, sets are inconvenient for learning, as they do not lend themselves to gradient-based adjustments. In order to learn options that represent specialized
and meaningful skills for lifelong learning, we revisit the
idea of an initiation set, used in the options framework, but
through a formulation that is more amenable to learning.
We introduce the notion of interest functions Iω : S →
IR. The idea is inspired by human visual attention: while
we engage in a task, each skill employed is specialized in
attending to only certain states. For example, a skill such as
‘stop if the traffic light is red’ is only applicable in states in
which a traffic light is present.
Note that we will interpret Iω (s) as an indicator of the extent to which an option is applicable in a state. Initiation set
can then be implemented through their characteristic function, which is a special type of interest function with binary
output. However, in general it is more convenient to consider differentiable interest functions, Iω,z parameterized by
a parameter vector z, in order to be able to adjust them with
gradients.
The state-value function over options that have interest
functions is defined as:
X
VΩ (s) =
πIω,z (ω|s)QΩ,θ (s, ω)
(1)

Preliminaries
A finite, discrete-time Markov Decision Processes (MDP)
(Sutton and Barto 1998) is a tuple hS, A, r, P, γi, where S
is the set of states, A is the set of actions, r : S × A → R
is the reward function, P is the state-transition probability,
and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. At each time step,
the learning agent perceives a state St ∈ S, takes an action At ∈ A drawn from a policy, π : S × A −
→ [0, 1],
and with probability P (St+1 |St , At ), enters into next state
St+1 , receiving a numerical reward Rt+1 from the environment.
value function of policy π is defined as: Vπ (s) =
PThe
∞
Eπ [ t=0 γ t Rt+1
0 = s] and its action-value function as
P|S
∞
Qπ (s, a) = Eπ [ t=0 γ t Rt+1 |S0 = s, A0 = a].
A Markovian option (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999)
ω ∈ Ω is composed of an intra-option policy πω , a termination condition βω : S → [0, 1], and an initiation set
Iω ⊆ S. In the call-and-return option execution model; the
agent chooses an option ω according to the policy over options πΩ , follows the option policy πω , until option termination governed by βω , at which point this process is repeated.
The option-value function is defined as:
X
QΩ (s, ω) =
πω,θ (a|s)QU (s, ω, a)
a

where QU : S × Ω × A −
→ R is the value of executing an
action in the context of a state-option pair:
X
QU (s, ω, a) = r(s, a) + γ
P (s0 |s, a)U (ω, s0 )

ω

where QΩ,θ is the option-value function parameterized by θ,
and the probability of option ω being sampled in in state s is
defined as:
.X
πIω,z (ω|s) = Iω,z (s)πΩ (ω|s)
Iω,z (s)πΩ (ω|s) (2)

s0

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

ω

9955

