The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Partners in Crime: Manipulating the
Deferred Acceptance Algorithm through an Accomplice
Theodora Bendlin, Hadi Hosseini
Department of Computer Science
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA
trb7281@rit.edu, hhvcs@rit.edu

Abstract

We consider a manipulation strategy where a woman can
potentially team up with a man to manipulate her outcome,
called manipulation through an accomplice. We imagine
a scenario like the school-choice problem, where a student wishes to use her connections to conspire with a more
knowledgeable administrator that is willing to manipulate on
her behalf without bearing a noticeable loss for the school. In
particular, we investigate whether it is possible for a woman
to collaborate with a man to obtain a better match with minimal cost to her accomplice. We aim to answer the following
questions: 1) Is a matching stable with respect to true preferences after manipulating with an accomplice? and 2) Can
manipulation through an accomplice result in an outcome
that is better than optimal single-woman manipulation?

We introduce a new manipulation strategy available to
women in the men-proposing stable matching, called manipulation through an accomplice. In this strategy, a woman can
team up with a potential male “accomplice” who manipulates
on her behalf to obtain a better match for her. We investigate
the stability of the matching obtained after this manipulation,
provide an algorithm to compute such strategies, and show its
benefit compared to single-woman manipulation strategies.

Introduction
The stable matching problem has been at the forefront of
many centralized market problems, such as the residency
assignment problem or the college admission problem (Gale
and Shapley 1962; Roth and Sotomayor 1989). The Deferred
Acceptance (DA) algorithm, proposed by Gale and Shapley, is an elegant procedure that guarantees a stable solution
and can be computed in polynomial time (Gale and Shapley
1962). In the men-proposing DA algorithm, men iteratively
“propose” to women according to their preferences. Each
woman accepts a proposal if she prefers it to her current
tentative match. The DA algorithm guarantees a stable outcome, is men-optimal, and strategy-proof for men (Dubins
and Freedman 1981). However, the algorithm is also susceptible to manipulation, as its pessimal result for women provides incentives for them to misrepresent their preferences.
The men-proposing DA algorithm is manipulable by a
woman either by (1) truncation or (2) permutation of her
preference list. Gale and Sotomayor proved that women
can induce a woman-optimal matching by “truncating” part
of their preference list (Gale and Sotomayor 1985). Teo,
Sutherman and Tan developed an O(n3 ) algorithm for an
optimal single-woman manipulation through the permutation of her preference list (Teo, Sethuraman, and Tan 1999).
Extensions of this work yielded a polynomial time algorithm
that can produce a manipulation that is nearly indistinguishable from the original preferences, i.e., a list that differs only
in the promotion of a single man (Vaish and Garg 2017).
These single-woman manipulation strategies are somewhat
limited: there may be other, more desirable, matches available to a woman, should she receive help from the proposing
side.

Preliminaries
A stable matching problem consists of two finite and disjoint sets of men (M ) and women (W ), where |W | = |M |,
and a preference profile = (M , W ) where M and W
are the preference lists of all men and women, respectively.
Each agent has an associated preference list i representing their strict total order preferences over the members of
the opposite set. Thus, a man m prefers woman w to w0 if
w m w0 , and a woman w prefers m to m0 if m w m0 . A
matching µ is a bijective mapping between the two sets such
that for all m ∈ M and w ∈ W , µ(w) ∈ M and µ(m) ∈ W .
We use DA() to denote the matching returned by the menproposing DA algorithm.
Given a matching µ, a pair of agents (m, w) is called a
blocking pair if w m µ(m) and m w µ(w), i.e. both m
and w prefer each other to their respective partners in µ. A
matching µ is stable with respect to the preference profile 
if it contains no blocking pairs.
A manipulative pair (m, w) consists of an accomplice
m ∈ M who willingly permutes his true preference m to
0m , and a woman w who truthfully reports her preference.
Given the men-optimality of DA, an accomplice may be
matched with a less preferred partner after the manipulation,
which we call regret. This may result in an unstable match
with respect to the true preference profile. Thus, we introduce a stability property with respect to the manipulative
pair’s strategy. Given a manipulative pair (m, w), a matching µ is m-stable with respect to  if either: (1) no blocking
pairs exist in µ or (2) for all blocking pairs (m0 , w0 ), we have

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9917

