The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Desiderata for Interpretability:
Explaining Decision Tree Predictions with Counterfactuals
Kacper Sokol, Peter Flach
Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
{K.Sokol,Peter.Flach}@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

Miller (2019) shows that counterfactual explanations comply with most of these desiderata, although not necessarily
all of them. For example, consider completeness – the extent
to which the explanation covers the whole underlying system – of a counterfactual explanation. A counterfactual foil
applies only to the queried data point and does not generalise
to a broader class of similar data points; i.e., had the foil
been true, ceteris paribus, the classification outcome would
change. The possible incompleteness of a counterfactual explanation is often overlooked by the explainees as humans
are known to overgeneralise. Therefore, for a counterfactual explanation to satisfy completeness, the explainer would
have to provide the necessary conditions under which the
foil, hence the explanation, holds (contextfullness). An example of such a generalised counterfactual would be “Had
you earned £10,000 more, your loan application would be
accepted provided you do not change your mortgage and
keep the same job.” Completeness and contextfullness are
two of many explainability desiderata. Other important aspects of an explanation are: soundness – truthfulness of the
explanation with respect to the predictive model; interactiveness – interactive explanations are better than static ones; actionability – explanations that give the user suggestions how
to change the model’s prediction are preferred; chronology
– more recent causes of an event are preferred; coherence
– explanations should agree with the user’s mental model;
novelty – the explanation should not repeat what the user
already knows; complexity – the complexity of an explanation should be tuned to the user’s ability and knowledge; and
parsimony – shorter explanations are more comprehensive.

Explanations in machine learning come in many forms, but
a consensus regarding their desired properties is still emerging. In our work we collect and organise these explainability
desiderata and discuss how they can be used to systematically evaluate properties and quality of an explainable system
using the case of class-contrastive counterfactual statements.
This leads us to propose a novel method for explaining predictions of a decision tree with counterfactuals. We show that
our model-specific approach exploits all the theoretical advantages of counterfactual explanations, hence improves decision tree interpretability by decoupling the quality of the
interpretation from the depth and width of the tree.

Introduction
Counterfactual explanations are becoming a de facto standard for explaining automated decisions (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2018; Miller 2019; Tolomei et al. 2017).
In their most popular form they follow this template:
“The prediction is <prediction>. Had a small subset
of features been different <foil>, the prediction would
have been <different prediction> instead.”
Such counterfactual explanations are deemed particularly
useful for a lay audience since they do not presuppose any
background in computer science or artificial intelligence.
They particularly gained in popularity when the European
Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) came
into force in May 2018 requiring organisations that use algorithmic decision making to provide explanations on the
client’s request. To address this requirement Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell (2018) showed that counterfactuals are
“user-friendly” and compliant with the GDPR.

Systematically evaluating these properties of explainable
techniques can be a useful precursor to user studies to show
their capabilities and compliance with the best practices in
the field. Despite theoretical guarantees of some desiderata for some explainability approaches, these guarantees can
be lost in implementation. For example, model-agnostic approaches can render some desiderata difficult to achieve
since they cannot take advantage of model-specific aspects
of the predictive algorithms. What appears to be lacking in
the literature is a connection between general desiderata and
properties of specific methods. At best, some studies select a subset of desiderata and evaluate a selected approach
for a particular task using them; for example Kulesza et
al. (2013) evaluate soundness and completeness of interac-

Explainability and Its Desiderata
The recent surge in interpretability and explainability research in AI may suggest that this is a new research topic, but
in fact it has been an active research area for much longer in
the humanities – to the point that researchers have started
to agree on a coherent list of desiderata for explainable
systems (Kulesza et al. 2013; 2015). The seminal work of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10035

