The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exploiting Coarse-to-Fine Task Transfer
for Aspect-Level Sentiment Classification∗
Zheng Li,1 Ying Wei,2 Yu Zhang,1 Xiang Zhang,1 Xin Li3
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
zlict@cse.ust.hk, judywei@tencent.com, yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com, xzhangax@ust.hk, lixin@se.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract

spectively. In terms of the aspect granularity, the AC task
is coarse-grained while the AT task is fine-grained.
To model aspect-oriented sentiment analysis, equipping
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) with the attention
mechanism has become a mainstream approach (Tang et
al. 2015; Wang et al. 2016; Ma et al. 2017; Chen et al.
2017), where RNNs aim to capture sequential patterns and
the attention mechanism is to emphasize appropriate context
features for encoding aspect-specific representations. Typically, attention-based RNN models can achieve good performance only when large corpora are available. However,
AT-level datasets require the aspect terms to be comprehensively manually labeled or extracted by sequence labeling
algorithms from the sentences, which is especially costly to
obtain. Thus, existing public AT-level datasets are all relatively small, which limits the potential of neural models.
Nonetheless, we observe that plentiful AC-level corpora
are more easily accessible. This is because that aspect categories are usually in a small set of general aspects that can be
pre-defined. For example, commercial services such as review sites or social media can define a set of valuable aspect
categories towards products or events in a particular domain
(e.g., “food”, “service”, “speed”, and “price” in the Restaurant domain). As a result, the mass collections of user preferences towards different aspect categories become practicable. Motivated by this observation, we propose a new problem named coarse-to-fine task transfer across both domain
and granularity, with the aim of borrowing knowledge from
an abundant source domain of the coarse-grained AC task to
a small-scale target domain of the fine-grained AT task.
The challenges in fulfillment of this setting are two-fold:
(1) task discrepancy: the two tasks concern with the aspects
with different granularity. Source aspects are coarse-grained
aspect categories, which lack a priori position information
in the context. However, target aspects are fine-grained aspect terms, which have accurate position information. Thus,
inconsistent granularity in aspects causes the discrepancy
between tasks; (2) feature distribution discrepancy: generally the domains in the two tasks are different, which causes
the distribution shift for both the aspects and its context between domains. For example, in the source Restaurant domain, tasty and delicious are used to express positive sentiment towards the aspect category “food”, while lightweight
and responsive often indicate positive sentiment towards the

Aspect-level sentiment classification (ASC) aims at identifying sentiment polarities towards aspects in a sentence, where
the aspect can behave as a general Aspect Category (AC)
or a specific Aspect Term (AT). However, due to the especially expensive and labor-intensive labeling, existing public corpora in AT-level are all relatively small. Meanwhile,
most of the previous methods rely on complicated structures
with given scarce data, which largely limits the efficacy of
the neural models. In this paper, we exploit a new direction
named coarse-to-fine task transfer, which aims to leverage
knowledge learned from a rich-resource source domain of
the coarse-grained AC task, which is more easily accessible,
to improve the learning in a low-resource target domain of
the fine-grained AT task. To resolve both the aspect granularity inconsistency and feature mismatch between domains, we
propose a Multi-Granularity Alignment Network (MGAN).
In MGAN, a novel Coarse2Fine attention guided by an auxiliary task can help the AC task modeling at the same finegrained level with the AT task. To alleviate the feature false
alignment, a contrastive feature alignment method is adopted
to align aspect-specific feature representations semantically.
In addition, a large-scale multi-domain dataset for the AC
task is provided. Empirically, extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the MGAN.

Introduction
Aspect-level sentiment classification (ASC) aims to infer
sentiment polarities over aspect categories (AC) or aspect
terms (AT) distributed in sentences (Pang, Lee, and others
2008; Liu 2012). An aspect category implicitly appears in
the sentence, which describes a general category of the entities. For example, in the sentence “The salmon is tasty while
the waiter is very rude”, the user speaks positively and negatively towards two aspect categories “food” and “service”,
respectively. An aspect term characterizes a specific entity
that explicitly occurs in the sentence. Considering the same
sentence “The salmon is tasty while the waiter is very rude”,
the aspect terms are “salmon” and “waiter”, and the user
expresses positive and negative sentiments over them, re∗
This work is supported by Hong Kong CERG grants
(16209715 and 16244616), and NSFC (61473087 and 61673202).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4253

