The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Neural Machine Translation with
SMT as Posterior Regularization
Shuo Ren,1∗ Zhirui Zhang,2 Shujie Liu,3 Ming Zhou,3 Shuai Ma1
1

SKLSDE Lab, Beihang University 1 Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, China
2
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China Ming Zhou,3 Microsoft Research Asia
1
{shuoren,mashuai}@buaa.edu.cn 2 zrustc11@gmail.com 3 {shujliu,mingzhou}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Without real bilingual corpus available, unsupervised Neural Machine Translation (NMT) typically requires pseudo
parallel data generated with the back-translation method for
the model training. However, due to weak supervision, the
pseudo data inevitably contain noises and errors that will be
accumulated and reinforced in the subsequent training process, leading to bad translation performance. To address this
issue, we introduce phrase based Statistic Machine Translation (SMT) models which are robust to noisy data, as posterior regularizations to guide the training of unsupervised
NMT models in the iterative back-translation process. Our
method starts from SMT models built with pre-trained language models and word-level translation tables inferred from
cross-lingual embeddings. Then SMT and NMT models are
optimized jointly and boost each other incrementally in a unified EM framework. In this way, (1) the negative effect caused
by errors in the iterative back-translation process can be alleviated timely by SMT filtering noises from its phrase tables; meanwhile, (2) NMT can compensate for the deficiency
of fluency inherent in SMT. Experiments conducted on en-fr
and en-de translation tasks show that our method outperforms
the strong baseline and achieves new state-of-the-art unsupervised machine translation performance.

1

Figure 1: The effect of noisy training data. The first training
sample contains the noise (“malade” in French means “ill”,
not “ill-fated”), leading to the wrong test result (sys).

sentences in two languages are mapped into the same latent
space with a shared encoder, which is expected to be the internal information representation irrelevant to the languages
themselves. From that target sentences are generated by a
shared or different decoders. Some of them also use denoising auto-encoders (Vincent et al. 2010) and adversarial training. Despite the differences in structures and training methods, they reach a consensus to use the pseudo parallel data
generated iteratively with the back-translation method (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016; Zhang et al. 2018a) to train
their unsupervised NMT models, i.e. they use monolingual
data in the target language and a target-to-source translation
model to generate source sentences, then use the pseudo parallel data of generated sources and real targets to train the
source-to-target model, and vice versa.
However, since the pseudo data are generated by unsupervised models, random errors and noises are inevitably
introduced, such as redundant or unaligned words deviating from the meaning of source sentences. Due to the lack
of supervision, those infrequent errors will be accumulated
and reinforced by NMT models into frequent patterns during the training iterations, leading to bad translation performance. For instance in Figure 1, the French word “malade”
is mistakenly translated into the English word “ill-fated” in
the first training sample. With strong abilities to identify and
memorize patterns, NMT models mistakenly translate this
word into “ill-fated” when “old” (similar to “grandmother”

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the rise and success of Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Sutskever, Vinyals, and
Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Luong, Pham,
and Manning 2015; Wu et al. 2016; Vaswani et al. 2017;
Hassan et al. 2018). However, NMT relies heavily on large
in-domain parallel data, resulting in poor performance on
low-resource language pairs (Koehn and Knowles 2017).
For some low-resource pairs without any bilingual corpus,
how to train NMT models with only a monolingual corpus
is a popular and interesting topic.
Existing methods for unsupervised machine translation
(Artetxe et al. 2017; Lample, Denoyer, and Ranzato 2017;
Yang et al. 2018; Lample et al. 2018) are mainly the modifications of encoder-decoder schema. In their work, source
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work. This
work is supported in part by NSFC U1636210 and 61421003, and
Shenzhen Institute of Computing Sciences.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

241

