The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robust Ordinal Embedding from Contaminated Relative Comparisons
Ke Ma,1,2 Qianqian Xu,3 Xiaochun Cao1,2∗
1

State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{make, caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

point configuration is constructed to preserve the above constraints as much as possible. This task is known as the
ordinal embedding. The problem first arises in the psychometric society (Shepard 1962a; 1962b; Kruskal 1964a;
1964b). In recent years, it has gained increasingly attention. (Agarwal et al. 2007; Tamuz et al. 2011; Jamieson
and Nowak 2011; van der Maaten and Weinberger 2012;
Kleindessner and Luxburg 2014; Terada and Luxburg 2014;
Amid and Ukkonen 2015; Jain, Jamieson, and Nowak 2016;
Ma et al. 2018)
However, the relative comparison approach leaves a cumbersome burden on participants with a large number of annotations. Due to its economical and scalable implementation, crowdsourcing platforms (e.g., MTurk, Innocentive,
CrowdFlower, CrowdRank, and Allourideas) are always restored to annotate these relative comparisons. Nevertheless, crowdsourced relative comparisons are not without pitfalls − the crowd is not all trustworthy (Xu et al. 2012;
Chen et al. 2013). Since participants perform experiments
without supervision on the Internet, when the testing time
for a single participant lasts too long, the annotators may
give untrustworthy feedbacks. Such unreliable labels bring
great challenges to control the quality of crowsourced relative comparisons, let alone utilizing them in the subsequent
tasks. Therefore, how to derive reliable embeddings from
these contaminated data has become an urgent issue in the
ordinal embedding research.
Traditional robust ordinal embedding methods are usually two-staged: (1) The outlier detection is employed to
pick out the inconsistent comparisons. (2) Based on the
cleaned data, the embedding is constructed to map items
into a Euclidean space with a low dimension. Various methods have been developed in literature for outlier detection,
such as majority voting (Welinder et al. 2010), M-estimator
(Huber and Ronchetti 2009), Least Median of Squares
(LMS) (Rousseeuw 1984), S-estimators (Rousseeuw and
Yohai 1984), Least Trimmed Squares (LTS) (Rousseeuw
and Leroy 2005), and Thresholding based Iterative Procedure for Outlier Detection (She and Owen 2011) etc. Among
these studies, perhaps the most well-known one is majority
voting. A large budget is allocated to obtain multiple annotations for each comparisons. These annotations are then
aggregated so as to eliminate label noise (McFee and Lanckriet 2011). However, the effectiveness of the majority voting

Existing ordinal embedding methods usually follow a twostage routine: outlier detection is first employed to pick out
the inconsistent comparisons; then an embedding is learned
from the clean data. However, learning in a multi-stage manner is well-known to suffer from sub-optimal solutions. In this
paper, we propose a unified framework to jointly identify the
contaminated comparisons and derive reliable embeddings.
The merits of our method are three-fold: (1) By virtue of the
proposed unified framework, the sub-optimality of traditional
methods is largely alleviated; (2) The proposed method is
aware of global inconsistency by minimizing a corresponding cost, while traditional methods only involve local inconsistency; (3) Instead of considering the nuclear norm heuristics, we adopt an exact solution for rank equality constraint.
Our studies are supported by experiments with both simulated
examples and real-world data. The proposed framework provides us a promising tool for robust ordinal embedding from
the contaminated comparisons.

Introduction
The solutions to many tasks involve the similarity estimation of data samples, e.g. clustering (von Luxburg 2007),
classification (Chen et al. 2009) and representation learning (Wei et al. 2018). Traditionally, the objective similarity
measurement extracts the features of data points to calculate their distances in some space, while the Euclidean distance, cosine similarity, Hamming distance and KullbackLeibler divergence are the favorite measurements. In realworld scenarios, the situation becomes complicated since
the off-the-shelf similarity functions are unreliable. It is too
difficult to customize a similarity function for the specific
data, or simply unavailable of the features or attributes. Consequently, the subjective method is more appropriate when
the objective criteria are ambiguous. Among various subjective approaches for similarity estimation, relative comparison is expected to yield more reliable results. Instead
of evaluating the similarity on an absolute scale, the relative similarity only needs individuals to answer a “yes or
no” question as: “Is the similarity between object i and
j larger than the similarity between l and k?” Then a
∗

The corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7908

