The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Generalized Distance Bribery
Dorothea Baumeister, Tobias Hogrebe, Lisa Rey
Institut für Informatik
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
40225 Düsseldorf, Germany

Abstract

The idea of limiting the distance between originally cast
votes and their altered versions in strategic influences is not
restricted to bribery. Obraztsova and Elkind (2012) have introduced distances to manipulation, where a voter changes
her vote in order to subjectively improve the election outcome. They focus on the unweighted swap distance and
footrule distance, and the maximum displacement distance
between the truthful and the strategic vote in the constructive
case. We propose to extend the study of distances to both,
the constructive and destructive bribery problem and use unweighted and weighted variants of the swap and footrule distance. One motivation for introducing a bound on the overall distance of the bribed profile follows from the work by
Obraztsova and Elkind (2012) on optimal manipulation. The
distance between a truthful and a manipulative vote should
be bounded since otherwise a manipulation may be detected
more easily. In a more positive sense bribery can be seen
as a form of campaign management where an external actor
tries to make her desired candidate win by running specific
campaigns. While the swap distance counts the inversions
of pairs of candidates, it is a more realistic approach to assign a weight to a specific swap, as, in a natural election,
voters are often very sure about the positioning of some candidates, while being less concerned with others. We show
that different assumptions on how to calculate the weights
have a crucial influence on the complexity. The restriction
of element-weighted distance functions (studied by Kumar
and Vassilvitskii (2010) for linear orders) assigns a weight
to every candidate. The weight of a swap is the product of
the corresponding candidate weights. This can be seen as an
indicator of how sure a voter is about the position of a candidate in the vote. The same weight functions can also be applied to the footrule distance. Instead of inversions, here the
positions a candidate is shifted by are counted. The idea is to
measure the cumulative change in the candidate’s standing
in the vote, based on its position. In the weighted version,
the influence of one candidate on the standing of another
can be set by the weight function. Hence, the footrule distance is more realistic in terms of robustness or comparison
of profiles.

The bribery problem in elections asks whether an external
agent can make some distinguished candidate win or prevent
her from winning, by bribing some of the voters. This problem was studied with respect to the weighted swap distance
between two votes by Elkind et al. (2009). We generalize this
definition by introducing a bound on the distance between the
original and the bribed votes. The distance measures we consider include a restriction of the weighted swap distance and
variants of the footrule distance, which capture some realworld models of influence an external agent may have on the
voters. We study constructive and destructive variants of distance bribery for scoring rules and obtain polynomial-time
algorithms as well as NP-hardness results. For the case of
element-weighted swap and element-weighted footrule distances, we give a complete dichotomy result for the class of
pure scoring rules.

1

Introduction

In an election in which voters influence the election’s result by casting their votes they might not be the only agents
interested in its outcome. A well known example of strategic influence on elections is bribery, formally introduced
by Faliszewski et al. (2009) (see also the book chapter by
Faliszewski and Rothe (2016)). By paying voters with a resource, e. g. money, to change their vote, an external agent
tries to change the election outcome to her advantage. In the
constructive case the aim is to make a specific candidate
a winner of the election, while in the destructive case the
briber tries to prevent a candidate from winning. Originally
the number of voters that can be bribed is limited. However,
there is no limitation to the amount of change within a vote.
It is natural to assume that a voter’s cost for changing her
vote to a large extent is higher than the cost for making small
adjustments. This intuition is modeled in the microbribery
problem introduced by Faliszewski et al. (2009), and in the
swap-bribery problem introduced by Elkind et al. (2009). In
both models the briber has to pay certain prices for swaps
of adjacent candidates. In order to obtain a more realistic
model, we propose to imply a bound on the distance between
the truthful and the bribed votes.

We study the computational complexity of distance
bribery for pure scoring rules with swap and footrule distances in the unweighted, element-weighted, and weighted
case. This includes showing how to exploit the relation-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1764

