The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Defending Elections against Malicious Spread of Misinformation
Bryan Wilder,1 Yevgeniy Vorobeychik2
1

2

Center for Artificial Intelligence in Society, University of Southern California, bwilder@usc.edu
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, yvorobeychik@wustl.edu

Abstract

actors to spread deliberately falsified information – “fake
news” – and in doing so, influence the results of democratic elections. Such concerns are particularly salient in
light of the 2016 U.S. presidential election. Recent research
shows that, on average, an American adult was exposed to
at least one fake news story during the campaign (Allcott
and Gentzkow 2017) and that these stories influenced voter
attitudes (Pennycook, Cannon, and Rand 2017).
Prior work on election control has considered a number of mechanisms for election interference, including
bribery (Faliszewski et al. 2009; Baumeister et al. 2015;
Erdélyi, Reger, and Yang 2017; Yang, Shrestha, and Guo
2016), adding or deleting voters (Erdélyi, Hemaspaandra,
and Hemaspaandra 2015; Loreggia et al. 2015; Faliszewski,
Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra 2011; Liu et al. 2009),
and adding or deleting candidates (Chen et al. 2015; Liu et
al. 2009). Only recently has social influence been explicitly studied as a means of election control (Sina et al. 2015;
Wilder and Vorobeychik 2018; Faliszewski et al. 2018). Further, with only a few exceptions which do not consider social influence (Li, Jiang, and Wu 2017; Yin et al. 2018),
election control has so far primarily been studied from the
attacker’s perspective (to establish the computational complexity of controlling an election when the attacker is the
only actor).
We therefore ask the following natural question: how can
a defender mitigate the impact of fake news on an election?
For instance, a social media platform or a news organization
may have the ability to detect and label fake news stories on
a given advertising channel, or propagate a counter-message
with more accurate information. We model this interaction
as a zero-sum game between an attacker, attempting to influence voters by advertising on a subset of possible channels,
and a defender who enacts counter-measures on a subset of
channels. The goal for the attacker is to maximize the expected number of voters who switch to the attacker’s preferred candidate, whereas the defender’s goal is to minimize
this quantity. Note that in this model the defender is neutral with respect which candidate actually wins; they focus
solely on minimizing the attacker’s malicious influence.
Computing equilibria is computationally challenging due
to the exponential number of possible actions for each
player. Complicating the problem, in practice the defender
may have considerable uncertainty about which candidate

The integrity of democratic elections depends on voters’ access to accurate information. However, modern media environments, which are dominated by social media, provide malicious actors with unprecedented ability to manipulate elections via misinformation, such as fake news. We study a zerosum game between an attacker, who attempts to subvert an
election by propagating a fake new story or other misinformation over a set of advertising channels, and a defender who
attempts to limit the attacker’s impact. Computing an equilibrium in this game is challenging as even the pure strategy
sets of players are exponential. Nevertheless, we give provable polynomial-time approximation algorithms for computing the defender’s minimax optimal strategy across a range of
settings, encompassing different population structures as well
as models of the information available to each player. Experimental results confirm that our algorithms provide nearoptimal defender strategies and showcase variations in the
difficulty of defending elections depending on the resources
and knowledge available to the defender.

Introduction
Free and fair elections are essential to democracy. However, the integrity of elections depends on voters’ access
to accurate information about candidates and issues. Oftentimes, such information comes via news media or political
advertising. When these information sources are accurate
and transparent, they serve an important role in producing
well-functioning elections. However, because of the great
impact that messaging can have on voter behavior (Gerber, Karlan, and Bergan 2009; DellaVigna and Kaplan 2007;
Brader 2005), such information can also subvert legitimate
elections when deliberately falsified by malicious actors.
In traditional media environments, such subversion is
relatively difficult because professional news organizations
serve as gatekeepers to information spread. However, modern media environments are increasingly decentralized due
to the importance of social networks such as Facebook or
Twitter, which allow outside actors to spread political information directly amongst voters (Chi and Yang 2011;
Wattal et al. 2010; Holcomb, Gottfried, and Mitchell 2013).
This presents an unprecedented opportunity for malicious
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2213

