The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Difficulty-Aware Attention Network with
Confidence Learning for Medical Image Segmentation
Dong Nie,1,2 Li Wang,2 Lei Xiang,2,3 Sihang Zhou,2,4 Ehsan Adeli,5 Dinggang Shen2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27514, USA
Department of Radiology and BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27514, USA
3
Institute for Medical Imaging Technology, School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
4
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
5
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
2

Abstract

often regard the feature learning and segmentation as two
separate tasks. UNet (Ronneberger et al. 2015), an evolutionary variant of FCN, has achieved excellent performance
by effectively combining high-level and low-level features
in the network architecture. Compared to FCN, UNet can
improve the localization accuracy, especially near organ
boundaries.
Though being effective in most cases, the abovementioned deep segmentation networks cannot properly
handle the hard-to-segment samples (or regions) since the
training of the network is inclined to be dominated by
the easy-to-segment samples. This easy-to-segment sample
dominance phenomenon often occurs in medical image segmentation tasks due to the irregular distribution of some
medical images which may be caused by the different abnormal degree of the lesion or the imaging factors, such as
different vendor devices or imaging protocols.
Several works have been proposed in the literature to address the aforementioned challenges (Shrivastava, Gupta,
and Girshick 2016; Lin et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2017). To
achieve better performance on hard-to-segment (or detect)
samples, (Shrivastava, Gupta, and Girshick 2016) proposed
a simple strategy to automatically select hard samples for
further tuning the networks. To prevent the vast number of
easy samples from overwhelming the networks during training, (Lin et al. 2017) proposed focal loss for detection and
achieved promising results. In another work, (Zhou et al.
2017) introduced focal loss for the biomedical image segmentation. However, the focal loss has some shortcomings
when applied to medical image segmentation due to its usage of predicted probability on the samples as the hard-oreasy evaluator which could neglect the structural information and also suffer from multi-category competition issues.
We argue that the widely used adversarial learning strategies
may contribute to building a better evaluator.
Adversarial learning, derived from the recent popular
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al.
2014), has achieved great success in image generation and
segmentation (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Kohl et al. 2017;
Nie et al. 2017; Xue et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2017; Zhu
et al. 2018). The GAN framework consists of two competing networks: a generator and a discriminator, both of which
are involved in an adversarial two-player game, in which
the generator aims to learn the data distribution while the

Medical image segmentation is a key step for various applications, such as image-guided radiation therapy and diagnosis. Recently, deep neural networks provided promising solutions for automatic image segmentation; however, they often
perform good on regular samples (i.e., easy-to-segment samples), since the datasets are dominated by easy and regular
samples. For medical images, due to huge inter-subject variations or disease-specific effects on subjects, there exist several difficult-to-segment cases that are often overlooked by
the previous works. To address this challenge, we propose a
difficulty-aware deep segmentation network with confidence
learning for end-to-end segmentation. The proposed framework has two main contributions: 1) Besides the segmentation network, we also propose a fully convolutional adversarial network for confidence learning to provide voxel-wise
and region-wise confidence information for the segmentation network. We relax the adversarial learning to confidence
learning by decreasing the priority of adversarial learning,
so that we can avoid the training imbalance between generator and discriminator. 2) We propose a difficulty-aware attention mechanism to properly handle hard samples or hard
regions considering structural information, which may go beyond the shortcomings of focal loss. We further propose a
fusion module to selectively fuse the concatenated feature
maps in encoder-decoder architectures. Experimental results
on clinical and challenge datasets show that our proposed network can achieve state-of-the-art segmentation accuracy. Further analysis also indicates that each individual component of
our proposed network contributes to the overall performance
improvement.

Introduction
The recent development of deep learning has largely boosted
the state-of-the-art segmentation methods (Long et al. 2015;
Ronneberger et al. 2015). Among them, fully convolutional
networks (FCN) (Long et al. 2015), a variant of convolutional neural networks (CNN), is a recent popular choice
for semantic image segmentation in both computer vision
and medical image fields (Long et al. 2015; Ronneberger et
al. 2015; Yu et al. 2017; Pan et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2017;
Xiao et al. 2017). FCN trains neural networks in an end-toend fashion by directly optimizing intermediate feature layers, which makes it outperform the traditional methods that
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1085

