The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

NeuroX: A Toolkit for Analyzing Individual Neurons in Neural Networks
Fahim Dalvi,1 Avery Nortonsmith,2 Anthony Bau,2
Yonatan Belinkov,2 Hassan Sajjad,1 Nadir Durrani,1 James Glass2
2

1
Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU Research Complex, Doha 5825, Qatar
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{faimaduddin,hsajjad,ndurrani}@qf.org.qa
{averyn,abau,belinkov,glass}@mit.edu

Abstract

Individual Model Analysis provides an intrinsic way to
comprehend the quality of a model. It enables the user
to visualize the effect of various design choices, such as
layer normalization and dropout, on individual neurons, and
can lead towards improving the architectural design of the
model. For example, given two similar models, one trained
with and another without layer normalization, one can visualize the effect of layer normalization on model activations
using various provided ranking strategies, such as variance,
distance from mean, etc.

We present a toolkit to facilitate the interpretation and understanding of neural network models. The toolkit provides several methods to identify salient neurons with respect to the
model itself or an external task. A user can visualize selected
neurons, ablate them to measure their effect on the model accuracy, and manipulate them to control the behavior of the
model at the test time. Such an analysis has a potential to
serve as a springboard in various research directions, such as
understanding the model, better architectural choices, model
distillation and controlling data biases. The toolkit is available for download.1

Cross-model Analysis provides a ranking of neurons
based on the correlation among several models. Such rankings provides an insight of the prevalent properties that the
models focused on while learning the task. For instance, in
the task of machine translation, we found that neurons handling the length of the sentence and end of sentence are the
most salient neurons across the models (Dalvi et al. 2019).

Introduction
Despite the remarkable evolution of deep neural networks in
natural language processing, their interpretability remains a
challenge. In this work, we aim to facilitate analysis of neural models by introducing the NeuroX toolkit. The toolkit
enables users to analyze models, and is flexible to use with
any neural model. Given a trained model, the toolkit provides several mechanisms to probe it at neuron level. A user
can visualize individual/group of neurons, ablate them to see
the effect on the overall quality, and manipulate them to control the behavior of the model at test time. The analysis provided by the toolkit opens new horizons of research in various directions, such as understanding the internal learning
of the model, better architectural choices, model distillation,
controlling data biases, etc.

Linguistic Correlation Analysis enables a user to analyze neurons against any external task. A task can be as simple as predicting position of a word in a sentence, or months
of year tag or as complex as predicting the morphological
or semantic property of a word. The task-specific analysis
helps to connect the dots between the features learned automatically by a neural model and features manually extracted
for a non-neural network model. It also enables to answer
questions like what has a neural model learned about word
morphology and lexical semantics and finding neurons that
are explicitly focusing at a specific phenomenon.

Analysis Methods
Given a trained model (or a set of models), the toolkit extracts the activations from the model(s) and runs several
analyses routines on it. It then provides an interactive visual
interface to analyze neurons. We provide three methods to
analyze neural network models in the toolkit: Individual
and Cross-model Analysis, to search for neurons,
important for the model itself (Bau et al. 2019) and
Linguistic Correlation Analysis, which identifies important neurons w.r.t. an extrinsic property (Dalvi
et al. 2019). The output of each method is a ranked list of
neurons.

Visualization
Given the identified salient neurons, a user can select individual or groups of neurons and visualize them in action
on the input text. In addition, a user sees statistics about
the selected neurons and a list of top words where the selected neurons are most activated. Visualization is especially
helpful in analyzing activations of the model independent of
any analysis methodologies. It spurs researchers to look for
questions whose answers are not straightforward to define as
a learning task.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/fdalvi/NeuroX

9851

