The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Deep Cascade Model for Multi-Document Reading Comprehension
Ming Yan, Jiangnan Xia, Chen Wu, Bin Bi,
Zhongzhou Zhao, Ji Zhang, Luo Si, Rui Wang, Wei Wang, Haiqing Chen
Alibaba Group
{ym119608, jiangnan.xjn, wuchen.wc, b,bi}@alibaba-inc.com
{zhongzhou.zhaozz, zj122146, luo.si, masi.wr, hebian.ww, haiqing.chenhq}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

stone that several MRC models have exceeded the performance of human annotators on the SQuAD dataset1 . However, the SQuAD dataset makes a strong assumption that
the answers are contained in the given paragraphs. Besides,
the parapraphs are rather short, approximately 200 words on
average, while a real-world scenario usually involves multiple documents of much longer length. Therefore, several
latest studies (Joshi et al. 2017; Clark and Gardner 2017;
Tan et al. 2017) begin to re-design the task into more realistic settings: the MRC models are required to read and
comprehend multiple documents to reach the final answer.
In multi-document MRC, depending on the way of combining the two components, document selection and extractive reading comprehension, there are two categories
of approaches: 1) The pipeline approach treats the document selection and extractive reading comprehension as
two separate parts, where a document is firstly selected
through document ranking and then passed to the MRC
model for extracting the final answer (Joshi et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2017a); 2) Several recent studies (Tan et al.
2017; Clark and Gardner 2017; Wang et al. 2018) adopt a
joint learning method to optimize both sub-tasks in a unified
framework simultaneously.
The pipeline method relies heavily on the quality of the
document ranking module. When it fails to give the relevant documents higher ranks or filters out the ones that contain the correct answers, the downstream MRC module has
no way to recover and extract the answers of interest. For
the joint learning method, it is computationally expensive
to jointly optimize both tasks with all the documents. This
computation cost limits its application to the operational online environment, such as Amazon2 and Taobao3 , where efficiency is a critical factor to be considered.
To address the above problems, we propose a deep cascade model which combines the advantages of both methods in a coarse-to-fine manner. The deep cascade model is
designed to properly keep the balance between the effectiveness and efficiency. At early stages of the model, simple
features and ranking functions are used to select a candidate set of most relevant contents, filtering out the irrelevant

A fundamental trade-off between effectiveness and efficiency
needs to be balanced when designing an online question
answering system. Effectiveness comes from sophisticated
functions such as extractive machine reading comprehension
(MRC), while efficiency is obtained from improvements in
preliminary retrieval components such as candidate document selection and paragraph ranking. Given the complexity
of the real-world multi-document MRC scenario, it is difficult to jointly optimize both in an end-to-end system. To address this problem, we develop a novel deep cascade learning model, which progressively evolves from the documentlevel and paragraph-level ranking of candidate texts to more
precise answer extraction with machine reading comprehension. Specifically, irrelevant documents and paragraphs are
first filtered out with simple functions for efficiency consideration. Then we jointly train three modules on the remaining
texts for better tracking the answer: the document extraction,
the paragraph extraction and the answer extraction. Experiment results show that the proposed method outperforms the
previous state-of-the-art methods on two large-scale multidocument benchmark datasets, i.e., TriviaQA and DuReader.
In addition, our online system can stably serve typical scenarios with millions of daily requests in less than 50ms.

Introduction
Machine reading comprehension (MRC), which empowers
computers with the ability to read and comprehend knowledge and then answer questions from textual data, has made
rapid progress in recent years. From the early cloze-style
test (Hermann et al. 2015; Hill et al. 2015) to answer extraction from a single paragraph (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), and
to the more complex open-domain question answering from
web data (Joshi et al. 2017; Nguyen et al. 2016), great efforts have been made to push the MRC technique to more
practical applications.
The rapid progress of MRC in recent years mostly owes
to the release of the single-paragraph benchmark dataset
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), on which various deep
attention-based methods have been proposed to constantly
push the state-of-the-art performance (Seo et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2017c; Yu et al. 2018). It is a significant mile-

1

https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer/
https://www.amazon.com/
3
https://www.taobao.com/
2

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7354

