The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

COALA: A Neural Coverage-Based
Approach for Long Answer Selection with Small Data
Andreas Rücklé,† Nafise Sadat Moosavi,†‡ Iryna Gurevych†
Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab (UKP)
‡
Research Training Group AIPHES
Department of Computer Science, Technische Universität Darmstadt
†
www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de
‡
www.aiphes.tu-darmstadt.de
†

based on the general compare-aggregate framework (He and
Lin 2016; Parikh et al. 2016; Wang and Jiang 2017), which
first compares the aspects of the answer (e.g., individual
words) to the aspects of the question and then aggregates
this information. Wang and Jiang (2017)’s approach is rather
complex and consists of several deep layers.
Despite their strong performances across a number of text
matching tasks, such approaches have three important limitations on which we focus in this work.
First, the ability to deal with long answers is a crucial
property of cQA as opposed to classical QA, and typically
state-of-the-art answer selection approaches fall short in these
cases (Cohen, Yang, and Croft 2018).
Second, since they are based on complex deep neural network architectures, current cQA approaches require large
amounts of training data. However, such data is not available in many cQA communities,1 let alone non-English data.
Thus, we need approaches that can effectively learn from
small training data to handle low-resource scenarios.
And third, neural models often ignore the linguistic structure of sentences such as dependency relations. These structures can, however, discriminate similar words in different
contexts, which is beneficial when all candidate answers have
high lexical similarity to the question.
In this work, we tackle these three challenges and propose
compare-aggregate for long answers (COALA), an answer
selection approach based on the compare-aggregate framework with a coverage-based method that ranks answers based
on the extent of covered question aspects. While our general
neural network architecture is motivated by Wang and Jiang
(2017)’s success on different text matching tasks, our proposed approach has three unique properties that correspond
to the previously identified limitations.
First, Wang and Jiang (2017) focus on answer aspects and
aggregate the comparisons of all answer aspects to the question. COALA, on the other hand, focuses on question aspects
and measures to which extent all question aspects are covered
by the answer. Therefore, its aggregation is independent from
the answer’s complexity.

Abstract
Current neural network based community question answering (cQA) systems fall short of (1) properly handling long
answers which are common in cQA; (2) performing under
small data conditions, where a large amount of training data is
unavailable—i.e., for some domains in English and even more
so for a huge number of datasets in other languages; and (3)
benefiting from syntactic information in the model—e.g., to
differentiate between identical lexemes with different syntactic
roles. In this paper, we propose COALA, an answer selection
approach that (a) selects appropriate long answers due to an effective comparison of all question-answer aspects, (b) has the
ability to generalize from a small number of training examples,
and (c) makes use of the information about syntactic roles of
words. We show that our approach outperforms existing answer selection models by a large margin on six cQA datasets
from different domains. Furthermore, we report the best results
on the passage retrieval benchmark WikiPassageQA.

Introduction
Question answering (QA) systems generally retrieve facts
from knowledge bases (Bao et al. 2014) or from web documents (Wang et al. 2018). However, many types of questions require information that cannot be found in these resources, e.g., explanations, descriptions, or advice. In this
work, we focus on community question answering (cQA),
and in particular on cQA answer selection, where we retrieve relevant answers to non-factoid questions from social
Q&A communities (Verberne et al. 2010; Tay et al. 2017;
Nakov et al. 2017). In contrast to factoid QA where questions can be answered with an individual entity or a single
sentence (Yang, Yih, and Meek 2015; Wang, Smith, and Mitamura 2007), in cQA we often deal with long multi-sentence
texts—e.g., in StackExchange Academia we observe an average answer length of 229 words. This presents a difficult
challenge to current neural answer selection approaches because they were primarily designed to retrieve short answers
(Cohen, Yang, and Croft 2018).
A popular state-of-the-art approach for answer selection is
the relevance matching model by Wang and Jiang (2017). It is

1
For instance, there are 35 communities in StackExchange with
less than 2,000 questions in total (including unanswered questions).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6932

