The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robustness Guarantees for Bayesian Inference with Gaussian Processes∗
Luca Cardelli,1 Marta Kwiatkowska,2 Luca Laurenti,2 Andrea Patane2
1

Microsoft Research Cambridge,
2
University of Oxford
luca.a.cardelli@gmail.com, marta.kwiatkowska@cs.ox.ac.uk, luca.laurenti@cs.ox.ac.uk,
andrea.patane@cs.ox.ac.uk
Abstract

els, such as deep neural networks (NNs) (Huang et al. 2017;
Hein and Andriushchenko 2017) and, to the best of our
knowledge, there is no work directed at providing formal
guarantees for the absence of adversarial local input perturbations in Bayesian prediction settings.
Gaussian processes (GPs) are a class of stochastic processes that are, due to their many favourable properties,
widely employed for Bayesian learning (Rasmussen 2004),
with applications spanning robotics, control systems and biological processes (Sadigh and Kapoor 2015; Laurenti et
al. 2017; Bortolussi et al. 2018). Further, driven by pioneering work that first recognized the convergence of fullyconnected NNs to GPs in the limit of infinitely many neurons (Neal 2012), GPs have been used recently as a model to
characterize the behaviour of NNs in terms of convergence
analysis (Matthews et al. 2018), approximated Bayesian inference (Lee et al. 2017) and training algorithms (Chouza,
Roberts, and Zohren 2018).
In this paper we compute formal local robustness guarantees for Bayesian inference with GP priors. The resulting
guarantees are probabilistic, as they take into account the uncertainty intrinsic in the Bayesian learning process and explicitly work with the a-posteriori output distribution of the
GP. More specifically, given a GP model trained on a given
data set, a test input point and a neighborhood around the latter, we are interested in computing the probability that there
exists a point in the neighbourhood such that the prediction
of the GP on the latter differs from the initial test input point
by at least a given threshold. This implicitly gives guarantees on the absence of adversarial examples, that is, input
samples that trick a machine learning model into performing wrong predictions.
Unfortunately, computing such a probability is far from
trivial. In fact, given a compact set T ⊆ Rm , m > 0, and
x∗ ∈ T, the above measure reduces to computing the probability that there exists a function f sampled from the GP
such that there exists x ∈ T for which ||f (x∗ ) − f (x)|| > δ,
where δ > 0 and || · || is a metric norm. Since the set T is
composed of an infinite number of points, computing such a
measure for general stochastic processes is extremely challenging. However, for GPs we can obtain tight upper bounds
on the above probability by making use of inequalities developed in the theory of GPs, such as the Borell-TIS inequality
(Adler and Taylor 2009) and the Dudley’s Entropy Integral

Bayesian inference and Gaussian processes are widely used
in applications ranging from robotics and control to biological systems. Many of these applications are safety-critical and
require a characterization of the uncertainty associated with
the learning model and formal guarantees on its predictions.
In this paper we define a robustness measure for Bayesian inference against input perturbations, given by the probability
that, for a test point and a compact set in the input space containing the test point, the prediction of the learning model will
remain δ−close for all the points in the set, for δ > 0. Such
measures can be used to provide formal probabilistic guarantees for the absence of adversarial examples. By employing
the theory of Gaussian processes, we derive upper bounds on
the resulting robustness by utilising the Borell-TIS inequality, and propose algorithms for their computation. We evaluate our techniques on two examples, a GP regression problem
and a fully-connected deep neural network, where we rely on
weak convergence to GPs to study adversarial examples on
the MNIST dataset.

Introduction
The widespread deployment of machine learning models,
coupled with the discovery of their fragility against carefully crafted manipulation of training and/or test samples
(Biggio and Roli 2017; Grosse et al. 2017a; Szegedy et
al. 2013), calls for safe approaches to AI to enable their
use in safety-critical applications, as argued, e.g., in (Seshia, Sadigh, and Sastry 2016; Dreossi, Donzé, and Seshia 2017). Bayesian techniques, in particular, provide a
principled way of combining a-priori information into the
training process, so as to obtain an a-posteriori distribution on test data, which also takes into account the uncertainty in the learning process. Recent advances in Bayesian
learning include adversarial attacks (Grosse et al. 2017b)
and methods to compute pointwise uncertainty estimates
in Bayesian deep learning (Gal and Ghahramani 2016).
However, much of the work on formal guarantees for machine learning models has focused on non-Bayesian mod∗
This work has been partially supported by a Royal Society Professorship, by the EU’s Horizon 2020 program under the
Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant No 722022 and by the EPSRC Programme Grant on Mobile Autonomy (EP/M019918/1).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7759

