The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

AFS: An Attention-Based Mechanism for Supervised Feature Selection
Ning Gui,1 Danni Ge,2 Ziyin Hu2
2

1
School of Software, Central South University, China, ninggui@gmail.com
School of Informatics, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, China, dongfangdecheng@gmail.com, fayssica@gmail.com

Abstract

the supervision target are ignored. The simplified feature
set often results in a more accurate model which is much
easier to understand. Many different methods have been
proposed and effectively used for various tasks.
In the era of big data, however, most off-the-shelf feature selection methods suffer major problems: varying
from the computation scalability to the stability. For instance, many existing algorithms demand the whole dataset
loaded into the memory before calculation, which becomes
infeasible when data scales to terabytes. Furthermore,
those datasets normally contain a lot of noisy/outlier samples. It is observed that many well-known feature selection
algorithms suffer from the low stability problem after small
data perturbation is introduced in the training set (Alelyani
et al. 2011). Our experience on one industrial dataset with
16K features and 6M records validates this conclusion as
many existing solutions are incapable, slow or unstable
upon this set. As pointed out in their review paper(BolónCanedo et al. 2015): “it is evident that feature selection
researchers need to adapt challenges posed by the explosion of big data.”
Deep-learning-based feature selection methods (Wang et
al. 2014; Li et al. 2015; Roy et al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2015)
are considered to have the potential to cope with the “curse
of dimensionality and volume” of big data because neural
networks have been proved effective for processing massive data. Among many techniques proposed in deep learning, the attention mechanism, a recent proposed technique
to focus on the most pertinent piece of information, rather
than using all available information, has already gained
much success in various machine learning tasks, e.g. natural language processing (Yin et al. 2015) and image recognition (Xu et al. 2015). Interestingly, the attention generation process is quite similar to the feature selection process
as they both focus on selecting partial data from the high
dimensional dataset. It becomes the initial inspiration of
our work. In this paper, a novel attention-based supervised
feature selection architecture, called AFS, is proposed to
evaluate feature attention weight (short as feature weight,
interchangeable with the term feature score used in feature
selection) by formulating the correlation problem among

As an effective data preprocessing step, feature selection
has shown its effectiveness to prepare high-dimensional data for many machine learning tasks. The proliferation of
high di-mension and huge volume big data, however, has
brought major challenges, e.g. computation complexity and
stability on noisy data, upon existing feature-selection techniques. This paper introduces a novel neural network-based
feature selection architecture, dubbed Attention-based Feature Selec-tion (AFS). AFS consists of two detachable modules: an at-tention module for feature weight generation and
a learning module for the problem modeling. The attention
module for-mulates correlation problem among features and
supervision target into a binary classification problem, supported by a shallow attention net for each feature. Feature
weights are generated based on the distribution of respective
feature selec-tion patterns adjusted by backpropagation during the training process. The detachable structure allows existing off-the-shelf models to be directly reused, which allows for much less training time, demands for the training
data and requirements for expertise. A hybrid initialization
method is also introduced to boost the selection accuracy for
datasets without enough samples for feature weight generation. Experimental results show that AFS achieves the best
accuracy and stability in comparison to several state-of-art
feature selection algorithms upon both MNIST, noisy
MNIST and several datasets with small samples.

Introduction
With the rapid advancement of Internet of Things and industrial automation systems, enterprises and industries are
collecting and accumulating data with unparalleled speed
and volume (Yin et al. 2014). The large amount of data
makes the data-driven modeling approach in many domains desirable with the automatic knowledge discovery.
In order to extract useful information from huge amounts
of otherwise meaningless data, one important machinelearning technique is feature selection (FS), which directly
applies a subset of relevant features for the learning tasks.
Those irrelevant, redundant and noisy features in respect to
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3705

