The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Improved Quasi-Polynomial Algorithm
for Approximate Well-Supported Nash Equilibria
Michail Fasoulakis

Evangelos Markakis

Institute of Computer Science,
Foundation for Research
and Technology-Hellas
(ICS-FORTH), Greece
mfasoul@ics.forth.gr

Department of Informatics,
Athens University of
Economics and Business, Greece
markakis@aueb.gr

Abstract

first negative results for finding exact equilibria were established in (Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2009;
Chen, Deng, and Teng 2009), the research community has
focused on computing approximate Nash equilibria. Although this is a relaxation of the initial algorithmic question,
approximate equilibria still form an appealing concept and
can be quite useful in practical settings, see e.g. the recent
work of (McCarthy et al. 2018).
Even for approximate Nash equilibria, efficient algorithms have been hard to obtain for all interesting notions
of approximation. The more standard and popular concept
of approximation, dictates that no player can gain much by
deviating to a different strategy. This is referred to as an εNash equilibrium, where ε is the maximum gain allowed by
a deviation. So far, it is known that we can compute such ap2
proximate equilibria in time nO(log n/ε ) , which is a quasipolynomial time algorithm (quasi-PTAS), for any constant
ε > 0 (Lipton, Markakis, and Mehta 2003). If we insist
on polynomial time, then efficient algorithms exist only for
ε ≥ 0.3393 (Tsaknakis and Spirakis 2008). A strengthening
of this concept is that of ε-well-supported Nash equilibrium,
for which the picture is even worse. An ε-well-supported
Nash equilibrium is a strategy profile in which the expected
payoff of any pure strategy played with positive probability
(i.e., in the support of the mixed strategy of some player) is
at most ε less than the best-response payoff against the strategy of the other player. We can still have a quasi-polynomial
time algorithm for this stronger notion (Kontogiannis and
Spirakis 2010), for any constant ε > 0, but when it comes to
polynomial time, the best known algorithm works only for
ε ≥ 0.6528 (Czumaj et al. 2018). Hence, a major open question is whether we can have polynomial time algorithms for
smaller values of ε.
Our focus in this work is on the notion of well-supported
equilibria. Note that since any ε-well-supported Nash equilibrium is also an ε-Nash equilibrium (the other direction
does not always hold), any algorithmic result directly implies the same approximation for ε-Nash equilibria. Given
the difficulty of going from quasi-polynomial to simply
polynomial running times, we take an intermediate step and
pose the following question: Is it possible to beat the 0.6528approximation by quasi-polynomial algorithms of better

We focus on the problem of computing approximate Nash
equilibria in bimatrix games. In particular, we consider the
notion of approximate well-supported equilibria, which is
one of the standard approaches for approximating equilibria.
It is already known that one can compute an ε-well-supported
2
Nash equilibrium in time nO(log n/ε ) , for any ε > 0, in
games with n pure strategies per player. Such a running
time is referred to as quasi-polynomial. Regarding faster algorithms, it has remained an open problem for many years
if we can have better running times for small values of the
approximation parameter, and it is only known that we can
compute in polynomial-time a 0.6528-well-supported Nash
equilibrium. In this paper, we investigate further this question
and propose a much better quasi-polynomial time algorithm
that computes a (1/2 + ε)-well-supported Nash equilibrium
1

2

in time nO(log log n ε /ε ) , for any ε > 0. Our algorithm is
based on appropriately combining sampling arguments, support enumeration, and solutions to systems of linear inequalities.

Keywords
Algorithmic game theory, bimatrix games, Nash equilibria,
approximate Nash equilibria.

1

Introduction

We revisit a fundamental by now problem in algorithmic
game theory: computing approximate Nash equilibria in bimatrix games. Right from the outset of the interplay between
economics and computation, a couple of decades ago, one
of the driving research questions has been to determine the
complexity of computing Nash equilibria in non-cooperative
games, see Chapter 2 of (Nisan et al. 2007). A Nash equilibrium is a strategy profile where no player has any incentive to deviate, and finding equilibria is important, among
others, for predicting strategic behavior, and also for understanding the difficulty of reaching stable points in such competitive situations. Eventually, the problem turned out to be
much challenging, even for two players, and ever since the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1926

