The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Solving Imperfect-Information
Games via Discounted Regret Minimization
Noam Brown

Tuomas Sandholm

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
noamb@cs.cmu.edu

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

and Sandholm 2017c; 2017b). A blend of CFR and CFR+
was used by DeepStack to defeat poker professionals in
HUNL (Moravčı́k et al. 2017).
The best known theoretical bound on the number of iterations needed for CFR and CFR+ to converge to an
-equilibrium (defined formally in the next section) is
O( 12 ) (Zinkevich et al. 2007; Tammelin et al. 2015). This is
asymptotically slower than first-order methods that converge
at rate O( 1 ) (Hoda et al. 2010; Kroer et al. 2015). However,
in practice CFR+ converges much faster than its theoretical
bound, and even faster than O( 1 ) in many games.
Nevertheless, we show in this paper that one can design
new variants of CFR that significantly outperform CFR+.
We show that CFR+ does relatively poorly in games where
some actions are very costly mistakes (that is, they cause
high regret in that iteration) and provide an intuitive example
and explanation for this. To address this weakness, we introduce variants of CFR that do not assign uniform weight to
each iteration. Instead, earlier iterations are discounted. As
we show, this high-level idea can be instantiated in many different ways. Furthermore, some combinations of our ideas
perform significantly better than CFR+ while others perform
worse than it. In particular, one variant outperforms CFR+ in
every game tested.

Counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) is a family of iterative algorithms that are the most popular and, in practice,
fastest approach to approximately solving large imperfectinformation games. In this paper we introduce novel CFR
variants that 1) discount regrets from earlier iterations in various ways (in some cases differently for positive and negative regrets), 2) reweight iterations in various ways to obtain the output strategies, 3) use a non-standard regret minimizer and/or 4) leverage “optimistic regret matching”. They
lead to dramatically improved performance in many settings.
For one, we introduce a variant that outperforms CFR+, the
prior state-of-the-art algorithm, in every game tested, including large-scale realistic settings. CFR+ is a formidable benchmark: no other algorithm has been able to outperform it. Finally, we show that, unlike CFR+, many of the important new
variants are compatible with modern imperfect-informationgame pruning techniques and one is also compatible with
sampling in the game tree.

Introduction
Imperfect-information games model strategic interactions
between players that have hidden information, such as in
negotiations, cybersecurity, and auctions. A common benchmark for progress in this class of games is poker. The typical goal is to find an (approximate) equilibrium in which no
player can improve by deviating from the equilibrium.
For extremely large imperfect-information games that
cannot fit in a linear program of manageable size, typically
iterative algorithms are used to approximate an equilibrium.
A number of such iterative algorithms exist (Nesterov 2005;
Hoda et al. 2010; Pays 2014; Kroer et al. 2015; Heinrich,
Lanctot, and Silver 2015). The most popular ones are variants of counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich
et al. 2007; Lanctot et al. 2009; Gibson et al. 2012). In particular, the development of CFR+ was a key breakthrough that
in many cases is at least an order of magnitude faster than
vanilla CFR (Tammelin 2014; Tammelin et al. 2015). CFR+
was used to essentially solve heads-up limit Texas hold’em
poker (Bowling et al. 2015) and was used to approximately
solve heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em (HUNL) endgames
in Libratus, which defeated HUNL top professionals (Brown

Notation and Background
We focus on sequential games as the most interesting and
challenging application of this work, but our techniques also
apply to non-sequential games. In an imperfect-information
extensive-form (that is, tree-form) game there is a finite set
of players, P. “Nature” is also considered a player (representing chance) and chooses actions with a fixed known
probability distribution. A state h is defined by all information of the current situation, including private knowledge
known to only a subset of players. A(h) is the actions available in a node and P (h) is the unique player who acts at that
node. If action a ∈ A(h) leads from h to h0 , then we write
h · a = h0 . H is the set of all states in the game tree. Z ⊆ H
are terminal states for which no actions are available. For
each player i ∈ P, there is a payoff function ui : Z → R.
We denote the range of payoffs in the game by ∆. Formally,
∆i = maxz∈Z ui (z) − minz∈Z ui (z) and ∆ = maxi∈P ∆i .
Imperfect information is represented by information sets
(infosets) for each player i ∈ P. For any infoset I belong-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1829

