The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Number Sequence Prediction Problems for
Evaluating Computational Powers of Neural Networks
Hyoungwook Nam

Segwang Kim

Kyomin Jung

College of Liberal Studies
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
hwnam831@snu.ac.kr

Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
ksk5693@snu.ac.kr

Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
kjung@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

algorithmic reasoning although reasoning has always been a
significant subject for many machine learning studies.
It is theoretically proven that carefully designed neural network models can simulate any Turing machine (Siegelmann
and Sontag 1995). Hence, there have been studies applying
neural network models to solve algorithmic tasks such as
learning context-sensitive languages (Gers and Schmidhuber 2001), solving graph questions (Graves et al. 2016), and
composing low-level programs (Reed and de Freitas 2015).
Also, there have been attempts to train neural networks with
simple numerical rules such as copy, addition or multiplication (Joulin and Mikolov 2015; Kaiser and Sutskever 2015;
Kalchbrenner, Danihelka, and Graves 2015; Graves, Wayne,
and Danihelka 2014). However, it has been unclear whether
the proposed models express computational powers equivalent to Turing machines in practice. To provide a method
to test the computational powers of neural network models,
we propose a set of number sequence prediction problems
designed to fit deep learning methods.
A number sequence prediction problem is a kind of intelligence test for machine learning models inspired by number
series tests, which are conventional methods to evaluate nonverbal human intelligence (Bracken and McCallum 1998).
A typical number series test gives a sequence of numbers
with a certain rule and requires a person to infer the rule and
fill in the blanks. Similarly, a number sequence prediction
problem requires a machine learning model to predict the
following numbers from a given sequence. The numbers are
represented as a sequence of digit symbols; hence the model
has to learn discrete transition rules between the symbols
such as carry or borrow rules.
To be specific, we suggest two types of number sequence
prediction problems: the number-level problems and the
digit-level problems. A number-level problem provides a
two-dimensional grid of digits as an input where each row
represents a multi-digit number. The target would be a grid of
the same format filled with the following numbers. Solving a
number-level problem is equivalent to constructing the combinatorial logic for the transition rules. On the other hand, a
digit-level task provides a single digit as an input per each
time step. A model needs to simulate a sequential state automaton to predict the outputs. The type of the state machine
required can vary from a finite state machine to a Turing
machine, depending on the generation rule of the sequence.

Inspired by number series tests to measure human intelligence,
we suggest number sequence prediction tasks to assess neural
network models’ computational powers for solving algorithmic problems. We define the complexity and difficulty of a
number sequence prediction task with the structure of the
smallest automaton that can generate the sequence. We suggest two types of number sequence prediction problems: the
number-level and the digit-level problems. The number-level
problems format sequences as 2-dimensional grids of digits and the digit-level problems provide a single digit input
per a time step. The complexity of a number-level sequence
prediction can be defined with the depth of an equivalent combinatorial logic, and the complexity of a digit-level sequence
prediction can be defined with an equivalent state automaton
for the generation rule. Experiments with number-level sequences suggest that CNN models are capable of learning the
compound operations of sequence generation rules, but the
depths of the compound operations are limited. For the digitlevel problems, simple GRU and LSTM models can solve
some problems with the complexity of finite state automata.
Memory augmented models such as Stack-RNN, Attention,
and Neural Turing Machines can solve the reverse-order task
which has the complexity of simple pushdown automaton.
However, all of above cannot solve general Fibonacci, Arithmetic or Geometric sequence generation problems that represent the complexity of queue automata or Turing machines.
The results show that our number sequence prediction problems effectively evaluate machine learning models’ computational capabilities.

Introduction
Well-defined machine learning tasks have been crucial for the
researches. Major deep learning breakthroughs in the field
of computer vision such as AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012), VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014)
and ResNet (He et al. 2016) could not be possible without
Imagenet dataset and challenges (Deng et al. 2009). In the
field of reinforcement learning, open platforms like MuJoCo
(Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012) and Deepmind Lab (Beattie
et al. 2016) provide challenging environments for the studies.
However, it is hard to find machine learning task suite for
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4626

