The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Leveraging Web Semantic Knowledge in Word Representation Learning
Haoyan Liu,1∗ Lei Fang,2 Jian-Guang Lou,2 Zhoujun Li1
1

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{haoyan.liu, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn; {leifa, jlou}@microsoft.com

Abstract

manually created, semantic lexicons or linguistic structures.
Even for high-quality semantic resources like WordNet1 , the
coverage might be quite limited. Taking English WordNet as
an example, it only contains 155K words organized in 176K
synsets, which is rather small compared to the large vocabulary size on the training data. Vulić et al. (2018) and Glavaš
and Vulić (2018) partially solve this problem by first designing a mapping function that learns the specialization process
for seen words, and then applying the learned function to
unseen words in semantic lexicons. Unfortunately, their approaches still depend on the linguistic constraints derived
from manually created resources. Therefore, we shall leverage semantic resources that can be automatically constructed
with a relatively high coverage on the vocabulary.

Much recent work focuses on leveraging semantic lexicons like WordNet to enhance word representation learning
(WRL) and achieves promising performance on many NLP
tasks. However, most existing methods might have limitations
because they require high-quality, manually created, semantic
lexicons or linguistic structures. In this paper, we propose to
leverage semantic knowledge automatically mined from web
structured data to enhance WRL. We first construct a semantic similarity graph, which is referred as semantic knowledge,
based on a large collection of semantic lists extracted from
the web using several pre-defined HTML tag patterns. Then
we introduce an efficient joint word representation learning
model to capture semantics from both semantic knowledge
and text corpora. Compared with recent work on improving
WRL with semantic resources, our approach is more general,
and can be easily scaled with no additional effort. Extensive
experimental results show that our approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods on word similarity, word sense disambiguation, text classification and textual similarity tasks.

1

Introduction

Distributed word representations boost performance of
many NLP applications mainly because they are capable of
capturing semantic regularities from a collection of text sequences. Much research work tries to enhance word representation learning (WRL) from the semantic perspective by
leveraging semantic lexicons. Semantic lexicons can be considered as a collection of lists, in which each list consists
of semantically related words. Some existing work pulls
the vectors of synonyms close by either a post-processing
model (Faruqui et al. 2015) or a joint representation learning model with the distances between synonyms as regularizers (Kiela, Hill, and Clark 2015; Bollegala et al. 2016).
More recently, many manually well-designed semantic relations or linguist structures, such as synonyms and antonyms
(Mrkšić et al. 2017; Glavaš and Vulić 2018), concept convergence and word divergence (Liu et al. 2018), have been
used to enhance the semantics of words.
However, it should be noted that most existing models
might have limitations because they require high-quality,

Figure 1: News categories with HTML structures.2
There is a considerable amount of structured data on the
web, such as tables, select options, drop down lists, etc.
Given a web table, entries in the same column or row are
usually highly semantically related. This inspires the idea
that it is promising to automatically construct the semantic
resources based on those semantically related entries. Figure 1 shows an example of news categories with their corresponding HTML structures. It can be seen that Politics,
Entertainment, Health are semantically related, because all
of them can be treated as news categories. In the HTML
DOM tree, Politics, Entertainment, Health share the same
HTML structure, which means that they can be easily extracted using HTML tag patterns. Moreover, we find that semantic information in structured data could be an enhancement or complement for text corpora. Consider the entries

∗
This work was done when the first author was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

6746

https://wordnet.princeton.edu/
The categories are from https://abcnews.go.com/.

