The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MPD-AL: An Efficient Membrane Potential Driven
Aggregate-Label Learning Algorithm for Spiking Neurons
Malu Zhang,1,2 Jibin Wu,2∗ Yansong Chua,3∗
Xiaoling Luo,1 Zihan Pan,2 Dan Liu,4 Haizhou Li2,3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
4
JD AI Research
{maluzhang, jibin.wu, panzihan}@u.nus.edu, chuays@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, cdliudan@jd.com, haizhou.li@nus.edu.sg
Abstract

spike timing encodes information in the temporal domain
that is important for neural computation is just as prominent
in the neuroscience community (Gerstner and Kistler 2002;
Gütig and Sompolinsky 2006). Consequently, the spiking
neuron models are proposed to describe the dynamic of
spike generation process, such that the additional temporal
information including precise spike timing and phase could
be better captured (Kasabov et al. 2013).
Although spiking neural networks (SNNs) offer a computing paradigm with the promise of emulating the human
brain, its potential in terms of computing powers and applications are yet to be exploited. Despite the exact learning mechanisms in the brain remain unknown, many spikebased learning algorithms have been proposed for pattern
recognition tasks. Depending on the number of target spikes,
these algorithms can be broadly categorized into single- or
multi-spike based.
One well-known single-spike learning algorithm is the
Tempotron (Gütig and Sompolinsky 2006), whereby the output neuron is trained to fire a single spike in response to
the correct input patterns and remain silent otherwise. The
Rank-Order learning algorithms (Kasabov et al. 2013) update synaptic weights based on the rank order of the arrival
time of incoming spikes. Additionally, the time-to-first spike
decoding scheme is employed at the output layer. The SpikeProp and its improved variants (Bohte, Kok, and La Poutre
2002) are other prominent single-spike based learning algorithms, extending the traditional gradient descent algorithm
to SNNs. The objective function is constructed from the distance between the actual and the desired firing time of the
output neuron, such that the output neuron is trained to generate a spike at the desired time.
Although single spike learning algorithms have been
applied in several applications (Thorpe, Delorme, and
Van Rullen 2001), only one output spike limits the robustness and amount of information that may be transmitted
across the SNN. Specifically, the presynaptic spikes arriving
after the output spike are discarded, while making a decision
only based on a single local temporal feature. In order to
overcome the aforementioned limitations, multi-spike based
learning algorithms have been proposed to train neurons to
emit multiple spikes with precise timing.

One of the long-standing questions in biology and machine
learning is how neural networks may learn important features from the input activities with a delayed feedback,
commonly known as the temporal credit-assignment problem. The aggregate-label learning is proposed to resolve
this problem by matching the spike count of a neuron with
the magnitude of a feedback signal. However, the existing threshold-driven aggregate-label learning algorithms are
computationally intensive, resulting in relatively low learning efficiency hence limiting their usability in practical applications. In order to address these limitations, we propose
a novel membrane-potential driven aggregate-label learning
algorithm, namely MPD-AL. With this algorithm, the easiest modifiable time instant is identified from membrane potential traces of the neuron, and guild the synaptic adaptation based on the presynaptic neurons’ contribution at this
time instant. The experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed algorithm enables the neurons to generate the desired number of spikes, and to detect useful clues embedded
within unrelated spiking activities and background noise with
a better learning efficiency over the state-of-the-art TDP1 and
Multi-Spike Tempotron algorithms. Furthermore, we propose
a data-driven dynamic decoding scheme for practical classification tasks, of which the aggregate labels are hard to define.
This scheme effectively improves the classification accuracy
of the aggregate-label learning algorithms as demonstrated on
a speech recognition task.

Introduction
Traditional artificial neural networks have made remarkable
achievements in recent years as demonstrated in a wide
range of applications (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015).
These rate-based computational models despite brain inspired, are lacking in several other aspects of biological realism, one being the presence of spiking activities (Bengio et al. 2015). Although it is widely accepted that the
graded activation of these analog neurons is equivalent to
the firing rate of spiking neurons inside the biological neural network (Rueckauer et al. 2017), the view that precise
∗

Jibin Wu and Yansong Chua are the corresponding authors
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1327

