The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exact and Approximate Weighted Model Integration with
Probability Density Functions Using Knowledge Compilation
Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires, Anton Dries, Luc De Raedt
KU Leuven, Belgium
firstname.lastname@cs.kuleuven.be

Abstract

1. We introduce the probability density semiring.
2. We show how this allows us to cast WMI within AMC and
thereby to use the general body of literature on knowledge
compilation.
3. We introduce Symbo, a solver for WMI that realizes
knowledge compilation and exact symbolic inference.
4. We introduce Sampo, a solver for WMI that realizes
knowledge compilation and approximate inference via
sampling.
Symbo exploits the PSI-Solver by (Gehr, Misailovic, and
Vechev 2016) to simplify algebraic expressions, while Sampo
is based on mapping the arithmetic circuit that results from
the KC step onto Edward (Tran et al. 2016), a probabilistic
programming language wrapped around TensorFlow (Abadi
et al. 2015). The latter transforms approximate inference in
probabilistic programs into an embarrassingly parallelizable
task.

Weighted model counting has recently been extended to
weighted model integration, which can be used to solve hybrid
probabilistic reasoning problems. Such problems involve both
discrete and continuous probability distributions. We show
how standard knowledge compilation techniques (to SDDs
and d-DNNFs) apply to weighted model integration, and use
it in two novel solvers, one exact and one approximate solver.
Furthermore, we extend the class of employable weight functions to actual probability density functions instead of mere
polynomial weight functions.

1

Introduction

The state-of-the-art method for inference in probabilistic
graphical models reduces inference to weighted model counting (WMC) (Chavira and Darwiche 2008), while utilizing
knowledge compilation (KC) (Darwiche and Marquis 2002).
Knowledge compilation transforms the logical structure underlying a graphical model into an equivalent target representation. Although the knowledge compilation step itself is
computationally hard, answering queries in the target representation only requires polytime.
Standard weighted model counting only supports discrete
probability distributions. To repair this omission, WMC
has recently been extended towards weighted model integration (WMI) (Belle, Passerini, and Van den Broeck
2015), supporting additionally continuous variables. However, the weight functions supported within current formulations of WMI (Belle, Passerini, and Van den Broeck 2015;
Belle et al. 2016; Morettin, Passerini, and Sebastiani 2017;
Kolb et al. 2018) allow only for piecewise polynomial functions. Moreover, none of these prior works has studied the
applicability of knowledge compilation to WMI.
The key contribution of this paper is that we show how to
handle actual probability density functions instead of piecewise polynomials in the context of WMI by applying standard knowledge compilation techniques. To this end, we cast
weighted model integration within the framework of algebraic model counting (AMC) (Kimmig, Van den Broeck, and
De Raedt 2017). More specifically, we make the following
contributions:

2
2.1

Preliminaries

Weighted Model Integration

Compared to the well-known SAT problem, where the problem consists of deciding whether there is a satisfying assignment to a logical formula or not, an SMT problem generalizes
SAT to additionally allowing the use of expressions formulated in a background theory.
Example 1. Consider the SMT theory broken:
broken ↔ (no cool ∧ (t > 20)) ∨ (t > 30)

(1)

where no cool is a Boolean variable and t a real-valued
variable. SMT then answers the question whether or not there
is a satisfying assignment to the formula for the variables
no cool and t.
In this paper we consider real arithmetic, non-linear real
arithmetic and linear real arithmetic SMT formulas.
Definition 1. (SMT(RA) (real arithmetics)) Let R denote
the set of reals, B = {⊥, >} the set of Boolean values, let B be
a set of M Boolean and X a set of N real variables. An atomic
formula is an expression of the form g(X) ./ c, where c ∈ R,
./∈ {=, ,, ≥, ≤, >, <}, and g : RN → R.
We then define SMT(RA) theories as Boolean combinations (by means of the standard Boolean operators

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7825

