The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Projection Convolutional Neural
Networks for 1-bit CNNs via Discrete Back Propagation
Jiaxin Gu,1 Ce Li,2 Baochang Zhang,1∗ Jungong Han,3 Xianbin Cao,1
Jianzhuang Liu,4 David Doermann5
1

Beihang University, 2 China University of Mining and Technology, Beijing
3
Lancaster University, 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 5 University at Buffalo
{jxgu1016, bczhang}@buaa.edu.cn, celi@cumtb.edu.cn

Abstract

process. In (Courbariaux et al. 2016; Rastegari et al. 2016),
XNOR-Net is presented where both the kernel weights
and inputs attached to the convolution are approximated
with binary values, thus allowing an efficient implementation of the convolutional operations. In (Zhou et al. 2016;
Lin, Zhao, and Pan 2017), DoReFa-Net exploits bit convolution kernels with low bitwidth parameter gradients to accelerate both training and inference. While ABC-Net (Lin,
Zhao, and Pan 2017) adopts multiple binary weights and activations to approximate full-precision weights such that the
prediction accuracy degradation can be alleviated. More recently, a simple fixed scaling method incorporated in a 1-bit
convolutional layer is employed to binarize CNNs, obtaining
closet-to-baseline results with minimal changes (McDonnell
2018). Modulated convolutional networks (MCNs) are presented in (Wang et al. 2018) to merely binarize the kernels,
which achieves better results than the baselines.
While reducing storage requirements greatly, these BNNs
generally have significant accuracy degradation, compared
to those using the full-precision kernels. This is primarily due to the following two reasons. (1) The binarization of CNNs could be essentially solved based on the discrete optimization, but it has long been neglected in previous work. Discrete optimization methods can often provide
strong guarantees about the quality of the solutions they find
and lead to much better performance in practice (Felzenszwalb and Zabih 2007; Kim et al. 2017; Laude et al. 2018).
(2) The loss caused by the binarization of CNNs has not been
well studied.
In this paper, we propose a new discrete back propagation
via projection (DBPP) algorithm to efficiently build our projection convolutional neural networks (PCNNs) and obtain
highly-accurate yet robust BNNs. In the theoretical framework, for the first time, we achieve a projection loss by taking advantage of our DBPP algorithm, i.e., capacity of discrete optimization, on model compression. The advantages
of the projection loss also lie in that, on the one hand, it can
be jointly learned with the conventional cross-entropy loss in
the same pipeline as back propagation; on the other hand, it
can enrich diversity and thus improve the modeling capacity
of PCNNs. As shown in Fig.1, we develop a generic projection convolution layer which can be easily used in existing
convolutional networks, where both quantized kernels and
the projection are jointly optimized in an end-to-end manner.

The advancement of deep convolutional neural networks
(DCNNs) has driven significant improvement in the accuracy of recognition systems for many computer vision tasks.
However, their practical applications are often restricted in
resource-constrained environments. In this paper, we introduce projection convolutional neural networks (PCNNs) with
a discrete back propagation via projection (DBPP) to improve
the performance of binarized neural networks (BNNs). The
contributions of our paper include: 1) for the first time, the
projection function is exploited to efficiently solve the discrete back propagation problem, which leads to a new highly
compressed CNNs (termed PCNNs); 2) by exploiting multiple projections, we learn a set of diverse quantized kernels
that compress the full-precision kernels in a more efficient
way than those proposed previously; 3) PCNNs achieve the
best classification performance compared to other state-ofthe-art BNNs on the ImageNet and CIFAR datasets.

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have shown
significant ability to learn powerful feature representations
directly from image pixels. However, their success has come
with requirements for large amounts of memory and computational power, and the practical applications of most DCNNs are limited on smaller embedded platforms and in mobile applications. In light of this, substantial research efforts
are being invested in saving bandwidth and computational
power by pruning and compressing redundant parameters
generated by convolution kernels (Boureau, Ponce, and LeCun 2010; Zhou et al. 2017).
One typically promising method is to compress the representations via approximating floating point weights of the
convolution kernels by binary values (Rastegari et al. 2016;
Courbariaux et al. 2016; Courbariaux, Bengio, and David
2015). Recently, Local Binary Convolution (LBC) layers
have been introduced in (Xu, Boddeti, and Savvides 2016),
to approximate the non-linearly activated responses of standard convolutional layers. In (Courbariaux, Bengio, and
David 2015), a BinaryConnect scheme using real-valued
weights as a key reference is exploited for the binarization
∗

Baochang Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8344

