The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Stepping Stones to Inductive Synthesis of Low-Level Looping Programs
Christopher D. Rosin
Parity Computing, Inc.
San Diego, California, USA
christopher.rosin@gmail.com

Abstract

out of reach without using significant problem-specific background knowledge (Cai, Shin, and Song 2017; Agapitos and
Lucas 2006).
We seek a simple method that can make progress and
provide insight on synthesis problems requiring algorithmic
subtlety. We target low-level programming languages, close
to assembly language; this provides some grounding (avoiding open-ended exploration of high-level language design),
and has the potential to yield a large speed advantage. We
focus on inductive program synthesis1 from input/output examples, which provides an opportunity to automatically create programs without presupposing the algorithmic form of
the solution (other approaches such as synthesis from natural language description (Yin and Neubig 2017) or deduction
from formal specifications (Manna and Waldinger 1980) often constrain the form of the solution (Gulwani, Polozov,
and Singh 2017)). Our goal is pure inductive synthesis: without problem-specific primitives or background knowledge.
The search space of programs is vast, and a key challenge is to identify cues that are available to guide search
towards correct programs. We focus on stochastic search in
the hopes of tackling programs that are prohibitively complex for exhaustive methods (we note though that work
on exhaustive methods is progressing (Balog et al. 2017;
So and Oh 2017)). While problems requiring simple loops
(e.g. same operation on each array element) can provide a
clear path for stochastic search to hillclimb, problems requiring more complex loops could lack partially-correct stepping stone programs that enable progress to complete solutions.
We find a simple Delayed Acceptance extension to hillclimbing can identify stepping stones that lead to successful synthesis of looping programs with challenging requirements. Our method, MAKESPEARE, performs well on established benchmarks and on previously unsolved problems.
The main contributions of this paper are:

Inductive program synthesis, from input/output examples,
can provide an opportunity to automatically create programs from scratch without presupposing the algorithmic
form of the solution. For induction of general programs with
loops (as opposed to loop-free programs, or synthesis for
domain-specific languages), the state of the art is at the
level of introductory programming assignments. Most problems that require algorithmic subtlety, such as fast sorting,
have remained out of reach without the benefit of significant
problem-specific background knowledge. A key challenge is
to identify cues that are available to guide search towards
correct looping programs. We present MAKESPEARE, a
simple delayed-acceptance hillclimbing method that synthesizes low-level looping programs from input/output examples. During search, delayed acceptance bypasses small gains
to identify significantly-improved stepping stone programs
that tend to generalize and enable further progress. The
method performs well on a set of established benchmarks,
and succeeds on the previously unsolved “Collatz Numbers”
program synthesis problem. Additional benchmarks include
the problem of rapidly sorting integer arrays, in which we observe the emergence of comb sort (a Shell sort variant that
is empirically fast). MAKESPEARE has also synthesized a
record-setting program on one of the puzzles from the TIS100 assembly language programming game.

1

Introduction

Automated synthesis of programs from user requirements
has a long history as an AI research goal (Waldinger and
Lee 1969; Gulwani, Polozov, and Singh 2017). Recent interest in the problem has led to synthesis success for nonlooping programs (e.g. clever bit-twiddling (Gulwani et al.
2011)), partial program “sketches” with holes to be synthesized (Solar-Lezama 2008; So and Oh 2017), domainspecific languages (e.g. Flash Fill in Microsoft Excel (Gulwani 2011)), and other areas. But for synthesis of general
looping programs from scratch, the state of the art is at
the level of introductory programming exercises (Helmuth
and Spector 2015b; Helmuth, McPhee, and Spector 2018;
Feser, Chaudhuri, and Dillig 2015). Most problems requiring algorithmic subtlety, such as fast sorting, have remained

1
“Program synthesis” here refers generally to the automated
creation of programs that meet user-supplied specifications, and inductive program synthesis indicates that the specification takes the
form of input/output examples – see (Pantridge et al. 2017) for similar usage. Others have used the term program induction to indicate
that the program is implicit, e.g. in a neural network (Devlin et al.
2017), instead of being explicitly generated. In this paper though,
we seek to output an explicit program.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2362

