The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Eliminating Latent Discrimination: Train Then Mask
Soheil Ghili∗

Ehsan Kazemi∗†

Amin Karbasi

School of Management
Yale University

Yale Institute for Network Science
Yale University

Yale Institute for Network Science
Yale University

Abstract

law prohibits the use of protected attributes (directly or indirectly) for several decision-making tasks (Ellis and Watson
2012). A naive approach towards fairness is to discard sensitive attributes from training data. However, if other (seemingly) non-sensitive variables are correlated with the protected ones, the learning algorithm may use them to proxy
for protected features in order to achieve a lower loss.1 We
call this a latent form of discrimination. Mitigating this kind
of latent discrimination has received considerable attention
in the machine learning community and interesting heuristic algorithms have been proposed (e.g., Zemel et al. (2013)
and Kamiran and Calders (2009)). Since this type of discrimination is latent, most previous works fail to provide an
operational description of this notion and usually resort to
descriptive statements.
The first contribution of this paper is to propose a new operational definition of fairness, called EL-fairness (it stands
for explicit and latent fairness), that controls for sensitive
features. This definition rules out explicit discrimination in
the conventional way by treating individuals with similar
non-sensitive features similarly. It also provides a detection
mechanism for observing latent discrimination of a classifier by comparing simple statistics within protected-feature
groups to the ones provided by the optimum unconstrained
classifier (trained on the full data set).
Proxying or omitted variable bias (OVB) occurs when a
feature which is correlated with some other attributes is left
out. In many models, for example, linear regression, it is
well known that provided enough data, keeping the sensitive
feature controls for OVB which enables us to separate its
effect from other correlated attributes (Seber and Lee 2012).
Building on our notion of EL-fairness and existing methods
to remove/reduce the proxying effect or OVB (e.g., Žliobaitė
and Custers (2016)), we develop a procedure for obtaining
fair classifiers. In particular, we show that in order to eliminate latent discrimination one needs to consider the sensitive
features in the training phase (in order to obtain reliable
statistics to control for such features) and then mask them in
evaluation/test phase. This way, we can ensure that correlated
variables do not proxy the sensitive features and, more impor-

How can we control for latent discrimination in predictive
models? How can we provably remove it? Such questions are
at the heart of algorithmic fairness and its impacts on society.
In this paper, we define a new operational fairness criteria, inspired by the well-understood notion of omitted variable-bias
in statistics and econometrics. Our notion of fairness effectively controls for sensitive features and provides diagnostics
for deviations from fair decision making. We then establish
analytical and algorithmic results about the existence of a fair
classifier in the context of supervised learning. Our results
readily imply a simple, but rather counter-intuitive, strategy
for eliminating latent discrimination. In order to prevent other
features proxying for sensitive features, we need to include
sensitive features in the training phase, but exclude them in
the test/evaluation phase while controlling for their effects.
We evaluate the performance of our algorithm on several realworld datasets and show how fairness for these datasets can
be improved with a very small loss in accuracy.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, many sensitive decision-making tasks rely on
automated statistical and machine learning algorithms. Examples include targeted advertising, credit scores and loans,
college admissions, prediction of domestic violence, and
even investment strategies for venture capital groups. There
has been a growing concern about errors, unfairness, and
transparency of such mechanisms from governments, civil
organizations and research societies (White House 2016;
Barocas and Selbst 2016; ProPublica 2018). That is, whether
or not we can prevent discrimination against protected groups
and attributes (e.g., race, gender, etc). Clearly, training a
machine learning algorithm with the standard aim of loss
function minimization (i.e., high accuracy, low prediction
error, etc) may result in predictive behaviors that are unfair towards certain groups or individuals (Hardt et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2018; Zhang and Bareinboim 2018).
In many real-world applications, we are not allowed to use
some sensitive features. For example, EU anti-discrimination
∗

The first two authors have equally contributed to this paper.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

†

In Section 6 we observe that in many datasets: (i) the admission
rate is hugely against the protected groups, and (ii) there are several
features that are tightly correlated with the sensitive attribute.

3672

