The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

End-to-End Structure-Aware
Convolutional Networks for Knowledge Base Completion
Chao Shang,1∗ Yun Tang,2 Jing Huang,2 Jinbo Bi,1 Xiaodong He,2 Bowen Zhou2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
2
JD AI Research, Mountain View, CA, USA
{chao.shang, jinbo.bi}@uconn.edu, {yun.tang, jing.huang, xiaodong.he, bowen.zhou}@jd.com

Abstract

ommendation and question answering. Although these KBs
have already contained millions of entities and triplets, they
are far from complete compared to existing facts and newly
added knowledge of the real world. Therefore knowledge
base completion is important in order to predict new triplets
based on existing ones and thus further expand KBs.
One of the recent active research areas for knowledge
base completion is knowledge graph embedding: it encodes
the semantics of entities and relations in a continuous lowdimensional vector space (called embeddings). These embeddings are then used for predicting new relations. Started
from a simple and effective approach called TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), many knowledge graph embedding methods have been proposed, such as TransH (Wang et al. 2014),
TransR (Lin et al. 2015), DistMult (Yang et al. 2014),
TransD (Ji et al. 2015), ComplEx (Trouillon et al. 2016),
STransE (Nguyen et al. 2016). Some surveys (Nguyen 2017;
Wang et al. 2017) give details and comparisons of these embedding methods.
The most recent ConvE (Dettmers et al. 2017) model uses
2D convolution over embeddings and multiple layers of nonlinear features, and achieves the state-of-the-art performance
on common benchmark datasets for knowledge graph link
prediction. In ConvE, the embeddings of s and r are reshaped and concatenated into an input matrix and fed to the
convolution layer. Convolutional filters of n × n are used
to output feature maps that are across different dimensional
embedding entries. Thus ConvE does not keep the translational property as TransE which is an additive embedding
vector operation: es + er ≈ eo ((Nguyen et al. 2017)). In
this paper, we remove the reshape step of ConvE and operate convolutional filters directly in the same dimensions of s
and r. This modification gives better performance compared
with the original ConvE, and has an intuitive interpretation
which keeps the global learning metric the same for s, r, and
o in an embedding triple (es , er , eo ). We name this embedding as Conv-TransE.
ConvE also does not incorporate connectivity structure in
the knowledge graph into the embedding space. In contrast,
graph convolutional network (GCN) has been an effective
tool to create node embeddings which aggregate local information in the graph neighborhood for each node (Kipf
and Welling 2016b; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017a;
Kipf and Welling 2016a; Pham et al. 2017; Shang et al.

Knowledge graph embedding has been an active research
topic for knowledge base completion, with progressive improvement from the initial TransE, TransH, DistMult et al
to the current state-of-the-art ConvE. ConvE uses 2D convolution over embeddings and multiple layers of nonlinear features to model knowledge graphs. The model can be
efficiently trained and scalable to large knowledge graphs.
However, there is no structure enforcement in the embedding space of ConvE. The recent graph convolutional network (GCN) provides another way of learning graph node
embedding by successfully utilizing graph connectivity structure. In this work, we propose a novel end-to-end StructureAware Convolutional Network (SACN) that takes the benefit
of GCN and ConvE together. SACN consists of an encoder of
a weighted graph convolutional network (WGCN), and a decoder of a convolutional network called Conv-TransE. WGCN
utilizes knowledge graph node structure, node attributes and
edge relation types. It has learnable weights that adapt the
amount of information from neighbors used in local aggregation, leading to more accurate embeddings of graph nodes.
Node attributes in the graph are represented as additional
nodes in the WGCN. The decoder Conv-TransE enables the
state-of-the-art ConvE to be translational between entities and
relations while keeps the same link prediction performance
as ConvE. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
SACN on standard FB15k-237 and WN18RR datasets, and it
gives about 10% relative improvement over the state-of-theart ConvE in terms of HITS@1, HITS@3 and HITS@10.

Introduction
Over the recent years, large-scale knowledge bases (KBs),
such as Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), DBpedia (Auer et
al. 2007), NELL (Carlson et al. 2010) and YAGO3 (Mahdisoltani, Biega, and Suchanek 2013), have been built to store
structured information about common facts. KBs are multirelational graphs whose nodes represent entities and edges
represent relationships between entities, and the edges are
labeled with different relations. The relationships are organized in the forms of (s, r, o) triplets (e.g. entity s = Abraham Lincoln, relation r = DateOfBirth, entity o = 02-121809). These KBs are extensively used for web search, rec∗

Work done during an internship at JD AI Research.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3060

