The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Scene Text Detection with Supervised Pyramid Context Network
Enze Xie,1,3∗ Yuhang Zang,2,3∗ Shuai Shao,3 Gang Yu,3 Cong Yao,3 Guangyao Li1†
1

2

Department of Comuter Science and Technology, Tongji University
School of Information and Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Megvii (Face++) Technology Inc.
{xieenze, lgy}@tongji.edu.cn, yuhangzang@foxmail.com, {shaoshuai, yugang, yaocong}@megvii.com

Abstract
cls score: 0.70
fus score: 0.75

Scene text detection methods based on deep learning have
achieved remarkable results over the past years. However,
due to the high diversity and complexity of natural scenes,
previous state-of-the-art text detection methods may still produce a considerable amount of false positives, when applied
to images captured in real-world environments. To tackle this
issue, mainly inspired by Mask R-CNN, we propose in this
paper an effective model for scene text detection, which is
based on Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) and instance segmentation. We propose a supervised pyramid context network (SPCNET) to precisely locate text regions while suppressing false positives.
Benefited from the guidance of semantic information and
sharing FPN, SPCNET obtains significantly enhanced performance while introducing marginal extra computation. Experiments on standard datasets demonstrate that our SPCNET
clearly outperforms start-of-the-art methods. Specifically, it
achieves an F-measure of 92.1% on ICDAR2013, 87.2% on
ICDAR2015, 74.1% on ICDAR2017 MLT and 82.9% on
Total-Text.

cls score: 0.78
fus score: 0.39

Figure 1: Visualization of detection results and semantic
segmentation feature maps. Left:The detection result with
classification score and fusion score. The fused score is calculated by Re-Score mechanism. Right: The feature map for
text segmentation.

Introduction

The first challenge is false positives (FP). Some specific
scenarios such as autonomous driving require high precision in text detection. To the best of our knowledge, little
research pays attention to false positive problem in scene
text detection. Second, flexible locating text in arbitrary
shape still remains challenges. Text in natural scenes can
be in multi-oriented, multi-lingual or curved forms, making network difficult to distinguish FPs. Most of the existing
methods are specifically designed to detect multi-oriented
text and may fall short when handling with curved text.
TextSnake (Long et al. 2018) uses ordered disks to represent
curved text, but it still needs time-consuming and complicated post-processing.
To detect text with various forms, instance segmentation
based method is adopted. Modern instance segmentation
methods, such as Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017a), are usually
developed as a multi-task learning problem: (1) differentiate foreground object proposals from background and assign them with proper class labels. (2) perform regression
and segmentation on each foreground proposal.
Nevertheless, simply transfer Mask-RCNN to the text detection scenario is prone to cause some problems, for the

Reading text in the wild, as a fundamental task in the field
of computer vision, has been widely studied. Many applications in the real world rely on accurate text localization, such
as license plate recognition, autonomous driving, and document analysis. Recently, most previous works mainly focus
on several challenging issues in natural scene text detection,
such as multi-oriented text (Lyu et al. 2018b), large aspect
ratios (Liao et al. 2018), and difficulty in separating adjacent
text instances (Deng et al. 2018). However, due to the large
differences in foreground text and background objects, as
well as the variety of text changes in shape, color, font, orientation and scale, together with extreme illumination and
occlusion, there are still many challenges to be addressed
for text detection in natural scenes.
∗
indicates equal contribution. This work was done when Enze
Xie and Yuhang Zang were interns in Detection Group, Face++,
Beijing, China.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9038

