The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robust Principal Component
Analysis-Based Infrared Small Target Detection
Qiwei Chen, Cheng Wu,∗ Yiming Wang
School of Rail Transportation
Soochow University

Abstract

The optical flow field method detects the motion state of the
object by the motion vector, and the calculation complexity
is high. Aiming at these problems, this paper proposes an infrared small target detection method based on RPCA (Candes et al. 2009). Under the augmented Lagrangian multiplier, the original iterative process is improved to make the
algorithm more simple and effective.

A method based on Robust Principle Component Analysis
(RPCA) technique is proposed to detect small targets in infrared images. Using the low rank characteristic of background and the sparse characteristic of target, the observed
image is regarded as the sum of a low-rank background matrix and a sparse outlier matrix, and then the decomposition
is solved by the RPCA. The infrared small target is extracted
from the single-frame image or multi-frame sequence. In order to get more efficient algorithm, the iteration process in
the augmented Lagrange multiplier method is improved. The
simulation results show that the method can detect out the
small target precisely and efficiently.

RPCA-based detection model
For infrared small target detection, the basic requirement
is to separate the moving target from the background. The
background area of the infrared image is mainly a smooth
scene with a large area of gentle and subtle changes. They
tend to exhibit a large continuous distribution in space and
a gradual transition state in strength. The small target of the
infrared image generally refers to a target that has a small
pixel and a low signal-to-noise, and appears as an isolated
point whose brightness is higher than the surroundings.
If the image is divided into blocks and then each image
block is sequentially converted into a column vector, we
can form an observation matrix. Since the background has
a strong correlation in the gray space, only the matrix composed of the background pixels has the low rank, and the
target itself has the sparse property. Thus the observation
matrix can be considered to having a low rank matrix and a
sparse matrix. In RPCA, if one part of a matrix has low rank
and the other part has sparsity, then we can separate and recover these parts of the matrix by convex optimization.
(i) RPCA model: Suppose there is an observation matrix
of size m × n, which can be decomposed into M = L + S,
where L is a sparse matrix of m × n. The low rank matrix L
can be recovered from the observation matrix M :

Introduction
As an important means of remote sensing and battlefield perception, infrared small target detection on sky background
has a wide range of applications in defense technology (Caefer, Silverman, and Mooney 2000). In order to provide the
target information as quickly as possible, and to obtain a
sufficiently long reaction time for the defense system, the
infrared imaging system is required to perform detection on
the target at a long distance. At this time, the target imaging
area is small, the contrast is low, and structural information
such as shape, size, and texture is lacking. At the same time,
due to the complex scenes and large span scenes in the air
scene, long-distance imaging effects are often affected by
many factors such as field of view selection, weather, day
and night and clouds, which may cause the infrared targets
to be submerged in complex backgrounds. Therefore, the detection of small targets is very difficult (Zhao et al. 2011).
Traditional infrared target detection methods include
the background difference method, the inter-frame difference method and the optical flow field method (Beck and
Teboulle 2009). The background difference method subtracts the current image from the background reference
model, and is sensitive to background light changes. The
inter-frame difference method is based on the difference between the front and back frames, and can adapt to changes in
the external environment. But when the change between the
target frames is not obvious, the detection will be difficult.

min rank(L) + λ kSk0

s.t. M = L + S

(1)

where rank(L) represents the rank of the matrix L, kSk0
represents the l0 -norm of the matrix S, i.e. the number of
non-zero values in the S. In fact, Equation (1) is an NP problem that is difficult to solve. It can be transformed into:
min kLk∗ + λ kSk1

s.t. M = L + S

(2)

where kLk∗ represents the kernel norm of the matrix L,
which is the sum of the singular values of the matrix L. kSk1
represents the l1 -norm of S, λ is the
p weighting parameter.
For the m × n matrix, λ is set to 1/ max(m, n).

∗

Corresponding author, (cwu@suda.edu.cn)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9925

