The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

FA N DA: A Novel Approach to Perform Follow-Up Query Analysis
Qian Liu,†∗ Bei Chen,§ Jian-Guang Lou,§ Ge Jin,♦∗ Dongmei Zhang§
† Beihang University, Beijing, China
§ Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
♦ Peking University, Beijing, China

qian.liu@buaa.edu.cn; {beichen, jlou, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com; elvisking@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

their Wizard-of-Oz experiment, up to 74.58% queries follow
immediately after the question they are related to.
In this paper, we focus on immediate follow-up queries,
and we formulate the follow-up query analysis problem
here. Consider a context-independent question and a question immediately following it, respectively named as precedent query and follow-up query. Generally speaking, the
follow-up query, like “How about 2018?” in the above example, would be too ambiguous to be parsed into executable
SQL by itself. Therefore, follow-up query analysis aims to
generate a fused query, which resolves the ambiguity of the
follow-up query in the context of its precedent query. Compared to the follow-up query, the fused query reflects users’
intent explicitly and facilitates better downstream parsing.
In reality, there are various scenarios for follow-up queries,
which can make the problem challenging. Setlur et al. (2016)
introduce the scenarios of single queries in their realistic
system, inspired by which, we summarize typical scenarios
of follow-up queries in Table 1. For instance, the followup query “Compare it with Bill Collins.” aims to perform a
comparison, and “Show their number.” belongs to the scenario of calculation and statistics.
Several attempts have been made to analyze follow-up
queries in specific datasets. For example, in the air travel
domain, the ATIS dataset collects user queries, including
follow-up ones, and their corresponding SQL from a realistic flight planning system (Dahl et al. 1994). Using this
dataset, Miller et al. (1996) employ a fully statistical model
with semantic frames; Zettlemoyer and Collins (2009) train
a semantic parser using context-independent data and generate context-dependent logical forms; and Suhr, Iyer, and
Artzi (2018) present a relatively complex sequence-tosequence model. While the ATIS dataset is realistic, it is
limited to a particular domain. All these methods are specific to it and hard to transfer across datasets. More recently,
the Sequential Question Answering (SQA) dataset is proposed along with a search-based method (Iyyer, Yih, and
Chang 2017). However, SQA focuses on relatively simple
follow-up scenarios, where the answer to follow-up queries
is always a subset of the answer to the precedent query.
While some of the previous efforts somehow follow the
idea of semantic parsing methods, typical analysis scenarios, such as compare, group and sort, are not covered in
ATIS or SQA. The lack of public high-quality and richer

Recent work on Natural Language Interfaces to Databases
(NLIDB) has attracted considerable attention. NLIDB allow users to search databases using natural language instead
of SQL-like query languages. While saving the users from
having to learn query languages, multi-turn interaction with
NLIDB usually involves multiple queries where contextual
information is vital to understand the users’ query intents.
In this paper, we address a typical contextual understanding problem, termed as follow-up query analysis. In spite
of its ubiquity, follow-up query analysis has not been well
studied due to two primary obstacles: the multifarious nature of follow-up query scenarios and the lack of high-quality
datasets. Our work summarizes typical follow-up query scenarios and provides a new FollowUp dataset with 1000 query
triples on 120 tables. Moreover, we propose a novel approach FA N DA, which takes into account the structures of
queries and employs a ranking model with weakly supervised
max-margin learning. The experimental results on FollowUp
demonstrate the superiority of FA N DA over multiple baselines across multiple metrics.

1

Introduction

Natural Language Interfaces to Databases (NLIDB) relieve
users from the burden of learning about the techniques behind the queries. They allow users to query databases using
natural language utterances, which offers a better interactive
experience compared to conventional approaches. By using
semantic parsing techniques, utterances are automatically
translated to executable forms (e.g. Structured Query Language or SQL) to retrieve answers from databases. The majority of the previous studies on NLIDB assumes that queries
are context-independent and analyzes them separately. However, if we want to make NLIDB systems conform to users’
mental models, it is vital to take contextual information into
account. As users often pose new queries based on the past
turns during a multi-turn interaction with the NLIDB system in a conversation. For example, given a query utterance,
“Show the sales in 2017.”, the user can simply say “How
about 2018?” instead of the complete query “Show the sales
in 2018.”. In fact, Bertomeu et al. (2006) point out that, in
∗

Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6770

