The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Multi-Agent Communication Framework for
Question-Worthy Phrase Extraction and Question Generation
Siyuan Wang,1 Zhongyu Wei,1∗ Zhihao Fan,1 Yang Liu,2 Xuanjing Huang3
1

School of Data Science, Fudan University, China
2
LAIX Inc., China
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
{18110980001,zywei,18210980005}@fudan.edu.cn, yang.liu@liulishuo.com, xjhuang@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
Question generation aims to produce questions automatically
given a piece of text as input. Existing research follows a
sequence-to-sequence fashion that constructs a single question based on the input. Considering each question usually
focuses on a specific fragment of the input, especially in the
scenario of reading comprehension, it is reasonable to identify the corresponding focus before constructing the question. In this paper, we propose to identify question-worthy
phrases first and generate questions with the assistance of
these phrases. We introduce a multi-agent communication
framework, taking phrase extraction and question generation as two agents, and learn these two tasks simultaneously
via message passing mechanism. The results of experiments
show the effectiveness of our framework: we can extract
question-worthy phrases, which are able to improve the performance of question generation. Besides, our system is able
to extract more than one question worthy phrases and generate multiple questions accordingly.

Figure 1: An example sentence from SQuAD with multiple questions. Phrases of light italic font and underlined are
corresponding focuses (answers in the dataset).

Introduction

question generation (NQG), and has become the state of the
art.
As shown in the example in Figure 1 from the dataset of
Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD) (Rajpurkar
et al. 2016) for reading comprehension, a question generated for the input sentence usually focuses on a specific
fragment of the input that is deemed to contain significant
information. Besides, there are several focuses in an input
sentence. Based on these observations, we argue that a question generation system should be able to generate questions
according to various focuses in the input content. Zhou et
al. (2017) make a move by encoding the position of the
ground-truth answer as auxiliary feature for question generation. Although the performance has been improved, it
requires pre-identified answers which are not available in
the real-environment for question generation. To tackle this
problem, we propose to identify focuses from the input content first and generate questions using such information as
assistance.
In the input text, not all but some content pieces are significant. Therefore, we propose a concept: question-worthy
phrases, i.e. phrases which are worthwhile to be asked
about. By extracting multiple phrases, our system is designed to generate various questions with different focuses.

Question generation has attracted attention from the research
area of Natural Language Processing in recent years. Given
a piece of text, automatic question generation aims to produce questions according to the input content. It acts as an
essential component in some interactive systems, such as dialogue system (Piwek et al. 2007). It also has various applications in educational area, e.g., generate questions for
reading comprehension. Besides, it is helpful for constructing question sets for the task of question answering (QA) to
further improve the performance of QA systems.
Most previous studies on question generation are rulebased relying on hand-crafted features. However, these features are usually hard to design and are difficult to be transferred among different domains. Inspired by the success of
the encoder-decoder structure in machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015) and image captioning (Xu
et al. 2015), Du et al. (2017) propose to apply sequence-tosequence model with attention mechanism for question generation without human designed rules, which is called neural
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7168

