The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

A Genetic Algorithm for Finding a Small and Diverse Set of
Recent News Stories on a Given Subject: How We Generate AAAI’s AI-Alert
Joshua Eckroth, Eric Schoen
i2k Connect, LLC

Abstract

alert containing the week’s most important and interesting
news stories about artificial intelligence and machine learning. Known as AI-Alert, this service is an official publication of AAAI and received without charge by virtually all
its members and affiliates and many members of the interested public, nearly 11,000 people in all. Each alert contains
just 10 stories from the 1,500 or so found by NewsFinder
each week from nearly one hundred sources including AAAI
journals and conferences, arXiv.org, links on Twitter marked
with the #artificialintelligence hashtag, and many reputable
news sources.
In the first year of our automated AI-Alert, stories were
selected for the alert according to a scoring algorithm we
call “TopClass.” In short, this algorithm grouped the week’s
stories according to their topic classifications, then picked
one story from each of these groups. We eventually felt this
algorithm was too simplistic as we sometimes saw too many
stories from the same day of week or same news source.
We also saw that the algorithm sometimes failed to pick a
good news source for a specific event that was reported by
several sources in the week. Thus, we realized that story
selection was a multicriteria decision problem and a technique like genetic algorithms may be able to do a better job.
We developed a new genetic algorithm for story selection
and conducted a six-month experiment in which readers received either the original TopClass selections, the new genetic algorithm selections, or random stories in their alert.
After concluding the experiment, we are able to report in
this paper that the genetic algorithm indeed performed significantly better. Since the conclusion of our experiment in
July 2018, AI-Alert has used the genetic algorithm for all
weekly alerts.
To give a sense of reader engagement since July 2018, we
can report the percent of readers who open the email, the
percent who unsubscribe, and the percent of readers who
click at least one story (each story is displayed with its title and a link to the original source). AI-Alert consistently
beats Computer and Electronics industry marketing email
averages (MailChimp 2018) for open rate (our average 30%
vs. their 19%), unsubscribe rate (our 0.11% vs. their 0.29%),
and click rate (our 5.5% vs. their 2.0%). Except for a final
editorial review, in which we sometimes remove stories that
we believe are inappropriate and stories that were misidentified as newly-published, the production of each week’s alert

This paper describes the genetic algorithm used to select news
stories about artificial intelligence for AAAI’s weekly AIAlert, emailed to nearly 11,000 subscribers. Each week, about
1,500 news stories covering various aspects of artificial intelligence and machine learning are discovered by i2k Connect’s NewsFinder agent. Our challenge is to select just 10
stories from this collection that represent the important news
about AI. Since stories and topics do not necessarily repeat
in later weeks, we cannot use click tracking and supervised
learning to predict which stories or topics are most preferred
by readers. Instead, we must build a representative selection
of stories a priori, using information about each story’s topics, content, publisher, date of publication, and other features.
This paper describes a genetic algorithm that achieves this
task. We demonstrate its effectiveness by comparing several
engagement metrics from six months of “A/B testing” experiments that compare random story selection vs. a simple scoring algorithm vs. our new genetic algorithm.

Since 2001, the AITopics.org information portal has hosted
links to news, overviews, journal and conference papers,
and classic texts about artificial intelligence (Buchanan and
Glick 2002; Buchanan, Eckroth, and Smith 2013). Every
item is classified according to a deep hierarchy of AI-related
topics as well as industry topics such as transportation,
health and medicine, and education. Initially, all items on
the site were collected and classified manually. In 2010, we
introduced automatic discovery and classification of news
stories with NewsFinder (Eckroth et al. 2012).
AAAI had originally hired a webmaster who spent approximately ten hours a week to find and generate the alerts
manually (as part of other duties covered by an NSF grant).
We estimate it took about 3-6 minutes to search for and review each candidate story, or about 10-20 candidates per
hour. At a nominal $35 per hour the cost of the alert service
was thus about $18,000 per year to scan and select from a
few hundred candidate stories per week.
When the webmaster left, AAAI continued the manual
service with volunteer help. This task requires a person with
some knowledge of AI and editorial skill, so it was difficult
to find a replacement, and relying on volunteers is not sustainable. In January 2017, we automated the weekly email
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9357

