The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adaptive Optimization Framework for Control of Multi-Agent Systems
Anna Lukina
Technische Universitát Wien
Treitlstrasse 3, 1040, Vienna, Austria
+43(677)62044339, anna.lukina@tuwien.ac.at
http://logic-cs.at/phd/students/anna-lukina/

Abstract
The main focus of this work is an optimization-based framework for control of multi-agent systems that synthesizes actions steering a given system towards a specified state. The
primary motivation for the research presented is a fascination with birds, which save energy on long-distance flights
via forming a V-shape. We ask the following question: Are
V-formations a result of solving an optimization problem and
can this concept be utilized in multi-agent systems, particularly in drones swarms, to increase their safety and resilience?
We demonstrate that our framework can be applied to any
system modeled as a controllable Markov decision process
with a cost (reward) function. A key feature of the procedure
we propose is its automatic adaptation to the performance
of optimization towards a given global objective. Combining
model-predictive control and ideas from sequential MonteCarlo methods, we introduce a performance-based adaptive
horizon and implicitly build a Lyapunov function that guarantees convergence. We use statistical model-checking to verify
the algorithm and assess its reliability.

In this work, we aim to design a real-time adaptive optimization framework for the resilient formation control of
unmanned aerial vehicles in adversary environmental conditions. We envision that a bird-inspired optimization technique can help a collection of autonomous agents fly safely
and efficiently while maintaining formation.
The physical environment renders the problem of MAS
control extremely cumbersome. Due to a wealth of uncertainties introduced by physical processes, the system is
best described by stochastic models. Approximate prediction techniques, such as statistical model checking (SMC),
have therefore recently become increasingly popular (Grosu
and Smolka 2005; Clarke and Zuliani 2011). Controlling the
systems, that is, computing appropriate response actions depending on the environment, involves probabilistic state estimation, as well as optimal action prediction, i.e., choosing
the best next step by simulating the future. In this work, we
develop a general framework addressing questions of control
of multi-agent systems under uncertainty via optimization.

Taking Off

Ground Control

Airplane industry is making every effort to lower their fuel
costs by as little as one percent. In August 2017, Boeing
Co. and NASA announced a collaboration on reducing fuel
consumption of commercial flights by copying the ways in
which migratory birds successfully perform long-distance
flights (Bloomberg 2017). They do so by taking advantage of the upward air boost generated under the flapping
wings of their flock mates while the leader does most of the
work (Weimerskirch et al. 2001).
This line of research is ongoing and Boeing is actively
striving to collect evidence showing an expected ratio of
saved fuel for commercial aircraft. NASA, in turn, has
been long studying efficient nature-inspired approaches to
flights in the Earth’s atmosphere and outer space (NASA
2003). Their experiments with Boeing C-17 military transport planes (Forse 2013) and F-18 fighter jets (NASA 2001)
flying in formation showed an energy saving of at least 10
and 15 percent, respectively. The core of this work was inspired by these discoveries and designed to improve state-ofthe-art techniques for control of stochastic multi-agent systems (MAS) in general.

The main contribution of this work is a general adaptive optimization framework for control of MAS. Every bird-like
agent in our model moves in 2-dimensional space locally
governed by the same control law (Yang et al. 2016). Any
agent in the flock can detect the positions and velocities of
all other agents through sensors. Given this information, the
agent’s controller calculates an optimal acceleration based
on the three metrics we define: clear view, velocity matching, and upwash benefit. Formulated this way the optimization problem we solve leads to a V-formation as an optimal
state for the flock.
Ultimately, we synthesize an algorithm providing analytical guarantees of birds getting into a V-formation starting from a random configuration using a flying drones
simulation model and statistical model checking (Lukina
et al. 2017; Tiwari et al. 2017). Particle swarm optimization (Kennedy and Eberhart 1995) uniformly distributes the
particles in space and adjusts their velocities to lead the
swarm to satisfying a given property while using a random
factor in the adjustment rule in order to explore the space.
The resulting V-formation provides the birds with a clear
view of the front field and visibility of their lateral neighbors. Moreover, the formation is of great importance to

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9991

