The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Multi-Task Learning Approach for Answer
Selection: A Study and a Chinese Law Dataset∗
Wenyu Du,1,2 Baocheng Li,2,3 Min Yang,1 Qiang Qu,1 Ying Shen4
1

2

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Westlake University, 3 Northeast Normal University, 4 Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School

Abstract

often rely on a single attention function to capture important parts of the input. However, in different representation
subspaces, the important information may appear at different positions (Vaswani et al. 2017). (3) There is no publicly
available benchmark for CQA in the law domain.
In this study, all the aforementioned limitations are considered and alleviated to some extent. MTAS simultaneously
optimizes two coupled objectives: text categorization and
answer selection, in which a document modeling module
is share across tasks. The main purpose of our multi-task
model is to strengthen the representation learning of questions, and safeguard the performance of answer selection in
the scale corpus. To capture the comprehensive semantics of
the whole input sequence, we employ a multi-head attention
mechanism to focus on important information that may appear at different positions according to different representation subspaces. To empirically demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach, we created a Chinese data set (LawQA) in
law domain by collecting question and answer pairs from a
Chinese law forum.
The main contribution of our approach is three-fold: (i)
we design a novel multi-task framework with multi-head attention mechanism for answer selection. (ii) we create the
first Chinese law dataset (LawQA). The release of it would
push forward the research in this field. (iii) the experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of MTAS in answer
selection.

In this paper, we propose a Multi-Task learning approach for
Answer Selection (MTAS), motivated by the fact that humans
have no difficulty performing such task because they possess
capabilities of multiple domains (tasks). Specifically, MTAS
consists of two key components: (i) A category classification
model that learns rich category-aware document representation; (ii) An answer selection model that provides the matching scores of question-answer pairs. These two tasks work
on a shared document encoding layer, and they cooperate
to learn a high-quality answer selection system. In addition,
a multi-head attention mechanism is proposed to learn important information from different representation subspaces
at different positions. We manually annotate the first Chinese question answering dataset in law domain (denoted as
LawQA) to evaluate the effectiveness of our model. The experimental results show that our model MTAS consistently
outperforms the compared methods.1

Introduction
Law Community Question Answering (CQA) forums are
gaining popularity online since it offers a new opportunity
for individuals to get free legal advice directly from experienced lawyers and users. A question often has hundreds
of answers, which makes it time consuming for users to inspect the high-quality answers. Thus, it is essential that we
have automatic answer selection techniques to select good
answers to new questions in a community-created discussion forum. In the literature, answer selection have been extensively studied in the last decade using both non-neural
approaches (Wang and Manning 2010) and neural ones (Yu
et al. 2014).
Despite the effectiveness of previous studies, answer selection remains a challenge since conventional methods
still have several drawbacks. (1) Prior answer selection approaches basically apply a uniform model for the questions
from different text categories. However, according to what
we observe, the answer styles in different categories can
vary to a large degree in law domain. (2) Existing studies

Our Model
Given a question q, our model aims to rank a set of candidate
answers A = {a1 , . . . , an }. MTAS jointly trains two related
tasks: answer selection (primary task) and text categorization (auxiliary task). Next, we will elaborate these two tasks
in details.
BiLSTM First, we employ a word embedding layer to
convert each word w into a low-dimensional vector ew .
Then, we use a BiLSTM to learn the hidden states of words
in the question and answer. Formally, given the input word
embedding et at index t in the document, the forward and
→
−
←
−
backward hidden states h t ∈ Ru and h t ∈ Ru can be
updated as:
→
←
−
−
→
−
−−−−→ −
←−−−− ←
h t = LST M ( h t−1 , et ), h t = LST M ( h t−1 , et ) (1)

∗

M. Yang is corresponding author (min.yang@siat.ac.cn). This
work is supported by CAS Pioneer Hundred Talents Program.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Source code: https://github.com/Ange1o/MTAS-LawQA

9935

