The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Layer-Based Sequential Framework for Scene Generation with GANs
Mehmet Ozgur Turkoglu,1 William Thong,2 Luuk Spreeuwers,1 Berkay Kicanaoglu2
1

University of Twente, 2 University of Amsterdam
moturkoglu@gmail.com, l.j.spreeuwers@utwente.nl, {w.e.thong, b.kicanaoglu}@uva.nl

Abstract
The visual world we sense, interpret and interact everyday is a
complex composition of interleaved physical entities. Therefore, it is a very challenging task to generate vivid scenes of
similar complexity using computers. In this work, we present
a scene generation framework based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to sequentially compose a scene, breaking down the underlying problem into smaller ones. Different
than the existing approaches, our framework offers an explicit
control over the elements of a scene through separate background and foreground generators. Starting with an initially
generated background, foreground objects then populate the
scene one-by-one in a sequential manner. Via quantitative
and qualitative experiments on a subset of the MS-COCO
dataset, we show that our proposed framework produces not
only more diverse images but also copes better with affine
transformations and occlusion artifacts of foreground objects
than its counterparts.

Figure 1: The proposed image generation process. Given a
semantic layout map, our model composes the scene stepby-step. The first row shows the input semantic map and images generated by state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction

jects will appear?” or ”How will they appear?”, (ii) ability to
manipulate an existing scene, e.g. ”Make that cow larger!”,
while keeping rest of the scene unaltered. One possible explanation is that a single source representation such as a
noise vector z is insufficient to explain all the complexity
involved in describing a scene meaningfully.
In this paper, we tackle the scene composition task with a
layered structure modeling approach. This formulation helps
reducing the complexity of the problem since we deal with
one subproblem at a time. Furthermore, our framework allows for explicit control mechanisms at multiple levels such
as scene layout and individual object appearances which
lack in the previous approaches.
Our main idea resembles how a landscape painter would
first sketch out the overall structure, e.g. first a background
such as mountain ranges or rivers, and later embellish the
scene gradually with other elements to populate the scene,
e.g. foreground instances such as trees and animals. Our proposed sequential framework works in an analogous manner
to the procedure as depicted in Figure 1. It starts with a background generator to fill the canvas at the first time step. In every consecutive time step a foreground generator draws then
a new entities conditioned on an instance mask and the canvas passed on from previous time step giving the user control
over where and how the object will appear in the scene. Our

The visual world we sense, interpret and interact everyday
is a complex composition of interleaved physical entities.
Scenes we perceive can then be altered due to accidental
factors such as occlusions caused by inter-entity interactions
and self-occlusions caused by differing vantage points with
respect to the camera. These factors do not only make the
problem harder but also diversifies the possible space of configurations given a fixed set of observable entities. Consequently, scene generation is challenged by high sample complexity in addition to photorealism constraints.
Scene generation problem has been studied extensively
in (Hertzmann et al. 2001; Tappan 2008; Chen et al. 2009;
Isola and Liu 2013), however the interest has certainly expanded with the advent of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). Although recently there
have been great strides in the quality and resolution of generated images (Miyato et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018), it has
mostly been addressed as learning a mapping from a single
source, e.g. noise or semantic map, to target, e.g. images of
giraffes, discarding almost all of the underlying complexity
that forms a scene. This formulation sets two major restrictions on (i) ability to control scene elements, e.g. ”What obCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8901

