The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Feature Isolation for Hypothesis Testing in Retinal
Imaging: An Ischemic Stroke Prediction Case Study
Gilbert Lim,1 Zhan Wei Lim,1 Dejiang Xu,1 Daniel S.W. Ting,2
Tien Yin Wong,2 Mong Li Lee,1 Wynne Hsu1
1

2

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore National Eye Centre, Duke-NUS Medical School
Abstract

Stroke risk prediction, as opposed to general risk factor prediction, poses an additional difficulty in that images for positive cases are hard to come by. In particular, for the purposes of this study, patients and images positive for ischemic
stroke could only be drawn from a single source, the MultiCentre Retinal Stroke (MCRS) study (De Silva et al. 2009).
This rarity of condition-specific data is not uncommon in the
medical domain. Negative data was relatively abundant, and
could be obtained from multiple sources.
However, this naturally raises a question of the trained
models: did they actually learn what they were expected to
(stroke vs. non-stroke), or did they learn something incidental? Put another way, there may be some combination of features (e.g. ethnicity, camera characteristics, compression artifacts, etc) that coincide with the stroke-positive/negative
divide in the training data. If so, it is plausible that the
model will instead learn these non-stroke-relevant features,
especially if they happen to be more discriminative to the
deep neural network architecture. Specifically, for this stroke
prediction task, the source domain involves labeled negative data from multiple datasets, but labeled positive data
from just a single dataset. However, the desired target domain would involve the classification of data from multiple datasets in general. Since the source and target domains
are not truly the same, a classifier trained on the source domain may not fully apply to data from the target domain.
This problem is known as domain shift in machine learning
(Quiñonero-Candela et al. 2009).
A standard response to domain shift would be to perform domain adaptation, for example through preprocessing
or transferring statistics between the source and target domains (Sun, Feng, and Saenko 2016). However, in this case,
a proper evaluation of domain adaptation is not possible, because of the lack of even unlabeled positive data in the target
domain. As such, we set out to estimate possible upper and
lower performance bounds on the stroke risk prediction task,
by performing dataset ablation, to examine the sensitivity of
model performance to variance in the training datasets.
Additionally, saliency map visualizations may also be examined to verify that the model is working on plausible features, as was done for (Poplin et al. 2018). Here, we additionally practise feature isolation, in which only the most
relevant data according to the literature, the vascular tree, is
retained. A similar idea has recently been reported for stan-

Ischemic stroke is a leading cause of death and long-term disability that is difficult to predict reliably. Retinal fundus photography has been proposed for stroke risk assessment, due
to its non-invasiveness and the similarity between retinal and
cerebral microcirculations, with past studies claiming a correlation between venular caliber and stroke risk. However, it
may be that other retinal features are more appropriate. In this
paper, extensive experiments with deep learning on six retinal
datasets are described. Feature isolation involving segmented
vascular tree images is applied to establish the effectiveness
of vessel caliber and shape alone for stroke classification, and
dataset ablation is applied to investigate model generalizability on unseen sources. The results suggest that vessel caliber
and shape could be indicative of ischemic stroke, and sourcespecific features could influence model performance.

Introduction
Ischemic stroke is an emergency medical condition characterized by a reduction of blood supply to the brain due to a
blocked artery. Stroke is the fifth-leading cause of death in
the United States, accounting for over 5% of deaths, and is a
leading cause of long-term disability (Benjamin et al. 2018).
While there exist evidence-based guidelines for assessing
stroke risk, many of the recommendations involve specialized tests, with general population-level genetic screening
currently not recommended.
Given the widespread prevalence of ischemic stroke and
the relative inability to predict its occurrence as of the
present, it is tempting to explore other modalities for purposes of stroke risk assessment. One such modality is retinal imaging, which has the attraction of being a noninvasive and cost-effective procedure that has the potential
to be broadly deployed. Further, previous studies have observed correlations between vascular features and incidence
of stroke (Baker et al. 2010). With the recent successes of
deep learning in medical imaging classification tasks (Litjens et al. 2017), it is only natural to ask whether this model
paradigm might also be applicable to stroke prediction.
An enduring criticism of deep neural network models
has however been their lack of interpretability, which is of
particular concern for clinical tasks (Caruana et al. 2015).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9510

