The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Transfer Relational Representations through Analogy
Gaetano Rossiello∗

Alfio Gliozzo

Michael Glass

Department of Computer Science
University of Bari, Italy
gaetano.rossiello@uniba.it

IBM Research AI
Yorktown Heights, NY, U.S.
gliozzo@us.ibm.com

IBM Research AI
Yorktown Heights, NY, U.S.
mrglass@us.ibm.com

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to learn representations of relations expressed by their textual mentions. In our assumption, if two pairs of entities belong to the same relation, then
those two pairs are analogous. We collect a large set of analogous pairs by matching triples in knowledge bases with
web-scale corpora through distant supervision. This dataset
is adopted to train a hierarchical siamese network in order
to learn entity-entity embeddings which encode relational
information through the different linguistic paraphrasing expressing the same relation. The model can be used to generate
pre-trained embeddings which provide a valuable signal when
integrated into an existing neural-based model by outperforming the state-of-the-art methods on a relation extraction task.

Figure 1: Learning relations by analogy through matching the
facts from knowledge bases with web-scale textual corpora.

Introduction
Relation Extraction (RE) is the task of identifying semantic
relationships between entities in unstructured textual corpora.
RE is commonly addressed as a classification task, where a
model is trained to classify relation mentions in text among
a predefined set of relation types. Since a given relation can
be expressed using different textual patterns surrounding
entities, the RE models which follow this approach need a
considerable amount of examples for each relation to reach
satisfactory performance. Distant supervision (Riedel, Yao,
and McCallum 2010) uses training examples from a knowledge base, guaranteeing a large amount of relation examples
without human annotations, which can be used effectively by
neural networks (Glass and Gliozzo 2018). However, even
with this technique, the state-of-the-art RE systems present
two limitations: (1) distantly supervised models are not accurate in extracting relations with a long-tailed distribution,
because they typically have a small set of instances in knowledge bases; (2) in most domains, relation types are very specific and only a few examples of each relation are available.
To address these limitations, we propose a method able
to encode information about the relations expressed in natural language into vector representations, that we call analogy embeddings, with the aim to integrate them in other RE
models. Our assumption states that if two pairs of entities,
(A, B) and (C, D), have at least one relation in common r,
∗

Work conducted during an internship at IBM Research AI, NY.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10015

then those two pairs are analogous. Viceversa, solving proportional analogies, such as A : B = C : D, consists of
identifying the implicit relations shared between two pairs of
entities. Based on this idea, we propose a end-to-end neural
model able to measure the degree of analogical similarity
between two entity pairs, instead of predicting a confidence
score for each relation type. An entity pair is represented
through its mentions in a textual corpus, sets of sentences
where entities in the pair co-occur. If a mention represents
a specific relation type, then this relationship is expressed
by the linguistic context surrounding the two entities. Thus,
given two analogous entity pairs represented by their textual
mentions sets as input, the model is trained to minimize the
difference between the representations of relations having
the same linguistic patterns. In other words, the model learns
the different paraphrases expressing the same relation. We
exploit alignments between knowledge bases and web-scale
textual corpora to build a reliable set of analogous facts used
as ground truth. Figure 1 provides an example of this process.
In our research hypothesis, a model trained in such way
is able to recognize analogies between entity pairs by: (1)
generalizing over the sequence of words in the mentions;
(2) projecting the sequence of words in the mentions into a
vector space representing relational semantics.
In our experiments, we integrate the pre-trained analogy
embeddings into an existing end-to-end model based on convolutional networks (Glass and Gliozzo 2018), outperforming
the state-of-the-art systems on two shared datasets commonly
used for distantly supervised relation extraction.

