The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Distributionally Robust Semi-Supervised Learning for People-Centric Sensing
Kaixuan Chen,1 Lina Yao,1 Dalin Zhang,1 Xiaojun Chang,2 Guodong Long,3 Sen Wang4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia
2
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
4
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Australia

Abstract

ples that obtain confident predictions. In their tasks, the correctness of labeling is ensured by the condition that the labeled data and the unlabeled data are drawn from similar
distributions. But this assumption does not always stand.
In practical human-centred scenarios, only a few subjects’ labeled data can be collected for training and unlabeled data are usually collected from the target users. Since
people have diverse behavior patterns and biological phenomena (Bulling, Blanke, and Schiele 2014), data collected
from different subjects are distributed variously. This triggers the distribution shift problem where the labeled data
and the unlabeled data are distributed differently.
Distribution shift is a common problem in people-centric
sensing and most practical applications that require predictive modeling. Despite this, the major attention is given to
semi-supervised learning of which the main challenge is
data scarcity instead of shifted distributions. Distribution
shift has been relatively underexplored until recently. Some
researchers propose to tackle the distribution shift problem by unsupervised domain adaptation or transferring the
model trained on the labeled data to the unlabeled data. For
instance, some recent works such as (Liu and Tuzel 2016)
and (Tzeng et al. 2017) are committed to mapping both domains into the common feature space. However, they make
the covariate assumption that only the marginal distributions
of the input data are shifted but overlook the potential shift
in the conditional distributions of the output labels given inputs. In this setting, their models only see the difference between the labeled data and the unlabeled data but neglect
their latent output-related similarity.
To fill this gap, we propose a two-faced treatment that
tackles the problem of SSL for distribution shift. We define
two characteristics for the training data, person-specific discrepancy and task-specific consistency. Person-specific discrepancy means the distribution divergence of data collected
from different people owing to their different behavior patterns and biological phenomena. In our semi-supervised setting, person-specific discrepancy also represents the distribution divergence between the labeled data and the unlabeled data. By contrast, task-specific consistency denotes
the inherent similarity of the data of the subjects performing the same task. Our aim is to learn an embedding that reduces person-specific discrepancy and simultaneously preserves task-specific consistency. The main building blocks

Semi-supervised learning is crucial for alleviating labelling burdens in people-centric sensing. However, humangenerated data inherently suffer from distribution shift in
semi-supervised learning due to the diverse biological conditions and behavior patterns of humans. To address this
problem, we propose a generic distributionally robust model
for semi-supervised learning on distributionally shifted data.
Considering both the discrepancy and the consistency between the labeled data and the unlabeled data, we learn the
latent features that reduce person-specific discrepancy and
preserve task-specific consistency. We evaluate our model in
a variety of people-centric recognition tasks on real-world
datasets, including intention recognition, activity recognition,
muscular movement recognition and gesture recognition. The
experiment results demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
People-centric sensing enables a wide range of challenging but promising applications which have great potential on impacting people’s daily lives (Liao et al. 2015;
Chen et al. 2018b) in many realms such as Brain Computer
Interface (BCI) (Zhang et al. 2018), assistive living (Basanta, Huang, and Lee 2017), robotics (Lauretti et al. 2017)
and rehabilitation (Smeddinck, Herrlich, and Malaka 2015).
One of the major components of people-centric sensing is
understanding human behaviors by analyzing the data collected from people-centric sensing devices, such as wearable sensors and biosensors. However, annotation is difficult
in the context of people-centric sensing due to the expensive
manual cost, privacy violation and the difficulty in automation (Do and Gatica-Perez 2014). Therefore, a large body of
research on semi-supervised learning (SSL) has been proposed. SSL enables a reliable model to be trained by learning from the labeled samples and properly leveraging the
unlabeled samples as well.
Most of the existing SSL works are based on the assumption that the labeled data and the unlabeled data are drawn
from identical or similar distributions. For example, (Cheng
et al. 2016), (Xing et al. 2018) and (Chen et al. 2018a) utilize multiple classifiers to pseudo-label the unlabeled samCopyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3321

