The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

APRP: An Anonymous Propagation Method in Bitcoin Network
Yuhang Yao, Xiao Zeng, Tianyue Cao, Luoyi Fu, Xinbing Wang
{yaoyuhang,ccnn20141227,vanessa ,yiluofu,xwang8}@sjtu.edu.cn
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, China 200240

Network Model and Problem Formulation

Abstract

General Adversarial Network Model

Due to little attention given to anonymous protection against
eavesdropping attacks in Bitcoin network, this paper initiatively proposes a solution to Bitcoin anonymization based
on network structure. We first present a general adversarial
network model for formulizing deanonymization attack, then
present a novel propagation method APRP(Adaptive PageRank Propagation) that adopts PageRank as propagation delay factor and constantly adjusts PR-value of nodes to adapt
to network dynamics. Experiments on both simulated and
real Bitcoin networks confirm the superiority of APRP in
terms of 20-50% performance enhancement under various
deanonymization attacks.

We derived a model shown in Figure 1. As the bases of the
model, we first consider the P2P network of Bitcoin nodes as
a graph G(V, E). Graph G contains 2 types of nodes: eavesdropping nodes Vh and honest nodes Ve . Each server has an
exclusive ID (IP address with port). Former work (Miller et
al. 2015) shows theoretical analysis can model Ge and Gh as
d-regular trees. The message should be initiated from source
node v ∗ ∈ V and be spread to the whole network.

Introduction
The anonymity implications of transaction broadcasting
were largely ignored until recently, when researchers
demonstrated practical deanonymization attacks on the P2P
network. In 2015, the Bitcoin community changed its
flooding protocol but it has also been proved insufficient
(Fanti and Viswanath 2017) and can be deanonymized
by maximum-likelihood estimator. To improve anonymity,
we propose a novel propagation anonymous method,
APRP(Adaptive PageRank Propagation). As far as we know,
no previous work provides Bitcoin anonymization method
based on network structure.
Our contributions are summarized as follows :

Figure 1: General Adversarial Network Model. Eavesdropping nodes establish θ connection (red edges) to each honest
node. Eavesdropping nodes connect as a de -regular tree and
honest nodes connect as a dh -regular tree (black edges).

Objective Function
Let v∗ denotes the source node of message and let τv denotes
the timestamp at which attacker first receive message from
node v ∈ V . Then we set τ = {τv , ∀v ∈ V }.
The objective of attacker is: Given τ and G, use deanonymous algorithm A(τ , G) that maximize P (A(τ , G) = v ∗ ).
The objective of defender is: Given G, use anonymous
algorithm D(G) that minimize P (A(τ , G) = v ∗ |D(G)).

• We propose a general Bitcoin P2P adversarial network
model for formulizing deanonymization attack problem in
Bitcoin Network and providing optimized objective function.
• We initiatively present a novel propagation anonymous
method APRP which detects high impact eavesdropping
nodes, brings order to process of transaction message
spreading and makes prohibitive cost for eavesdropper.

APRP: Adative PageRank Propagation Model
To break the bottleneck of anonymity, we present a novel
method APRP (Adaptive PageRank Propagation) that
• Provides a transaction spreading protocol integrated in
Trickle and Diffusion.
• Uses PageRank as propagation delay factor that determine
the order of message spreading.

• We show that APRP has strong and robust performance,
which largely reduces the probability of detection under
deanonymization attacks on both simulated networks and
real Bitcoin networks with different spreading protocols.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10073

