The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Automatic Detection and Compression for Passive
Acoustic Monitoring of the African Forest Elephant
Johan Bjorck,1 Brendan H. Rappazzo,1 Di Chen,1
Richard Bernstein,1 Peter H. Wrege,2 Carla P. Gomes1
1

2

Dept. of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
Bioacoustics Research Program, Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Ithaca, NY

Abstract
In this work, we consider applying machine learning to the
analysis and compression of audio signals in the context of
monitoring elephants in sub-Saharan Africa. Earth’s biodiversity is increasingly under threat by sources of anthropogenic
change (e.g. resource extraction, land use change, and climate change) and surveying animal populations is critical
for developing conservation strategies. However, manually
monitoring tropical forests or deep oceans is intractable. For
species that communicate acoustically, researchers have argued for placing audio recorders in the habitats as a costeffective and non-invasive method, a strategy known as passive acoustic monitoring (PAM). In collaboration with conservation efforts, we construct a large labeled dataset of passive acoustic recordings of the African Forest Elephant via
crowdsourcing, compromising thousands of hours of recordings in the wild. Using state-of-the-art techniques in artificial
intelligence we improve upon previously proposed methods
for passive acoustic monitoring for classification and segmentation. In real-time detection of elephant calls, network
bandwidth quickly becomes a bottleneck and efficient ways
to compress the data are needed. Most audio compression
schemes are aimed at human listeners and are unsuitable for
low-frequency elephant calls. To remedy this, we provide a
novel end-to-end differentiable method for compression of
audio signals that can be adapted to acoustic monitoring of
any species and dramatically improves over näive coding
strategies.

Figure 1: The African forest elephant (Loxodonta cyclotis) is the smallest of the three extant elephant species,
a keystone species in the rainforests of the Congo Basin,
and is entirely relied upon by many trees to disperse their
seeds (Campos-Arceiz and Blake 2011). Due to their highlyvalued ivory tusks, the elephant is a typical target for poachers in central Africa and the population has fallen by more
than 60% in the last decade (Morelle 2016). Population
monitoring is critical for the elephant’s survival, and in this
work, we consider combining passive acoustic monitoring
and artificial intelligence towards this end.

requires less bandwidth for transferring the data. However,
extracting useful data from these soundscapes is non-trivial
and automatic approaches are necessary.
In this work, we consider PAM in the context of monitoring the African forest elephant. To enable real-time acoustic
monitoring one needs to quickly and accurately detect elephants and potential threats to them – a classical challenge of
classification and segmentation. Leveraging recent advances
in neural networks, we improve upon previous methods in
automating PAM. In real-time threat-detection and population monitoring the bandwidth of the wireless networks becomes a bottleneck, and one additionally has to use efficient
data representations to only communicate the necessary information. In many lossy compression schemes, signal components inaudible to humans such as low frequencies are
given low bit-rates, which in the context of low-frequency
elephant calls is a poor strategy. Using a differentiable proxy

Introduction
Poaching, illegal logging, and infrastructure expansions are
some of many current threats to biodiversity, and large mammals are particularly susceptible. To effectively allocate conservation resources and develop conservation strategies, endangered animal populations need to be accurately and economically surveyed, but for species that roam large or inaccessible areas monitoring by humans becomes intractable. A
promising approach for species communicating via acoustic signals is passive acoustic monitoring (PAM), which involves the use of autonomous recording devices scattered
throughout habitats that record animal vocalizations. Compared to video monitoring, acoustic monitoring is not limited by line of sight, is typically considerably cheaper and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

476

