The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Title-Guided Encoding for Keyphrase Generation
Wang Chen,1,2 Yifan Gao,1,2 Jiani Zhang,1,2 Irwin King,1,2 Michael R. Lyu1,2
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Rich Media Big Data Analytics and Application,
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
{wchen, yfgao, jnzhang, king, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Title: Within-document retrieval: A user-centred evaluation of
relevance profiling

Keyphrase generation (KG) aims to generate a set of
keyphrases given a document, which is a fundamental task in
natural language processing (NLP). Most previous methods
solve this problem in an extractive manner, while recently,
several attempts are made under the generative setting using
deep neural networks. However, the state-of-the-art generative methods simply treat the document title and the document main body equally, ignoring the leading role of the title to the overall document. To solve this problem, we introduce a new model called Title-Guided Network (TG-Net) for
automatic keyphrase generation task based on the encoderdecoder architecture with two new features: (i) the title is
additionally employed as a query-like input, and (ii) a titleguided encoder gathers the relevant information from the title
to each word in the document. Experiments on a range of KG
datasets demonstrate that our model outperforms the state-ofthe-art models with a large margin, especially for documents
with either very low or very high title length ratios.

Main Body: We present a user-centred, task-oriented,
comparative evaluation of two within-document retrieval tools.
ProfileSkim computes a relevance profile for a document with
respect to a query, and presents the profile as an interactive bar
graph. … Relevance profiling should prove highly beneficial for
users trying to identify relevant information within long
documents. …
(a) Present Keyphrases:
{within-document retrieval; relevance profiling}
(b) Absent Keyphrases:
{interactive information retrieval; task-oriented evaluation;
language models}

Figure 1: An example of keyphrase generation. The present
keyphrases are bold and italic in the source text.

semantic meaning underlying the context content and cannot generate absent keyphrases like “interactive information retrieval”, which do not appear in the source text.
To overcome the above drawbacks, several encoderdecoder based keyphrase generation methods have been proposed including CopyRNN (Meng et al. 2017) and CopyCNN (Zhang, Fang, and Weidong 2017). First, these methods treat the title and the main body equally and concatenate them as the only source text input. Then, the encoder
maps each source text word into a hidden state vector which
is regarded as the contextual representation. Finally, based
on these representations, the decoder generates keyphrases
from a predefined vocabulary regardless of the presence or
absence of the keyphrases. A serious drawback of these
models is that they ignore the leading role of the title and
consequently fail to sufficiently utilize the already summarized information in it.
It is a widely agreed fact that the title can be viewed as a
high-level summary of a document and the keyphrases provide more details of the key topics introduced in the document (Li et al. 2010). They play a similar and complementary role with each other. Therefore, keyphrases should have
close semantic meaning to the title (Li et al. 2010). For example, as shown in Figure 1, the title contains most of the
salient points reflected by these keyphrases including “re-

Introduction
Keyphrases are short phrases that can quickly provide the
main information of a given document (the terms “document”, “source text” and “context” are interchangeable in
this study, and all of them represent the concatenation of
the title and the main body.). Because of the succinct and
accurate expression, keyphrases are widely used in information retrieval (Jones and Staveley 1999), document categorizing (Hulth and Megyesi 2006), opinion mining (Berend
2011), etc. Due to the huge potential value, various automatic keyphrase extraction and generation methods have
been developed. As shown in Figure 1, the input usually consists of the title and the main body, and the output is a set of
keyphrases.
Most typical automatic keyphrase extraction methods (Witten et al. 1999; Medelyan, Frank, and Witten 2009;
Mihalcea and Tarau 2004) focus on extracting present
keyphrases like “relevance profiling” in Figure 1, which
are the exact phrases appearing in the source text. The main
ideas among them are identifying candidate phrases first and
then ranking algorithms. However, these methods ignore the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6268

