The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

From Independent Prediction to Reordered Prediction: Integrating
Relative Position and Global Label Information to Emotion Cause Identification
Zixiang Ding, Huihui He, Mengran Zhang, Rui Xia∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
dingzixiang@njust.edu.cn, hehuihui1994@gmail.com, zhangmengran@njust.edu.cn, rxia@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

For example, in the following document:
Yesterday morning, a policeman visited the old man with the
lost money, and told him that <cause> the thief was caught
</cause>. The old man was very <emotion word> happy
</emotion word>. Accompanied by the policeman, he deposited the money in the bank.
There are six clauses in this document. The emotion “happy”
is contained in the fourth clause (we denote this clause
as “emotion clause”, which refers to a clause that contains emotion expressions), and the corresponding cause
“the thief was caught” is in the third clause. The emotion
cause identification task was actually defined as a clauselevel binary classification problem in (Gui et al. 2016a;
2017). The goal is to detect for each clause in a document,
whether the clause contains potential emotion causes (i.e.,
whether the clause is an emotion cause) given the annotation of emotion. As (Gui et al. 2016a) pointed, this task is
more difficult than emotion classification because it requires
a deeper understanding of the document.
In the past, several techniques including rule based methods and traditional machine learning methods have been
proposed to address this problem based on manually designed rules and features (Lee, Chen, and Huang 2010;
Lee et al. 2013; Chen et al. 2010; Gui et al. 2016a). More
recently, some deep neural networks have also been applied
to this task, with the attempt to automatically capture the
causal relationship of emotion and its causes. For example,
(Cheng et al. 2017) proposed to use a long short-term memory (LSTM) network to address this task. (Gui et al. 2017)
introduced a new deep memory network architecture which
encodes the context of each word by multiple memory slots.
While most of these methods emphasized on the usage of
content information, we find in this work, in addition to the
content information, there are two other kinds of information
that are also very important for emotion cause identification:

Emotion cause identification aims at identifying the potential causes that lead to a certain emotion expression in text.
Several techniques including rule based methods and traditional machine learning methods have been proposed to address this problem based on manually designed rules and features. More recently, some deep learning methods have also
been applied to this task, with the attempt to automatically
capture the causal relationship of emotion and its causes embodied in the text. In this work, we find that in addition to
the content of the text, there are another two kinds of information, namely relative position and global labels, that are
also very important for emotion cause identification. To integrate such information, we propose a model based on the
neural network architecture to encode the three elements (i.e.,
text content, relative position and global label), in an unified
and end-to-end fashion. We introduce a relative position augmented embedding learning algorithm, and transform the task
from an independent prediction problem to a reordered prediction problem, where the dynamic global label information
is incorporated. Experimental results on a benchmark emotion cause dataset show that our model achieves new state-ofthe-art performance and performs significantly better than a
number of competitive baselines. Further analysis shows the
effectiveness of the relative position augmented embedding
learning algorithm and the reordered prediction mechanism
with dynamic global labels.

Introduction
Emotion cause identification, as a sub-task of emotion analysis, aims at identifying the potential causes that lead to
a certain emotion expression in text. It has gained much
attention in recent years due to its wide potential applications (Lee, Chen, and Huang 2010; Russo et al. 2011;
Gao, Xu, and Wang 2015a; Cheng et al. 2017). In the
benchmark emotion cause dataset released by (Gui et al.
2016a), emotion cause identification was formally defined
as a binary clause classification problem that detects for each
clause in the document whether this clause contains potential emotion causes given the annotation of emotion. In this
paper, we refer to a instance of the corpus as a “document”,
although it is normally a short document.

• “relative position”, which denotes the relative distance to
the emotion clause;
• “global label”, which means the predicted labels of the
other clauses in the whole document.
However, most of the previous work including the stateof-the-art predicted clauses independently and ignored the
global label information. It was hence possible that none
of the clauses in the document was predicted as the emo-

∗

The corresponding author of this paper.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6343

