The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Anytime Recursive Best-First Search for Bounding Marginal MAP
Radu Marinescu,1 Akihiro Kishimoto,1 Adi Botea,1 Rina Dechter,2 Alexander Ihler2
1

IBM Research
University of California, Irvine
radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com,akihirok@ie.ibm.com,adibotea@ie.ibm.com, dechter@ics.uci.edu,ihler@ics.uci.edu
2

Abstract

solvers that can provide either deterministic or probabilistic bounds. Indeed, the most advanced deterministic bounding schemes are based on a hybrid best+depth-first search
strategy over an AND/OR search graph. The best-first component aims at generating improved upper bounds while
the depth-first search facilitates the generation of improved
lower bounds, which are obtained by solving exactly the corresponding conditioned summation subproblems. For this
reason, these methods are limited to problems with tractable
summation subproblems (Marinescu et al. 2017).
On the other hand, the probabilistic bounding algorithms
were introduced recently to address the case when the conditioned summation subproblem is intractable (Marinescu,
Dechter, and Ihler 2018). Indeed, these methods, which in
general do not come with completeness guarantees, combine stochastic best-first search strategies with concentration
bounds on the conditioned likelihood computations in order
to produce probabilistic upper and lower bounds with high
confidence in an anytime fashion.
A major drawback of these recent deterministic and probabilistic solvers is that they are essentially memory intensive
schemes (via the best-first component) and do not use an
efficient memory management mechanism. When the available memory is exhausted, improving the upper bound via
the best-first search component is no longer possible. In this
case, the only option is to switch to depth-first search and try
to improve the current lower bound for the remaining time.
Therefore, these solvers are often less effective in practice,
especially under more restrictive memory requirements.

Marginal MAP is a difficult mixed inference task for graphical
models. Existing state-of-the-art solvers for this task are based
on a hybrid best-first and depth-first search scheme that allows
them to compute upper and lower bounds on the optimal solution value in an anytime fashion. These methods however are
memory intensive schemes (via the best-first component) and
do not have an efficient memory management mechanism. For
this reason, they are often less effective in practice, especially
on difficult problem instances with very large search spaces.
In this paper, we introduce a new recursive best-first search
based bounding scheme that operates efficiently within limited
memory and computes anytime upper and lower bounds that
improve over time. An empirical evaluation demonstrates the
effectiveness of our proposed approach against current solvers.

Introduction
Graphical models provide a powerful framework for reasoning about conditional dependency structures over many
variables. The Marginal MAP (MMAP) query asks for the
optimal configuration of a subset of variables that has the
highest marginal probability. Specifically, MMAP distinguishes between maximization variables (called MAP variables) and summation variables, and it is more difficult than
either max- or sum- inference tasks alone primarily because
summation and maximization operations do not commute,
forcing processing along constrained variable orderings that
may have significantly higher induced widths (Dechter 1999;
2013). This implies larger search spaces (when using search
algorithms) or larger messages (when using message-passing
schemes). In general, MMAP is NPPP -complete and it can
be NP-hard even on tree structured models (Park 2002).
Still, MMAP is often the appropriate task where hidden
variables or uncertain parameters exist. It can be also
treated as a special case of the more complicated frameworks of decision networks (Howard and Matheson 2005;
Liu and Ihler 2013).
Over the past few years, a prominent direction of research
has focused on a new generation of solvers that provide not
only anytime lower bounds but also anytime upper bounds
on the optimal MMAP value. We distinguish two classes of

Contribution In this paper, we focus on deterministic
bounding schemes and introduce a new memory efficient
anytime scheme for computing deterministic upper and lower
bounds on the optimal MMAP value. In addition, our proposed approach is also complete, namely it guarantees finding
the optimal solution if given enough time. More specifically,
we develop an anytime recursive best-first search algorithm
that traverses the AND/OR search space for MMAP and
uses a bounded size cache table to store partial search results
that allows it to operate efficiently within restricted memory. Therefore, our proposed algorithm replaces the best-first
search component (which is used by the existing state-of-theart hybrid best+depth-first schemes) with recursive best-first
search that yields best-first behavior with any memory bound.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7924

