The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Implicit Argument Prediction as Reading Comprehension
Katrin Erk

Pengxiang Cheng

Department of Linguistics
The University of Texas at Austin
katrin.erk@mail.utexas.edu

Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
pxcheng@utexas.edu

Abstract

introduce a new neural model for implicit argument prediction.
In this paper, we view the task of implicit argument prediction as related to Reading Comprehension (Hermann et
al. 2015): A predicate-argument tuple with the missing argument is a query. The answer to the query has to be located in the document. However the tasks are not exactly
the same. One difference is that the answer is not a vocabulary item or text span, but a single input item. This suggests the use of Pointer Networks (Vinyals, Fortunato, and
Jaitly 2015). We obtain the Pointer Attentive Reader for implicit argument prediction. Another difference is that more
than one argument may be missing in a predicate-argument
tuple. In this case we want the model to reason over the
whole document to derive a more informative query. We do
this through a multi-hop extension, taking inspiration from
multi-hop memory networks (Sukhbaatar et al. 2015). Our
model shows good performance on an argument cloze task
as well as on a nominal implicit argument prediction task.

Implicit arguments, which cannot be detected solely through
syntactic cues, make it harder to extract predicate-argument
tuples. We present a new model for implicit argument prediction that draws on reading comprehension, casting the
predicate-argument tuple with the missing argument as a
query. We also draw on pointer networks and multi-hop computation. Our model shows good performance on an argument
cloze task as well as on a nominal implicit argument prediction task.

1

Introduction

Predicate-argument tuples describe “who did what to
whom” and are an important data structure to extract from
text, for example in Open Information Extraction (Etzioni et
al. 2007). This extraction is straightforward when arguments
are syntactically connected to the predicate, but much harder
in the case of implicit arguments, which are not syntactically
connected to the predicate and may not even be in the same
sentence. These cases are not rare; they can be found within
the first few sentences on any arbitrary Wikipedia page, for
example:1
Twice in the late 1980s Gillingham came close to winning promotion to the second tier of English football,
but a decline then set in. . .
Here, Gillingham is an implicit argument to decline. Generally, predicates with implicit arguments can be nouns, as in
the example, or verbs.
Implicit argument prediction as a machine learning task
was introduced by Gerber and Chai (2010) and Ruppenhofer et al. (2010), and was studied in a number of papers (Silberer and Frank 2012; Laparra and Rigau 2013a;
Stern and Dagan 2014; Chiarcos and Schenk 2015; Schenk
and Chiarcos 2016; Do, Bethard, and Moens 2017). In this
task, the model is given a predicate-argument tuple with one
or more arguments missing. The model then chooses a filler
for each missing argument from the document (or chooses
to leave the argument unfilled). Building on recent work that
made the task accessible to neural models through training
on automatically generated data (Cheng and Erk 2018), we

2

Related Work

Recent work on implicit arguments started from Gerber
and Chai (2010) and Ruppenhofer et al. (2010). Gerber
and Chai (2010) constructed a dataset (G&C) by selecting 10 nominal predicates and labeling implicit arguments
of these predicates in the NomBank (Meyers et al. 2004)
corpus manually. The resulting dataset is quite small, consisting of approximately 1000 examples. They also proposed a linear classifier for the task. Gerber and Chai (2012)
added more features and performed cross validation on the
dataset, leading to better results. Ruppenhofer et al. (2010)
also introduced an implicit argument dataset by annotating
several chapters of fiction (SemEval-2010), which is even
smaller (about 500 examples) and more complex than Gerber and Chai (2010). There has since been much followup work proposing new methods for G&C (Laparra and
Rigau 2013a; Schenk and Chiarcos 2016; Do, Bethard, and
Moens 2017) and SemEval-2010 (Silberer and Frank 2012;
Laparra and Rigau 2013b; Chiarcos and Schenk 2015). To
overcome the size limitation, several methods for creating
additional training data have been proposed. Feizabadi and
Padó (2015) combined the two datasets, using one as outof-domain training data for another. Roth and Frank (2015)
identified new instances of implicit arguments by aligning

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History of Gillingham F.C.

6284

