The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Semi-Supervised Learning for Electron Microscopy Image Segmentation
Eichi Takaya,1 Yusuke Takeichi,2 Mamiko Ozaki,2 Satoshi Kurihara1
1

Graduate School of Science and Technology, Keio University, Japan
2
Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, Japan
etakaya@keio.jp, take.kapa3@gmail.com, mako ozaki@hotmail.com, satoshi@keio.jp

Introduction
In the research field called connectomics, it is aimed to investigate the structure and connection of the neural system
in the brain and sensory organ of the living things, and understand their functions. The method for investigating the
neural structure varies depending on the scale, serial blockface scanning electron microscopy (SBF-SEM) is used when
the target is sensory organs of small size organisms such as
ants. In general, hundreds of consecutive images taken are
reconstructed into three-dimensional.
Since the annotation is time-consuming task, automation
by machine learning has been attempted in recent years.
Many of the things that have been proposed so far are based
on supervised learning, using a large amount of data labeled
by experts in advance, and end-to-end learning with deep
neural network has especially achieved significant results
(Chen et al. 2016). However, in the case of using SBF-SEM,
there is an outside chance of imaging due to the difficulty of
hardening tiny sensory organs. And in most cases, therefore,
a large amount of training data can not be prepared. Furthermore, labeling for training samples also places a heavy
burden on experts.
In this paper, we propose a method of performing neuronal segmentation on all images for 3-D reconstruction
from a very small number of training samples. This makes
it possible to automatically segment neuronal regions using
only a small amount of labeled data.

Figure 1: An overview of proposed method. Three labeled
sample is used for first training, and trained model predicts
a label of next sample. Then the model is retrained with next
three samples to make a next pseudo label.

layers are directly leveraged by the skip connection. On the
latest study, much deeper network with residual connection
has been proposed to pursue further improvement (Xiao et
al. 2018). However, these previous studies are based on a
sufficient amount of training samples, which makes it hard
to use for researchers who can not readily prepare a large
amount of labeled data. Our proposed method is usable even
in such cases because of leveraging a few labeled samples.

Related Work
Regarding the task of neuronal cell segmentation, various
methods have been proposed with the related competition
such as ISBI Challenge. In particular, since a method proposed by (Ciresan et al. 2012) achieved the high precision,
most of newly proposed methods have been based on deep
neural network. And recently, examples of achievements in
recent years are Deep Contextual Network (Chen et al. 2016)
and U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015).
Though both of them have characteristics in terms of the
network structure respectively, their networks are based on
the Fully Convolutional Network (Long, Shelhamer, and
Darrell 2015), and the feature maps obtained in the middle

Proposed Method
The task addressed by aforementioned studies is regarded as
pixel-wise classification, and according to the earlier study,
it is possible even with a small amount of data (Ciresan et
al. 2012). Therefore, we propose a semi-supervised learning
(SSL) algorithm which learns and infer all data with pseudo
labeling (Lee 2013) using a small number of consecutive
training samples. An outline of the SSL algorithm is shown
in Fig 1 and Algorithm 1. Firstly, supervised learning is suf-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10047

