The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Order Attentive Ranking Model for Sequential Recommendation
Lu Yu,1 Chuxu Zhang,2 Shangsong Liang,1,3 Xiangliang Zhang1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, 23955, SA
2
University of Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
3
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
Email: {lu.yu,xiangliang.zhang}@kaust.edu.sa, czhang11@nd.edu, liangshangsong@gmail.com

Abstract
In modern e-commerce, the temporal order behind users’
transactions implies the importance of exploiting the transition dependency among items for better inferring what a
user prefers to interact in “near future”. The types of interaction among items are usually divided into individual-level
interaction that can stand out the transition order between a
pair of items, or union-level relation between a set of items
and single one. However, most of existing work only captures one of them from a single view, especially on modeling the individual-level interaction. In this paper, we propose a Multi-order Attentive Ranking Model (MARank) to
unify both individual- and union-level item interaction into
preference inference model from multiple views. The idea
is to represent user’s short-term preference by embedding
user himself and a set of present items into multi-order features from intermedia hidden status of a deep neural network.
With the help of attention mechanism, we can obtain a unified embedding to keep the individual-level interactions with
a linear combination of mapped items’ features. Then, we
feed the aggregated embedding to a designed residual neural network to capture union-level interaction. Thorough experiments are conducted to show the features of MARank
under various component settings. Furthermore experimental results on several public datasets show that MARank significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines on different evaluation metrics. The source code can be found at
https://github.com/voladorlu/MARank.

u

S1

u

S2

u

S3

u

S4

u

S5

u

S6

u

S1

u

S2

u

S3

u

S4

individual-level

union-level

!"#

!$#

u

S5

u

S6

Figure 1: Toy example to illustrate individual- and unionlevel item relevance model. S u denotes historical interaction
sequence of user u, Siu represents a specific item.

Schmidt-Thieme 2010; He, Kang, and McAuley 2017; He
and McAuley 2016a) shine light on how to extend general
user preference by fusing individual-level item-item transition dependency, shown as Figure 1(a), where the arrows
indicate the individual-level dependency between a pair of
items that don’t need to be adjacent. Given a set of previous
interacted items (referred as query items), the dependency of
a target item on these query items is usually measured as the
average or weighted relevance value. Such individual-level
dependencies can result in better recommendations, however have limitations on capturing the collective influence
between items. For example, buying eggs, milk, and butter
together indicates a higher probability of buying flour than
eggs, milk or butter individually.
To tackle this limitation, Tang et al. (Tang and
Wang 2018) introduce to model union-level influence
shown as Figure 1(b), which can be measured with
the support-confidence for rule X → Y of the form
(xt−L , · · · , xt−2 , xt−1 ) → xt . Such a rule can reflect that
purchase decisions are made based on what collocational
products have already been ordered. However, from the evidences as shown in (Tang and Wang 2018), there is a serious
sparsity problem as L increases. That is, union-level itemitem relation is difficult to model, especially in sparse data.
Note that modeling individual-level relationship has no such
a problem since only a single pair of items are involved.
Despite the success of recent advances on applying recurrent neural network (RNN) or convolutional neural network
(CNN) (Hidasi et al. 2016; Loyola, Liu, and Hirate 2017;
Tang and Wang 2018; Wang et al. 2015) to model unionlevel item dependency, they whittle the ability of discriminating the highly correlated item pairs for sequential recom-

Introduction
Modeling the complicated interactions behind users’ temporal preferences over items is very essential for providing
personalization service in many domains like e-commerce,
social friend suggestion, news/article recommendation, etc.
In this work, we focus on exploring users’ sequential behavior for predicting next item to visit/buy according to his/her
given sequential transaction. One typical example is which
book will Mike buy at future time t after ordering multiple
books? To answer this question, the proposed solution needs
to account for a balance between general (long-term) and
sequential (short-term) patterns.
As a representative solution, Markov chain based approaches (Chen et al. 2012; Rendle, Freudenthaler, and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5709

