The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Spatial-Temporal Person Re-Identification
Guangcong Wang,1 Jianhuang Lai,1,2,3∗ Peigen Huang,1 Xiaohua Xie1,2,3
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education
{wanggc3, huangpg}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {stsljh, xiexiaoh6}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

Visual
Feature

Most of current person re-identification (ReID) methods neglect a spatial-temporal constraint. Given a query image, conventional methods compute the feature distances between the
query image and all the gallery images and return a similarity ranked table. When the gallery database is very large in
practice, these approaches fail to obtain a good performance
due to appearance ambiguity across different camera views.
In this paper, we propose a novel two-stream spatial-temporal
person ReID (st-ReID) framework that mines both visual semantic information and spatial-temporal information. To this
end, a joint similarity metric with Logistic Smoothing (LS)
is introduced to integrate two kinds of heterogeneous information into a unified framework. To approximate a complex spatial-temporal probability distribution, we develop a
fast Histogram-Parzen (HP) method. With the help of the
spatial-temporal constraint, the st-ReID model eliminates lots
of irrelevant images and thus narrows the gallery database.
Without bells and whistles, our st-ReID method achieves
rank-1 accuracy of 98.1% on Market-1501 and 94.4% on
DukeMTMC-reID, improving from the baselines 91.2% and
83.8%, respectively, outperforming all previous state-of-theart methods by a large margin.

a

Spatial-temporal
constraint

b

Figure 1: Conventional person ReID vs. our st-ReID. (a)
Retrieval results of the conventional person ReID. Without
the help of spatial-temporal information, it is difficult for
the conventional ReID to deal with the appearance ambiguity (red boxes denote false alarms). (b) Retrieval results of
our st-ReID. With spatial-temporal information, st-ReID can
eliminate irrelevant images. Besides, spatial-temporal information (camera ID and timestamp) of st-ReID widely exists
in video surveillance and can be easily collected without any
manual annotation. (Best viewed in color)

believe that person structure information, such as body parts,
human poses, person attributes, and background context information, can help ReID methods capture discriminative
local visual features. For example, part-based methods (Li
et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2017b) make a assumption that a
person image consists of head, upper body, lower body and
foot from top to bottom. Considering the person structure
information, they can jointly learn both the global full-body
and local body-part features for person ReID. Pose-based
methods (Su et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2017a) aim to extract
pose-invariant features by exploiting keypoint annotations
to localize and align the poses. Other methods mine the cues
of attribute, semantic segmentation or background context
(Kalayeh et al. 2018; Song et al. 2018) for person ReID.
However, these models obtain a limited improvement for
person ReID to address the appearance ambiguity problem.
Instead of using person structure information, a wide variety of approaches also attempt to exploit spatial-temporal
information. The straightforward way is to exploit both spatial and temporal information from videos. Image-to-video
and video-based person ReID methods (Wang, Lai, and Xie
2017; Li et al. 2018) aim to learn spatial- and temporal-

Introduction
Person ReID aims to re-target pedestrian images across nonoverlapping camera views given a query image. Recently,
state-of-the-art person ReID methods (Wang et al. 2016;
Zhong et al. 2017a; Bai, Bai, and Tian 2017; Tang et al.
2017; Zhuo et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2017a) gained a significant improvement (e.g., rank-1 accuracy of 80-90% on
Market-1501) by using deep learning for feature representation. However, these methods are still far from applied
in real-world scenarios that may contain a large amount of
gallery images. It is hard to further improve the performance
using only general visual features due to appearance ambiguity. For example, different persons may share a similar
appearance, a lighting condition or a human pose. How to
exploit extra information to get around this bottleneck becomes a hot topic in person ReID community.
Recent studies attempt to exploit person structure information to improve the performance of ReID methods. They
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8933

