The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Counting and Sampling Markov Equivalent Directed Acyclic Graphs
Topi Talvitie

Mikko Koivisto

Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
topi.talvitie@helsinki.fi

Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
mikko.koivisto@helsinki.fi

Abstract

their restricted variants where the essential graph is an undirected connected chordal graph (UCCG); see Gillispie and
Perlman (2002) and Section 2. Then the DAGs in the equivalence class correspond to what we, in this paper, call moral
acyclic orientations (MAOs).
Two approaches to count and sample MAOs have been
investigated recently. For counting, He, Jia, and Yu (2015)
discovered a recurrence: by guessing the unique source vertex of a MAO (i.e., branching on the options), the orientations of some edges get fixed, leaving some number of
smaller disjoint UCCGs; if a so-encountered UCCG is an
“almost clique,” then a fast special treatment is given. He
and Yu (2016) enhanced the algorithm by extracting at every
level of the recurrence a so-called core graph of the UCCG
in question. Ghassami, Salehkaleybar, and Kiyavash (2018)
observed that the basic recurrence admits a complexity
bound n∆+O(1) on graphs of maximum degree ∆, and readily allows for uniform sampling.1 While these algorithms
can handle sparse graphs with hundreds of vertices, their
best known worst-case complexity bound is O(n!). Bernstein and Tetali (2017) took a different approach and considered sampling MAOs from an almost uniform distribution.
They showed that a simple edge-flip Markov chain mixes
in time that is exponential in the worst case but polynomial
under certain restrictions on the input UCCG.
In this paper we give new exact algorithms. Our algorithms (i) yield improved worst-case complexity bounds and
(ii) also run faster in practice, by several orders of magnitude
in some cases. We begin in Section 2 by introducing more
formally the problem and the basic recurrence. Then, in Section 3, we make a simple observation that gives us a dynamic
programming (DP) variant of the recursive algorithm with a
complexity bound of O 2n n4 . In Section 4 we derive a better bound for sparse graphs. Specifically, we assume that the
largest clique has size k, potentially much smaller than n,
and give another DP algorithm that requires O k! 2k k 2 n
operations. Using standard routines, both algorithms can be
turned into uniform samplers. In Section 5 we report on empirical results and draw conclusions as to which algorithm is
the fastest for what type of instances. We end in Section 6 by
discussing open questions and directions for future research.

Exploring directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) in a Markov equivalence class is pivotal to infer causal effects or to discover the causal DAG via appropriate interventional data.
We consider counting and uniform sampling of DAGs that
are Markov equivalent to a given DAG. These problems efficiently reduce to counting the moral acyclic orientations of a
given undirected connected chordal graph on n vertices, for
which we give two algorithms. Our first algorithm requires
O(2n n4 ) arithmetic operations, improving a previous super-
exponential upper bound. The second requires O k! 2k k2 n
operations, where k is the size of the largest clique in the
graph; for bounded-degree graphs this bound is linear in n.
After a single run, both algorithms enable uniform sampling
from the equivalence class at a computational cost linear in
the graph size. Empirical results indicate that our algorithms
are superior to previously presented algorithms over a range
of inputs; graphs with hundreds of vertices and thousands of
edges are processed in a second on a desktop computer.

1

Introduction

In causal discovery a key task is to learn a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) on the variables of interest. What makes learning particularly challenging is that different DAGs can represent the same conditional independence relations among the
variables; such DAGs are Markov equivalent. Every Markov
equivalence class can be represented uniquely by an essential graph (a.k.a. completed partial DAG), in which an edge
is undirected unless the direction is unique in the class (Andersson, Madigan, and Perlman 1997). Purely observational
data are generally sufficient for identifying a unique essential graph, but not singling out a DAG.
That said, the DAGs within a given equivalence class
are well worth exploring, for instance, to estimate causal
effects between pairs of variables (Maathuis, Kalisch, and
Bühlmann 2009) or to direct some of the undirected edges
in the essential graph based on interventional data (Ghassami et al. 2018). Such tasks call for efficient algorithms for
generating random DAGs from a given equivalence class, as
well as, for studying the related combinatorial problem of
computing the size of the equivalence class. It is well known
that these problems immediately (and efficiently) reduce to

1
Our complexity bounds assume that two O(n log n)-bit integers can be added and multiplied with one (unit-cost) operation.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7984

