The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Binary Classifier Inspired by Quantum Theory
Prayag Tiwari

Massimo Melucci

Department of Information Engineering
University of Padova
Via Gradenigo 6/b 35131 - Padova, Italy
https://sites.google.com/view/prayag-tiwari/home
tiwari@dei.unipd.it

Department of Information Engineering
University of Padova
Via Gradenigo 6/b 35131 - Padova, Italy
http://www.dei.unipd.it/ melo/
melo@dei.unipd.it

Abstract

recall is crucial in many daily tasks aiming to find all the pertinent items of a class such as patent search and biomedical
image classification.
Our approach is to develop a new theoretical approach inspired by Quantum Mechanics (QM) in order to dig into the
quantum world and come up with new and effective models which are capable of increasing recall. Our hypothesis is
that, since QM has already shown its effectiveness in several
fields, it may also be effective in ML. To this end we will
exploit Quantum Probability theory, which is the quantum
generalization of classical probability theory and was developed by Von Neumann. While classical probability theory
provides that a system can be in either state 0 or 1, quantum
probability comes into existence to go beyond classical theory and describes states which can be anything in-between
0 and 1. In this paper, we propose the BCIQT model which
is a step towards shifting from classical models to quantum
models.

Machine Learning (ML) helps us to recognize patterns from
raw data. ML is used in numerous domains i.e. biomedical,
agricultural, food technology, etc. Despite recent technological advancements, there is still room for substantial improvement in prediction. Current ML models are based on classical theories of probability and statistics, which can now be
replaced by Quantum Theory (QT) with the aim of improving the effectiveness of ML. In this paper, we propose the Binary Classifier Inspired by Quantum Theory (BCIQT) model,
which outperforms the state of the art classification in terms
of recall for every category.

Introduction
ML is a set of models which can automatically identify the
hidden patterns in the data and can then utilize hidden patterns to make decisions in condition of uncertainty. ML has
been progressively implemented in several areas including
chemistry, biomedical science and robotics. ML falls into
three categories, i.e. supervised learning (e.g. classification),
unsupervised learning (e.g. clustering) and reinforcement
learning. In this paper we focus on classification, which is
the way to represent and allocate objects into different categories.
QT is the probabilistic approach to representing and predicting properties of microscopic phenomena. Given an observable and an arbitrary state of a microscopic particle, QT
computes a probability distribution of the values of the observable. The quantum formalism is explicitly acceptable to
explain distinct types of stochastic processes. Several nonstandard implementations of the quantum formalism has
emerged. For instance, the quantum formalism have been
utilized vastly in the economic processes, game theory and
cognitive science as well.
Since the data is growing exponentially, current state-ofthe-art models are still not effective. In particular, recall is
still unsatisfactory because most classification models aim to
maximize precision especially when the items of a class can
be ranked by a certain measure of membership to the class;
a glaring example is the search of the Internet. In contrast,

Proposed Methodology
Classical and Quantum Signal Detection Theory
BCIQT is based on the overlap between Signal Detection
Theory (SDT) and QM. The main difference between the
classical framework and the quantum framework of signal
detection regards what encoders encode and what decoders
decode (Helstrom 1969).
In the classical framework, there is c-c (classicalclassical) mapping from a symbol to the wave to the corrupted channel; then the decoder produce c-c (classicalclassical) mapping from the corrupted channel wave to a
symbol. In the quantum framework, there is a coder between
the source and the channel; the classical symbol is transmitted through the quantum state. Initial encoding starts like c-q
(classical-quantum) mapping from the symbol to the quantum state selected from a finite set of possible states. More
details about classical and quantum SDT can be found in
(Helstrom 1969).

Binary Classifier Inspired by Quantum Theory
A novel BCIQT that is inspired by quantum detection theory is described in this section. For each category we supposed that each training sample was about the category or
not. For a given category and the set of training samples, we

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10051

