The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Reverse-Engineering Satire, or “Paper on
Computational Humor Accepted despite Making Serious Advances”
Robert West*

Eric Horvitz

EPFL
robert.west@epfl.ch

Microsoft Research
horvitz@microsoft.com

Task 1:
Unfun the headline!

Abstract
Humor is an essential human trait. Efforts to understand humor have called out links between humor and the foundations
of cognition, as well as the importance of humor in social engagement. As such, it is a promising and important subject of
study, with relevance for artificial intelligence and human–
computer interaction. Previous computational work on humor has mostly operated at a coarse level of granularity, e.g.,
predicting whether an entire sentence, paragraph, document,
etc., is humorous. As a step toward deep understanding of
humor, we seek fine-grained models of attributes that make a
given text humorous. Starting from the observation that satirical news headlines tend to resemble serious news headlines,
we build and analyze a corpus of satirical headlines paired
with nearly identical but serious headlines. The corpus is constructed via Unfun.me, an online game that incentivizes players to make minimal edits to satirical headlines with the goal
of making other players believe the results are serious headlines. The edit operations used to successfully remove humor
pinpoint the words and concepts that play a key role in making the original, satirical headline funny. Our analysis reveals
that the humor tends to reside toward the end of headlines,
and primarily in noun phrases, and that most satirical headlines follow a certain logical pattern, which we term false
analogy. Overall, this paper deepens our understanding of the
syntactic and semantic structure of satirical news headlines
and provides insights for building humor-producing systems.

1

Satirical
headlines

Real
headlines

h

A

g

1

h′

3

Task 2:
Real or not?

Modified
satirical

2

B

h′
3

RA(h,h′)

RB(g)

God diagnosed with bipolar disorder
real
Words changed: 2

serious

Obama elected president
real

serious

Figure 1: Unfun.me, a game for building a corpus of pairs
(h, h0 ) of satirical and similar-but-serious-looking headlines.
Numbers: order of steps. Screenshots: running example (h =
God diagnosed with bipolar disorder; h0 = Bob Dylan diagnosed with bipolar disorder; g = Obama elected president).
the option to say something funny and have it understood
that way; e.g., recent work has shown that misunderstanding
of playful quips can be the source of failures in conversational dialog in open-world interaction (Andrist et al. 2016).
Given how tied humor is to the human condition, the
phenomenon has challenged some of the greatest thinkers
throughout history and has been the subject of much academic research across over 20 disciplines (Raskin 2008), including computer science (Binsted et al. 2006), where researchers have developed algorithms for detecting, analyzing, and generating humorous utterances (cf. Sec. 6).
The automated analysis of humor is complicated by the
fact that most humorous texts have a complex narrative
structure that is difficult to disentangle; e.g., typical jokes—
the type of humorous text studied most in the literature—
carefully set the stage to build certain expectations in the audience, which are then turned upside down in the punchline.
To circumvent the difficulties imposed by narrative structure, we focus on a specific humorous genre: satirical news.
Satirical news articles, on the surface, mimic the format typical of mainstream journalism, but unlike serious news articles, they do not aim to relate facts, but rather to ridicule
individuals, groups, or society. Crucially, though, satirical
news stories are typically written headline-first: only if the

Introduction

Humor is a uniquely human trait that plays an essential role
in our everyday lives and interactions. Psychologists have
pointed out the role of humor in human cognition, including its link to the identification of surprising connections
in learning and problem solving, as well as the importance
of humor in social engagement (Martin 2010). Humor is a
promising area for studies of intelligence and its automation: it is hard to imagine a computer passing a rich Turing
test without being able to understand and produce humor. As
computers increasingly take on conversational tasks (e.g., in
chat bots and personal assistants), the ability to interact with
users naturally is gaining importance, but human–computer
interactions will never be truly natural without giving users
* Research done partly at Microsoft Research.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7265

