The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

The Level Weighted Structural Similarity Loss: A Step Away from MSE
Yingjing Lu
Carnegie Mellon University
yingjinl@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

In the following sections we show SSIM’s limitations by
providing mathematical intuitions and empirical results. We
then propose LWSSIM, a revised SSIM loss, and provide
intuitive justifications for our formulation and experiment
results.

The Mean Square Error (MSE) has shown its strength when
applied in deep generative models such as Auto-Encoders to
model reconstruction loss. However, in image domain especially, the limitation of MSE is obvious: it assumes pixel independence and ignores spatial relationships of samples. This
contradicts most architectures of Auto-Encoders which use
convolutional layers to extract spatial dependent features. We
base on the structural similarity metric (SSIM) and propose
a novel level weighted structural similarity (LWSSIM) loss
for convolutional Auto-Encoders. Experiments on common
datasets on various Auto-Encoder variants show that our loss
is able to outperform the MSE loss and the Vanilla SSIM loss.
We also provide reasons why our model is able to succeed in
cases where the standard SSIM loss fails.

The SSIM and Its Limitations
The SSIM is originally constructed as an image quality measure with respect to the human perception rather than absolute differences measured by metrics such as the MSE or
Mean Absolute Error (MAE).
To express the SSIM formally, according to (Wang et al.
2004), consider a pair of images {x, y} of sizes m × n,
we want to measure three aspects of similarities according
to human perception: luminance(l(x, y)), contrast(c(x, y)),
and structure(s(x, y)). Those are quantified according to the
summary of relative measures including mean, variance, and
co-variance measured under sliding windows of size ξ × ξ
with step size of 1 on both horizontal and vertical directions.
For each sliding window, we measure base quantity for
images x and y respectively. Then each perception subfunction is computed as follows:
2µx µy + C1
l(x, y) = 2
(1)
µx + µ2y + C1

The MSE has several advantages: it is convex, differentiable,
and fast to compute. In the image domain, the MSE has been
a great reconstruction loss metric for Auto-Encoders (AE)
(Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006). Even though the MSE
has proved to be the most successful loss for AEs, its major
feature, measuring error of each dimension independently,
does not align with the assumption in the actual model as
we point out in the case of convolutional Auto-Encoders (CAE). A C-AE uses its sliding convolutional filters to extract
features such as ears or eyes, which requires to sample an
area rather than individual pixels to encode meaningful information. Thus C-AE assumes that pixels are depending on
its surrounding pixels to express information which is not
aligning with the assumption of MSE. Another problem with
using the MSE as reconstruction loss is that it measures absolute pixel differences rather than the structural difference
which is more aligned with human’s perception.
Existing works that seek alternative reconstruction loss
mainly utilize the SSIM proposed by (Wang et al. 2004).
However, despite the fact that it has shown its strength in
measuring the image similarity, it has some limitations including not as effective in RGB images as it does in greyscale images, and not being sensitive to luminance. Some
works seek to alleviate its limitations by combining the
SSIM score with the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) or the
MSE (Zhao et al. 2017), but those formulations lack straightforward explanations.

2σx σy + C2
(2)
σx2 + σy2 + C2
σxy + C3
(3)
s(x, y) =
σx σy + C3
Here {C1 , C2 , C3 } are constants less than 1 to balance
potential zero division issue. Usually, C3 = 12 C2 .
To enforce independence among those measures, the final
SSIM is constructed as the product of those metrics with
exponential constant weights {α, β, γ} as:
c(x, y) =

SSIM (x, y; ξ) = l(x, y)α · c(x, y)β · s(x, y)γ

(4)

Notice that the luminance function is different from contrast and structure measures in that it uses mean to measure
relative difference in luminance as oppose to absolute luminance difference. Mathematically, mean measures can output same value despite the range of pixel value in our measure window. In other word, the SSIM is not able to discriminate between a picture with high light-dark variance

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9989

