The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Human-in-the-Loop Feature Selection
Alvaro H. C. Correia∗

Freddy Lecue∗

ENSTA ParisTech, Palaiseau, France
Utrecht University, The Netherlands
a.h.chaimcorreia@uu.nl

CortAIx Thales, Montreal, Canada
Inria, Sophia Antipolis, France
freddy.lecue@inria.fr

Abstract

able to describe all observations (Avdiyenko, Bertschinger,
and Jost 2012).
Towards this challenge, we present a per-example feature
selection method by including the human-in-the-loop. We
propose a framework where experts are asked to identify the
most relevant features for a few examples. Reinforcement
Learning (RL) allows us to use that feedback to explicitly
model the probability of selecting each feature and derive a
policy that produces a new feature subset for each observation in the dataset. Each example is thus represented by a
different set of features, which is the only input to a subsequent learning algorithm (e.g., a classifier or regressor). The
feature selection policy is learned through policy gradient
methods to minimize both (i) the loss function of the associated learning algorithm and (ii) the dissimilarity between
the feature subsets chosen by the model and the users.
Such an approach can not only improve the performance
of the model but also render its decision-making more interpretable to human users. As the final prediction relies only
on the selected feature subset, which is individual to each
example, one can interpret those variables as an explanation
for the model’s output. Moreover, by mimicking human annotation in selecting the most relevant features, the model
can better reflect causal relationships in the experts’ minds.
We frame our model as a stochastic computation graph
(Schulman et al. 2015) and compare two different solvers:
Score Function (SF) and Pathwise Derivative (PD) estimators. We validate our method in two scenarios: (i) a proofof-concept image classification task and (ii) a real-world
project risk classification task. In the latter, which is highly
human-curated, our architecture improves the baseline accuracy by more than 50%. We also study the influence of
different hyperparameters and factors of practical relevance,
such as the required number of pieces of feedback and the
presence of conflicting information from different experts.
The next section reviews related work. Then, we present
(i) the feature selection problem, (ii) our human-in-the-loop
approach, (iii) the stochastic computation graph framework
with the SF and PD solvers, and finally (iv) the experiments
in the two tasks described above.

Feature selection is a crucial step in the conception of Machine Learning models, which is often performed via datadriven approaches that overlook the possibility of tapping
into the human decision-making of the model’s designers and
users. We present a human-in-the-loop framework that interacts with domain experts by collecting their feedback regarding the variables (of few samples) they evaluate as the most
relevant for the task at hand. Such information can be modeled via Reinforcement Learning to derive a per-example feature selection method that tries to minimize the model’s loss
function by focusing on the most pertinent variables from a
human perspective. We report results on a proof-of-concept
image classification dataset and on a real-world risk classification task in which the model successfully incorporated
feedback from experts to improve its accuracy.

Introduction
Selecting a subset of the available features for a given Machine Learning task, also known as feature selection, is a
critical step that helps in the design of relevant, accurate and
robust models (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003; Chandrashekar
and Sahin 2014). Although ideally models should be capable of identifying the most predictive features during training, a large input space can reduce performance due to the
“curse of dimensionality”: the amount of data required to fit
a reliable estimator increases exponentially with the number
of variables. Therefore, a model based on a smaller number
of features might produce better results while being faster
and more cost-effective.
A way of tackling this problem is to select features according to experts’ prior knowledge, but that is costly, time
demanding and manual. Furthermore, often the users with
the relevant understanding of the domain and task are not
the ones designing the model. An alternative is to resort to
methods that automatically rank and select features under
some measure of relevance or importance. Even so, a limitation common to manual and automatic approaches alike is
that they define a single feature subset to represent the entire
dataset. When the amount of training data is small compared
to the number of features, a single subset is unlikely to be

Related Work

∗

Work funded by Accenture Labs, Ireland for an internship.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The literature is rich in feature selection methods, and we refer to (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003) and (Chandrashekar and
2438

