The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multiagent Decision Making For Maritime Traffic Management
Arambam James Singh, Duc Thien Nguyen, Akshat Kumar, Hoong Chuin Lau
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
{arambamjs.2016,dtnguyen.2014,akshatkumar,hclau}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

Landmass

We address the problem of maritime traffic management in
busy waterways to increase the safety of navigation by reducing congestion. We model maritime traffic as a large multiagent systems with individual vessels as agents, and VTS
authority as the regulatory agent. We develop a maritime
traffic simulator based on historical traffic data that incorporates realistic domain constraints such as uncertain and asynchronous movement of vessels. We also develop a traffic coordination approach that provides speed recommendation to
vessels in different zones. We exploit the nature of collective interactions among agents to develop a scalable policy
gradient approach that can scale up to real world problems.
Empirical results on synthetic and real world problems show
that our approach can significantly reduce congestion while
keeping the traffic throughput high.

1

Zone markers

Anchorages
Traffic Separation
Scheme (TSS)

Landmass

Figure 1: Electronic navigation chart (ENC) of strait near a
large asian city with color-coded features (best viewed electronically)

sible for carrying the bulk of the maritime traffic. Therefore,
we focus on traffic coordination in the TSS.
Based on geographical features, the TSS can be further divided into smaller zones (as shown in figure 1). Our goal is
to compute the recommended time taken to cross each zone
based on the current traffic in other zones such that (a) traffic
intensity is within some pre-defined limit (which increases
safety of navigation), and (b) maximize traffic throughput
while maintaining the safety of navigation. E.g., if the path
leading to berths is crowded (or the count of vessels is high),
we may slow down vessels entering TSS to regulate the traffic. We develop both the maritime traffic simulator and traffic control approaches.
Domain constraints: Our work is motivated by road
traffic light control using multiagent RL (Wiering 2000;
Bakker et al. 2010). However there are several differences
in the maritime domain that necessitate the development of
new methods for the maritime traffic control. First, vessels,
unlike cars, can never fully stop in the TSS. They always
have to maintain a minimum cruising speed, and have a maximum speed limit. Without the minimum speed, they risk
overturning due to their sheer size, and the effects of water
movement. Similarly, the TSS, although looks similar to a
road lane, there are major differences. Unlike road segments,
vessel traffic in a TSS zone cannot be neatly arranged in a
single queue. Vessels move dynamically, often sail in parallel to each other and overtake each other. Finally, vessel
movement is highly dynamic in the water, and is affected

Introduction

We address the problem of maritime traffic management in
busy waterways such as the Singapore Strait and Tokyo Bay.
The Singapore Strait is one of the busiest shipping lane in
the world connecting the Indian ocean and the South China
Sea. Vessel traffic in Strait has been consistently increasing (Hand 2017) with approximately 2000 merchant vessels
(such as oil and gas tankers) crossing it daily (Liang and
Maye-E 2017). Increased traffic affects safety of navigation
as well as impacts the maritime ecosystem with oil and gas
spills (Lim 2017; Tan 2017). Congestion in narrow waterways critically affects the safety of navigation as it leads
to frequent evading maneuverer from vessels and increases
the cross traffic (Segar 2015). Therefore, the key research
question we address is how to coordinate maritime traffic in
heavily trafficked narrow waterways, such as the Singapore
Strait and Tokyo Bay, to increase the safety of navigation by
reducing traffic hotspots.
Figure 1 shows the e-navigation chart (ENC) of a strait.
The ENC is composed of several features such as anchorages where vessels anchor and wait for services, berths, pilot
boarding grounds, and the traffic separation scheme or TSS.
The TSS (figure 1) is the set of mandatory unidirectional
routes designed to reduce collision risk among vessels transitioning through or entering the Strait. The TSS is responCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6171

