The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Personalized Attribute Preference via Multi-Task AUC Optimization
Zhiyong Yang,1,2 Qianqian Xu,3 Xiaochun Cao,1,2 Qingming Huang3,4,5∗
1

SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS, Beijing, China
{yangzhiyong, caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
Abstract

slightly at random around the common opinion. However,
different annotators might very well have distinct comprehension regarding the meaning of the attributes (typical ones
like ”open”, ”fashionable”). This suggests that the gap between the personalized decisions and the common opinions
could not be simply interpreted as random noises. What’s
worse, one might even come to find conflicting results from
different users. In such a case, there is a need to learn the
consensus effects as well as personalized effects simultaneously, especially when personalized annotations are available. There are two crucial issues that should be noticed in
this problem.
The grouping effects, lying in between consensus and personalized ones, also play an essential role in understanding the user-specific attribute annotations. As pointed out in
the previous literature (Kovashka and Grauman 2015), when
understanding semantic attributes, humans often form the
”school of thoughts” in terms of their cultural backgrounds
and the way they interpret the semantic words. Though personalized effect might lead to conflicting results from different schools or groups, the users within the same group might
very likely provide similar decisions. Moreover, different
groups of people may probably favor distinct visual cues,
as there is significant diversity among user groups. In other
words, each user group should be assigned with a distinct
feature subset. Accordingly, visual features and users should
be simultaneously grouped to guarantee better performance.
Furthermore, seeing that we cannot obtain the user-feature
groups in advance, this constraint should be implicitly and
automatically reflected via the structure of model parameters.
Unlike the consensus-based attribute predictions, preference learning is more important than label prediction for personalized attribute learning, be it recommendation and image searching. Under such circumstances, when the attribute
words are used as keywords or tags, it should be guaranteed
that the positive labeled instances are ranked higher than the
negative ones. It is well-known that the Area Under the ROC
curve (AUC) metric exactly meets this requirement (Yang et
al. 2017), and thus a better objective for our task.
Our goal in this paper is to learn personalized attributes
based on the two mentioned issues. More precisely, we regard attribute preference learning for a specific user as a
task. On top of this, we propose a multi-task model for the

Traditionally, most of the existing attribute learning methods
are trained based on the consensus of annotations aggregated
from a limited number of annotators. However, the consensus
might fail in settings, especially when a wide spectrum of annotators with different interests and comprehension about the
attribute words are involved. In this paper, we develop a novel
multi-task method to understand and predict personalized attribute annotations. Regarding the attribute preference learning for each annotator as a specific task, we first propose a
multi-level task parameter decomposition to capture the evolution from a highly popular opinion of the mass to highly
personalized choices that are special for each person. Meanwhile, for personalized learning methods, ranking prediction
is much more important than accurate classification. This motivates us to employ an Area Under ROC Curve (AUC) based
loss function to improve our model. On top of the AUC-based
loss, we propose an efficient method to evaluate the loss and
gradients. Theoretically, we propose a novel closed-form solution for one of our non-convex subproblem, which leads to
provable convergence behaviors. Furthermore, we also provide a generalization bound to guarantee a reasonable performance. Finally, empirical analysis consistently speaks to the
efficacy of our proposed method.

Introduction
Visual attributes are semantic cues describing visual properties such as texture, color, mood, and etc. Typical instances are comfortable or high heeled for shoes, and smiling or crying for human faces. During the past decade, attribute learning has emerged as a powerful building block
for a wide range of applications (Song, Tan, and Chen 2014;
Su et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2018).
The status quo of the attribute learning methods are
mostly based on the global labels aggregated from few annotators (Farhadi et al. 2009; Sadovnik et al. 2013; Luo et al.
2018). Recently, the rise of online crowd-sourcing platforms
(like Amazon Mechanical Turk) makes collecting attribute
annotations from a broad variety of annotators possible (Kovashka and Grauman 2015), which offers us a chance to revisit the attribute learning. For consensus attribute learning,
the underlying assumption is that the user decisions perturb
∗

The corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5660

