The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

M2Det: A Single-Shot Object Detector
Based on Multi-Level Feature Pyramid Network
Qijie Zhao,1 Tao Sheng,1 Yongtao Wang,1∗
Zhi Tang,1 Ying Chen,2 Ling Cai,2 Haibin Ling3
1

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China
2
AI Labs, DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
Computer and Information Sciences Department, Temple University
{zhaoqijie, shengtao, wyt, tangzhi}@pku.edu.cn,
{cailing.cl, chenying.ailab}@alibaba-inc.com, {hbling}@temple.edu
detect
detect
detect
detect
detect
detect

Abstract
Feature pyramids are widely exploited by both the state-ofthe-art one-stage object detectors (e.g., DSSD, RetinaNet,
RefineDet) and the two-stage object detectors (e.g., Mask RCNN, DetNet) to alleviate the problem arising from scale
variation across object instances. Although these object detectors with feature pyramids achieve encouraging results,
they have some limitations due to that they only simply construct the feature pyramid according to the inherent multiscale, pyramidal architecture of the backbones which are
originally designed for object classification task. Newly, in
this work, we present Multi-Level Feature Pyramid Network
(MLFPN) to construct more effective feature pyramids for
detecting objects of different scales. First, we fuse multi-level
features (i.e. multiple layers) extracted by backbone as the
base feature. Second, we feed the base feature into a block
of alternating joint Thinned U-shape Modules and Feature
Fusion Modules and exploit the decoder layers of each Ushape module as the features for detecting objects. Finally,
we gather up the decoder layers with equivalent scales (sizes)
to construct a feature pyramid for object detection, in which
every feature map consists of the layers (features) from multiple levels. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed
MLFPN, we design and train a powerful end-to-end one-stage
object detector we call M2Det by integrating it into the architecture of SSD, and achieve better detection performance
than state-of-the-art one-stage detectors. Specifically, on MSCOCO benchmark, M2Det achieves AP of 41.0 at speed of
11.8 FPS with single-scale inference strategy and AP of 44.2
with multi-scale inference strategy, which are the new stateof-the-art results among one-stage detectors. The code will be
made available on https://github.com/qijiezhao/M2Det.

detect
detect
detect
detect

(b) FPN-style feature pyramid

(a) SSD-style feature pyramid
Scale
transfer

detect

…

detect
detect
detect
detect
detect
detect
detect

(c) STDN-style feature pyramid

(d) Our multi-level feature pyramid

Figure 1: Illustrations of four kinds of feature pyramids.
Obviously, this solution will greatly increase memory and
computational complexity, thus the efficiency of such object
detectors drop dramatically. The second one is to detect objects in a feature pyramid extracted from the input image
(Liu et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2017a), which can be exploited
at both training and testing phases. Compared with the first
solution that uses an image pyramid, it has less memory
and computational cost. Moreover, the feature pyramid constructing module can be easily integrated into the state-ofthe-art deep neural networks based detectors, yielding an
end-to-end solution.
Although the object detectors with feature pyramids (Liu
et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2017a; 2017b; He et al. 2017) achieve
encouraging results, they still have some limitations due to
that they simply construct the feature pyramid according
to the inherent multi-scale, pyramidal architecture of the
backbones which are actually designed for object classification task. For example, as illustrated in Fig. 1, SSD (Liu
et al. 2016) directly and independently uses two layers of
the backbone (i.e. VGG16) and four extra layers obtained
by stride 2 convolution to construct the feature pyramid;
STDN (Zhou et al. 2018) only uses the last dense block
of DenseNet (Huang et al. 2017) to construct feature pyramid by pooling and scale-transfer operations; FPN (Lin et al.
2017a) constructs the feature pyramid by fusing the deep and
shallow layers in a top-down manner. Generally speaking,
the above-mentioned methods have the two following limitations. First, feature maps in the pyramid are not representa-

Introduction
Scale variation across object instances is one of the major
challenges for the object detection task (Lin et al. 2017a;
He et al. 2015; Singh and Davis 2018), and usually there are
two strategies to solve the problem arising from this challenge. The first one is to detect objects in an image pyramid
(i.e. a series of resized copies of the input image) (Singh and
Davis 2018), which can only be exploited at the testing time.
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9259

