The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Low-Rank Semidefinite Programming for the MAX2SAT Problem
Po-Wei Wang

J. Zico Kolter

Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
poweiw@cs.cmu.edu

School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, and
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Pittsburgh, PA 15222
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

a very limited special case of the MAXSAT problem, unlike the SAT setting (where 2-SAT can be solved in polynomial time), the MAX2SAT problem is NP-COMPLETE and
forms a non-trivial starting point for more general MAXSAT
problems. Although SDP relaxations of the MAX2SAT
problem have been known for some time (Goemans and
Williamson, 1994, 1995; Gomes, van Hoeve, and Leahu,
2006), they have not generally been viewed as practical
strategies for solving MAXSAT problems (of any type),
owing to the high computational cost of solving SDPs via
standard methods (e.g., interior point methods, whose runtime grows cubically in the number of variables). Indeed,
to the best of our knowledge, no entry in the history of the
MAXSAT competition (Argelich et al., 2016) has ever used
an approach based upon semidefinite programming. Furthermore, our approach also applies to more general MAXSAT
problems, though the practical efficiency is much less for
settings with a large number of variables per clause; but later
in the paper, we will also highlight MAX3SAT results, for
example, where the method is also still competitive.
In this work, we show that a recent method for lowrank semidefinite programming (the Mixing method (Wang,
Chang, and Kolter, 2017)) combined with branch-and-bound
strategy, warm-starts, and simple pruning based upon a
dual bound, can achieve state-of-the-art performance for
MAX2SAT problems. Specifically, for the MAXSAT 2016
competition problems1 , our single proposed approach dominates the best solvers (selecting the best solver for each
individual problem instance for all the 2016 problems) in
both the incomplete and complete tracks of the competition.
While naturally these results need to be taken with a grain of
salt, as the MAXSAT competition solvers of course did not
specialize for the MAX2SAT case, it is notable our single
solver, using ultimately a very simple search procedure, can
outperform highly specialized and tuned solvers so heavily
in this domain across both competition tracks. Thus, while a
great deal of work remains to turn the approach into a general MAXSAT solver, the work here strongly suggests that
semidefinite programming techniques can play a sizable role
in the solution to MAXSAT problems going forward.

This paper proposes a new algorithm for solving MAX2SAT
problems based on combining search methods with semidefinite programming approaches. Semidefinite programming
techniques are well-known as a theoretical tool for approximating maximum satisfiability problems, but their application has traditionally been very limited by their speed and
randomized nature. Our approach overcomes this difficult by
using a recent approach to low-rank semidefinite programming, specialized to work in an incremental fashion suitable
for use in an exact search algorithm. The method can be used
both within complete or incomplete solver, and we demonstrate on a variety of problems from recent competitions. Our
experiments show that the approach is faster (sometimes by
orders of magnitude) than existing state-of-the-art complete
and incomplete solvers, representing a substantial advance in
search methods specialized for MAX2SAT problems.

1

Introduction

The maximum satisfiability (MAXSAT) task — the
optimization-based version of satisfiability, where the goal
is to find a maximal set of clauses to be satisfied — is a
foundational problem in combinatorial optimization. These
problems can be written as the optimization task
maximize

v1 ,...,vn ∈{0,1}

m ⋁
∑
j=1 i∈S +
j

vi

⋁

¬vi ,

(1)

i∈Sj−

where v1 , . . . , vn denote the binary optimization variables,
and Sj+ /Sj− denotes the set of variables and negated variables respectively in the jth clause. MAXSAT problems
have been used to solve probabilistic inference (Park, 2002),
planning (Zhang and Bacchus, 2012), and clustering (Berg
and Järvisalo, 2017). And the recent MAXSAT contests
(Argelich et al., 2016) have aimed at evaluating a wide number of different solution methods on a wide variety of both
real and synthetic problems.
In this paper, we present an approach based upon lowrank semidefinite programming (SDP) and a simple branchand-bound strategy for solving the simplest case of the
MAXSAT problem: the MAX2SAT problem, where each
clause contains only two variables. While this is naturally

1

The 2016 MAXSAT competition was the last year of the competition to features MAX2SAT instances, as the “random” problem
track was removed in subsequent years.

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1641

