The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Phenotypes and Dynamic Patient Representations via RNN Regularized
Collective Non-Negative Tensor Factorization
Kejing Yin,1 Dong Qian,1 William K. Cheung,1 Benjamin C. M. Fung,2 Jonathan Poon3
1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
School of Information Studies, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
3
Hong Kong Hospital Authority, Hong Kong SAR, China
{cskjyin, dongqian, william}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, ben.fung@mcgill.ca, jonathan@ha.org.hk
Abstract

data are often mapped to some clinically relevant and interpretable concepts, or phenotypes, that reveal the latent true
disease states of patients (Kirby et al. 2016). With the aim
of extracting phenotypes without intensive human supervision to scale well in large-scale datasets, a large number
of machine learning based computational phenotyping models have been proposed (Hripcsak and Albers 2013), among
which the Non-negative Tensor Factorization (NTF) has
shown effective for this task with its capability of preserving
and modeling the high-dimensional interactions (Henderson
et al. 2017; Kim et al. 2017; Yin et al. 2018). Given the EHR
dataset, the tensor representing the interactions among different data modalities, e.g., lab tests and medications, can be
defined and the interpretable phenotypes then can be discovered by factorizing the tensor.

Non-negative Tensor Factorization (NTF) has been shown effective to discover clinically relevant and interpretable phenotypes from Electronic Health Records (EHR). Existing NTF
based computational phenotyping models aggregate data over
the observation window, resulting in the learned phenotypes
being mixtures of disease states appearing at different times.
We argue that by separating the clinical events happening at
different times in the input tensor, the temporal dynamics and
the disease progression within the observation window could
be modeled and the learned phenotypes will correspond to
more specific disease states. Yet how to construct the tensor
for data samples with different temporal lengths and properly capture the temporal relationship specific to each individual data sample remains an open challenge. In this paper,
we propose a novel Collective Non-negative Tensor Factorization (CNTF) model where each patient is represented by
a temporal tensor, and all of the temporal tensors are factorized collectively with the phenotype definitions being shared
across all patients. The proposed CNTF model is also flexible
to incorporate non-temporal data modality and RNN-based
temporal regularization. We validate the proposed model using MIMIC-III dataset, and the empirical results show that the
learned phenotypes are clinically interpretable. Moreover, the
proposed CNTF model outperforms the state-of-the-art computational phenotyping models for the mortality prediction
task.

Despite the advances in computational phenotyping using
the NTF models, there are still fundamentally challenging
issues to be solved. One of the important ones is that the
temporal progression of patients is not well considered in
general. Most of the NTF based models integrate the data
over the observation window to build the input tensor (Ho et
al. 2014), making the clinical events happening at different
times being mixed in the input tensor. Consequently, the resulting phenotypes would also be mixtures of disease states
that appearing at different times in the patient journey, instead of describing one distinct and specific disease state. It
will be particularly undesirable for circumstances where disease states are evolving. In Intensive Care Units (ICU), for
example, patients rapidly progress from one disease state to
another. Given the data accumulated over the ICU stay, it
would be extremely difficult to recover the disease states
which are in fact appearing at different time points. As an
empirical evidence, it has been observed in (Yin et al. 2018)
that the disease “other disease of lung” appears in almost every phenotype. This is very likely due to the fact that many
patients in ICU would finally develop to acute respiratory
failure and thus dominates the learned phenotypes. Therefore, we believe that separating the events happening at different time in the input tensor would yield more distinct and
specific disease states. However, modeling the temporal dynamic using the NTF model is not straightforward. Firstly,
the length of the observation window for different patients
may differ from each other, making it difficult to align the
patient records. Although different heuristics can be used,

Introduction
With the global adoption of Electronic Health Records
(EHR) over the past decade, a large amount of clinical data
about patients, including diagnoses, laboratory test results,
medication prescriptions, etc., were accumulated, providing great opportunities to accelerate clinical research and
improve healthcare quality by strategic use of the EHR
data (Yadav et al. 2018). However, using the raw EHR data
is very challenging due to the inherently complex nature
of healthcare and the data recording process, which is reflected by the fact that EHR data are often largely missing,
frequently inaccurate and possibly biased (Hripcsak and Albers 2013), making the true disease states of patients not
directly observable from the data. Therefore, the raw EHR
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1246

