The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Strong Equivalence for Epistemic Logic Programs Made Easy
Wolfgang Faber, Michael Morak

Stefan Woltran

Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt
Klagenfurt, Austria

TU Wien
Vienna, Austria

Abstract

on the polynomial hierarchy than deciding answer set existence (Eiter and Gottlob 1995).
Gelfond (1991; 1994) recognized epistemic negation as
a desired construct for ASP early on and introduced the
modal operators K (“known” or “provably true”) and M
(“possible” or “not provably false”) to address this. Ka and
Ma correspond to ¬not a and not ¬a, respectively. Renewed interest in recent years has revealed several flaws in
the original semantics, and various new approaches (cf. e.g.
(Gelfond 2011; Truszczynski 2011; Kahl 2014; Fariñas del
Cerro, Herzig, and Su 2015; Shen and Eiter 2016)) were proposed. Also the development of ELP solving systems (Kahl
et al. 2015; Son et al. 2017; Bichler, Morak, and Woltran
2018) has gained momentum.
A main application and major motivation of ELPs is the
formalization of the Closed World Assumption (CWA), as
pointed out already by Gelfond (1991). Interestingly, there
are two formalizations of the CWA using ELPs in the literature. The first, given in (Gelfond 1991)1 , shall be referred to
as Gelfond-CWA and introduces one rule for each atom p:

Epistemic Logic Programs (ELPs), that is, Answer Set Programming (ASP) extended with epistemic operators, have received renewed interest in recent years, which led to a flurry
of new research, as well as efficient solvers. An important
question is under which conditions a sub-program can be replaced by another one without changing the meaning, in any
context. This problem is known as strong equivalence, and is
well-studied for ASP. For ELPs, this question has been approached by embedding them into epistemic extensions of
equilibrium logics. In this paper, we consider a simpler, more
direct characterization that is directly applicable to the language used in state-of-the-art ELP solvers. This also allows us
to give tight complexity bounds, showing that strong equivalence for ELPs remains coNP-complete, as for ASP. We further use our results to provide syntactic characterizations for
tautological rules and rule subsumption for ELPs.

1

Introduction

Epistemic Logic Programs (ELPs) are an extension of the
well-established formalism of Answer Set Programming
(ASP), a generic, fully declarative logic programming language that allows for encoding problems such that the resulting answers (called answer sets) directly correspond to solutions of the encoded problem (Brewka, Eiter, and Truszczynski 2011; Schaub and Woltran 2018). Negation in ASP is
generally interpreted according to the stable model semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988), that is, as negation-asfailure, also called default negation. Such a default negation
¬a of an atom a is true if there is no justification for a in the
same answer set, making it a “local” operator in the sense
that it is defined relative to one considered answer set. ELPs
(in the version of (Shen and Eiter 2016)), on the other hand,
extend ASP with the epistemic negation operator not that
allows for a form of meta-reasoning, that is, reasoning over
multiple answer sets. Intuitively, an epistemically negated
atom not a expresses that a cannot be proven true, meaning that it is not true in every answer set. Thus, epistemic
negation is defined relative to a collection of answer sets, referred to as a world view. Deciding whether a world view exists, is Σ3P -complete (Shen and Eiter 2016), one level higher

p0 ← ¬not ¬p.

(1)

Intuitively, this says that p0 (i.e. the negation of p) shall be
true if there is no possible world where p is true. Shen and
Eiter (2016) propose a different rule for CWA, which we will
refer to as Shen-Eiter-CWA for p:
p0 ← not p.

(2)

Again, intuitively, this formulation makes p0 true iff there is
a possible world where p is false.
A natural question is whether (1) and (2) yield the same
results in any context, which will be answered in this paper.
To this end, we study notions of equivalence between ELPs.
For instance, two ELPs Π1 and Π2 are strongly ELP-WVequivalent iff, for any third ELP Π, the combined programs
Π1 ∪ Π and Π2 ∪ Π are equivalent (i.e. have the same world
views). This notion is useful to transform ELPs into equivalent versions where one wants to verify that a local change
1

Gelfond (1991) proposed the rule ∼ p ← ¬Mp, where ∼
is a third kind of negation, usually referred to as strong negation,
not considered in this paper. It can be simulated by replacing occurrences of ∼ p by a fresh atom p0 and adding a constraint rule
← p, p0 that excludes p and p0 to hold simultaneously.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2809

