The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Deep Sequential Model for Discourse Parsing on Multi-Party Dialogues
Zhouxing Shi, Minlie Huang∗
Dept. of Computer Science & Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI), China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
zhouxingshichn@gmail.com; aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

dialogues (Afantenos et al. 2015) since multi-party dialogue data have more complex discourse structures in nature.
RST is constituency-based, where related adjacent discourse
units are merged to form larger units recursively, resulting in
a hierarchical tree structure (Li, Li, and Hovy 2014). By contrast, dependency-based structures, where EDUs are directly
linked without forming upper-level structures, are more applicable for multi-party dialogues. It is because multi-party
dialogues have immediate relations between non-adjacent
discourse units and the discourse structures are generally
non-projective2 (Morey, Muller, and Asher 2018). Therefore, the focus of this paper is on parsing dependency structures of multi-party dialogues. Figure 1 shows an example of
a multi-party dialogue and its dependency structure, where
three speakers (A, B, C) are conversing in an online game.

Discourse structures are beneficial for various NLP tasks
such as dialogue understanding, question answering, sentiment analysis, and so on. This paper presents a deep sequential model for parsing discourse dependency structures
of multi-party dialogues. The proposed model aims to construct a discourse dependency tree by predicting dependency
relations and constructing the discourse structure jointly and
alternately. It makes a sequential scan of the Elementary Discourse Units (EDUs)1 in a dialogue. For each EDU, the model
decides to which previous EDU the current one should link
and what the corresponding relation type is. The predicted
link and relation type are then used to build the discourse
structure incrementally with a structured encoder. During link
prediction and relation classification, the model utilizes not
only local information that represents the concerned EDUs,
but also global information that encodes the EDU sequence
and the discourse structure that is already built at the current
step. Experiments show that the proposed model outperforms
all the state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Discourse parsing is to identify relations between discourse
units and to discover the discourse structure that the units
form (Li, Li, and Chang 2016). Previous studies have shown
that discourse structures are beneficial for various NLP
tasks, including dialogue understanding (Asher et al. 2016;
Takanobu et al. 2018), question answering (Verberne et al.
2007), information retrieval (Seo, Croft, and Smith 2009),
and sentiment analysis (Cambria et al. 2013; Bhatia, Ji, and
Eisenstein 2015).
Many approaches have been proposed for discourse parsing based on Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) (Mann and
Thompson 1988). However, RST is designed for written text
and only allows discourse relations to appear between adjacent discourse units, and thus is inapplicable for multi-party

Figure 1: A multi-party dialogue example with its discourse structure from the STAC Corpus (Asher et al. 2016),
where “Q-Elab” is short for “Question-Elaboration”, “QAP”
for “Question-Answer-Pair”, and “Ack.” for “Acknowledgement”.
Prior state-of-the-art approaches for discourse dependency parsing commonly adopt a pipeline framework: first
estimating the local probability of the dependency relation
between each combination of two EDUs, and then constructing a discourse structure with decoding algorithms such
as maximum spanning tree or integer linear programming

∗
Corresponding author: Minlie Huang.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A discourse can be segmented into clause-level units called Elementary Discourse Units (EDUs) which are the most fundamental
discourse units in discourse parsing. Following previous work such
as (Li et al. 2014; Li, Li, and Hovy 2014), we also assume that
EDU segmentations are preprocessed.

2
A discourse structure is non-projective if it is impossible to
draw the relations on the same side without crossing (McDonald et
al. 2005). As the non-projective example shown in Figure 1, 1 → 4
and 3 → 5 have to be drawn on two sides to avoid crossing.

7007

