The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improved Knowledge Graph Embedding
Using Background Taxonomic Information
Bahare Fatemi, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, David Poole
{bfatemi, siamakx, poole}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract

A common approach to apply machine learning to symbolic data, such as text, graph and entity-relationships, is
through embeddings. Word, sentence and paragraph embeddings (Mikolov et al. 2013; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014), which vectorize words, sentences and paragraphs using context information, are widely used in a variety of natural language processing tasks from syntactic
parsing to sentiment analysis. Graph embeddings (Hoff,
Raftery, and Handcock 2002; Grover and Leskovec 2016;
Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014) are used in social network analysis for link prediction and community detection.
In relational learning, embeddings for entities and relationships are used to generalize from existing data. These
embeddings are often formulated in terms of tensor factorization (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel 2012; Bordes et al. 2013;
Trouillon et al. 2016; Kazemi and Poole 2018c). Here, the
embeddings are learned such that their interaction through
(tensor-)products best predicts the (probability of the) existence of the observed triples; see (Nguyen 2017; Wang
et al. 2017) for details and discussion. Tensor factorization
methods have been very successful, yet they rely on a large
number of annotated triples to learn useful representations.
There is often other information in ontologies which specifies the meaning of the symbols used in a knowledge base.
One type of ontological information is represented in a hierarchical structure called a taxonomy. For example, a knowledge base might contain information that DJTrump, whose
name is “Donald Trump” is a president, but may not contain
information that he is a person, a mammal and an animal, because these are implied by taxonomic knowledge. Being told
that mammals are chordates, lets us conclude that DJTrump
is also a chordate, without needing to have triples specifying
this about multiple mammals. We could also have information about subproperties, such as that being president is a
subproperty of “managing”, which in turn is a subproperty
of “interacts with”.
This paper is about combining taxonomic information
in the form of subclass and subproperty (e.g., managing
implies interaction) into relational embedding models. We
show that existing factorization models that are fully expressive cannot reflect such constraints for all legal entity
embeddings. We propose a model that is provably fully expressive and can represent such taxonomic information, and
evaluate its performance on real-world datasets.

Knowledge graphs are used to represent relational information in terms of triples. To enable learning about domains,
embedding models, such as tensor factorization models, can
be used to make predictions of new triples. Often there is
background taxonomic information (in terms of subclasses
and subproperties) that should also be taken into account. We
show that existing fully expressive (a.k.a. universal) models cannot provably respect subclass and subproperty information. We show that minimal modifications to an existing knowledge graph completion method enables injection of
taxonomic information. Moreover, we prove that our model
is fully expressive, assuming a lower-bound on the size of
the embeddings. Experimental results on public knowledge
graphs show that despite its simplicity our approach is surprisingly effective.

The AI community has long noticed the importance of
structure in data. While traditional machine learning techniques have been mostly focused on feature-based representations, the primary form of data in the subfield of Statistical Relational AI (StaRAI) (Getoor and Taskar 2007;
Raedt et al. 2016) is in the form of entities and relationships among them. Such entity-relationships are often in the
form of (head, relationship, tail) triples, which can also be
expressed in the form of a graph, with nodes as entities and
labeled directed edges as relationships among entities. Predicting the existence, identity, and attributes of entities and
their relationships are among the main goals of StaRAI.
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are graph structured knowledge bases that store facts about the world. A large number of KGs have been created such as NELL (Carlson et
al. 2010), F REEBASE (Bollacker et al. 2008), and Google
Knowledge Vault (Dong et al. 2014). These KGs have applications in several fields including natural language processing, search, automatic question answering and recommendation systems. Since accessing and storing all the facts in
the world is difficult, KGs are incomplete. The goal of link
prediction for KGs – a.k.a. KG completion – is to predict
the unknown links or relationships in a KG based on the existing ones. This often amounts to infer (the probability of)
new triples from the existing triples.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3526

