The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Explainable, Normative, and Justified Agency
Pat Langley
Institute for the Study of Learning and Expertise,
2164 Staunton Court, Palo Alto, CA 94306 USA
Department of Computer Science, University of Auckland,
Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142 NZ

Abstract

so reaching the hospital in short order had higher priority
than being polite to others along the way or obeying traffic
laws. Humans can defend their behavior in this manner even
when they violate serious societal norms, and we want intelligent agents of the future to exhibit the same ability to
justify their decisions and actions on demand.
We discuss this challenge in the sections that follow, arguing that such justified agency is an important topic that
deserves substantial attention from AI researchers. We first
examine the two related topics of explainable agency and
normative agency. In each case, we describe the desired
abilities, offer illustrative examples, and touch on relevant
research. We also consider the space of agent designs, including some open issues that require additional work. After this, we turn to justified agency, arguing that it combines
the first two abilities and proposing a hypothesis about what
else is required to support it. We close by considering some
testbeds and experiments that would let the research community evaluate progress in this critical arena.

In this paper, we pose a new challenge for AI researchers –
to develop intelligent systems that support justified agency.
We illustrate this ability with examples and relate it to two
more basic topics that are receiving increased attention –
agents that explain their decisions and ones that follow societal norms. In each case, we describe the target abilities,
consider design alternatives, note some open questions, and
review prior research. After this, we return to justified agency,
offering a hypothesis about its relation to explanatory and
normative behavior. We conclude by proposing testbeds and
experiments to evaluate this empirical claim and encouraging
other researchers to contribute to this crucial area.

1

Background and Motivation

Autonomous artifacts, from self-driving cars to drones to
household robots, are becoming more widely adopted, and
this trend seems likely to accelerate in the future. The increasing reliance on these devices has raised concerns about
our ability to understand their behavior and our capacity
to ensure their safety. Before intelligent agents can gain
widespred acceptance in society, they must be able to communicate their decision making to humans in ways that convince us they actually share our aims.
This challenge involves two distinct but complementary
issues. The first is the need for agents to explain the reasons
they carried out particular courses of action in terms that we
can understand. Langley et al. (2017) have referred to this
as explainable agency. The second is the need for assurance
that, when agents pursue explicit goals, they will also follow the many implicit rules of society. We will refer to this
ability as normative agency. Both of these functions are necessary underpinnings of trustable autonomous systems, and
two capabilities are closely intertwined.
Consider a scenario in which a person drives a friend with
a ruptured appendix to the hospital. The driver exceeds the
speed limit, weaves in and out of traffic, runs through red
lights, and even drives on a sidewalk, although he is still
careful to avoid hitting other cars or losing control on turns.
Afterwards, the driver explains that he took such drastic actions because he thought the passenger’s life was in danger,

2

Explainable Agency

People can usually explain their reasons for making decisions and taking actions. When someone purchases a microwave oven, rearranges furniture in a room, or plans a vacation, he can state the choices considered, why he selected
one alternative over the others, and even how his decision
might have differed in other circumstances. Retrospective
reports are seldom perfect, but they often offer important
windows into the decision process.
As intelligent agents become both more autonomous and
more prevalent, it is essential that they support similar abilities. We will say that:
• An intelligent system exhibits explainable agency if it can
provide, on request, the reasons for its activities.
Consider some examples from the realm of autonomous vehicles. If we ask a self-driving car why it followed a given
route, it should be able to state that the path had few lights
and stop signs while still being reasonably short. More importantly, when we ask the vehicle why it swerved into another car, it should explain that it was the only way to avoid
hitting an unexpected jaywalker. Like humans, such agents
should have reasons for their actions and they should be able
to communicate them to others when asked.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9775

