The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Spatiality Preservable Factored Poisson Regression for
Large-Scale Fine-Grained GPS-Based Population Analysis
Masamichi Shimosaka,1 Yuta Hayakawa,1 Kota Tsubouchi2
1

Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2 Yahoo Japan Corporation
simosaka@miubiq.cs.titech.ac.jp, hayakawa@miubiq.cs.titech.ac.jp, ktsubouc@yahoo-corp.jp

Abstract

analyzed by using non-negative tensor factorization (Fan,
Song, and Shibasaki 2014). This approach is known to be
prominent for analyzing urban dynamics to understand the
functionality (Yao et al. 2017) and the population trend of
each POI (Nishi, Tsubouchi, and Shimosaka 2014) when the
stored data are sufficient in each tensor cell. However, it has
a critical drawback when used for predictive tasks, such as
congestion forecast (Konishi et al. 2016). This stems from
the fact that the approach based on tensor factorization is
originally designed for the data compression to intuitively
interpret the past GPS records, whereas it provides an inaccurate performance without any near future observation.
With regard to the well-known recommendation systems,
this issue is akin to the out-of-example extension (i.e., cold
start problem for the recommendation systems research)
(Lika, Kolomvatsos, and Hadjiefthymiades 2014).

With the wide use of smartphones with Global Positioning
System (GPS) sensors, the analysis of the population from
GPS traces has been actively explored in the last decade. We
propose herein a brand new population prediction model to
capture the population trends in a fine-grained point of interest (POI) densely distributed over large areas and understand
the relationship of each POI in terms of spatiality preservation. We propose a new framework, called Spatiality Preservable Factorized Regression (SPFR), to realize this model. The
SPFR is inspired by the success of the recently proposed bilinear Poisson regression and the concept of multi-task learning with factorization approach and the graph proximity regularization. Given that the proposed model is written simply
in terms of optimization, we achieve scalability using our
model. The results of our empirical evaluation, which used
a massive dataset of GPS logs in the Tokyo region over 32 M
count logs, show that our model is comparable to the stateof-the-art methods in terms of capturing the population trend
across meshes while retaining spatial preservation in finer
mesh areas.

In contrast to the factorization approach, recent advances
on urban dynamics based on the discriminative approach
using contextual information, such as calendar information, weather information, and urban-scale event information, were reported to provide accurate prediction results
(Jiang et al. 2018). However, its POI size in their analyses
was prone to be large (e.g., approximately 1 km square with
GPS data and 2 ∼ 3 km square with cellular network data).
This can be attributed to the performance of the predictionbased approaches being degraded on small-sized regions.
This is also analogous to the data sparseness problem in the
counting problem (Lichman and Smyth 2018). Furthermore,
the increases of the number of POIs were not negligible because of the high spatial granularity. Therefore, the previous work tended to choose the POI sizes, which were, by
no means, small. Without the spatially fine-grained analysis
(e.g., 100 m square per POI), the population trend in a commercial building, visualization of rush hour in front of the
terminal stations, and the functionality of POI with small
areas could not be available. In spite of the importance of
the analysis with high spatial granularity, to the best of our
knowledge, no work on the population analysis with a high
spatial granularity, except (Xu et al. 2016), exists in the literature. Indeed, the work provides successful results on visualization and functionality analysis of each POI within a
fine-grained way; however, this state-of-the-art work is designed for real-time estimation instead of the prediction task.
Prediction tasks are highly significant for real-world applica-

The understanding of the flow of people in a city, which
is known as the analysis of urban dynamics, is of great importance in urban planning, emergency management, and
commercial activity. Questionnaire-based surveys, such as
the person trip survey and the traffic flow survey, have been
useful for understanding urban dynamics (Sekimoto et al.
2011). With the spread of smart devices, a large amount
of mobility log data, such as the global positioning system
(GPS) and cell tower logs, has been accumulated. Therefore,
studies have paid attention to the analysis of urban dynamics using mobility logs from smartphones without other additional survey costs.
With the structured property of the population data across
regions, time, and days obtained from GPS logs, the analytics based on spatio-temporal tensor factorization (Fan, Song,
and Shibasaki 2014) and discriminative approach, such as
neural network (Jiang et al. 2018), and Poisson regression
(Okawa, Kim, and Toda 2017) have been established as urban dynamics analysis in the last decade. In the former approach, the tensor data, where the population data with respect to locations, time-zones, and days are accumulated, are
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1142

