The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Representing and Learning Grammars in Answer Set Programming
Mark Law

Alessandra Russo

Elisa Bertino

Imperial College London, UK
mark.law09@imperial.ac.uk

Imperial College London, UK
a.russo@imperial.ac.uk

Purdue University, USA
bertino@purdue.edu

Krysia Broda

Jorge Lobo

Imperial College London, UK
k.broda@imperial.ac.uk

ICREA - Universitat Pompeu Fabra
jorge.lobo@upf.edu

Abstract

Greene, and Amini 2007), hand written grammars may contain errors, meaning automatically generated test instances
may fail in the programs parser (Godefroid, Peleg, and Singh
2017). Another example arises in the domain of signaturebased intrusion detection systems. Signatures of attacks are
specified as regular expressions. Writing these signatures is
difficult, and the definitions are usually incomplete: there are
attacks that are not detected by the signature and strings that
are classified as attacks when they are not, e.g. (Alnabulsi,
Islam, and Mamun 2014). This is also the case in automatic
classification of logs, where signatures are used and specified as regular expressions to parse the logs into classes, and,
as in the case of intrusion detection, often there are incorrect
classifications, e.g. (Tang, Tao, and Chang-Shing 2011).
The contribution of this paper is twofold. Firstly, a class of
grammars, called Answer Set Grammars (ASG) is defined.
These grammars are CFGs with annotations, which go beyond CFGs and are able to express some context-sensitive
languages, including some which are not polynomially decidable. Secondly, a framework that given an ASG and two
sets of strings, E + and E − , learns a target ASG that has the
same context-free component as the input grammar, and every string in E + (resp. E − ) is accepted (resp. rejected) by
the target grammar. This framework is intended as a first step
towards addressing problems such as the three described
above, by automatically modifying the grammars.
ASG annotations are expressed as Answer Set Programs
(ASP). They are inspired by extensions of CFGs, such as
attribute grammars (Knuth 1968) and definite clause grammars (Pereira and Warren 1980), which are capable of expressing context-sensitive conditions. The former extend
CFGs with attributes and production rules with assignments
to these attributes and constraints on the values that these attributes can take. The latter extend CFGs with variables that
can be passed up and down the parse tree. ASGs differ from
both attribute grammars and DCGs in that the annotations
are purely declarative and are not subject to procedural constraints. ASGs have a high degree of expressiveness and by
restricting the fragment of ASP used by the ASG, languages
of different complexities can be characterised.
The insight of using ASP annotations allows recent advances in learning ASP (Law, Russo, and Broda 2015a) to
be used to learn the annotations of ASGs. Our proposed
learning framework is able to learn the ASP part of an

In this paper we introduce an extension of context-free grammars called answer set grammars (ASGs). These grammars
allow annotations on production rules, written in the language of Answer Set Programming (ASP), which can express
context-sensitive constraints. We investigate the complexity
of various classes of ASG with respect to two decision problems: deciding whether a given string belongs to the language
of an ASG and deciding whether the language of an ASG is
non-empty. Specifically, we show that the complexity of these
decision problems can be lowered by restricting the subset of
the ASP language used in the annotations. To aid the applicability of these grammars to computational problems that require context-sensitive parsers for partially known languages,
we propose a learning task for inducing the annotations of an
ASG. We characterise the complexity of this task and present
an algorithm for solving it. An evaluation of a (prototype)
implementation is also discussed.

Introduction
All computational problems can be characterised as the task
of recognising a language. Many of these languages can be
captured by grammars. For example, finite state automata
can be characterised by regular grammars, pushdown automata by context-free grammars (CFGs), linear bounded
automata by context-sensitive grammars and Turing machines by unrestricted grammars. Grammars are useful in
many situations where the problem to solve is that of recognising the sentences of a language. For instance, grammars
are useful to automatically generate parsers of programming
languages. Typically, the problem of parser generation is,
roughly speaking, done in two steps: firstly a CFG is defined and secondly either the grammar, or the parser generated by the grammar, is annotated or modified to capture the
language; e.g. a CFG is used, together with annotations, as
input to YACC (Johnson 1975) in order to generate parsers.
Parsers are used in many situations. However, in practice
there are situations where a parser’s grammar may be unknown or a parser’s implementation does not match its specification. For instance, in the context of automatic test generation for program debugging, known as fuzzing (Sutton,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2919

