The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Heuristic Voting as Ordinal Dominance Strategies
Svetlana Obraztsova

Reshef Meir

Omer Lev
Ben-Gurion University
Beersheba, Israel
omerlev@bgu.ac.il

Maria Polukarov

Nanyang Technological University King’s College London
Technion
London, United Kingdom
Singapore
Haifa, Israel
maria.polukarov@kcl.ac.uk
lana@ntu.edu.sg
reshefm@ie.technion.ac.il

Abstract

or to act according to them (Tversky and Kahneman 1974;
Chater, Tenenbaum, and Yuille 2006). There is no reason to
believe that in voting scenarios people will perform differently in this respect.

Decision making under uncertainty is a key component of
many AI settings, and in particular of voting scenarios where
strategic agents are trying to reach a joint decision. The common approach to handle uncertainty is by maximizing expected utility, which requires a cardinal utility function as
well as detailed probabilistic information. However, often
such probabilities are not easy to estimate or apply.
To this end, we present a framework that allows for “shades
of gray” of likelihood without probabilities. Specifically, we
create a hierarchy of sets of world states based on a prospective poll, with inner sets contain more likely outcomes.
This hierarchy of likelihoods allows us to define what we
term ordinally-dominated strategies. We use this approach to
justify various known voting heuristics as bounded-rational
strategies.

Voting without Probabilities Alternative approaches, focusing on decision making in face of strict uncertainty (defined in terms of possible or impossible states) have been
formulated and applied in various AI and economic settings (Dow and Werlang 1994; Boutilier 1994; Halpern
1997; Matt, Toni, and Vaccari 2009), and more recently,
in the context of voting (Conitzer, Walsh, and Xia 2011;
Reijngoud and Endriss 2012; Meir, Lev, and Rosenschein
2014). The idea at the core of this approach is that, for any
given voter, a vote a0 locally dominates another vote a if a0
is at least as good as a for this voter in any voting profile that
she considers to be possible.
In fact, voting behavior can also be defined without any
explicit epistemic model. Indeed, several recent papers suggest various heuristics that are specific to a voting rule and/or
context. Some of these heuristics have been shown to be
empirically consistent with voters’ behavior in lab experiments (Laslier 2010), and others guarantee desirable convergence and/or welfare properties when applied by all voters
in a group (Grandi et al. 2013).

Introduction
The question of how agents – human or artificial – choose a
strategy when facing a choice, has been at the center of attention in artificial intelligence since its inception. Approaches
to decision making often rely on two primary components:
the epistemic state of the agent (her beliefs on how her actions will affect the world), and her innate preferences (the
utility or cost associated with each outcome).
In voting scenarios, agents’ actions are aggregated to
reach a shared result. Voters can make strategic choices once
they know what the state of the world is (what other agents
are voting), following their own utility function (in most voting settings, an ordinal preference over possible outcomes is
assumed). This voting decision may either be applied once
based on the current beliefs of the voters, or in an iterative
fashion so that voters have several opportunities to observe
the world and change their action. When the votes of others are unknown, the epistemic state might depend on some
prior knowledge and/or signals from the environment.
The most common way to address this lack of knowledge is to assign probabilities to each state of the world
and assume that agents each maximize their expected utility over all possible states (see Related Work). However, in
many situations human agents may not have the ability to
determine precise probabilities of each state of the world,

Contribution We extend the framework suggested in the
strict uncertainty papers mentioned above, by allowing
gradual levels of uncertainty. Specifically, we build on the
idea of having a likelihood hierarchy – a sequence of sets of
states of the world, where each next set is a superset of the
previous set in the sequence, so that the states in inner sets
are considered by the voter to be more likely. An undominated vote in this setting is one which is not dominated at
any level of the hierarchy.
Using this hierarchy of likelihood, we suggest an alternative representation for information structures in voting.
We show how the relevant information can be boiled down
to what we call a pivot-graph, which succinctly captures all
situations where the voter may be pivotal. We then show that
the information structure allows us to justify several existing voting heuristics as rational decisions for an appropriate epistemic model (a specific hierarchy of pivot-graphs).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2077

