The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Lipper: Synthesizing Thy Speech Using Multi-View Lipreading
Yaman Kumar

Rohit Jain

Khwaja Mohd. Salik

Adobe
ykumar@adobe.com

MIDAS Lab, NSIT-Delhi
rohitj.co@nsit.net.in

MIDAS Lab, NSIT-Delhi
khwajam.co@nsit.net.in

Rajiv Ratn Shah

Yifang Yin

Roger Zimmermann

MIDAS Lab, IIIT-Delhi
rajivratn@iiitd.ac.in

NUS, Singapore
yifang@comp.nus.edu.sg

NUS, Singapore
rogerz@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Thus, with this in mind, we present a model, namely Lipper, which given a silent video consisting of lip-movements
reconstructs the speech of the speaker. It does this by modeling lipreading as a regression rather than a classification
task.

Lipreading has a lot of potential applications such as in the
domain of surveillance and video conferencing. Despite this,
most of the work in building lipreading systems has been
limited to classifying silent videos into classes representing
text phrases. However, there are multiple problems associated
with making lipreading a text-based classification task like
its dependence on a particular language and vocabulary mapping. Thus, in this paper we propose a multi-view lipreading to audio system, namely Lipper, which models it as a
regression task. The model takes silent videos as input and
produces speech as the output. With multi-view silent videos,
we observe an improvement over single-view speech reconstruction results. We show this by presenting an exhaustive set
of experiments for speaker-dependent, out-of-vocabulary and
speaker-independent settings. Further, we compare the delay
values of Lipper with other speechreading systems in order to
show the real-time nature of audio produced. We also perform
a user study for the audios produced in order to understand the
level of comprehensibility of audios produced using Lipper.

Distinction between Speech-reconstruction,
Speech-reading, and Speech-recognition systems
Lipper is a speech reconstruction model. People can easily get confused between speech reconstruction, reading and
recognition systems. The only commonality amongst all of
these systems, pertaining to our work, is that lipreading has
been shown to be effective in all the three tasks.
Taking the case of speech recognition systems, they perform the task of identifying the speaker of a speech, and
therefore, are not related to this work. However, lipreading
based speech-reading and reconstruction systems do share
some common features. Thus, with this in mind, in explaining this work, we focus on speech-reading and speechreconstruction systems only.
While on one hand, speech-reading systems involve identifying what a person says (using text as the identification metric), on the other hand, the objective of speechreconstruction systems is to generate the speech of a person (using audio as the output generated). However, generation of the speech using reconstruction systems may not
involve identifying what a person says. For instance, speech
can be generated even for illegible tokens (such as any random permutation of characters), but due to the vocabulary
dependence of speech-reading models, it becomes difficult
to identify these illegible tokens. Consider another example where this might be useful, multilingual people often
speak in code-switched languages (for e.g., in India, a codeswitched version of “I was in London the last month”, can
be, “Pichle mahine, I was in London”). For identifying that
kind of speech, a speechreading system has to consider all
the possible combinations of words in both the languages
and then identify them. This quickly becomes un-scalable
as the number of languages and the size of each vocabulary
increase.
The reason for the language and vocabulary independence
of speech reconstruction models like Lipper is that for the
generation of a sound, lip, nose, throat and other movements
are required, but not the vocabulary (or language) per se.

Introduction
Human speech is bimodal in nature, with the two modalities coming from the auditory and optical senses. An example in this regard comes from experiments by McGurk
and MacDonald in their appropriately titled paper, “Hearing lips and seeing voices” (McGurk and MacDonald 1976),
where they show that subjects when shown mouth images
speaking /ga/ but with the sound of /ba/, perceived it as
/da/. However, the recent work in lipreading domain has decoupled the visual signals from the auditory ones. Instead,
most of the lipreading projects treat this problem as a classification task where they consider speech videos from a restricted vocabulary of a particular language. Then, models
are trained to classify those videos into a fixed number of
classes made up of that limited vocabulary. However, scaling that approach to multiple languages and a complete vocabulary is a difficult task. In addition, humans do not always speak valid statements. Meaningless, gibberish or nonlanguage and vocabulary-conformant speech (for instance,
a human speaker making animal sounds) cannot be modeled using a restrictive approach like a classification model.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2588

