The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

A Lightweight Approach to Academic
Research Group Management Using Online Tools:
Spend More Time on Research and Less on Management
Eric Eaton
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Computer and Information Science
eeaton@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract

could be viewed as a large (e.g., 25-person) semester-long
group project (Eaton 2017).
The selection of tools and protocols were driven by the
following goals:
• Ease of use: All research management tools should be
easy to use and maintain, requiring little effort both on
the part of the research advisor (who has little free time)
and research assistants (who will fight against using these
tools if they consume much time or are cumbersome).
• Awareness of the status of all ongoing research: At
any time, there are multiple projects and papers that are
being developed in parallel within the group. More senior
members of the group, especially the principal investigator, should have a complete picture of current efforts and
their status. Junior members should also be aware of the
various ongoing projects, allowing them to seek out assistance and forge collaborations across projects.
• Ensure the quality and longevity of all research: Individual research papers will be easier to develop, edit,
and build upon if everyone in the group follows similar
conventions and uses similar development tools. Additionally, great effort goes into writing research code, and
other members of the group and (eventually) the scientific
community should benefit from these efforts.
• Promote communication within the group: Unless we
are careful, it is quite easy to duplicate effort or waste time
attempting problems that other group members know how
to solve. Frequent communication can help alleviate this,
leading everyone to be more productive and efficient.
• Ease the transition of new group members: Academic
research groups have frequent turnover, and so new members should be able to quickly adopt the tools and procedures to contribute effectively with minimal guidance.
• Coordination of shared resources: Research groups
often maintain computational servers and other resources
that must be shared effectively across projects.
In addition to these criteria, all tools described in this paper are either free or have relatively low cost, making this
combination especially affordable to academic groups. Finally, this set of tools allows for redundant backups of all
critical data, although in some cases the backup might require a manual process to export the data.

After years of taking a trial-and-error approach to managing
a moderate-size academic research group, I settled on using a
set of online tools and protocols that seem effective, require
relatively little effort to use and maintain, and are inexpensive. This paper discusses this approach to communication,
project management, document and code management, and
logistics. It is my hope that other researchers, especially new
faculty and research scientists, might find this set of tools and
protocols useful when determining how to manage their own
research group. This paper is targeted toward research groups
based in mathematics and engineering, although faculty in
other disciplines may find inspiration in some of these ideas.

Introduction
Although doctoral and postdoctoral programs are effective
preparation for how to do research, they do not necessarily
include training on how to manage research across multiple
projects and staff. When I first started as a new faculty member and was faced with managing a small research group,
I adopted approaches similar to those used by my former
advisors. As my research group grew and I acquired more
funded and unfunded projects, I took a trial-and-error approach to improving the management process. Some ideas
were quickly discarded, while others consumed extensive
time only to provide little or no additional benefit. The tools
and protocols that lasted were those that were effective and
lightweight, requiring little of my own effort to set up and
maintain. I suspect that my experience is not unique, and
that many new faculty members can recount similar experiences as they learned how to manage their research group
and the multitude of current and future projects within it.
This paper describes the set of online tools and management protocols that I use to manage my research group.
This group is of moderate size in the computer science department at a large research university, consisting of 10–15
members depending on the semester (e.g., 1–2 postdocs, 4–5
PhD students, 4–5 Master’s students, and a few undergraduates). This approach would fit smaller research groups, and
could be scaled to manage much larger projects—I use a
variant of it to manage a project-driven robotics course that
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9644

