The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adversarial Binary Collaborative Filtering for Implicit Feedback
Haoyu Wang,1 Nan Shao,1 Defu Lian∗2,3
1

School of Computer Science and Engeering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
3
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
{haoyu.uestc,shaonan.uestc,dove.ustc}@gmail.com

Abstract

GAN (Generative Adversarial Networks) (Goodfellow et al.
2014) to get high-quality negative samples. IRGAN (Wang
et al. 2017) which is based on a minimax game and matrix factorization model is one of their representative works.
By generating high-quality negative samples, IRGAN is the
state-of-art algorithm for implicit feedback tasks.
Because the preferences of customers may change constantly, recommender systems need update in time, which
means the efficiency of online recommendation is important. Unfortunately, latent factor models, as generative models in IRGAN, has a critical efficiency bottleneck in top-K
task that is almost the most common and important recommendation task today. If there are M users and N items,
and the dimension of latent space is k, the time complexity of recommendation is O(M N k + M N logK) to extract
top-K desirable items for every user because it needs to
compute users’ preference for all items and rank the preference. To solve this bottleneck, hash technique is applied
in recommendation. Hash technique, encoding real-valued
vectors compact binary codes(e.g.,{0,1},{1,-1}), can provide an efficient way to compute preference because inner product can be computed efficiently by bit operation. It
can also be used to find approximate top-K items in sublinear or logarithmic time (Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012;
Muja and Lowe 2009).
To make adversarial-based recommendation for implicit
feedback effectively and efficiently, we propose an adversarial binary collaborative filtering framework (ABinCF) following IRGAN. However, binary constraints make the learning generally NP-hard (Håstad 2001). To solve this discrete
optimization problem, some work used two-stage methods
like BCCF (Zhou and Zha 2012), PPH (Zhang et al. 2014)
and CH (Liu et al. 2014)) and some directly learnt binary
codes like Discrete Collaborative Filtering (DCF) (Zhang
et al. 2016). However, the two-stage methods lead to a
large quantization loss (Zhang et al. 2016), and DCF optimizes binary codes bit by bit, which is a local search
method (Hromkovič 2013). It searches neighborhoods with
the distance of one. So DCF is easy to fall into local optima because our objective function is non-convex and nonlinear. And a recent work (Courbariaux et al. 2016) did optimization by estimating discrete gradient, which use sign
function as feed-forward pass and a hard tanh as backpropagation. It may be hard to converge asthe feed-forward

Fast item recommendation based on implicit feedback is vital
in practical scenarios due to data-abundance, but challenging
because of the lack of negative samples and the large number
of recommended items. Recent adversarial methods unifying
generative and discriminative models are promising, since the
generative model, as a negative sampler, gradually improves
as iteration continues. However, binary-valued generative
model is still unexplored within the min-max framework, but
important for accelerating item recommendation. Optimizing
binary-valued models is difficult due to non-smooth and nondifferentiable. To this end, we propose two novel methods to
relax the binarization based on the error function and Gumbel
trick so that the generative model can be optimized by many
popular solvers, such as SGD and ADMM. The binary-valued
generative model is then evaluated within the min-max framework on four real-world datasets and shown its superiority
to competing hashing-based recommendation algorithms. In
addition, our proposed framework can approximate discrete
variables precisely and be applied to solve other discrete optimization problems.

Introduction
Nowadays the recommendation system has become more
and more important for a lot of companies(e.g.,Amazon,
Facebook, Netflix) to help their customers find their desirable products to purchase. Traditional recommender systems
aim to predict ratings and recommend items based on explicit ratings.
However, explicit ratings are not always available in many
cases. Implicit feedback is more common and abundant, e.g.,
purchase history, mouse activities and users’ video viewing (Bennett, Lanning, and others 2007). So how to utilize
implicit feedback is a problem needing to be solved. However, compared with explicit feedback, implicit feedback
is more difficult to utilize because lack of negative feedback (Pan et al. 2008). Some work such as WR-MF (Hu,
Koren, and Volinsky 2008), BPR (Rendle et al. 2009),
LambdaFM (Yuan et al. 2016) etc based on matrix factorization (Koren and Bell 2015) achieved great performance in solving this problem. Recently, some work used
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5248

