The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Sequence to Sequence Learning for Query Expansion
Salah Zaiem

Fatiha Sadat

Ecole Polytechnique
Palaiseau, France
mohamed-salah.zaiem@polytechnique.edu

Universite du Quebec a Montreal
201 Avenue du Président Kennedy, Montreal
sadat.fatiha@uqam.ca

Abstract

results. Proposed by Sutskever and al (2014), it consists in
a two-component model using recurrent neural networks to
link variable-length input sequences to variable-length output sequences. The introduced sequence gets encoded by the
first component into a vectorial representation. Therefore,
the decoder transforms that vector into the target sequence.
At each step the next token maximizes :

As fas as we are aware, using Sequence to Sequence algorithms for query expansion has not been explored yet in Information Retrieval literature. We tried to fill this gap in the
literature with a custom Query Expansion system trained and
tested on open datasets. One specificity of our engine compared to classic ones is that it does not need the documents
to expand the introduced query. We test our expansions on
two different tasks : Information Retrieval and Answer preselection. Our method yielded a slight improvement in performance in both two tasks . Our main contributions are :

p(yi |y1 , ..., yi−1 , x) = g(yi−1 , si , c)
where si is the i-th hidden state of the encoder, c the final
vector output by the encoder representing the entire input
sentence and yi the i-th generated token. g is the function
learned by the decoder.

• Starting from open datasets, we built a Query Expansion
training set using sentence-embeddings-based Keyword
Extraction.
• We assess the ability of the Sequence to Sequence neural
networks to capture expanding relations in the words embeddings’ space.
We afterwards started a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the weights learned by our network. In the second
part, I will discuss what is learned by a Recurrent Neural Network compared to what we know about human language learning.

Our Approach
Building the training set
Datasets We used MultiNLI (Williams, Nangia, and Bowman 2018) and SNLI (Bowman et al. 2015). For both corpora, we naturally eliminate pairs classified as contradiction
as they shall not provide relevant expansions.
We also selected the duplicate pairs from the Quora question pairs dataset and trained our expansion model using the
words that do not appear in the first formulation.
Finally, MSCOCO (Lin et al. 2014) dataset consists in human annotated captions of over 120K images. Since they are
describing the same image. We can assume the words appearing in one description and not in the other are an eventual expansion for the first annotation.

Related Work
Relevance feedback has been a popular choice for query
expansion, starting with the Rocchio Algorithm (Salton
1971) in SMART Information Retrieval System. Using a set
of relevant and non relevant documents, the original query
vector is modified.
Recently, the introduction of word embeddings (Mikolov
et al. 2013) allowed new possibilities for Query Expansion.
The distributed representations of the words in a query
made it possible to produce expansions without extracting
them from the documents. Using the centroid of the words
introduced and cosine-similar tokens, Kuzi and al (2016)
proposed a document-independent expansion method.

Keywords extraction We will use sentence embeddings
to find out which words contribute most to the final vector.
This computation is based on the hidden states of the encoder. The last layer in the Infersent (Conneau et al. 2017)
model is a Maxpooling one. The words chosen the most
times will be our selected keywords.

The training
Preprocessing We extract the keywords from the target
sequence, and then we remove the ones that appear in the
source sequence. To get targets with similar lengths, we
remove the pairs with a target having less than 3 tokens
and limit them to 6. We finally get 520k pairs of sentenceexpansion.

Sequence to sequence architectures
Sequence to Sequence is a neural architecture very popular
in machine translation since it has achieved state of the art
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10075

