The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bézier Simplex Fitting: Describing Pareto Fronts of
Simplicial Problems with Small Samples in Multi-Objective Optimization
Ken Kobayashi,1,2 Naoki Hamada,1,2 Akiyoshi Sannai,2,3 Akinori Tanaka,2,3
Kenichi Bannai,3,2 Masashi Sugiyama2,4
1

Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd., Japan
2
The Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan
3
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University, Japan
4
Department of Complexity Science and Engineering, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Japan
Abstract

which describe the best-compromising solutions and their
values of the conflicting objective functions, respectively.
In industrial applications, obtaining the whole Pareto
set/front rather than a single solution enables us to compare promising alternatives and to explore new innovative
designs, whose concept is variously refered to as innovization (Deb and Srinivasan 2006), multi-objective design exploration (Obayashi, Jeong, and Chiba 2005) and design
informatics (Chiba, Makino, and Takatoya 2009). Quite a
few real-world problems involve simulations and/or experiments to evaluate solutions (Chand and Wagner 2015) and
lack the mathematical expression of their objective functions
and derivatives. Multi-objective evolutionary algorithms are
a tool to solve such problems where the Pareto set/front is
approximated by a population, i.e., a finite set of sample
points (Coello, Lamont, and Van Veldhuisen 2007).
While the available sample size is limited due to expensive simulations and experiments, it is well-known that the
dimensionality of the Pareto set/front increases as the number of objectives grows. Describing high-dimensional Pareto
sets/fronts with small samples is one of the key challenges
in many-objective optimization today (Li et al. 2015).
A considerable number of real-world applications share
an interesting structure: their Pareto sets and/or Pareto fronts
are often homeomorphic to an (M − 1)-dimensional simplex. See for example (Rodrı́guez-Chı́a and Puerto 2002;
Vrugt et al. 2003; Shoval et al. 2012; Mastroddi and Gemma
2013). This observation has been theoretically backed up in
some cases (Kuhn 1967; Smale 1973; Shoval et al. 2012).
A recent study (Lovison and Pecci 2014) pointed out that
for all m ≤ M , each (m − 1)-dimensional face of such a
simplex is the Pareto set of a subproblem optimizing m objective functions of the original problem.
By exploiting this simplex structure, we considers the
problem of fitting a hyper-surface to the Pareto front. In
statistics, machine learning and related fields, regression
problems have been considered in Euclidean space without boundary or at most with coordinate-wise upper/lower
boundaries (Gelman and Hill 2007; Gelman et al. 2013).
Hyper-surface models developed in such spaces are not suitable for Pareto fronts as a simplex has a non-axis-parallel
boundary whose skeleton structure is described by its faces.
This paper proposes a new model and its fitting algorithm
for approximating Pareto fronts with the simplex structure.

Multi-objective optimization problems require simultaneously optimizing two or more objective functions. Many studies have reported that the solution set of an M -objective
optimization problem often forms an (M − 1)-dimensional
topological simplex (a curved line for M = 2, a curved
triangle for M = 3, a curved tetrahedron for M = 4,
etc.). Since the dimensionality of the solution set increases
as the number of objectives grows, an exponentially large
sample size is needed to cover the solution set. To reduce
the required sample size, this paper proposes a Bézier simplex model and its fitting algorithm. These techniques can
exploit the simplex structure of the solution set and decompose a high-dimensional surface fitting task into a sequence of low-dimensional ones. An approximation theorem
of Bézier simplices is proven. Numerical experiments with
synthetic and real-world optimization problems demonstrate
that the proposed method achieves an accurate approximation of high-dimensional solution sets with small samples. In
practice, such an approximation will be conducted in the postoptimization process and enable a better trade-off analysis.

Introduction
A multi-objective optimization problem is a problem that
minimizes multiple objective functions f1 , . . . , fM : X →
R over a common domain X ⊆ RL :
minimize f (x) := (f1 (x), . . . , fM (x))
subject to x ∈ X.
Different functions usually have different minimizers, and
one needs to consider a trade-off that two solutions x, y ∈
X may satisfy fi (x) < fi (y) and fj (x) > fj (y). According to Pareto ordering, i.e.,
def

f (x) ≺ f (y) ⇐⇒ fm (x) ≤ fm (y) for all m = 1, . . . , M
and fm (x) < fm (y) for some m = 1, . . . , M,
the goal of multi-objective optimization is to obtain the
Pareto set
X ∗ (f ) := { x ∈ X | f (y) 6≺ f (x) for all y ∈ X }
and the Pareto front
f X ∗ (f ) :=



f (x) ∈ RM

x ∈ X ∗ (f )

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2304

