The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Distantly Supervised Entity Relation
Extraction with Adapted Manual Annotations
Changzhi Sun,1 Yuanbin Wu1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, East China Normal University
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing
changzhisun@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, ybwu@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
ACE05

Abstract

Entity Types

PER (person)
FAC (facility)
LOC (location)
VEH (vehicle)
ORG (organiztaion) WEA (weapon)
GPE (geographical entities)

We investigate the task of distantly supervised joint entity relation extraction. It’s known that training with distant supervision will suffer from noisy samples. To tackle the problem,
we propose to adapt a small manually labelled dataset to the
large automatically generated dataset. By developing a novel
adaptation algorithm, we are able to transfer the high quality
but heterogeneous entity relation annotations in a robust and
consistent way. Experiments on the benchmark NYT dataset
show that our approach significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art methods.

ACE05

PER (person)
LOC (location)
ORG (organiztaion)

Relation Types

ART (agent-artifact)
GPE-AFF (gpe-affiliation)
ORG-AFF (organization-affiliation)
PART-WHOLE (part-whole)
PER-SOC (person-social)
PHYS (phisical)

NYT

NYT

/business/company/founders
/business/company/industry
/location/country/capital
/location/location/contains
/people/person/nationality
/people/person/place_of_birth
......

Introduction
Figure 1: Datasets with different annotation schemas.
ACE05 is a manually labelled dataset with 7 entity types
and 6 relation types. NYT is a distantly supervised dataset
(from Freebase) with 3 entity types and 24 relation types.

A fundamental problem in information extraction is to recognize entities and relations from plain texts. Given a sentence, the task aims to find out strings representing different objects (e.g., person (“Jobs”, “Obama”), organization
(“Labour Party”)), and different semantic relations among
entities (e.g., affiliation relation between a person and an
organization). As it is always the first step to convert unstructured texts into structured knowledge, the entity and relation extraction task attracts long lasting interests in both
researches and applications of natural language processing.
Given a manually annotated dataset, fully supervised
models (especially, neural-network-based models) have
achieved remarkable progress on the extraction task (Miwa
and Bansal 2016; Katiyar and Cardie 2017; Zheng et al.
2017; Zhang, Zhang, and Fu 2017). However, the main factor limiting the application of these methods is the cost to
obtain high quality annotations on entities and relations.
In order to gain more training data on broader domains,
Mintz et al. (2009) start using distant supervision from
knowledge bases. Specifically, instead of annotating entities and relations manually, we can generate training data
automatically via aligning triples in knowledge bases and
free texts. The main problem of distantly supervised datasets
is the noisy samples: the aligned relations are not always
true in contexts. For example, the triple (“Obama”, “United
States”) holds a “born in” relation in a knowledge base, but
it does not necessarily mean all appearances of the pair express the same relationship.

In this work, we focus on distantly supervised extraction
models, and try to alleviate the effect of noisy training samples by adapting high quality annotations from manually labelled datasets. By introducing accurate context-dependent
samples to automatically generated datasets, we aim to make
distantly supervised models more accurate and robust.
The major challenge here is that the two datasets are usually heterogeneous: they could annotate different types of
entities and relations following different guidelines. For example, Figure 1 shows annotation schemas of two benchmark datasets (ACE05 and NYT). A straightforward way
to tackle this challenge is simply merging the two datasets.
However, it ignores inherent differences between the two
schemas and hardly brings performance gains to distantly
supervised models. Another way is trying to establish a
(approximate) mapping between the two schemas manually
(Qiu, Zhao, and Huang 2013). However, it would be inflexible to extend to more schemas. Thus, how to balance scalability and specificity, and how to carefully control the adaptation process are key problems to the task.
We propose a novel fine-grained framework to incorporate manually labelled dataset to the distantly supervised
learning process. Specifically, we introduce two shared tasks
to bridge discrepancies between the two heterogeneous annotation schemas. For extracting entities, the shared task is

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7039

