The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving Distantly Supervised Relation Extraction with
Neural Noise Converter and Conditional Optimal Selector
Shanchan Wu

Kai Fan

Qiong Zhang

Alibaba Group (U.S.) Inc.
shanchan.wu@alibaba-inc.com

Alibaba Group (U.S.) Inc.
k.fan@alibaba-inc.com

Alibaba Group (U.S.) Inc.
qz.zhang@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

the noisy training data. Takamatsu, Sato, and Nakagawa propose a solution to identify those potential noisy sentences
and remove them from training data by syntactic patterns
during the preprocessing stage. Although the effort of removing noise during preprocessing is practically effective,
it has to rely on manual rules and hence is unable to scale.
Some other work directly makes effort to reduce the impact
of the noisy data during the training process. Riedel, Yao,
and McCallum make the at-least-one assumption that if two
entities participate in a relation, at least one sentence that
mentions these two entities might express that relation. They
then propose a graphical model to build relation classifier.
There are some following works based on this assumption
using probabilistic graphic models (Hoffmann et al. 2011;
Surdeanu et al. 2012), and neural network methods (Zeng
et al. 2015). The methods based on at-least-one assumption can reduce the impact of some noisy sentences. However, it can also lose a large amount of useful information
containing in neglected sentences. Lin et al. propose to use
sentence-level selective attention mechanism to reduce the
noise through a sentence bag. The selective attention mechanism represents a group of sentences including the same
entity pair into a vector representation, and then use it for
classification. This method has very significant improvement over other previous methods. The selective attention
mechanism uses the information of all sentences in the group
containing the entity pair. Moreover, it still considers that
the label of the group of sentences in the training data is
always correct, and it is further used to derive the loss function. However, under distant supervision, it is very likely
that none of the sentences in the same sentence group with
the same entity pair express the semantic relation decided
by KBs. Neither at-least-one solution nor selective attention
solution is able to handle this situation properly.

Distant supervised relation extraction has been successfully
applied to large corpus with thousands of relations. However,
the inevitable wrong labeling problem by distant supervision
will hurt the performance of relation extraction. In this paper,
we propose a method with neural noise converter to alleviate
the impact of noisy data, and a conditional optimal selector to
make proper prediction. Our noise converter learns the structured transition matrix on logit level and captures the property
of distant supervised relation extraction dataset. The conditional optimal selector on the other hand helps to make proper
prediction decision of an entity pair even if the group of sentences is overwhelmed by no-relation sentences. We conduct
experiments on a widely used dataset and the results show
significant improvement over competitive baseline methods.

Introduction
The task of relation extraction (RE) is to predict semantic
relations between pairs of entities in text. To alleviate the
work load of obtaining the training data for relation extraction, distant supervision is applied to collect training data for
learning a model. Relation extraction (RE) under distant supervision heuristically aligns entities in texts to some given
knowledge bases (KBs). For a triplet (e1 , r, e2 ), where e1
and e2 are a pair of entities with relation type r in KBs, distant supervision assumes that all sentences that contain both
entities e1 and e2 will express the same relation type r which
will be used in training.
Although distant supervision is an effective way
to automatically label training data, it always suffers
from the problem of wrong labeling. For example,
(M arkZuckerberg, f ounder, F acebook) is a relational
triplet in KBs. Distant supervision will regard all sentences
that contain M arkZuckerberg and F acebook as the instances containing relation f ounder. For example, the sentence “Mark Zuckerberg uses Facebook to visit Puerto Rico
in VR.” does not express the relation f ounder but will still
be regarded as a positive instance containing that relation
type. This will introduce noise into the training data.
Tackling the noisy data problem for distant supervision
is a non-trivial problem, as there is not any explicit supervision for the noisy data. Some previous work tries to clean

In this paper, we propose a model with neural noise converter and conditional optimal selector for distant supervised
relation extraction to tackle the noisy data problem. We regard the relation label for a pair of entities decided by KBs
as a noisy label for the corresponding group of sentences obtained by distant supervision. We build a neural noise converter which tries to build the connection between true labels
and noisy labels. Our final prediction output is then based on
the prediction of true labels rather than noisy labels using a
conditional optimal selector. Some previous works in com-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7273

