The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Y2 Seq2Seq: Cross-Modal Representation Learning for 3D Shape and Text by
Joint Reconstruction and Prediction of View and Word Sequences
Zhizhong Han,1,2 Mingyang Shang,1 Xiyang Wang,1 Yu-Shen Liu,1∗ Matthias Zwicker2
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
h312h@umd.edu, smy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangxiya16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, zwicker@cs.umd.edu
2

Abstract

resolution voxel representations due to the computational
cost caused by the cubic complexity of 3D voxels. This leads
to low discriminability of learned cross-modal representations due to a lack of detailed geometry information.
We resolve this issue by proposing to learn cross-modal
representations of 3D shape and text from view sequences
and word sequences, where each 3D shape is represented
by a view sequence. Our deep learning model captures the
correlation between 3D shape and text by the joint reconstruction and prediction of view and word sequences from
each modality. This strategy aims to get part-level information as much as possible to understand mainly part-related
descriptions, which remedies a lack of part prior knowledge
in 3D-Text understanding. We call our model Y2 Seq2Seq,
since it is implemented by two coupled “Y” like sequenceto-sequence (Seq2Seq) structures. In addition, we employ
novel hierarchical constraints that can be easily added to extract more detailed discriminative information from different aspects. Specifically, Y2 Seq2Seq consists of a 3D shape
branch and a text branch. Starting from the encoding of either 3D shape modality or text modality, each branch jointly
reconstructs the modality itself and predicts the counterpart modality using one RNN encoder and two RNN decoders. The two branches are coupled by sharing parameters in decoders for reconstruction and prediction, which is
effective to bridge the semantic meaning embedded in 3D
shape modality and text modality. In addition, we propose
to employ the discriminative information at the class level,
instance pair level, and instance level as constraints in the
training procedure. Our significant contributions are list below.

Jointly learning representations of 3D shapes and text is crucial to support tasks such as cross-modal retrieval or shape
captioning. A recent method employs 3D voxels to represent 3D shapes, but this limits the approach to low resolutions due to the computational cost caused by the cubic
complexity of 3D voxels. Hence the method suffers from a
lack of detailed geometry. To resolve this issue, we propose
Y2 Seq2Seq, a view-based model, to learn cross-modal representations by joint reconstruction and prediction of view
and word sequences. Specifically, the network architecture
of Y2 Seq2Seq bridges the semantic meaning embedded in
the two modalities by two coupled “Y” like sequence-tosequence (Seq2Seq) structures. In addition, our novel hierarchical constraints further increase the discriminability of the
cross-modal representations by employing more detailed discriminative information. Experimental results on cross-modal
retrieval and 3D shape captioning show that Y2 Seq2Seq outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
With the development of 3D modeling and scanning techniques, more and more 3D shapes become available on the
Internet with detailed physical properties, such as texture,
color, and material. With large 3D datasets, however, shape
class labels are becoming too coarse of a tool to help people efficiently find what they want, and visually browsing
through shape classes is cumbersome. To alleviate this issue, an intuitive approach is to allow users to describe the
desired 3D object using a text description. Jointly understanding 3D shape and text by learning a cross-modal representation, however, is still a challenge because it requires
an efficient 3D shape representation that can capture highly
detailed 3D shape structures.
To overcome this challenge, a 3D-Text cross-modal
dataset was recently released in (Chen et al. 2018), where a
combined multimodal association model was also proposed
to capture the many-to-many relations between 3D voxels
and text descriptions. This model employed a shape encoder
to compute the embeddings of 3D shapes directly from 3D
voxels. However, this strategy is limited to learning from low

• We propose a deep learning model called Y2 Seq2Seq,
which enables to learn cross-modal representations of 3D
shape and text from view sequences and word sequences.
• Our novel coupled “Y” like Seq2Seq structures have a
powerful capability to bridge the semantic meaning of
two sequence-represented modalities by joint reconstruction and prediction.
• Our results demonstrate that our novel hierarchical constraints can further increase the discriminability of learned
cross-modal representations by employing more detailed
discriminative information.

∗

Corresponding author: Yu-Shen Liu
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

126

