The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

GAMENet: Graph Augmented MEmory
Networks for Recommending Medication Combination
Junyuan Shang,1,2 Cao Xiao,3 Tengfei Ma,3 Hongyan Li,1,2 Jimeng Sun4
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
2
School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China 3 IBM Research
4
Georgia Institute of Technology
sjy1203@pku.edu.cn, cxiao@us.ibm.com, Tengfei.Ma1@ibm.com, lihy@cis.pku.edu.cn, jsun@cc.gatech.edu
Abstract

them considers drug safety in their modeling, especially ignoring the adverse drug-drug interactions (DDI) which are
harder to prevent than single drug adverse reaction. Drugs
may interact when they are prescribed and taken together,
thus DDIs are common among patients with complex health
conditions. Preventing DDIs is important since they could
lead to health deterioration or even death.
To fill the gap, we propose Graph Augmented Memory
Networks (GAMENet), an end-to-end deep learning model
that takes both longitudinal patient EHR data and drug
knowledge base on DDIs as inputs and aims to generate
effective and safe recommendation of medication combination. In particular, GAMENet consists of 1) patient queries
based on representations learned by a dual recurrent neural
networks (Dual-RNN), and 2) an integrative and dynamic
graph augmented memory module. It builds and fuses across
multiple data sources (drug usage information from EHR
and DDI knowledge from drug knowledge base (Tatonetti et
al. 2012b)) with graph convolutional networks (GCN) (Kipf
and Welling 2017) in Memory Bank (MB). The knowledge
of combined uses of medications and drug-drug interaction
relations are thus integrated. It further writes patient history
to dynamic memory (DM) in key-value form, which mimics case-based retrievals in clinical practice, i.e., considering
similar patient representations from the DM. Information
from the graph augmented memory module can be retrieved
by patient representation as query to generate memory outputs. Then, memory outputs and query will be concatenated
to make effective and safe recommendations. GAMENet is
optimized to balance between effectiveness and safety by
combining multi-label prediction loss from EHR data and
DDI loss for DDI knowledge.
To summarize, our work has the following contributions:

Recent progress in deep learning is revolutionizing the healthcare domain including providing solutions to medication recommendations, especially recommending medication combination for patients with complex health conditions. Existing
approaches either do not customize based on patient health
history, or ignore existing knowledge on drug-drug interactions (DDI) that might lead to adverse outcomes. To fill
this gap, we propose the Graph Augmented Memory Networks (GAMENet), which integrates the drug-drug interactions knowledge graph by a memory module implemented
as a graph convolutional networks, and models longitudinal
patient records as the query. It is trained end-to-end to provide safe and personalized recommendation of medication
combination. We demonstrate the effectiveness and safety of
GAMENet by comparing with several state-of-the-art methods on real EHR data. GAMENet outperformed all baselines
in all effectiveness measures, and also achieved 3.60% DDI
rate reduction from existing EHR data.

Introduction
Today abundant health data such as longitudinal electronic
health records (EHR) enables researchers and doctors to
build better computational models for recommending accurate diagnoses and effective treatments. Medication recommendation algorithms have been developed to assist doctors in making effective and safe medication prescriptions.
A series of deep learning methods have been designed for
medication recommendation. There are mainly two types of
such methods: 1) Instance-based medication recommendation models that perform recommendation based only on the
current encounter and do not consider the longitudinal patient history, see (Zhang et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2017).
As a result, a patient with newly diagnosed hypertension
will likely be treated the same as another patient who has
suffered chronic uncontrolled hypertension. Such a limitation affects accuracy and utility of the recommendations. 2)
Longitudinal medication recommendation methods such as
(Choi et al. 2016b; Choi et al. 2016a; Lipton et al. 2015;
Le, Tran, and Venkatesh 2018) that leverage the temporal
dependencies within longitudinal patient history to predict
future medication. However, to our best knowledge, none of

• We jointly model the longitudinal patient records as an
EHR graph and drug knowledge base as a DDI graph in
order to provide effective and safe medication recommendations. This is achieved by optimizing a combined loss
that balances between multi-label prediction loss (for effectiveness) and DDI loss (for safety).
• We propose graph augmented memory networks which
embed multiple knowledge graphs using a late-fusion
mechanism based GCN into the memory component and
enable attention-based memory search using query gener-

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1126

