The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Optimal Dynamic Auctions Are Virtual Welfare Maximizers∗
Vahab Mirrokni

Renato Paes Leme

Pingzhong Tang

Song Zuo

Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Google Research
renatoppl@google.com

Tsinghua University
kenshinping@gmail.com

Google Research
szuo@google.com

Abstract

dynamic mechanisms has been investigated by a number
of recent papers (Bergemann and Välimäki 2002; Parkes
and Singh 2004; Cavallo 2008; Athey and Segal 2013;
Kakade, Lobel, and Nazerzadeh 2013; Pai and Vohra 2013;
Pavan, Segal, and Toikka 2014; Devanur, Peres, and Sivan
2015; Balseiro, Mirrokni, and Paes Leme 2016; Chawla et
al. 2016; Bergemann, Castro, and Weintraub 2017; Balseiro
et al. 2017; Balseiro, Mirrokni, and Leme 2017; Lobel and
Paes Leme 2017; Shen, Wang, and Zuo 2018; Balseiro et al.
2019). We refer to Bergemann and Said (2011) and Bergemann and Välimäki (2017) for comprehensive surveys on
the subject.
In particular, we consider a setting where a seller repeatedly interacts with a set of buyers and sells one item per
period. The value of each buyer for the item at each period
are independently drawn from commonly known prior distributions (no need to be identical) at the beginning of that
period. The seller is allowed to sell the item of each period
not only depending on the bids submitted in the current period, but also the histories, i.e., all the bids submitted in past
periods. In the meanwhile, the seller must guarantee the dynamic auctions to be ex-post individual rational — the cumulative utility for each buyer is always positive, and dynamic incentive compatible — bidding truthfully (i.e., submitting private values as bids) to the auction is optimal for
each buyer by taking into consideration the effect of current
bids on future outcomes.
Even though dynamic mechanisms can be much more effective in maximizing revenue and social welfare (Jackson
and Sonnenschein 2007; Papadimitriou et al. 2016), they
have not been widely adopted in practice. The main issue
of implementing dynamic mechanisms in practice is their
high complexity. The complexity induced by the exponentially growing design space makes it difficult to solve or even
to describe such mechanisms.
A series of recent work has made progress to resolve
the complexity issue described above. For example, Ashlagi, Daskalakis, and Haghpanah (2016) and Mirrokni et
al. (2018b) show that it is enough for the optimal dynamic
auction to depend on scalar summaries of histories instead of
the full history. However, the approximately optimal mechanisms described in these papers are solutions of complex
dynamic programs that are written into a large table. It is
therefore very difficult to understand the structure of these

We are interested in the setting where a seller sells sequentially arriving items, one per period, via a dynamic auction.
At the beginning of each period, each buyer draws a private
valuation for the item to be sold in that period and this valuation is independent across buyers and periods. The auction can be dynamic in the sense that the auction at period
t can be conditional on the bids in that period and all previous periods, subject to certain appropriately defined incentive compatible and individually rational conditions. Perhaps
not surprisingly, the revenue optimal dynamic auctions are
computationally hard to find and existing literatures that aim
to approximate the optimal auctions are all based on solving
complex dynamic programs. It remains largely open on the
structural interpretability of the optimal dynamic auctions.
In this paper, we show that any optimal dynamic auction is
a virtual welfare maximizer subject to some monotone allocation constraints. In particular, the explicit definition of
the virtual value function above arises naturally from the
primal-dual analysis by relaxing the monotone constraints.
We further develop an ironing technique that gets rid of the
monotone allocation constraints. Quite different from Myerson’s ironing approach, our technique is more technically involved due to the interdependence of the virtual value functions across buyers. We nevertheless show that ironing can be
done approximately and efficiently, which in turn leads to a
Fully Polynomial Time Approximation Scheme of the optimal dynamic auction.

1

Introduction

Recently, the problem of designing multi-period dynamic
mechanisms has been shown to be both theoretically challenging and practically important. In particular, when running a sequence of repeated auctions on online advertising
platforms, using dynamic auctions optimized across different time periods could potentially bring significant gains
both in terms of revenue and social welfare. The power of
∗
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. This paper is supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61561146398, a
China Youth 1000-talent Program, and an Alibaba Innovative
Research Program. A full version of this paper is available at
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3282600.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2125

