The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Task Embedded Coordinate Update: A Realizable
Framework for Multivariate Non-Convex Optimization
Yiyang Wang,1,2 Risheng Liu,3,4,∗ Long Ma,3,4 Xiaoliang Song5
1
Institute of Atmospheric Sciences, Fudan University
Shanghai Ecological Forecasting and Remote Sensing Center
3
DUT-RU International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
4
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, Dalian University of Technology
5
Department of Applied Mathematics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
yywerica@fudan.edu.cn rsliu@dlut.edu.cn malone94319@gmail.com xiaoliang.song@polyu.edu.hk
2

with vectors/matrices x and y. Being employed to varieties
of tasks, the coordinate descent (CD) (Luo and Tseng 1989)
is widely used for solving problem (1), which optimizes the
objective over each direction, while fixing the remaining one
with its latest value, i.e, solving univariate optimization problems in a loop. Doing in this way, calculating the coordinate
updates are much simpler than computing a full update, requiring less memory and computational cost. However, in
addition to these benefits, few CD algorithms consider useful
traits of univariate sub-problems for improving either convergence speeds or optimized results for solving the generic
problem (1) with non-convex, non-smooth objective function.
In most cases, though Ψ(z) is non-convex and even nonsmooth, it is quite likely to have univariate sub-problems with
nice properties: e.g., the sub-problems can be optimized via
convex optimization, or may have unique solutions. Moreover, the univariate problems usually have entirely distinct
formations referred to different variables. For example, many
literatures have posted superiorities on restricting dictionaries
with normalized bases, meanwhile, constraining sparsity for
the codes with various non-convex penalties for dictionary
learning tasks (Gregor and Lecun 2010; Wang et al. 2016;
Bao et al. 2016). Though these models are non-convex and
non-smooth, their univariate sub-problems of dictionary can
be efficiently solved, compared with the other sub-problem.
Thus, in view of the nice traits and specificities of univariate
problems, it is significant to specifically integrate effective
algorithms for optimizing task-specific sub-problems, to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of CD schemes.
More critically, though there are not a few CD algorithms
for solving multivariate optimization problems, converging
to a critical point is still a nice result for generic non-convex
and non-smooth problems (Bolte, Sabach, and Teboulle 2014;
Xu and Yin 2015; Pock and Sabach 2017). While, we have noticed that, many univariate sub-problems of real-world image
processing tasks are referred to specific application problems.
E.g., in tasks like image deblurring and super-resolution, one
univariate sub-problem can be regarded as an image denoising task. Rather than numerical algorithms, techniques such

Abstract
We in this paper propose a realizable framework TECU, which
embeds task-specific strategies into update schemes of coordinate descent, for optimizing multivariate non-convex problems
with coupled objective functions. On one hand, TECU is capable of improving algorithm efficiencies through embedding
productive numerical algorithms, for optimizing univariate
sub-problems with nice properties. From the other side, it also
augments probabilities to receive desired results, by embedding advanced techniques in optimizations of realistic tasks. Integrating both numerical algorithms and advanced techniques
together, TECU is proposed in a unified framework for solving
a class of non-convex problems. Although the task embedded
strategies bring inaccuracies in sub-problem optimizations, we
provide a realizable criterion to control the errors, meanwhile,
to ensure robust performances with rigid theoretical analyses.
By respectively embedding ADMM and a residual-type CNN
in our algorithm framework, the experimental results verify
both efficiency and effectiveness of embedding task-oriented
strategies in coordinate descent for solving practical problems.

Introduction
Over the past few decades, multivariate non-convex optimization has been widely concerned in the realms of pattern recognition and machine learning. Achieving well performances in
the tasks such as matrix factorization (Vu and Monga 2016;
Bao et al. 2016) and image enhancement task (Fu et al. 2016;
Gharbi et al. 2017), multivariate non-convex problems have
motivated a revived interest in designing and analyzing numerical algorithms.
Compared to univariate optimization, it is much more complicated to optimize multivariate problems with coupled objective functions. Taking two variables as instance, this kind
of coupled problem can be formulated as:
min Ψ(z) := f (x) + g(y) + H(x, y),
z:=(x,y)

(1)

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1650

