The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

State-Augmentation Transformations for Risk-Sensitive Reinforcement Learning
Shuai Ma, Jia Yuan Yu
Concordia Institute of Information System Engineering, Concordia University
1455 De Maisonneuve Blvd. W., Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1M8
m shua@encs.concordia.ca, jiayuan.yu@concordia.ca

Abstract

Weng 2016; Huang and Haskell 2017; Chow et al. 2017;
Berkenkamp et al. 2017). However, the reward function is
usually in a more complicated form. In a Markov decision
process (MDP), we say the reward function is transitionbased if it involves current state, action, and successor state,
and state-based if it involves current state and action only.
Furthermore, the reward could be stochastic. For a (stochastic) transition-based reward function, the value function, or
Q-function, implies a reward simplification, which changes
the reward sequence {Rt }, and only preserves the mean of
the reward distribution. This may not be sufficient in many
risk-sensitive applications, especially when the small probability events have serious consequences, such as self-driving
and medical diagnosis. That is where a risk-sensitive criterion should be considered. A risk-sensitive criterion refers
to a risk measure, or a risk function, which maps a random
variable to a scalar. Since the risk measure depends on the
distribution of the random variable, the reward simplification will lead to an incorrect result.

In the framework of MDP, although the general reward
function takes three arguments—current state, action, and
successor state; it is often simplified to a function of two
arguments—current state and action. The former is called a
transition-based reward function, whereas the latter is called
a state-based reward function. When the objective involves
the expected total reward only, this simplification works perfectly. However, when the objective is risk-sensitive, this simplification leads to an incorrect value. We propose three successively more general state-augmentation transformations
(SATs), which preserve the reward sequences as well as the
reward distributions and the optimal policy in risk-sensitive
reinforcement learning. In risk-sensitive scenarios, firstly we
prove that, for every MDP with a stochastic transition-based
reward function, there exists an MDP with a deterministic
state-based reward function, such that for any given (randomized) policy for the first MDP, there exists a corresponding
policy for the second MDP, such that both Markov reward
processes share the same reward sequence. Secondly we illustrate that two situations require the proposed SATs in an
inventory control problem. One could be using Q-learning (or
other learning methods) on MDPs with transition-based reward functions, and the other could be using methods, which
are for the Markov processes with a deterministic state-based
reward functions, on the Markov processes with general reward functions. We show the advantage of the SATs by considering Value-at-Risk as an example, which is a risk measure
on the reward distribution instead of the measures (such as
mean and variance) of the distribution. We illustrate the error
in the reward distribution estimation from the reward simplification, and show how the SATs enable a variance formula
to work on Markov processes with general reward functions.

The motivation for our proposed methods arises from a
contradiction between theory and practice with respect to
the reward function. On the one hand, some methods require MDPs, or Markov reward processes, to be with deterministic (and state-based) reward functions. On the other
hand, for many practical problems, the underlying MDPs or
Markov processes have stochastic (and transition-based) reward functions, and the reward simplification changes the
reward sequences, as well as the reward distributions, which
are crucial in risk-sensitive scenarios. This paper proposes
three successively more general state-augmentation transformations (SATs) for different settings (Cases 1, 2, and
3) to solve this problem. With the aid of the SATs, we
can apply methods, which requires a deterministic statebased reward function, to MDPs (or Markov processes) with
stochastic transition-based reward function, and at the same
time preserve the reward sequence (and the reward distribution).
We study the return—the discounted total reward
P∞ t−1
Rt —in an infinite-horizon MDP with finite state
t=0 γ
and action spaces, and consider the Value-at-Risk (VaR) objective as a risk-sensitive example. We generalize the transformation in (Ma and Yu 2017) to three successively more
general SATs (Cases 1, 2, and 3), give a proof for the most
general one, and illustrate the error from the reward simplification on the return distribution.

Introduction
The most widely used optimization criterion in reinforcement learning (RL) is represented by the expected total reward. This risk-neutral criterion renders two functions—
the value function and the Q-function—important in many
applications. The two functions can be considered as substitutes for the reward functions, even in risk-sensitive
reinforcement learning (Borkar 2002; Shen et al. 2014;
Garcı́a and Fernández 2015; Junges et al. 2016; Gilbert and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4512

