The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Analysis of Joint Multilingual Sentence
Representations and Semantic K-Nearest Neighbor Graphs
Holger Schwenk, Douwe Kiela, Matthijs Douze
Facebook AI Research
{schwenk,dkiela,matthijs}@fb.com

Abstract

be promising, e.g. (Kiros et al. 2015; Peters et al. 2018),
due to their ability to take advantage of huge corpora.On
the other hand, it was shown that state-of-the-art results
can be obtained with supervised training on an NLI corpus (Conneau et al. 2017). Extending this idea, multitask learning was successfully applied to learning universal sentence representations, e.g. (Subramanian et al. 2018;
Cer et al. 2018).
In this paper we learn universal multilingual sentence representations for twenty-one languages, and show how they
can be applied to a variety of problems efficiently and at a
large scale, going beyond the traditional limited set of evaluations. The major contributions of this work are:
• we train a joint multilingual sentence embedding with a
shared byte-pair-encoding for 21 European languages;
• we construct a large k-nn graph over the joint space of
566M sentences in seven languages.
• we provide a detailed quantitative analysis comprising important open questions such as:
– how many BPE tokens are shared between languages?
– to what extent does this overlap reflect the linguistic
properties of the languages and their categorization into
language families?
– how dense are the k nearest neighbors?
– is it possible to extract trajectories between sentences
in the graph that are linguistically plausible?
– does the model support code-switching, i.e. words from
multiple languages in one sentence?
• we show that our multilingual encoder outperforms previous work on large scale similarity search: we achieve a
precision@1 of 83.3 on the reconstruction of the UN corpus of 11.3M English/French sentences, in comparison to
P@1 of 48.9 obtained by (Guo et al. 2018);
• we define new quantitative evaluation tasks to analyze the
generalization behavior of multilingual sentence embeddings with respect to unseen domains and languages;
• we show that our system is able to handle zero-shot transfer to several linguistically related languages without using any resources of those languages;
• the code used in this paper is freely available in
the LASER toolkit (Language Agnostic SEntence

Multilingual sentence and document representations are becoming increasingly important. We build on recent advances
in multilingual sentence encoders, with a focus on efficiency
and large-scale applicability. Specifically, we construct and
investigate the k-nn graph over the joint space of 566 million news sentences in seven different languages. We show
excellent multilingual retrieval quality on the UN corpus of
11.3M sentences, which extends to the zero-shot case where
we have never seen a language. We provide a detailed analysis of both the multilingual sentence encoder for twenty-one
European languages and the learned graph. Our sentence encoder is language agnostic and supports code switching.

1

Introduction

Multilingual representations, at the word, sentence or document level, are becoming increasingly important. The main
motivation for such joint multilingual representations is the
desire to transfer NLP applications across languages, using
no or only a limited amount of resources for the target language. This is particularly useful in cases where the target
language is low-resourced, as is the case for most languages
in the world. Multilingual representations tend to be evaluated on cross-lingual document classification, where the
standard task is based on the Reuters corpus (Klementiev,
Titov, and Bhattarai 2012; Schwenk and Li 2018) or sentiment analysis (Chen et al. 2016). More recently, SemEval17 (Bethard et al. 2017) organized a task on multi- and
cross-lingual semantic word similarity, as well as a task on
semantic textual similarity for multiple monolingual and a
few cross-lingual pairs. These examples illustrate that multilingual representation learning has mostly been focused on
constructing optimal representations only for specific tasks,
and has often been limited to two languages only. Recently,
a natural language inference task (NLI) was extended to fifteen languages (Conneau et al. 2018).
At the same time, a large body of research has developed that concerns itself with learning “universal representations” for a single language, usually English. The goal
of such representations is to perform well on many tasks.
On the one hand, unsupervised approaches have shown to
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6982

