The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Recognizing Unseen Attribute-Object Pair with Generative Model
Zhixiong Nan,1,2∗ Yang Liu,2∗ Nanning Zheng,1 Song-Chun Zhu2
1

2

Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
University of California, Los Angeles, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we are studying the problem of recognizing
attribute-object pairs that do not appear in the training dataset,
which is called unseen attribute-object pair recognition. Existing methods mainly learn a discriminative classifier or
compose multiple classifiers to tackle this problem, which exhibit poor performance for unseen pairs. The key reasons for
this failure are 1) they have not learned an intrinsic attributeobject representation, and 2) the attribute and object are processed either separately or equally so that the inner relation
between the attribute and object has not been explored. To explore the inner relation of attribute and object as well as the
intrinsic attribute-object representation, we propose a generative model with the encoder-decoder mechanism that bridges
visual and linguistic information in a unified end-to-end network. The encoder-decoder mechanism presents the impressive potential to find an intrinsic attribute-object feature representation. In addition, combining visual and linguistic features in a unified model allows to mine the relation of attribute
and object. We conducted extensive experiments to compare
our method with several state-of-the-art methods on two challenging datasets. The results show that our method outperforms all other methods.

small dog

wrinkled dog

big dog

wet dog

old bear

old book

old bike

old bridge

Figure 1: The upper row shows the same object ‘dog’ with
the different attributes. Though dogs can be small, big,
wet, or wrinkled, they present similar visual properties. The
lower row shows the same attribute ‘old’ with the different
objects, we can observe that the visual properties significantly differ from each other.

and object visual ‘prototype’. It is true that an object always
has a visual ‘prototype’. For example, when we ask people
to draw a dog, different people may draw beagles, collies,
dalmatians or poodles, but the ‘dogs’ they draw always have
two ears and four legs. However, if we ask people to draw
‘old’, people may find difficulties to do because the ‘old’ is
nonobjective and does not present clear visual ‘prototype’.
As illustrated in the upper row of Fig. 1, the dogs with different attributes present the similar visual feature. On the
contrary, as shown in the lower row, the visual feature of attribute ‘old’ varies dramatically for different object classes.
As a result, the discriminative model is not such successful for attribute recognition as that for object recognition,
which further results in the low accuracy of attribute-object
pair recognition. In fact, attribute is highly dependent on object. For example, when we teach a baby to recognize the
attribute ‘old’, we often use instances like ‘old book’, ‘old
bike’, and ‘old dog’ to show how ‘old’ looks like. Therefore,
to better recognize attribute-object pair, we should explore
the inner relation of the attribute and object instead of composing the discriminative models that are separately trained
for the object and attribute.

Introduction
Attributes are the description of ‘objects’. To reach a higher
level of vision understanding, a computer should understand not only object categories but also their attributes.
As a result, recognizing objects with their attributes have
been widely studied in various problems such as person reidentification (Su et al. 2016), scene understanding (Laffont
et al. 2014), image caption (Wu et al. 2017), image search
(Kumar, Belhumeur, and Nayar 2008), and image generation (Yan et al. 2016).
Encouraged by the success of discriminative models implemented with deep neural networks for object classification (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016;
Huang et al. 2017), some studies like (Misra, Gupta, and
Hebert 2017) have tried to recognize attribute-object pairs
by composing the discriminative models that are separately
trained for the object and attribute. Factually, the discriminative models are trying to learn the attribute visual ‘prototype’
∗

Yang Liu and Zhixiong Nan are co-first authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8811

