The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adaptive Proximal Average Based Variance Reducing
Stochastic Methods for Optimization with Composite Regularization
Jingchang Liu, Linli Xu, Junliang Guo, Xin Sheng
School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
xdjcl@mail.ustc.edu.cn, linlixu@ustc.edu.cn, {guojunll, xins}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

the calculation of n gradients. When the data size scales up,
n can be rather large, which makes the calculation in deterministic algorithms unaffordable. An effective alternative
is stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro
1951) which involves lower per iteration cost by utilizing the
stochastic gradient instead of the full gradient to update x.
However, a rather large variance introduced by the stochastic gradient would slow down the convergence (Bottou, Curtis, and Nocedal 2016). To address this issue, a number of
variance reducing (VR) stochastic methods are proposed recently, including SAG (Schmidt, Le Roux, and Bach 2017),
SVRG (Johnson and Zhang 2013), SAGA (Defazio, Bach,
and Lacoste-Julien 2014) and SARAH (Nguyen et al. 2017).
As the key feature of these methods, the variance of stochastic gradient asymptotically goes to zero along the iterative
updates, which allows them to achieve the linear convergence rate when each loss is supposed to be strongly convex.
To obtain a compact representation of models, nonsmooth regularisers are often used in regularized ERM problems. Based on the VR stochastic methods mentioned above,
a general routine for this case is to employ the forwardbackward splitting (Singer and Duchi 2009), which involves
the calculation of the proximal operator of r, i.e., proxγr (·).
A formal definition of proxγr (·) is
1
2
proxγr (x) = arg min r(y) +
ky − xk ,
(2)
2γ
y∈Rd

Abstract
We focus on empirical risk minimization with a composite
regulariser, which has been widely applied in various machine learning tasks to introduce important structural information regarding the problem or data. In general, it is challenging to calculate the proximal operator with the composite
regulariser. Recently, proximal average (PA) which involves a
feasible proximal operator calculation is proposed to approximate composite regularisers. Augmented with the prevailing variance reducing (VR) stochastic methods (e.g. SVRG,
SAGA), PA based algorithms would achieve a better performance. However, existing works require a fixed stepsize,
which needs to be rather small to ensure that the PA approximation is sufficiently accurate. In the meantime, the smaller
stepsize would incur many more iterations for convergence.
In this paper, we propose two fast PA based VR stochastic methods – APA-SVRG and APA-SAGA. By initializing
the stepsize with a much larger value and adaptively decreasing it, both of the proposed methods are proved to enjoy the
O(n log 1 + m0 1 ) iteration complexity to achieve the accurate solutions, where m0 is the initial number of inner
iterations and n is the number of samples. Moreover, experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
algorithms.

Introduction
In many artificial intelligence and machine learning applications, one needs to solve the following generic optimization
problem in the form of regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM) given n samples (Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2001):

where γ > 0. One requirement for using proximal operators is that proxγr (·) can be calculated effectively, such as
when r(x) = kxk1 . But in a large number of important applications in machine learning, such as overlapping group
lasso (Jacob, Obozinski, and Vert 2009) and graph-guided
fused lasso (Kim and Xing 2009), the regularisers that take
PK
a composite form r(x) = k=1 wk rk (x) cannot be handled
effectively by proximal operators. One feasible technique to
fix this issue is the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) (Boyd et al. 2011) as well as its VR stochastic
variants, such as SDCA-ADMM (Suzuki 2014) and SVRGADMM (Zheng and Kwok 2016). However, in spite of the
improved efficiency and scalability, these methods require
more space to store the transformation matrix and involve
complex implementation and convergence analysis. Very recently, attempts are made to apply three operator splitting to
problems with the composite form regularisers (Pedregosa

n

min F (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x) + r(x),
n i=1

(1)

where fi : Rd → R denotes the empirical loss of the i-th
sample with regard to the parameter x, and r is the regularization term, which is convex but possibly non-smooth. The
goal is to find the optimal solution of x that minimizes the
regularized empirical loss over the whole dataset.
To solve the problem, deterministic algorithms including
traditional gradient descent (GD) and accelerated gradient
descent (AGD) (Nesterov 2013) are proposed, which involve
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1552

