The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Crawling the Community Structure of Multiplex Networks
Ricky Laishram

Jeremy D. Wendt

Sucheta Soundarajan

Syracuse University
Syracuse NY, USA
rlaishra@syr.edu

Sandia National Laboratories
Albuquerque, NM, USA
jdwendt@sandia.gov

Syracuse University
Syracuse NY, USA
susounda@syr.edu

Abstract

Collecting data from multiplex networks is a practical and
important problem, and raises challenges that one does not encounter in the single-layer case. In particular, data collection
costs are unlikely to be uniform across layers: for example,
when observing a ‘dark’ criminal network, family relationships may be easily obtained, but face-to-face interactions
are much harder to observe. Additionally, certain layers may
be more reliable than others: for example, individuals will
likely not recall all of their personal interactions, but may
keep a complete record of their e-mail communications. Most
existing work on network data collection focuses on only one
type of interaction, or aggregate multiple types of interactions
into one, discarding potentially useful information.
We consider two problem settings based on the query response. In the Reliable Query Response (RQR) model, we
assume that when a node is queried in a particular layer, we
obtain all of its neighbors in that layer. In the Unreliable
Query Response (UQR) model, when we query a node, each
neighbor has some probability of being excluded.
The challenges associated with this problem are: (1) The
layer of interest is costly to explore, so queries on this layer
must be made wisely. (2) The network can be explored only
through crawling. Thus, we do not know the true properties of
many nodes. (3) Initially, none of the layers are fully explored.
Hence, one must balance the trade-off between exploring a
cheap layer, which may or may not be correlated with the
expensive layer, vs. querying the expensive layer.
We propose MultiComSample (MCS), a multi-armed
bandit-based algorithm that uses queries on the cheaper layers
to guide a network crawler in exploring the more expensive
layer of interest. With a budget equivalent to sampling 20%
of the nodes, MCS outperforms the best baseline by up to
25% in the case of RQR, and 49% for UQR.
The main contributions of this paper are:

We examine the problem of crawling the community structure
of a multiplex network containing multiple layers of edge relationships. While there has been a great deal of work examining
community structure in general, and some work on the problem of sampling a network to preserve its community structure,
to the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to consider
this problem on multiplex networks. We consider the specific
case in which the layers of a multiplex network have different
query (collection) costs and reliabilities; and a data collector is
interested in identifying the community structure of the most
expensive layer. We propose MultiComSample (MCS), a novel
algorithm for crawling a multiplex network. MCS uses multiple levels of multi-armed bandits to determine the best layers,
communities and node roles for selecting nodes to query. We
test MCS against six baseline algorithms on real-world multiplex networks, and achieved large gains in performance. For
example, after consuming a budget equivalent to sampling
20% of the nodes in the expensive layer, we observe that MCS
outperforms the best baseline by up to 49%.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we examine the problem of collecting data by
crawling a multiplex network, in which different types of
edges represent different types of relationships, with the end
goal of finding the community structure in a layer of interest.
In particular, we consider the case where one can query nodes
to obtain some or all of their neighbors (e.g., through an API),
but queries on the layer of interest are costly (in terms of time,
money, or resources) relative to other layers.
A multiplex network is a type of multilayer network where
the nodes participate in multiple types of interactions, or
layers (Mucha et al. 2010; Lee, Min, and Goh 2015). For
example, communication between a group of people can be
represented as a multiplex network, where the different layers
represent the modes of communication – email, face-to-face,
phone calls, etc. In order to study the community structure of
such networks, one must first collect appropriate data, usually
through a network crawling algorithm. For optimal analysis
results, the sample that the algorithm generates should be
representative of the community structure of the original
network.

1. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to consider
the problem of crawling a multiplex network with the
goal of generating a sample that is representative of the
underlying community structure of the layer of interest.
2. We propose MCS, a novel sampling algorithm for crawling
the community structure of multi-layer networks.
3. We perform extensive evaluations, and demonstrate that
MCS outperforms a wide variety of baseline algorithms in
crawling the community structure of the layer of interest.

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

168

