The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Natural Language Corpus of Common Grounding
under Continuous and Partially-Observable Context
Takuma Udagawa

Akiko Aizawa

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
takuma udagawa@nii.ac.jp

National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
aizawa@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
Common grounding is the process of creating, repairing and
updating mutual understandings, which is a critical aspect
of sophisticated human communication. However, traditional
dialogue systems have limited capability of establishing common ground, and we also lack task formulations which introduce natural difficulty in terms of common grounding while
enabling easy evaluation and analysis of complex models. In
this paper, we propose a minimal dialogue task which requires advanced skills of common grounding under continuous and partially-observable context. Based on this task formulation, we collected a largescale dataset of 6,760 dialogues
which fulfills essential requirements of natural language corpora. Our analysis of the dataset revealed important phenomena related to common grounding that need to be considered.
Finally, we evaluate and analyze baseline neural models on a
simple subtask that requires recognition of the created common ground. We show that simple baseline models perform
decently but leave room for further improvement. Overall, we
show that our proposed task will be a fundamental testbed
where we can train, evaluate, and analyze dialogue system’s
ability for sophisticated common grounding.

1

A’s view

B’s view

A: I see three in a line going up and to the right. The middle one
is the largest and darkest
B: I don’t see that. I have one large, medium gray dot that’s under
a small, darker gray dot
A: Is the larger dot slightly to the left
B: yes, slightly, let’s choose the larger one.
A: SELECT red
B: SELECT blue

Figure 1: Example dialogue and context of our task. Two
agents have 7 entities in each view, but their views are centered slightly differently and only some entities are in common. Under this setting, agents must find a common entity
through natural language communication.

Introduction

One major goal of natural language processing is to develop agents with human-level competency in dialogue. In
the field of human communication and development, the
ability to construct and maintain common ground has been
pointed out to be essential for natural language communication (Clark 1996) and acquisition (Tomasello 2009). Furthermore, in the field of human-computer interaction, it is
important that humans and computers have certain ways of
creating mutual understandings in order to collaboratively
solve problems. Although natural language communication
is not the only option, it is one of the most natural and effective solutions to this problem.
However, existing study of common grounding in dialogue system research is limited in three major ways.
First, existing dialogue tasks are limited in terms of common grounding due to the restricted types of information
that need to be dealt with. Specifically, previous tasks are
focused on either fully-observable or categorical context,
which makes common grounding a relatively trivial task:

• In a fully-observable context (De Vries et al. 2017), it is
usually given that every information about the context is
shared among the agents. This makes common grounding easier because information about the context is already in their common ground, and there could be little
chance of misunderstandings. In contrast, under partiallyobservable context agents typically need to create common ground from minimal shared information, and there
could be a lot more misunderstandings between agents
that need to be resolved.
• In a categorical context (Bordes and Weston 2016; He
et al. 2017; Lewis et al. 2017), information can be expressed by symbolic natural language without ambiguity.
For example, there could be little ambiguity in describing categorical properties, such as discrete color (red, blue
and yellow). However, in a continuous context natural lan-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7120

