The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Online Embedding Compression for Text
Classification Using Low Rank Matrix Factorization
Anish Acharya,∗1 Rahul Goel,1 Angeliki Metallinou,1 Inderjit Dhillon2,3
1

Amazon Alexa AI, 2 Amazon Search Technologies, 3 University of Texas at Austin
{achanish, goerahul, ametalli}@amazon.com, isd@a9.com

Abstract

models deployed on servers need to serve millions of requests per day, therefore compressing them would result in
memory and inference cost savings.
For NLP specific tasks, the word embedding matrix often
accounts for most of the network size. The embedding matrix is typically initialized with pretrained word embeddings
like Word2Vec, (Mikolov et al. 2013) FastText (Bojanowski
et al. 2016) or Glove (Pennington, Socher, and Manning
2014) and then fine-tuned on the downstream tasks, including tagging, classification and others. Typically, word embedding vectors are 300-dimensional and vocabulary sizes
for practical applications could be up to 1 million tokens.
This corresponds to up to 2Gbs of memory and could be
prohibitively expensive depending on the application. For
example, to represent a vocabulary of 100K words using
300 dimensional Glove embeddings the embedding matrix
would have to hold 60M parameters. Even for a simple sentiment analysis model the embedding parameters are 98.8%
of the total network (Shu and Nakayama 2017).
In this work, we address neural model compression in the
context of text classification by applying low rank matrix
factorization on the word embedding layer and then retraining the model in an online fashion. There has been relatively less work in compressing word embedding matrices
of deepNLP models. Most of the prior work compress the
embedding matrix offline outside the training loop either
through hashing or quantization based approaches (Joulin et
al. 2016; Shu and Nakayama 2017; Raunak 2017).
Our approach includes starting from a model initialized
with large embedding space, performing a low rank projection of the embedding layer using Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) and continuing training to regain any
lost accuracy. This enables us to compress a deep NLP
model by an arbitrary compression fraction (p), which can
be pre-decided based on the downstream application constraints and accuracy-memory trade-offs. Standard quantization techniques do not offer this flexibility, as they typically
allow compression fractions of 1/2 or 1/4 (corresponding to
16-bit or 8-bit quantization from 32-bits typically).
We evaluate our method on text classification tasks, both on
the benchmark SST2 dataset and on a proprietary dataset
from a commercial artificial agent. We show that our method
significantly reduces the model size (up to 90%) with minimal accuracy impact (less than 2% relative), and outper-

Deep learning models have become state of the art for natural language processing (NLP) tasks, however deploying
these models in production system poses significant memory
constraints. Existing compression methods are either lossy
or introduce significant latency. We propose a compression
method that leverages low rank matrix factorization during
training, to compress the word embedding layer which represents the size bottleneck for most NLP models. Our models are trained, compressed and then further re-trained on the
downstream task to recover accuracy while maintaining the
reduced size. Empirically, we show that the proposed method
can achieve 90% compression with minimal impact in accuracy for sentence classification tasks, and outperforms alternative methods like fixed-point quantization or offline word
embedding compression. We also analyze the inference time
and storage space for our method through FLOP calculations, showing that we can compress DNN models by a configurable ratio and regain accuracy loss without introducing
additional latency compared to fixed point quantization. Finally, we introduce a novel learning rate schedule, the Cyclically Annealed Learning Rate (CALR), which we empirically
demonstrate to outperform other popular adaptive learning
rate algorithms on a sentence classification benchmark.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved great success in various NLP
tasks such as sequence tagging (Chung et al. 2014), (Ma
and Hovy 2016) and sentence classification (Liu et al. 2015;
Kim 2014). While traditional machine learning approaches
extract hand-designed and task-specific features, which are
fed into a shallow model, neural models pass the input
through several feedforward, recurrent or convolutional layers of feature extraction that are trained to learn automatic
feature representations. However, deep neural models often have large memory-footprint and this poses significant
deployment challenges for real-time systems that typically
have memory and computing power constraints. For example, mobile devices tend to be limited by their CPU speed,
memory and battery life, which poses significant size constraints for models embedded on such devices. Similarly,
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6196

