The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Personalized Review
Summarization via User-Aware Sequence Network
Junjie Li,1,2 Haoran Li,1,2 Chengqing Zong1,2,3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
{junjie.li, haoran.li, cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Review: The hotel is right next to the airport (my room had a view
of the runways) but the noise is pretty well dampened so that is not
an issue at all. Very convenient to the airport obviously, but also the
main highways. Room was clean and comfortable, no complaints
there. The price is a little high, but it is ok for me.

We address personalized review summarization, which generates a condensed summary for a user’s review, accounting for
his preference on different aspects or his writing style. We
propose a novel personalized review summarization model
named User-aware Sequence Network (USN) to consider the
aforementioned users’ characteristics when generating summaries, which contains a user-aware encoder and a useraware decoder. Specifically, the user-aware encoder adopts a
user-based selective mechanism to select the important information of a review, and the user-aware decoder incorporates
user characteristic and user-specific word-using habits into
word prediction process to generate personalized summaries.
To validate our model, we collected a new dataset Trip, comprising 536,255 reviews from 19,400 users. With quantitative
and human evaluation, we show that USN achieves state-ofthe-art performance on personalized review summarization.

用户

Summary: very quite room in a great location.

Bob

用户

Summary: expensive hotel near by airport.

John

用户

Summary: clean and comfortable rooms, i love !!!

Alice

Figure 1: Personalized review summarization is motivated
by that different users are likely to generate different summaries for the same review, according to their own experiences, thoughts, or writing styles.

Introduction
such as Tripadvisor and Yelp. For example, users often write
reviews about their attitudes on hotels or restaurants in these
websites. One function is to automatically generate summaries for these reviews using their own words and considering their preference on different aspects2 .
Another example would be helpful for users who read
these reviews to choose products. Classical review summarization systems only summarize reviews based on review
contents and show the same summaries to all readers. However, personalized review summarization can consider readers’ preference and generate different summaries of reviews
for different readers. These summaries can directly reflect
aspects that readers care about and may be more suitable for
them to choose products.
To perform personalized review summarization, we propose a User-aware Sequence Network (USN). USN is based
on sequence to sequence models (Seq2Seq), which are popular methods in machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2015; Zhao et al. 2018), text summarization (Rush,
Chopra, and Weston 2015; See, Liu, and Manning 2017; Li
et al. 2018) and review summarization (Lu and Wang 2016;

Review summarization aims to generate a condensed summary for a review or multiple reviews (Hu and Liu 2004;
Ganesan 2010; Carenini, Cheung, and Pauls 2013; Gerani et
al. 2014; Lu and Wang 2016). As this task can alleviate the
information overload problem, it has been widely studied.
This paper addresses personalization issues of review
summarization1 , which have not been discussed in previous research. Given a review, different users may care about
different contents according to their own experiences or
thoughts. Figure 1 illustrates the motivation with a hotel
review sample. Bob may travel on business and he cares
about location and room more than price, while John may
travel on a tight budget and care about price more. What’s
more, different users have their own writing styles. Alice often summarizes reviews with the words which can explicitly
express her emotions, such as “love” or “hate”, while Bob
and John don’t do that.
Actually, personalized review summarization is applicable to a wide range of online consumer review platforms,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this paper, we focus on single-review summarization and we
leave adapting our model to multi-review summarization scenario
to future work.

2
aspects refer to a properties (attributes) of products or services,
such as location and room for the hotel domain.

6690

