The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Virtual-Taobao: Virtualizing Real-World Online
Retail Environment for Reinforcement Learning∗
Jing-Cheng Shi,1,2 Yang Yu,1 Qing Da,2 Shi-Yong Chen,1 An-Xiang Zeng2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{shijc, yuy, chensy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
2
Alibaba Group
{jingcheng.sjc, daqing.dq}@alibaba-inc.com, renzhong@taobao.com
Abstract

with customers, which may have great influence on the user
experience as well as the social wealth.
Large online systems, though rarely incorporated with RL
methods, can indeed yearn for the embrace of RL (Hu et al.
2018). In fact, a variety of online systems involve the sequential decision making as well as the delayed feedbacks. For
instance, an automated trading system needs to manage the
portfolio according to the historical metrics and all the related
information with a high frequency, and carefully adjusts its
strategy through analyzing the long-term gains. Similarly, an
E-commerce search engine observes a buyer’s request, and
displays a page of ranked commodities to the buyer, then
updates its decision model after obtaining the user’s feedback to pursue revenue maximization. During a session, it
keeps displaying new pages according to latest information
of the buyer if he/she continues to browse. Previous solutions
are mostly based on supervised learning. They are incapable
of learning sequential decisions and maximizing long-term
reward. Thus RL solutions are highly appealing.
One major barrier to directly applying RL in these scenarios is that, current RL algorithms commonly require a large
amount of interactions with the environment, which take
high physical costs, such as real money, time from days to
months, bad user experience, and even lives in medical tasks.
To avoid physical costs, simulators are often employed for
RL training. Google’s application of data center cooling (Gao
and Jamidar 2014) demonstrates a good practice: the system
dynamics are approximated by a neural network, and a policy is later trained in the simulated environment via some
state-of-the-art RL algorithms. In our project for commodity
search in Taobao.com, we have the similar process: build a
simulator, i.e, Virtual-Taobao, then the policy can be trained
offline in the simulator by any RL algorithm maximizing
long-term reward. Ideally, the obtained policy would perform
equally well in the real environment, or at least provides a
good initialization for cheaper online tuning.
However, different from approximating the dynamics of
data centers, simulating the behavior of hundreds of millions
of customers in a dynamic environment is much more challenging. We treat customers behavior data to be generated
from customers’ policies. Deriving a policy from data can be
realized by existing imitation learning approaches (Schaal
1999; Argall et al. 2009). The behavior cloning (BC) methods (Pomerleau 1992) learn a policy mainly by supervised

Applying reinforcement learning in physical-world tasks is
extremely challenging. It is commonly infeasible to sample a
large number of trials, as required by current reinforcement
learning methods, in a physical environment. This paper reports our project on using reinforcement learning for better
commodity search in Taobao, one of the largest online retail platforms and meanwhile a physical environment with a
high sampling cost. Instead of training reinforcement learning in Taobao directly, we present our environment-building
approach: we build Virtual-Taobao, a simulator learned from
historical customer behavior data, and then we train policies
in Virtual-Taobao with no physical sampling costs. To improve the simulation precision, we propose GAN-SD (GAN
for Simulating Distributions) for customer feature generation
with better matched distribution; we propose MAIL (Multiagent Adversarial Imitation Learning) for generating better
generalizable customer actions. To further avoid overfitting the
imperfection of the simulator, we propose ANC (Action Norm
Constraint) strategy to regularize the policy model. In experiments, Virtual-Taobao is trained from hundreds of millions
of real Taobao customers’ records. Compared with the real
Taobao, Virtual-Taobao faithfully recovers important properties of the real environment. We further show that the policies
trained purely in Virtual-Taobao, which has zero physical sampling cost, can have significantly superior real-world performance to the traditional supervised approaches, through online
A/B tests. We hope this work may shed some light on applying
reinforcement learning in complex physical environments.

Introduction
With the incorporation of deep neural networks, Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved significant progress recently, yielding lots of successes in games (Mnih et al. 2013;
Silver et al. 2016; Mnih et al. 2016), robotics (Kretzschmar
et al. 2016), natural language processing (Su et al. 2016),
etc. However, there are few studies on the application of RL
in physical-world tasks like large online systems interacting
∗
This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program
of China (2018YFB1004300), NSFC (61876077), Jiangsu SF
(BK20170013), and Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization. Yang Yu is the corresponding author. This work is done when Jing-Cheng Shi was an intern in
Alibaba Group, whom is now affiliated with Alibaba Group.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4902

