The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards to Reasonable Decision Basis in Automatic
Bone X-Ray Image Classification: A Weakly-Supervised Approach
Jianjie Lu,1 Kai-yu Tong2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong SAR, China, 999077
1
jacklu@link.cuhk.edu.hk, 2 kytong@cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Dataset

A weakly-supervised framework is proposed that cannot only make class inference but also provides reasonable decision basis in bone X-ray images. We implement it in three
stages progressively: (1) design a classification network and
use positive class activation map (PCAM) for attention location; (2) generate masks from attention maps and lead the
model to make classification prediction from the activation
areas; (3) label lesions in very few images and guide the
model to learn simultaneously. We test the proposed method
on a bone X-ray dataset. Results show that it achieves significant improvements in lesion location.

We evaluate our method on MURA, a large dataset of
musculoskeletal radiographs containing 40561 images,
where each study is manually labeled as normal or abnormal and no lesion label is provided (Rajpurkar et al. 2018).

Methodology
The framework is designed in three stages progressively.
In each stage, we first train a 23-layer ResNet with around
98% accuracy in the validation set. Note that our goal is
not to achieve state-of-the-art classification accuracy but
rather to output more reasonable decision basis.
Stage 1: Positive Class Activation Map The classification network essentially maps an image to class scores.
For MURA datasets, our model outputs two values. The
weights of fully-connected (FC) layers will learn to assign
high scores to the correct class. Before flowing into the
classification layers, features are 2-dimensional and hence
we can visualize them to see which part of inputs contribute to the classification results. We use hi to denote the i-th
feature map and wc,i to denote the weight in the FC layer
for hi leading to class c. There are totally 128 filters in the
last convolution layer. The CAM for class c is given by:

Introduction
Deep learning, particularly convolutional network (CNN),
has achieved high accuracies in classification of medical
images (Litjens et al. 2017). However, it is still risky to
leave diagnosis to machines entirely. Patients and clinicians would prefer to have reliable decision basis from
classifiers rather than simple classification results, i.e.,
normal or abnormal. This is challenging in some cases
since it is expensive to obtain lesion labels from experts for
classification datasets with tens of thousands of images.
The unsupervised or weakly-supervised approach can be
a better choice in this situation. Class activation map
(CAM) is one of the widely-used interpretation methods
for CNN-based medical image classification models (Feng
et al. 2017; Hicks et al. 2018). It can produce heatmaps for
localizing the most indicative areas of the input, which is
first proposed by (Zhou et al. 2016).
In this work, we propose a 3-stage weakly-supervised
framework for providing more reasonable decision basis
instead of using CAM directly. Experimental results show
that our method achieves highly competitive improvements
in lesion location.

128

H c   wc ,i hi

(1)

i 1

where hi is a 20×20 matrix and wc,i is a scalar. We observe
that when weight wc,i is negative, the corresponding hi has
a negative effect on the class scores. Therefore, we only
visualize the features maps that have positive weights. We
name this method as positive class activation map (PCAM),
which has the formulation as (2). It provides clearer lesion
location in our work.
128

H c   max(0, wc ,i )hi
i 1

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9985

(2)

