The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Few-Shot Image and Sentence Matching via Gated Visual-Semantic Embedding
Yan Huang,1,3 Yang Long,4 Liang Wang1,2,3
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
Open Lab, School of Computing, Newcastle University
{yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn yang.long@newcastle.ac.uk
Abstract

the winners 1st
2nd and 3rd of a
event posing for a
picture each
holding flowers

Although image and sentence matching has been widely
studied, its intrinsic few-shot problem is commonly ignored,
which has become a bottleneck for further performance improvement. In this work, we focus on this challenging problem of few-shot image and sentence matching, and propose
a Gated Visual-Semantic Embedding (GVSE) model to deal
with it. The model consists of three corporative modules in
terms of uncommon VSE, common VSE, and gated metric
fusion. The uncommon VSE exploits external auxiliary resources to extract generic features for representing uncommon instances and words in images and sentences, and then
integrates them by modeling their semantic relation to obtain global representations for association analysis. To better
model other common instances and words in rest content of
images and sentences, the common VSE learns their discriminative representations directly from scratch. After obtaining
two similarity metrics from the two VSE modules with different advantages, the gated metric fusion module adaptively
fuses them by automatically balancing their relative importance. Based on the fused metric, we perform extensive experiments in terms of few-shot and conventional image and
sentence matching, and demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed model by achieving the state-of-the-art results on
two public benchmark datasets.

two nuns one with
paper in her hand
and the other
holding a bag

a child carries his
younger sibling
in a cloth sling
on his back

a young mother is
letting her child lick
a wooden cooking
spoon clean

Figure 1: Logarithmic frequencies during training v.s. words
from test set. (best viewed in colors).

Image and sentence matching has drawn much attention,
which aims to measure the visual-semantic similarity between an image and a sentence. It has been widely applied
to the task of cross-modal retrieval, e.g., given a query image to find similar sentences, namely image annotation, or
given a query sentence to retrieve matched images, namely
image search. Recently, much progress in this direction has
been achieved, and many effective methods (Huang, Wu,
and Wang 2018; Gu et al. 2017; Faghri et al. 2017) are proposed to deal with this task.
However, different from existing methods, here we focus
on a more challenging problem in terms of few-shot image and sentence matching, which is commonly existed but

rarely investigated. Particularly, most state-of-the-art methods learn discriminative data representations jointly with
cross-modal association based on pairs of image and sentence, which makes them easily recognize and associate
those pairs containing frequently appeared instances and
words in a statistical manner. But they cannot well handle
certain pairs having uncommon instances and words, because the number of similar pairwise data is quite limited
during training.
We build a vocabulary consisting of all words extracted
from test sentences in Flickr30k dataset (Young et al. 2014),
and then count their appearing frequencies (after logarithmic
transformation) during training in Figure 1. From the figure,
we can see that about 24% words have very low frequencies
of less than 10 (threshold is denoted by the dashed line),
and even 8% words have frequencies of 1 or 01 . For these
images and sentences containing uncommon instances and
words (marked by red color), even current state-of-the-art
methods cannot well associate them, and their performance
drops heavily as demonstrated in the Tables 2 and 3. In fact,
this few-shot problem has become a bottleneck for further
performance improvement in image and sentence matching.
Although the traditional few-shot learning problem for

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Since the logarithmic transformation of 0 is negative infinity,
for simple illustration, we plot the logarithmic frequencies as 0.

Introduction

8489

