The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Triple Classification Using Regions and Fine-Grained Entity Typing
Tiansi Dong

Zhigang Wang

Juanzi Li

B-IT, University of Bonn, Germany
dongt@bit.uni-bonn.de

Aisino Corporation, China
wangzhigang@aisino.com

DCST, Tsinghua University, China
lijuanzi@tsinghua.edu.cn

Christian Bauckhage,1,2 Armin B. Cremers1
1

B-IT, University of Bonn, Germany
2
Fraunhofer IAIS, Germany
{bauckhag, abc}@bit.uni-bonn.de
which can be understood as a translation from h to t by
adding r. Using this method, (Bordes et al. 2013) achieved
the state-of-the-art performance, but it suffers from the 1to-N, N-to-1 and N-to-N relations. Hyperplane projection
methods allow an entity to have several embeddings for
different relations. However, these methods do not significantly improve the performance of predicting unknown
tails of Triples in 1-to-N relations (Wang et al. 2014b;
Lin et al. 2015).
It is not difficult to understand that there is no perfect vector representation for 1-to-N relation: Let isa be the perfect
vector representation for the isa relation, (zurich, isa, city)
and (new york, isa, city) be two Triples. Ideally, we shall
have zurich + isa = city and new york + isa = city.
However, this leads to a wrong assertion that zurich and
new york are the same city. We propose to extend entityembeddings from vectors into regions, so that the isa relation can be implicitly represented by the inclusion relation between regions: zurich region and new york region
are located inside the city region, the city region is inside
the municipality region, . . . . We can have a further finegrained typing chain of city: city, municipality, region, physical entity, entity, as illustrated in Figure 1. Such chains
can be interpreted as an incremental conceptual clustering
(Fisher 1987), and proven to be useful. They carry more type
information than a single type (Ren et al. 2016), provide
more specific semantic information (Xu et al. 2016). They
have benefitted many real applications, e.g., knowledge-base
completion (Dong et al. 2014), entity linking (Ling, Singh,
and Weld 2015; Durrett and Klein 2015), relation extraction (Liu et al. 2014), and question-answering (Yahya et al.
2014).
In this article, we propose a new region-based entityembedding method using type chains. Given pre-trained
vector entity-embeddings, we extend them into regions, in
which tail regions of 1-to-N relations are located in the
head region. A type chain will introduce nested regions.
As an entity can have different 1-to-N relations, we need
to distinguish different kinds of inclusion relations among
regions. For example, given two Triples (beijing, isa, city)
and (inner city, part of, city). Both the beijing ball and the
inner city ball shall be located inside the city ball. We need
to distinguish the isa relation from the part of relation. Our
solution is to introduce the isa subspace and the part of sub-

Abstract
A Triple in knowledge-graph takes a form that consists of
head, relation, tail. Triple Classification is used to determine the truth value of an unknown Triple. This is a hard
task for 1-to-N relations using the vector-based embedding
approach. We propose a new region-based embedding approach using fine-grained type chains. A novel geometric process is presented to extend the vectors of pre-trained entities into n-balls (n-dimensional balls) under the condition
that head balls shall contain their tail balls. Our algorithm
achieves zero energy cost, therefore, serves as a case study of
perfectly imposing tree structures into vector space. An unknown Triple (h, r, x) will be predicted as true, when x’s
n-ball is located in the r-subspace of h’s n-ball, following the same construction of known tails of h. The experiments are based on large datasets derived from the benchmark datasets WN11, FB13, and WN18. Our results show
that the performance of the new method is related to the
length of the type chain and the quality of pre-trained entityembeddings, and that performances of long chains with welltrained entity-embeddings outperform other methods in the
literature. Source codes and datasets are located at https:
//github.com/GnodIsNait/mushroom.

Introduction
Knowledge-graphs represent truth knowledge in the Triple
(head, relation, tail), shortened as (h, r, t). In Semantic Web
Community, such a Triple is named as (subject, predicate,
object). Knowledge-graphs such as Word-Net, Yago, and
Freebase (Miller 1995; Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum
2007; Bollacker et al. 2008) are very useful for AI applications, e.g. question-answering, query expansion, information retrieval, document classification (Manning, Raghavan, and Schütze 2008; Socher et al. 2013; Bordes et
al. 2013; Wang et al. 2014a; Wang and Li 2016). However, knowledge-graphs normally suffer from incompleteness. One research topic in AI is to predict the missing part
of a knowledge-graph. The basic task is Triple Classification, which is to determine the truth value, or the degree of
truth value, of an unknown Triple.
In the literature of representational learning, a Triple
(h, r, t) is encoded as a quasi triangular relation h + r ≈ t,
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

77

