The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Unified Approach to Online Matching with Conflict-Aware Constraints
Pan Xu,1 Yexuan Shi,2 Hao Cheng,2 John Dickerson,1 Karthik Abinav Sankararaman,1
Aravind Srinivasan,1 Yongxin Tong,2 Leonidas Tsepenekas1
1 University of Maryland, College Park, USA

2 BDBC, SKLSDE Lab and IRC, Beihang University, China

1 {panxu,john,kabinav,srin,ltsepene}@cs.umd.edu, 2 {skyxuan,haocheng,yxtong}@buaa.edu.cn

result. Each advertiser has a unit capacity (can be matched
only once) and we aim to design an efficient online algorithm
such that the expected total weight (profit) of all matches is
maximized. Following the seminal work of Karp, Vazirani,
and Vazirani (1990), there has been a large body of research
on related variants (see also the survey by Mehta (2013)).
Apart from Internet advertising, online matching and its
variants have wide applications in other domains such as
crowdsourcing marketplaces (Assadi, Hsu, and Jabbari 2015;
Ho and Vaughan 2012) (e.g., Amazon Mechanical Turk, offline tasks vs. online workers), online recommendation systems (Ahmed, Dickerson, and Fuge 2017; Chen et al. 2016b;
Sha, Wu, and Niu 2016; Qin and Zhu 2013) (e.g., Amazon
Books, offline products vs. online buyers) and ridesharing
platforms (Tong et al. 2016a; Dickerson et al. 2018a) (e.g.,
Uber and Lyft, offline drivers vs. online requests). In many
real applications, we need to match each online agent with
multiple offline agents simultaneously. A generic model is as
follows: we have a set of offline agents U and online agents V ;
each time an online agent v arrives, we need to immediately
and irrevocably decide if we should reject v or assign v to a
set S ⊆ Nv (Nv refers to the set of offline agents interesting
to v). A natural goal is to design an online matching policy
such that the total weight among all matches is maximized
subject to certain kinds of capacity constraints, e.g., each u
can be matched at most cu times while each v can be matched
with a set |S| ≤ cv , where cu and cv are given as input. In
many real applications, there are inherent conflicts among offline agents by nature, which causes significant algorithmic
challenges. Consider the following motivating examples.
Event-Participant Arrangement in Social Networks. Li et
al. (2014) introduced an interesting event-participant matching problem arising in Event-Based Social Networks (EBSNs) such as Meetup and Plancast (Liu et al. 2012). In this
case, the two sets are offline events and online users. Each
time a user arrives, we need to match her to some events
she shows interest in. Naturally, there are potential conflicts
among a set of events S with respect to a user if she cannot
attend all events in S on time due to travel/time constraints.
Online Recommendations in E-Commerce. Chen et
al. (2016a) studied online recommendations in E-Commerce
(e.g., Amazon, Netflix) via online matching models where
the two sets are the offline products/items (e.g., books, music, movies) and online users/buyers. Each time an online

Abstract
Online bipartite matching and allocation models are widely
used to analyze and design markets such as Internet advertising, online labor, and crowdsourcing. Traditionally, vertices
on one side of the market are fixed and known a priori, while
vertices on the other side arrive online and are matched by a
central agent to the offline side. The issue of possible conflicts
among offline agents emerges in various real scenarios when
we need to match each online agent with a set of offline agents.
For example, in event-based social networks (e.g., Meetup),
offline events conflict for some users since they will be unable
to attend mutually-distant events at proximate times; in advertising markets, two competing firms may prefer not to be
shown to one user simultaneously; and in online recommendation systems (e.g., Amazon Books), books of the same type
“conflict” with each other in some sense due to the diversity
requirement for each online buyer.
The conflict nature inherent among certain offline agents raises
significant challenges in both modeling and online algorithm
design. In this paper, we propose a unifying model, generalizing the conflict models proposed in (She et al., TKDE
2016) and (Chen et al., TKDE 16). Our model can capture
not only a broad class of conflict constraints on the offline
side (which is even allowed to be sensitive to each online
agent), but also allows a general arrival pattern for the online
side (which is allowed to change over the online phase). We
propose an efficient linear programming (LP) based online
algorithm and prove theoretically that it has nearly-optimal
online performance. Additionally, we propose two LP-based
heuristics and test them against two natural baselines on both
real and synthetic datasets. Our LP-based heuristics experimentally dominate the baseline algorithms, aligning with our
theoretical predictions and supporting our unified approach.

1

Introduction

Online bipartite matching problems are primarily motivated
by the Internet advertising business. In the basic setting,
we have a set of offline advertisers and online keywords
(impressions). Each time a keyword v arrives online, a central
clearinghouse (such as a search engine or other matchmaking
platform) must make an instant and irrevocable decision to
either reject v or assign v to an advertiser showing interest
toward v: the clearinghouse will obtain a profit wu,v as a
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2221

