The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Get IT Scored Using AutoSAS —
An Automated System for Scoring Short Answers
Yaman Kumar,1 Swati Aggarwal,2 Debanjan Mahata,3 Rajiv Ratn Shah,4
Ponnurangam Kumaraguru,4 Roger Zimmermann5
1

Adobe, India, 2 NSIT-Delhi, India, 3 Bloomberg, USA
IIIT-Delhi, India, 5 National University of Singapore, Singapore
ykumar@adobe.com, swati@nsit.ac.in, dmahata@bloomberg.net. rajivratn@iiitd.ac.in,
pk@iiitd.ac.in, rogerz@comp.nus.edu.sg
4

Abstract

have been taught to write their essays and short answers
(Dale and Krueger 2002).

In the era of MOOCs, online exams are taken by millions of
candidates, where scoring short answers is an integral part.
It becomes intractable to evaluate them by human graders.
Thus, a generic automated system capable of grading these
responses should be designed and deployed. In this paper, we
present a fast, scalable, and accurate approach towards automated Short Answer Scoring (SAS). We propose and explain
the design and development of a system for SAS, namely
AutoSAS. Given a question along with its graded samples,
AutoSAS can learn to grade that prompt successfully. This
paper further lays down the features such as lexical diversity, Word2Vec, prompt, and content overlap that plays a pivotal role in building our proposed model. We also present a
methodology for indicating the factors responsible for scoring an answer. The trained model is evaluated on an extensively used public dataset, namely Automated Student Assessment Prize Short Answer Scoring (ASAP-SAS). AutoSAS
shows state-of-the-art performance and achieves better results
by over 8% in some of the question prompts as measured
by Quadratic Weighted Kappa (QWK), showing performance
comparable to humans.

Motivation
Automated Essay Scoring (AES) and Short Answer Scoring
(SAS) systems such as the one presented in this work (AutoSAS), provides economic advantages to testing companies
and state-wide corporations. These systems reduce the economic and time burden of getting each response checked by
human graders close to zero, bringing down the cost and effort significantly.
It has been noted that about 30% of a teacher’s time is
spent in evaluating students that subsequently translates to
close to 4.02 Billion US Dollars per year coming from the
taxpayers (Mason and Grove-Stephensen 2002). To eliminate this, it is necessary to design an automated system that
a teacher can trust, and can use to mark essays and short text
responses. In addition, one often hears about biases in marking students based on region, religion, and ethnicity. AES
systems can possibly aid in uprooting any such biases from
the education system.
Currently, AES systems have been successfully deployed
by Educational Testing Service1 , where GRE essays are
graded by a human grader as well as an AES system
(Burstein et al. 1998). A second human grader is required
only if there is a non-negligible difference between the two
grades. AES systems form a major use case for Massive
Open Online Classes (MOOCs) where economies of scale
are required. As MOOCs advent towards offering courses in
subjects such as literature and humanities, a range of assessment techniques such as AES will come in handy.
Systems similar to AutoSAS can be deployed in other
agencies where it can not only be used for reducing the economic cost related to grading, but also in providing a scalable system for uniform grading in a time-bound manner.
Students can also benefit from use of these systems if they
can verify and check their work before actually submitting
it for final reviews.
In this work, we primarily focus on utilizing natural language processing (NLP) for the task of Short Answer Scoring (SAS), which involves automated scoring of short answers provided for a given prompt that presents questions

Introduction
Essays and other types of writing practices have been extensively used for evaluation purposes. Graduate Record Examination (GRE), Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT), Senior
School Examinations such as Zhongkao in China and All
India Senior School Certificate Examination (AISSCE) in
India are just some of the many examples. The stakes for
getting high grades in the essays and hence in these exams
are tremendous for pupils, teachers and schools alike. The
essays and short answers written by the students in the exams determine their future colleges and hence have a career
wide impact.
Under the No Child Left Behind Regulations, U.S. States
have been asked to use uniform and regulated test scores
for evaluation of teachers for determining their salaries and
tenures (Higgins 2014). This underlines the importance of
getting good scores in these writing practices. A school’s
reputation is often determined by the SAT scores of its graduating students, which in turn is impacted by how well they
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9662

https://www.ets.org/

