The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving Full-Body Pose Estimation from a Small
Sensor Set Using Artificial Neural Networks and a Kalman Filter
Frank J. Wouda,1 Matteo Giuberti,2 Giovanni Bellusci,2 Bert-Jan F. van Beijnum,1
Peter H. Veltink1
1

Department of Biomedical Signals & Systems, Technical Medical Centre,
University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands f.j.wouda@utwente.nl
2
Xsens Technologies B.V., Enschede, The Netherlands

Abstract

states with the measurements (Welch and Bishop 1995).
The goal of this work is to investigate the use of a statistical framework like a KF for combining the pose output of
an ANN (estimated from a minimal IMU sensor setup) with
a pose prediction. This approach allows for using explicit
modelling of constraints of the human body, e.g. movement
range and joint degree of freedom limits.

Previous research has shown that estimating full-body poses
from a minimal sensor set using a trained ANN without explicitly enforcing time coherence has resulted in output pose
sequences that occasionally show undesired jitter. To mitigate such effect, we propose to improve the ANN output by
combining it with a state prediction using a Kalman Filter.
Preliminary results are promising, as the jitter effects are diminished. However, the overall error does not decrease substantially.

Methods
An ANN (with two hidden layers of 200 and 100 neurons)
was trained (using MATLAB R2016a) to map the (relative
to pelvis) orientation of 4 body segments (lower legs and
arms) to a full-body pose, identical to Wouda et al. 2016.
The training data for this ANN consists of movements of
6 participants (∼ 120 minutes in total), identical to used
in (Wouda et al. 2016). An inertial motion capture system
(Xsens MVN) consisting of 17 on-body sensors was used
for capturing the dataset (Schepers, Giuberti, and Bellusci
2018). It was chosen to describe orientations using quaternions, as it was shown to be suitable for pose estimation
from a minimal sensor set with a trained ANN (Wouda et
al. 2016). However, orientations complicate the use of a KF,
due to the potentially large linearization errors. Therefore,
we propose to use an error-state KF, similar to Kortier et al.
2014, which keeps linearization errors to a minimum. The
error-state was used as follows: q1 = q2 δq, i.e. the error quaternion can be seen as the orientation difference between two body segments. Furthermore, the 
error quaternion

were converted to helical angles using: δq ≈ 1 21 δθ . We
will take orientation and its derivative: angular velocity of
the full-body
pose
(23 segments) into account in the states:


xt = δθ δ θ̇ .
The purpose of applying a KF is to stabilize the pose prediction (process) using the ANN output (measurement), as depicted in Figure 1. We assume our process can be described
with constant velocity, which should be acceptable for small
timesteps. This results
 in the following state transition ma1 ∆t
trix: A =
. The output of the trained ANN is used
0 1
as a measurement update, which is related to the states by
the measurement matrix: H = [1 0].
The noise covariance of the process (Q) and the measurement (R) effectively reflect the reliability of both information sources. To test the viability of this approach, an esti-

Introduction
The human motion capture industry has grown a lot in recent
years, which is shown by the availability of a large variety
in technologies. The most prominent solutions are based on
inertial measurement units (IMUs) and optical tracking, and
both require numerous sensors/markers for full-body motion
capturing (van der Kruk and Reijne 2018). This results in a
large setup time and obtrusiveness to the subject.
Many works focused on reducing complexity by relying on
database solutions. For example, the number of markers (in
optical motion capture) was successfully reduced (to as few
as six markers) by using a nearest neighbour search approach (Chai and Hodgins 2005). Similarly, Tautges et al.
exploited nearest neighbour search to reconstruct full-body
movements using only four accelerometers (Tautges et al.
2011). Both approaches require a movement database to be
available at runtime, which is computationally expensive.
Therefore, Wouda et al. 2016 used an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) to overcome this limitation and showed comparable performance. However, this approach does not enforce
any temporal coherence between consecutive poses and thus
results might show unrealistic jumps and jitter.
By providing temporal coherence, the overall performance
of an ANN approach is likely to improve. For example, use
of recurrent neural networks were effective in predicting sequences of human movement from a (short) pose sequence
(Fragkiadaki et al. 2015). However, such an approach requires sufficient computation resources and training data (of
the sequences of interest). An interesting alternative is the
use of a Kalman filter (KF), which fuses a prediction of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10063

