The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MEAL: Multi-Model Ensemble via Adversarial Learning
Zhiqiang Shen,1,2∗ Zhankui He,3∗ Xiangyang Xue1
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
3
School of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
zhiqiangshen0214@gmail.com, {zkhe15, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

FLOPs at Inference Time
Snapshot Ensemble
(Huang et al. 2017)
Our FLOPs at Test Time

6×

Often the best performing deep neural models are ensembles
of multiple base-level networks. Unfortunately, the space required to store these many networks, and the time required
to execute them at test-time, prohibits their use in applications where test sets are large (e.g., ImageNet). In this paper, we present a method for compressing large, complex
trained ensembles into a single network, where knowledge
from a variety of trained deep neural networks (DNNs) is
distilled and transferred to a single DNN. In order to distill
diverse knowledge from different trained (teacher) models,
we propose to use adversarial-based learning strategy where
we define a block-wise training loss to guide and optimize
the predefined student network to recover the knowledge in
teacher models, and to promote the discriminator network to
distinguish teacher vs. student features simultaneously. The
proposed ensemble method (MEAL) of transferring distilled
knowledge with adversarial learning exhibits three important
advantages: (1) the student network that learns the distilled
knowledge with discriminators is optimized better than the
original model; (2) fast inference is realized by a single forward pass, while the performance is even better than traditional ensembles from multi-original models; (3) the student network can learn the distilled knowledge from a teacher
model that has arbitrary structures. Extensive experiments on
CIFAR-10/100, SVHN and ImageNet datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our MEAL method. On ImageNet, our
ResNet-50 based MEAL achieves top-1/5 21.79%/5.99% val
error, which outperforms the original model by 2.06%/1.14%.

5×

FLOPs

4×
3×
2×
1×
0×

1

2

3
4
# of ensembles

5

Figure 1: Comparison of FLOPs at inference time. Huang
et al. (Huang et al. 2017a) employ models at different local minimum for ensembling, which enables no additional
training cost, but the computational FLOPs at test time linearly increase with more ensembles. In contrast, our method
use only one model during inference time throughout, so the
testing cost is independent of # ensembles.
using the outputs of different network architectures with different or identical augmented input. Our testing still operates
on a single network, but the supervision labels made on different pre-trained networks correspond to an ensemble prediction of a group of individual reference networks.
The traditional ensemble, or called true ensemble, has
some disadvantages that are often overlooked. 1) Redundancy: The information or knowledge contained in the
trained neural networks are always redundant and has overlaps between with each other. Directly combining the predictions often requires extra computational cost but the gain
is limited. 2) Ensemble is always large and slow: Ensemble requires more computing operations than an individual
network, which makes it unusable for applications with limited memory, storage space, or computational power such as
desktop, mobile and even embedded devices, and for applications in which real-time predictions are needed.
To address the aforementioned shortcomings, in this paper we propose to use a learning-based ensemble method.
Our goal is to learn an ensemble of multiple neural networks

1. Introduction
The ensemble approach is a collection of neural networks
whose predictions are combined at test stage by weighted
averaging or voting. It has been long observed that ensembles of multiple networks are generally much more robust and accurate than a single network. This benefit has
also been exploited indirectly when training a single network through Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), Dropconnect (Wan et al. 2013), Stochastic Depth (Huang et al. 2016),
Swapout (Singh, Hoiem, and Forsyth 2016), etc. We extend
this idea by forming ensemble predictions during training,
∗
equal contribution. This work was done when Zhankui He was
a research intern at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4886

