The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Teaching Machines to Extract Main Content for Machine Reading Comprehension
Zhaohui Li,1 Yue Feng,1 Jun Xu,2 Jiafeng Guo,1 Yanyan Lan,1 Xueqi Cheng1
1
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods,
School of Information, Renmin University of China
{lizhaohui,fengyue,lanyanyan,guojiafeng,cxq}@ict.ac.cn, junxu@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

question and the candidate passages, the attention mechanism is employed to learn the embeddings for the question
and every passage sentences. Then, the MDP scans all of
the sentences and selects sentences as the main content. This
MC-MDP model, is trained with end-to-end manner and policy gradient is used to update the parameters.
It is shown that MC-MDP can identify the sentences
that contain the answers with high precision, and thus has
the ability of boosting the performances of span prediction
models. Experimental results based on MSMARCO also
showed that the combinations of MC-MDP and span prediction models can improve the MRC performances.

Machine reading comprehension, whose goal is to find answers from the candidate passages for a given question, has
attracted a lot of research efforts in recent years. One of the
key challenge in machine reading comprehension is how to
identify the main content from a large, redundant, and overlapping set of candidate sentences. In this paper we propose to
tackle the challenge with Markov Decision Process in which
the main content identification is formalized as sequential
decision making and each action corresponds to selecting a
sentence. Policy gradient is used to learn the model parameters. Experimental results based on MSMARCO showed that
the proposed model, called MC-MDP, can select high quality
main contents and significantly improved the performances
of answer span prediction.

Our Approach: MC-MDP
MC-MDP consists of an encoding step which employs attention mechanism to obtain question-aware representations
for the question and sentences, and a MDP step for constructing the main content sequence. Question-awared representation: Following the practices (Seo et al. 2016), two
bi-direction attention models (two BiLSTMs) are respectively employed to learn the representations of the question (represented as q), and the sentences (represented as
X = {x1 , · · · , xM }) in the passages, where M is the total number of sentences in all of the passages related to
the question. Main content construction: The learned representations are used as the inputs to the following MDP
model, whose goal is to construct an agent for selecting a
set of sentences as the main content. The elements of the
MDP is defined as: States S: State at step t is a triple
st = [Q, Zt , Xt ], where Q is the question, Zt = {x(n) }tn=1
is the sequence of t selected sentences, and Xt is the set of
remaining sentences. At the beginning (t = 0), the state is
initialized as s0 = [Q, ∅, X], where X contains the top w
sentences in all the candidate passages. Note the agent will
scan all sentences one by one and the w-size window is used
to control the number of actions the agent can choose from.
Actions A: At each time step t, the A (st ) is the set of
actions the agent can choose, each corresponds to a sentence
in Xt . That is, action at ∈ A(st ) selects a sentence xm(at ) ∈
Xt as the main content sequence, where m(at ) is the index
of the sentence corresponding to at .
Transition T : The function T : S × A → S is defined as
two steps: 1) append sentence xm(at ) to Zt ; 2) Set Xt+1 as
{xm(at )+1 , · · · , xm(at )+w }, where w is the window size.

Introduction
Machine reading comprehension (MRC) aims to extract answers from a set of passages according to a question. Given
a question, a large number of candidate passages could be
involved. Therefore, how to identify answer-related content
becomes a critical issue. Existing approaches address the
issue through ranking the passages or merging the candidate answers extracted from the passages (Wang et al. 2017).
However, the issue is still far from being fully addressed due
to: 1) ranking of the passages is not effective for MRC because the goal is to identify the right answer from related
content, rather than to find and browse the relevant passages;
2) the candidate passages could be similar in content or contain some wrong information, which makes the extracted answers overlapping or contain unrelated information.
Ideally, an MRC model shall follow the RC process of human beings. That is, human beings may first read the given
question, and then go through the whole passages to identify the question-related contents, and finally conclude the
answer. The attention of human beings should focus on the
question-related sentences during the whole process.
In this paper, we proposed a model that could automatically identify the main content from the candidate passages
through mimicking the human RC process, on the basis of
the attention mechanism (Seo et al. 2016) in DL and the
Markov Decision Process (MDP). Specifically, given the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9973

