The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Self-Ensembling Attention Networks:
Addressing Domain Shift for Semantic Segmentation
Yonghao Xu,1, 2 Bo Du,1∗ Lefei Zhang,1 Qian Zhang,3 Guoli Wang,3 Liangpei Zhang2
1

2

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China.
State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping, and Remote Sensing,
Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, P. R. China.
3
Horizon Robotics, Inc., Beijing 100190, P. R. China.
yonghaoxu@ieee.org, remoteking@whu.edu.cn, zhanglefei@whu.edu.cn,
qian01.zhang@horizon.ai, guoli.wang@horizon.ai, zlp62@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

A real image

Recent years have witnessed the great success of deep learning models in semantic segmentation. Nevertheless, these
models may not generalize well to unseen image domains
due to the phenomenon of domain shift. Since pixel-level
annotations are laborious to collect, developing algorithms
which can adapt labeled data from source domain to target domain is of great significance. To this end, we propose
self-ensembling attention networks to reduce the domain gap
between different datasets. To the best of our knowledge,
the proposed method is the first attempt to introduce selfensembling model to domain adaptation for semantic segmentation, which provides a different view on how to learn
domain-invariant features. Besides, since different regions in
the image usually correspond to different levels of domain
gap, we introduce the attention mechanism into the proposed
framework to generate attention-aware features, which are
further utilized to guide the calculation of consistency loss in
the target domain. Experiments on two benchmark datasets
demonstrate that the proposed framework can yield competitive performance compared with the state of the art methods.

…

…

Segmentation
Networks

Synthetic images with
annotations

?…

…

?
Real images without
annotations

(a) Without adaptation

Domain
Adaptation
(b) With adaptation

Figure 1: An illustration of domain shift in semantic segmentation task. (a) Segmentation map of a real image generated with models trained on synthetic data without domain
adaptation technique. (b) Segmentation map of a real image
with models trained on both synthetic data and real ones using domain adaptation technique.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer
vision, which assigns the class label for each pixel in a given
image (Tao et al. 2017). It has been widely utilized in many
important applications nowadays such as autonomous driving (Xu et al. 2017).
Deep learning is a powerful tool for semantic segmentation task. Nevertheless, the training of deep learning models
generally relies on a large amount of labeled data. A common solution in real world application is manual labeling.
Obviously, this process is laborious and time-consuming. It
is reported that high-quality semantic labeling requires about
90 minutes per image for the CITYSCAPES dataset (Cordts

et al. 2016). An alternative way is to train deep neural networks with synthetic data. Recent advances on the graphics engine make it feasible to collect photo-realistic images
from computer games with accurate pixel-level annotations
automatically (Richter et al. 2016). Research has been made
to apply models trained on synthetic data to real ones. However, the performance of these models on real images is usually not satisfactory due to the phenomenon of domain shift
(Adel, Zhao, and Wong 2017), which is caused by factors
like imaging devices (graphics engines vs. RGB sensors),
illumination, distortion, and shadows in different domains,
though it may be mild to a human observer. As a result, models which achieve high accuracies in synthetic datasets may
fail to yield good performances for real images as shown in
Figure 1 (a).

∗

Corresponding author. This work is supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61822113, Grant
41431175, Grant 61471274, and Grant U1536204.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5581

