The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DeepChannel: Salience Estimation by Contrastive
Learning for Extractive Document Summarization
Jiaxin Shi,1∗ Chen Liang,1∗ Lei Hou,1† Juanzi Li,1 Zhiyuan Liu,1 Hanwang Zhang2
1

Tsinghua University
Nanyang Technological University
{shijx12,lliangchenc}@gmail.com, {houlei,lijuanzi,liuzy}@tsinghua.edu.cn, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

D: Rutgers University has banned fraternity and sorority house parties at its main campus in New Brunswick,
New Jersey, for the rest of the spring semester after several alcohol-related problems this school year, including the
death of a student.

We propose DeepChannel, a robust, data-efficient, and interpretable neural model for extractive document summarization. Given any document-summary pair, we estimate a
salience score, which is modeled using an attention-based
deep neural network, to represent the salience degree of the
summary for yielding the document. We devise a contrastive
training strategy to learn the salience estimation network,
and then use the learned salience score as a guide and iteratively extract the most salient sentences from the document as
our generated summary. In experiments, our model not only
achieves state-of-the-art ROUGE scores on CNN/Daily Mail
dataset, but also shows strong robustness in the out-of-domain
test on DUC2007 test set. Moreover, our model reaches a
ROUGE-1 F-1 score of 39.41 on CNN/Daily Mail test set
with merely 1/100 training set, demonstrating a tremendous
data efficiency.

S1 : Rutgers University has banned fraternity and sorority
house parties because of an alcohol-related accident that led
to the death of a student.
S2 : The main campus of Rutgers University is located in
New Brunswick, New Jersey.

Table 1: Examples of different degrees of salience. We consider P (D|S1 ) > P (D|S2 ) because S1 contains more important information compared with S2 and thus is more
salient for yielding D.
extracted, and many abstractive models (See, Liu, and Manning 2017; Jadhav and Rajan 2018) are developed based
on the encoder-decoder framework that encodes a document
and decodes its summary. These existing neural summarizers mostly aim to build an end-to-end mapping from the input document to its summary. The learning of such an endto-end neural network 1) always requires a huge amount of
training corpus, 2) easily suffers from the overfitting problem (Srivastava et al. 2014; Erhan et al. 2010), and 3) usually
lacks interpretability.
To alleviate these problems, we propose a neural extractive summarizer named DeepChannel, which estimates
salience for guiding the extraction procedure instead of
learning an end-to-end mapping. DeepChannel is inspired
by the noisy-channel (Knight and Marcu 2002; Daumé III
and Marcu 2002), a probabilistic approach for sentence-level
and document-level compression. Given an input document
D, the noisy-channel model aims to find an optimal summary S that maximizes P (S|D). It 1) splits P (S|D) using Bayes rule, 2) independently estimates a language model
probability P (S) and a channel model probability P (D|S),
3) defines expanding rules, and 4) learns the parameters in
a traditional statistical manner. Such a statistical approach
depends on manual rules, lacks generality, suffers from data
sparsity, and fails to capture semantics (Mnih and Hinton
2009), which is the key for document understanding. To this
end, we design a neural channel model to draw support from

Introduction
Automatic document summarization is a challenging task in
natural language understanding, aiming to compress a textual document to a shorter highlight that contains the most
representative information of the original text. Existing summarization approaches are mainly classified into two categories: extractive methods and abstractive methods. Extractive summarization methods, on which this paper focuses,
aim to select salient snippets, sentences or passages directly
from the input document, while abstractive summarization
generates summaries that may have words or phrases not
present in the input.
Recently, as end-to-end deep learning has made great
progress in many NLP fields, such as machine translation (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015) and question answering (Iyyer et al. 2014), a lot of researchers have proposed neural models to address the document summarization
problem. For example, SummaRuNNer (Nallapati, Zhai,
and Zhou 2017) uses a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
based sequence model for extractive summarization, Refresh (Narayan, Cohen, and Lapata 2018) assigns each document sentence a score to indicate its probability of being
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6999

