The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Improved Generic Bet-and-Run Strategy with
Performance Prediction for Stochastic Local Search
Thomas Weise, Zijun Wu

Markus Wagner

Institute of Applied Optimization
Faculty of Computer Science and Technology
Hefei University, Hefei, Anhui, China

Optimisation and Logistics
The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia

Phase 1
of length t1

Abstract
k initial runs

A commonly used strategy for improving optimization algorithms is to restart the algorithm when it is believed to be
trapped in an inferior part of the search space. Building on
the recent success of B ET- AND -RUN approaches for restarted
local search solvers, we introduce a more generic version that
makes use of performance prediction. It is our goal to obtain
the best possible results within a given time budget t using
a given black-box optimization algorithm. If no prior knowledge about problem features and algorithm behavior is available, the question about how to use the time budget most efficiently arises. We first start k ≥ 1 independent runs of the
algorithm during an initialization budget t1 < t, pause these
runs, then apply a decision maker D to choose 1 ≤ m < k
runs from them (consuming t2 ≥ 0 time units in doing so),
and then continue these runs for the remaining t3 = t−t1 −t2
time units. In previous B ET- AND -RUN strategies, the decision maker D = currentBest would simply select the run
with the best-so-far results at negligible time. We propose using more advanced methods to discriminate between “good”
and “bad” sample runs with the goal of increasing the correlation of the chosen run with the a-posteriori best one. In
over 157 million experiments, we test different approaches to
predict which run may yield the best results if granted the remaining budget. We show (1) that the currentBest method is
indeed a very reliable and robust baseline approach, and (2)
that our approach can yield better results than the previous
methods.

Phase 2
of length t2

Phase 3
of length t3

decision
maker D

start

t1

t1+t2

t=t1+t2+t3

pause initial
k runs

choose m runs
to continue

end of
time budget

Figure 1: Our generic B ET- AND -RUN strategy receives a total time budget t. It starts k independent runs and pauses
them after time t1 . A decision maker D then takes time t2 to
decide which of them to continue. All but the m chosen runs
are terminated (marked with ). The m chosen runs (marked
with ) continue for a total of t3 .
2010) and therefore divide the budget t into k equally-sized
chunks. It can be expected that the former strategy is the best
for small budgets while the latter one is the better choice for
large budgets. Budgets t of a few minutes, however, fall in
neither category for many problem types, which, of course,
depends on the instance and the solver.
Here, B ET- AND -RUN strategies (Fischetti and Monaci
2014) pose a compromise by using an initialization time
budget 0 ≤ t1 ≤ t which is divided evenly amongst k independent runs. The run with the best-so-far solution is then
continued for the remaining t − t1 time units. (Friedrich,
Kötzing, and Wagner 2017) showed that this simple approach can routinely outperform the two budgeting approaches above. Yet, it makes only use of a single unit of
information per run for the “decision” which of the k runs to
resume, namely the solution quality they reached at the end
of their respective initialization budgets.
In order to investigate the question Can we do better than
that?, we generalize the B ET- AND -RUN concept as illustrated in Figure 1: The budget t is divided into three pieces,
i.e., t = t1 + t2 + t3 and used as follows.

Introduction
Optimization algorithms are widely used in a variety of domains, such as production scheduling and planning or vehicle routing. In many such practical applications, the total
time budget t available for optimization is limited to at most
a few minutes. The goal is to find a solution which is asgood-as-possible within this budget. One method to do so is
to develop better optimization algorithms. Another method
is to make the best use of an existing solver.
There are two straightforward methods when approaching an optimization problem with one algorithm and a total
time budget t: One can either assign the whole budget t to a
single run of the algorithm or execute k independent restarts
of the algorithm (Martı́ 2003; Lourenço, Martin, and Stützle

Phase 1 The initialization budget t1 is divided among a set
of k initial, independent runs according to a budgeting
strategy. All of these runs are paused after t1 has been
consumed.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2395

