The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

One-Class Adversarial Nets for Fraud Detection
Panpan Zheng,1∗ Shuhan Yuan,1∗ Xintao Wu,1 Jun Li,2 Aidong Lu3
1

University of Arkansas, {pzheng,sy005,xintaowu}@uark.edu
2
University of Oregon, lijun@cs.uoregon.edu
3
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, aidong.lu@uncc.edu

Abstract

In this work, we tackle the problem of identifying malicious users when only benign users are observed. The basic
idea is to adopt a generative model to generate malicious
users with only given benign users. Generative adversarial
networks (GAN) as generative models have demonstrated
impressive performance in modeling the real data distribution and generating high quality synthetic data that is similar to real data (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Radford, Metz, and
Chintala 2015). However, given benign users, a regular GAN
model is unable to generate malicious users.
We develop one-class adversarial nets (OCAN) for fraud
detection. During training, OCAN contains two phases.
First, OCAN adopts the LSTM-Autoencoder (Srivastava,
Mansimov, and Salakhutdinov 2015) to encode the benign
users into a hidden space based on their online activities,
and the encoded vectors are called benign user representations. Then, OCAN trains improved generative adversarial
nets in which the discriminator is trained to be a classifier
for distinguishing benign users and malicious users with the
generator producing potential malicious users. To this end,
we adopt the idea of bad GAN (Dai et al. 2017) that the generator is trained to generate complementary samples instead
of matching the original data distribution. The generator of
the complementary GAN aims to generate samples that are
complementary to the representations of benign users, i.e.,
the potential malicious users. We revise the objective function of the discriminator in the regular GAN to achieve oneclass classification. The discriminator is trained to separate
benign users and complementary samples. Since the behaviors of malicious users and that of benign users are complementary, we expect the discriminator can distinguish benign users and malicious users. By combining the encoder
of LSTM-Autoencoder and the discriminator of the complementary GAN, OCAN can accurately predict whether a new
user is benign or malicious based on his online activities.
The advantages of OCAN for fraud detection are as follows. First, since OCAN does not require any information
about malicious users, we do not need to manually compose a mixed training dataset, thus more adaptive to different types of malicious user identification tasks. Second, different from existing one-class classification models, OCAN
generates complementary samples of benign users and trains
the discriminator to separate complementary samples from
benign users, enabling the trained discriminator to better

Many online applications, such as online social networks
or knowledge bases, are often attacked by malicious users
who commit different types of actions such as vandalism on
Wikipedia or fraudulent reviews on eBay. Currently, most of
the fraud detection approaches require a training dataset that
contains records of both benign and malicious users. However, in practice, there are often no or very few records of
malicious users. In this paper, we develop one-class adversarial nets (OCAN) for fraud detection with only benign users as
training data. OCAN first uses LSTM-Autoencoder to learn
the representations of benign users from their sequences of
online activities. It then detects malicious users by training
a discriminator of a complementary GAN model that is different from the regular GAN model. Experimental results
show that our OCAN outperforms the state-of-the-art oneclass classification models and achieves comparable performance with the latest multi-source LSTM model that requires
both benign and malicious users in the training phase.

Introduction
Online platforms such as online social networks (OSNs) and
knowledge bases play a major role in online communication and knowledge sharing. However, there are various malicious users who conduct various fraudulent actions, such
as spams, rumors, and vandalism, imposing severe security
threats to OSNs and their legitimate participants. To protect
legitimate users, most Web platforms have tools or mechanisms to block malicious users. For example, Wikipedia
adopts ClueBot NG 1 to detect and revert obvious bad edits,
thus helping administrators to identify and block vandals.
Detecting malicious users has also attracted increasing
attention in the research community (Cheng et al. 2017;
Kumar et al. 2017; Yuan et al. 2017a; Kumar, Spezzano, and
Subrahmanian 2015; Yuan et al. 2017b). However, these detection models are trained over a training dataset that consists of both positive data (benign users) and negative data
(malicious users). In practice, there are often no or very few
records from malicious users in the collected training data.
Manually labeling a large number of malicious users is tedious.
∗
Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:ClueBot\ NG

1286

