The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Recommender Systems: A Healthy Obsession
Barry Smyth
Insight Centre for Data Analytics,
University College Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland
barry.smyth@ucd.ie

Abstract

everyday lives can be recorded and analysed to better understand our activity patterns. This provides a near constant supply of rich data about our habits and routines.

We propose endurance sports as a rich and novel domain
for recommender systems and machine learning research. As
sports like marathon running, triathlons, and mountain biking
become more and more popular among recreational athletes,
there exists a growing opportunity to develop solutions to a
number of interesting prediction, classification, and recommendation challenges, to better support the complex training
and competition needs of athletes. Such solutions have the
potential to improve the health and well-being of large populations of users, by promoting and optimising exercise as part
of a productive and healthy lifestyle.

2. It is an inconventient truth about human evolution that our
bodies are adapted for the type of physical activity that
is associated with hunter-gatherer lifestyles, rather than
the sedentary habits enabled by modern society. This is
taking its toll in the developed world, with the emergence
of common disease states (obesity, diabetes, osteoporisis
etc.) that appear to arise, in large part, because our bodies
are maladapted for modern society.
3. As people are becoming better informed about the importance of an active lifestyle, they are seeking out new ways
to be more active, become fitter, and stay healthy, often
looking to mobile apps as key tools in this quest.

Introduction
Recommender systems learn about the preferences and
needs of users in order to deliver more personalised online experiences. Techniques such as collaborative filtering
and content-based recommendation harness ratings, metadata, and other forms of content, to make suggestions to
users based on their stated, or inferred, likes and dislikes;
see (Ricci, Rokach, and Shapira 2015; Bridge et al. 2005;
Smyth 2007; Burke 2002). Such techniques have proven to
be particularly successful in many e-commerce and entertainment settings, so much so that today recommender systems are increasingly influencing the books we read, the music we listen to, and the movies we watch.
We can usefully view the above as the first generation of
recommender systems. As for the next generation, the central message in this paper is that this will see the emergence
of a new type of recommender system, one that will reach
beyond the online world of movies and music, and into the
‘real-world’ of how we work, rest, and play. In particular, we
highlight an important opportunity when it comes to helping
people to live healthier lives. Of course there is a long history of AI and machine learning in classical medicine and
healthcare (Peek et al. 2015), but in this work we focus instead on ways to promote and support physical activity and
exercise, as a vital part of staying healthy well into old age.
This is motivated by a coincidence of factors:

With this in mind, we will present the case for recommender systems as a way to nudge people towards healthier lifestyles. We will argue that they are particularily well
suited to popular endurance sports, while calling out a variety of interesting and novel recommendation tasks that will
be familiar to many runners, cyclists, and triatheletes.

Escaping the Exercise Trap
In our always-on, connected world almost everything we do
generates a data record that is stored somewhere (Campbell
et al. 2008). While this brings its own set of issues, especially when it comes to safe-guarding the privacy rights of
individuals, it also affords new opportunities when it comes
to better understanding, at scale, how people live, work, and
play (Mayer-Schönberger and Cukier 2013; Rooksby et al.
2014). And this has important implications for modern society, from transport and energy policy, to healthcare and
security, and many more besides.

Small Sensors & Big Data
Recently, there has been an explosion in the number of apps,
sensors, and devices that are concerned with collecting, analyising, and communicating our personal health and activity
data. Indeed it is now unusual to see people exercising without some evidence that they are recording their activities,
whether via a mobile phone strapped to their arm, the latest

1. The ubiquity of always-on, fully-connected, locationaware, mobile devices means that many aspects of our
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9790

