The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Counterfactual Reasoning in Observational Studies
Negar Hassanpour
University of Alberta, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
hassanpo@ualberta.ca

Introduction
To identify the appropriate action to take, an intelligent
agent must infer the causal effects of every possible action
choices. A prominent example is precision medicine, that
attempts to identify which medical procedure (t ∈ T )
will benefit each individual patient (x) the most. This requires answering counterfactual questions (Rubin 1974;
Pearl 2009) such as: “Would this patient have lived longer,
had she received an alternative treatment?”. There are several reasons why this is more challenging than conventional
supervised machine learning:
First, for the ith patient, the training data only contains
the observed outcome yiti of the administered treatment
ti but never the outcome(s) of the alternative treatment(s)
¬ti ∈ T \ {ti } – i.e., counterfactual outcome(s). This
challenge can be mitigated if we are allowed to perform
experimentation (on-line exploration), or have access to a
randomized controlled trial (RCT) dataset (Pearl 2009). In
many cases, however, conducting an experiment or RCT is
expensive, impractical, or even infeasible. As a result, we
are forced to approximate causal effects from data that is
available: off-line datasets collected through observational
studies. Such datasets, however, often exhibit sample selection bias (Imbens and Rubin 2015). That is, the treatment t
assignment procedure depends on some or all of the attributes
x of the individual – i.e., Pr( t | x ) 6= Pr( t ). This becomes
detrimental to the accuracy and confidence of counterfactuals
prediction when the same covariates that determine treatment
also [partially] determine the outcome y. Existence of such
confounders is the second challenge with causal inference.
There are two categories of performance measures for evaluating causal inference methods. Population-based measures
help find the one treatment that works [somewhat] well for
the entire population. Individual-based measures, in contrast,
focus on identifying the best treatment option personalized to
each individual x. An example of individual-based measure –
that requires estimating outcomes of all possible treatments
– is Precision in q
Estimation of Heterogeneous Effect (Hill
Pn
2
2011): PEHE = n1 i=1 (ei − êi ) , where ei = yi1 − yi0
is the true Individual Treatment Effect (ITE) for individual i,
êi = ŷi1 − ŷi0 is the estimated ITE, and n is the sample size.

Figure 1: An example observational dataset (best viewed
in color). Here, to treat heart disease, a doctor prescribes
surgery (t = 1) to younger patients (•) and medication (t = 0)
to older ones (+) – hence we have sample selection bias.
The unobservable counterfactuals are illustrated by small and
faint • (for ¬t = 1) and + (for ¬t = 0).

Research Questions
In my PhD, I will explore ways to address the abovementioned challenges associated with causal effect estimation; with a focus on devising methods that enhance performance according to the individual-based measures. Specifically, my Research Questions (RQs) are the following:
1. The first challenge makes it impossible to properly evaluate the proposed methods with real-world observational
datasets, since the ground truth for counterfactuals are in
fact unobservable. Therefore, we require algorithms that
can generate realistic synthetic observational datasets that
exhibit various degrees of sample selection bias.
The remaining RQs are related to the second challenge:
2. Learning a representation space (Bengio et al. 2013) Φ,
shared between treatment arms, is a good strategy to reduce sample selection bias. This is effective if distributions
of the transformed instances Φ( x ) belonging to every
treatment arm are similar – making the dataset close to an
RCT. Reasonably, it should be possible to further alleviate
the bias by incorporating appropriate weighting schemes.
3. Employ generative models to create new virtual samples
that can fill in the gap in order to help better predicting

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9886

