The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Neural Network Approach to Verb Phrase Ellipsis Resolution
Wei-Nan Zhang,1 Yue Zhang,2 Yuanxing Liu,1 Donglin Di,1 Ting Liu1
1

Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
School of Engineering, Westlake University

Abstract
wsj_0018 (line 5, ant vped):

Verb Phrase Ellipsis (VPE) is a linguistic phenomenon, where
some verb phrases as syntactic constituents are omitted and
typically referred by an auxiliary verb. It is ubiquitous in both
formal and informal text, such as news articles and dialogues.
Previous work on VPE resolution mainly focused on manually constructing features extracted from auxiliary verbs, syntactic trees, etc. However, the optimization of feature representation, the effectiveness of continuous features and the automatic composition of features are not well addressed. In this
paper, we explore the advantages of neural models on VPE
resolution in both pipeline and end-to-end processes, comparing the differences between statistical and neural models. Two
neural models, namely multi-layer perception and the Transformer, are employed for the subtasks of VPE detection and
resolution. Experimental results show that the neural models
outperform the state-of-the-art baselines in both subtasks and
the end-to-end results.

Raw Sentence

Not only is development of the new company's initial
machine tied directly to Mr. Cray, so is its balance sheet.

VPE Detection

Not only is development of the new company's initial
machine tied directly to Mr. Cray, so is its balance sheet.

VPE Resolution

Not only is development of the new company's initial
machine [tied directly to Mr. Cray], so is its balance sheet.

Detected Trigger

Identified Antecedent

Figure 1: An example of VPE resolution process, where “is”
and the VP in square bracket “tied directly to Mr. Cray”
denote the trigger and antecedent of VPE, respectively.
Cheung, and Precup 2016). Previous work on VPE resolution has addressed the sub-tasks of VPE detection (Hardt
1992; 1997; Hobbs and Kehler 1997; Nielsen 2003b; 2004a;
2004b) and VPE resolution (Hardt 1998; Nielsen 2003a;
2005; Bos 2005) separately, pipeline processing of VPE
detection and VPE resolution (Bos and Spenader 2011;
Bos 2012; Kawai 2013; Liu, Pellicer, and Gillick 2016;
Bakhshandeh, Wellwood, and Allen 2016), and end-to-end
modeling of the two steps (Kenyon-Dean, Cheung, and Precup 2016; McShane and Babkin 2016). Most existing work
uses heuristic rules, manually constructed features extracted
from auxiliaries and syntactic structures, and linguistic theories such as Discourse Representation Structure (DRS) (Bos
2012), Simple Parallel Configuration (SPC) (McShane and
Babkin 2016), etc1 . Despite the success of existing work,
heuristic rules and manual features are sparse and cannot
fully explored deep semantic information across a sentence.
Such limitations can potentially be addressed by using neural network models (Collobert and Weston 2008).
In this paper, we explore neural network models for VPE
resolution in both pipeline and end-to-end processes, comparing statistical models and neural models while investigating novel lexical and slot pattern features. For VPE detection, we choose an SVM model with non-linear kernel func-

Introduction
Ellipsis is a linguistic phenomenon where some syntactic
constituents are omitted but can be reconstructed from context. One type of ellipsis, Verb Phrase Ellipsis (VPE), denotes the omission of verb phrases. In English, a VPE is usually associated with an auxiliary verb without a verb phrase.
For example, in the sentence “Not only is development of
the new company’s initial machine tied directly to Mr. Cray,
so is its balanced sheet.”, the verb phrase “tied directly to
Mr. Cray” is omitted for “its balanced sheet” with the auxiliary verb “is” being given. In the above instance, the auxiliary verb is usually called a trigger and the omitted verb
phrase the antecedent. Given a sentence, there are two NLP
tasks associated with VPE, namely VPE detection, which
is to detect a trigger verb, and VPE resolution, which is
to identify the antecedent of a given trigger (Hardt 1992;
Nielsen 2003b; 2005; Van Craenenbroeck 2017). Figure 1
shows an example VPE resolution process.
VPE occurs frequently in both formal and informal texts,
such as news articles and dialogues (Nielsen 2005). Thus resolving VPE is important for downstream NLP tasks such
as event extraction, dialogue systems, etc (Kenyon-Dean,

1

Here, DRS and SPC are proposed based on the discourse representation theory (Kamp, Reyle, and others 1993) and parallelism
theory (Hobbs and Kehler 1997), respectively.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7468

