The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Lipper: Speaker Independent Speech Synthesis Using Multi-View Lipreading
Khwaja Mohd. Salik

Yaman Kumar

Rohit Jain

MIDAS Lab, NSUT-Delhi
khwajam.co@nsit.net.in

MIDAS Lab, IIIT-Delhi
yaman@nsitonline.in

MIDAS Lab, NSUT-Delhi
rohitj.co@nsit.net.in

Swati Aggarwal

Rajiv Ratn Shah

Roger Zimmermann

NSUT-Delhi
swati@nsit.ac.in

MIDAS Lab, IIIT-Delhi
rajivratn@iiitd.ac.in

NUS, Singapore
rogerz@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

output and language and vocabulary dependency. Speechreconstruction systems are not marred by these since they
map lip movements directly to sound.
Lipper, to the best of our knowledge, is the first system to attempt speaker independent multi-view speech
reconstruction. Both speech reconstruction using lipreading and multi-view lipreading have not seen much research.
There have been only three deep learning based previous
works which have leveraged multiple views to build lipreading based speechreading (and not speech reconstruction)
models (Petridis et al. 2017; Zimmermann et al. 2016;
Lee, Lee, and Kim 2016). These systems being speechreading systems, suffer from all the constraints of a speechreading system as pointed out above. Moreover, few authors
have worked on speech reconstruction systems (Ephrat and
Peleg 2017; Cornu and Milner 2015; Kumar et al. 2018a;
2018b) and the major limitations with these models were,
neither did they work for speaker-independent settings nor
did they utilize multiple views. Due to these shortcomings,
they effectively ignored the pose problem with real-world
visual feeds. We address that problem and also produce the
results on all speakers without re-training the model from
scratch for every new speaker we have to use it for. For the
complete results and explanation of the model, readers are
encouraged to refer to (Kumar et al. 2019).

Lipreading is the process of understanding and interpreting
speech by observing a speaker’s lip movements. In the past,
most of the work in lipreading has been limited to classifying
silent videos to a fixed number of text classes. However, this
limits the applications of the lipreading since human language
cannot be bound to a fixed set of words or languages. The aim
of this work is to reconstruct intelligible acoustic speech signals from silent videos from various poses of a person which
Lipper has never seen before. Lipper, therefore is a vocabulary and language agnostic, speaker independent and a
near real-time model that deals with a variety of poses of a
speaker. The model leverages silent video feeds from multiple cameras recording a subject to generate intelligent speech
of a speaker. It uses a deep learning based STCNN+BiGRU
architecture to achieve this goal. We evaluate speech reconstruction for speaker independent scenarios and demonstrate
the speech output by overlaying the audios reconstructed by
Lipper on the corresponding videos.

Introduction
Lipreading is the process of understanding and interpreting
speech by observing a speaker’s lip movements. Lipper is a
multi-view speech reconstruction model unlike most of the
work in this field in the past which deal with classifying
speech videos into restricted text classes. It is easy to get
confused between speech reconstruction, recognition and
reading systems. Speech recognition systems help in identification of the speaker of a speech. Speech-reading systems involve identifying what a person says. The ‘what’
part in these classification models is given by text-class
of the video. Speech-reconstruction systems generate the
speech of a person. They deal with the problem by considering it as a regression and not a classification problem.
Speech-reconstruction normally does not identify speech but
just reconstructs it. The reason for this is that speech can
be produced even for those sounds for which one may not
have any vocabulary in a particular language (e.g, a Television plays the sounds in a show without knowing the language or vocabulary). Due to these reasons, speechreading
models suffer from the following limitations: non-real time

Lipper: Design and Development
Lipper uses deep learning based neural network model for
speech reconstruction. We build STCNN+BiGRU (SpatioTemporal CNN in conjugation with Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Units) architecture (as shown in Figure 1) to utilize multiple visual feeds of different views to finally reconstruct the speech of a speaker. While STCNN layers help
the system to extract visual features, BiGRU layers help it
to take care of the time dependencies in the speech videos.
The architecture is composed of seven layers of STCNN followed by two layers of Bi-GRU layers whose output is subsequently fed to a dense layer that produces the final output.
Audio Features: Raw audio wave cannot be used for
training of the model due to a lack of suitable loss function.
Lipper uses Linear Predictive Coding (LPC) for representing
the audio speech (Fant 2012). LPC is a technique to represent the compressed spectral envelope of speech using a linear predictive model. It produces high-quality speech using

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10023

