The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Data-Adaptive Metric Learning with Scale Alignment
Shuo Chen,† Chen Gong,† Jian Yang,†∗ Ying Tai,‡ Le Hui,† Jun Li†
†

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and System for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
†
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Undersatanding for Social Security
†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
‡
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{shuochen, chen.gong, csjyang, le.hui}@njust.edu.cn, yingtai@tencent.com, junl.mldl@gmail.com
Abstract

Projection
( x , x' )

The central problem for most existing metric learning methods is to find a suitable projection matrix on the differences of
all pairs of data points. However, a single unified projection
matrix can hardly characterize all data similarities accurately
as the practical data are usually very complicated, and simply
adopting one global projection matrix might ignore important local patterns hidden in the dataset. To address this issue,
this paper proposes a novel method dubbed “Data-Adaptive
Metric Learning” (DAML), which constructs a data-adaptive
projection matrix for each data pair by selectively combining
a set of learned candidate matrices. As a result, every data pair
can obtain a specific projection matrix, enabling the proposed
DAML to flexibly fit the training data and produce discriminative projection results. The model of DAML is formulated
as an optimization problem which jointly learns candidate
projection matrices and their sparse combination for every
data pair. Nevertheless, the over-fitting problem may occur
due to the large amount of parameters to be learned. To tackle
this issue, we adopt the Total Variation (TV) regularizer to
align the scales of data embedding produced by all candidate
projection matrices, and thus the generated metrics of these
learned candidates are generally comparable. Furthermore,
we extend the basic linear DAML model to the kernerlized
version (denoted “KDAML”) to handle the non-linear cases,
and the Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm (ISTA)
is employed to solve the optimization model. Intensive experimental results on various applications including retrieval,
classification, and verification clearly demonstrate the superiority of our algorithm to other state-of-the-art metric learning
methodologies.

Distance Result

෡ ‫ א‬ௗൈ௥
P

෡࢞ െ P
෡࢞Ԣ
P

෡
Learning Projection Matrix P

ଶ
ଶ

(a). Framework of Traditional Metric Learning.
Projection
( x , x' )

P(w) ‫ א‬ௗൈ௥

Distance Result

Combining The Selected Matrices

Selecting
Matrices
by using w

w

P::0,P::1,…,P::c

Projection Matrix:

P(w)࢞ െ P(w)࢞Ԣ

ଶ
ଶ

Learning w and
P::0, P::1, …, P::c

P(w)=P::0 + λ∑k=1wkP::k

(b). Framework of Our Proposed DAML.

Figure 1: The comparison of traditional metric learning and
our proposed model. (a) The traditional method learns a sinb to distinguish the similarity
gle global projection matrix P
of (x, x0 ). (b) Our proposed DAML jointly learns multiple
projection matrices P ::0 , P ::1 , · · · , P ::c and their weight
vector w ∈ Rc for each data pair (x, x0 ).
c (x−
halanobis distance function DPb (x, x0 ) = (x−x0 )> M
0 1
0
b can
x ) for all data pairs (x, x ) (see Fig. 1(a)), where P
be understood as a projection matrix. The detailed implementations can be linear projection (Harandi, Salzmann, and
Hartley 2017) or non-linear deep neural networks (DNN)
(Oh Song et al. 2016). The primitive linear works utilized
the supervised information (e.g. must-link and cannot-link)
to control the learned distance during their training phases,
such as Distance Metric Learning for Clustering (Xing et
al. 2003), Large Margin Nearest Neighbor (LMNN) (Weinberger, Blitzer, and Saul 2006), and Information-Theoretic
Metric Learning (ITML) (Davis et al. 2007). To enhance the
fitting performance and effectively discover the structure for
more complicated data, some recent non-linear methods including Projection Metric Learning on Grassmann Manifold
(Huang et al. 2015) and Geometric Mean Metric Learning
(GMML) (Zadeh, Hosseini, and Sra 2016) are proposed to
c and P
b on a manifold instead of the
learn the matrices M
original linear space. Moreover, by adaptively enriching the

Introduction
Metric learning aims to learn a distance function for data
pairs to faithfully measure their similarities. It has played
an important role in many pattern recognition applications, such as face verification (Liu et al. 2018), person reidentification (Si et al. 2018), and image retrieval (Zhan et
al. 2009; Liu, Tsang, and Müller 2017).
The well-studied metric learning models are usually
global, which means that they directly learn a single semic =P
b >P
b to decide a Mapositive definite (SPD) matrix M
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
For simplicity, the notation of “square” on DPb (x, x0 ) has
been omitted and it will not influence the final output.

3347

