The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Discriminative Feature Learning for Unsupervised Video Summarization
Yunjae Jung, Donghyeon Cho, Dahun Kim, Sanghyun Woo, In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Korea
{yun9298a, cdh12242}@gmail.com, {mcahny, shwoo93, iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

truth labels that represent importance scores of each frame
to train deep neural networks. Since human-annotated data
is used, semantic features are faithfully learned. However,
labeling for many video frames is expensive, and overfitting
problems frequently occur when there is insufficient label
data. These limitations can be mitigated by using the unsupervised learning method as in (Mahasseni, Lam, and Todorovic 2017; Zhou and Qiao 2018). However, since there is no
human labeling in this method, a method for supervising the
network needs to be appropriately designed.
Our baseline method (Mahasseni, Lam, and Todorovic 2017) uses a variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma
and Welling 2013) and generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) to learn video summarization without human labels. The key idea is that a good
summary should reconstruct original video seamlessly. Features of each input frame obtained by convolutional neural network (CNN) are multiplied with predicted importance
scores. Then, these features are passed to a generator to restore the original features. The discriminator is trained to
distinguish between the generated (restored) features and the
original ones.
Although it is fair to say that a good summary can represent and restore original video well, original features can
also be restored well with uniformly distributed frame level
importance scores. This trivial solution leads to difficulties
in learning discriminative features to find key-shots. Our approach works to overcome this problem. When output scores
become more flattened, the variance of the scores tremendously decreases. From this mathematically obvious fact, we
propose a simple yet powerful way to increase the variance
of the scores. Variance loss is simply defined as a reciprocal
of variance of the predicted scores.
In addition, to learn more discriminative features, we
propose Chunk and Stride Network (CSNet) that simultaneously utilizes local (chunk) and global (stride) temporal
views on the video. CSNet splits input features of a video
into two streams (chunk and stride), then passes both split
features to bidirectional long short-term memory (LSTM)
and merges them back to estimate the final scores. Using
chunk and stride, the difficulty of feature learning for longlength videos is overcome.
Finally, we develop an attention mechanism to capture
dynamic scene transitions, which are highly related to key-

In this paper, we address the problem of unsupervised video
summarization that automatically extracts key-shots from an
input video. Specifically, we tackle two critical issues based
on our empirical observations: (i) Ineffective feature learning
due to flat distributions of output importance scores for each
frame, and (ii) training difficulty when dealing with longlength video inputs. To alleviate the first problem, we propose
a simple yet effective regularization loss term called variance
loss. The proposed variance loss allows a network to predict
output scores for each frame with high discrepancy which
enables effective feature learning and significantly improves
model performance. For the second problem, we design a
novel two-stream network named Chunk and Stride Network
(CSNet) that utilizes local (chunk) and global (stride) temporal view on the video features. Our CSNet gives better
summarization results for long-length videos compared to
the existing methods. In addition, we introduce an attention
mechanism to handle the dynamic information in videos. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods by
conducting extensive ablation studies and show that our final
model achieves new state-of-the-art results on two benchmark
datasets.

Introduction
Video has become a highly significant form of visual data,
and the amount of video content uploaded to various online platforms has increased dramatically in recent years.
In this regard, efficient ways of handling video have become increasingly important. One popular solution is to
summarize videos into shorter ones without missing semantically important frames. Over the past few decades,
many studies (Song et al. 2015; Ngo, Ma, and Zhang 2003;
Lu and Grauman 2013; Kim and Xing 2014; Khosla et
al. 2013) have attempted to solve this problem. Recently,
Zhang et al. showed promising results using deep neural networks, and a lot of follow-up work has been conducted in areas of supervised (Zhang et al. 2016a; 2016b;
Zhao, Li, and Lu 2017; 2018; Wei et al. 2018) and unsupervised learning (Mahasseni, Lam, and Todorovic 2017;
Zhou and Qiao 2018).
Supervised learning methods (Zhang et al. 2016a; 2016b;
Zhao, Li, and Lu 2017; 2018; Wei et al. 2018) utilize ground
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8537

