The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MaMiC: Macro and Micro
Curriculum for Robotic Reinforcement Learning
Manan Tomar, Akhil Sathuluri, Balaraman Ravindran
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 600036, India, +91-9899687343
manan.tomar@gmail.com, akhilsathuluri@gmail.com, ravi@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract

curriculum helps in identifying such a sequence and allows
the micro scheme to learn in between important subgoals
of such a sequence. The policy starts from a sub-goal and
proceeds to the next sub-goal, evolving in the process,
ultimately reaching the desired goal. Two ideas are
at the core of this technique, of being able to discover the
subgoals and of learning between the recognized sub-goals.
Moreover, the Q function Q(s, a, g) and the policy π(st , gt )
are explicitly parametrized by the goal in order to aid
learning in sparse reward settings.

Generating a curriculum for guided learning involves subjecting the agent to easier goals first, and then gradually increasing their difficulty. This work takes a similar direction and
proposes a dual curriculum scheme for solving robotic manipulation tasks with sparse rewards, called MaMiC. It includes a macro curriculum scheme which divides the task into
multiple subtasks followed by a micro curriculum scheme
which enables the agent to learn between such discovered
subtasks. We show how combining macro and micro curriculum strategies help in overcoming major exploratory constraints considered in robot manipulation tasks without having to engineer any complex rewards and also illustrate the
meaning and usage of the individual curricula. The performance of such a scheme is analysed on the Fetch environments.

Micro Curriculum
A micro curriculum tries to alleviate the above mentioned
assumption of being able to start some trajectories from
favourable states. We believe that starting at a particular state
should be based on the environment’s choice but not the
agent’s. We propose replacing all or some transition sample goals with micro goals, which are artificially generated, using any generative modelling technique. Using an
off policy RL algorithm allows us to replace sampled transition goals from the buffer with micro goals during
learning. The goals are generated such that they are initially
close to the achieved states at the end of each trajectory (i.e.
the achieved goal distribution) and slowly shift to being closer to the actual or desired goal distribution of
the task in hand. Since this procedure involves learning a
mapping between goals and actions, eventually the agent is
able to generalize well for the actual goal distribution. We
relate this with curriculum learning because the agent initially learns for a goal distribution much simpler to learn
i.e. the achieved goal distribution and then continues
learning for increasingly difficult goals, leveraging the previously learned skills. To train the goal generator, we modify the formulation used by (Held et al. 2017), by incorporating an additional parameter α  [0, 1] which governs the
resemblance of the generated distribution to the achieved
goal distribution and the actual or desired goal distribution. α = 0 forces the generator to produce goals similar
to the currently achieved states, while α = 1 produces goals
similar to the actual distribution. The exact objective function is given below.

Introduction
Starting to learn for simpler tasks and then using the acquired knowledge to learn progressively harder tasks is a
natural outcome of formulating a curriculum. Recently, curriculum learning has been used to solve complex robotic
tasks such as in (Florensa et al. 2017), (Nair et al. 2017).
However, these approaches make the assumption that the
agent can be reset to any desired state, and also make use
of expert state action trajectories (Nair et al. 2017), which
are expensive to generate.
The proposed approach, MaMiC, introduces two
schemes, macro and micro curriculum, which can be
applied either individually or in combination. A micro
curriculum essentially generates increasingly complex
goals for the agent to achieve. For example, in learning to
push a block, initial goals will be generated very near to
the block and then slowly shifted to the desired location.
However, such a scheme is not sufficient if we need to solve
tasks which are more complex, such as ones which require
the agent to execute particular sequences of temporally
extended actions or sub policies. In order to put an object
in a drawer, it is not enough to guide the agent in learning
to put the object to the desired location, but also to open
the drawer first. It is only when a particular sequence is
followed that we refer to the task as completed. A macro

minD V (D) = Eg∼pdata (g) [(1 − α) (D(gachieved ) − 1)2 +

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

α (D(gdesired ) − 1)2 ] + Ez∼pz (z) [D(G(z))2 ]

10053

