The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Coreset Stochastic Variance-Reduced Gradient with
Application to Optimal Margin Distribution Machine
Zhi-Hao Tan, Teng Zhang, Wei Wang
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023, China
{tanzh, zhangt, wangw}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

putation time and memory storage, which is prohibitive for
large-scale datasets.
Alleviating this issue has motivated a variety of practical approaches, including random Fourier feature methods (Rahimi and Recht 2008; 2009; Le, Sarlós, and Smola
2013), the Nyström methods (Williams and Seeger 2001;
Drineas and Mahoney 2005; Zhang, Tsang, and Kwok 2008;
Gittens and Mahoney 2016), and coreset approximation
methods (Tsang, Kwok, and Cheung 2005; Tsang, Kwok,
and Zurada 2006; Loosli and Canu 2007; Asharaf, Murty,
and Shevade 2007; Le et al. 2017), etc. RFF aims to approximate the shift-invariant kernel function through orthogonal
trigonometric function family. However, this devised kernel
mapping is data-independent, which leads to poorer generalization performance than the Nyström method (Yang et al.
2012). On the other hand, the Nyström method focuses on
constructing a low-rank approximation kernel matrix using a
subset of examples. In the classic variants, since these points
are randomly selected without considering their position or
importance, it may destroy the spectral structure of the kernel matrix and result in unstable performance.
Coreset approximation is a method originated in computational geometry. The basic idea is to use core points to
approximate the shape of all samples. It could significantly
reduce the size of kernel matrix in kernel method, especially
in kernel SVM. Notable works include the Core Vector Machine (CVM) (Tsang, Kwok, and Cheung 2005), the Ball
Vector Machine (BVM) (Tsang, Kocsor, and Kwok 2007)
and the Approximation Vector Machine (AVM) (Le et al.
2017). The main idea of CVM is to reformulate SVM as a
minimum enclosing ball (MEB) problem and obtain the approximation solution of the MEB using the coreset-based
algorithm in computational geometry (Bădoiu and Clarkson
2008). However, the state-of-the-art coreset-based kernel
machine, AVM (Le et al. 2017), solves the primal problem
directly and utilizes an online way to construct coreset with
overlapping hyperballs. Moreover, the AVM uses core points
to approximate all gradients required in SGDP
and easily obr
tains a sparse model in the form of ŵ =
i=1 σi φ(ci ),
where r is the coreset size and satisfies r  m. Despite
using approximated sparse gradients, Le et al. (2017) prove
that the AVM has a convergence rate of O(1/T ), and the
gap between the approximated and optimal solutions can be
controlled by the diameter of hyperballs. However, the SGD

A major problem for kernel-based predictors is the prohibitive computational complexity, which limits their application in large-scale datasets. Coreset, an approximation
method which tries to cover the given examples with a small
set of points, can be used to remain the prominent information and accelerate the kernel method. In this paper, we provide perhaps the first coreset-based kernel-accelerating optimization method that has a linear convergence rate, which
is much faster than existing approaches. Our method can be
used to train kernel SVM-style problems and obtain sparse
solutions efficiently. Specifically, the method uses SVRG as
the framework, and utilizes the core points to approximate the
gradients, so it can significantly reduce the complexity of the
kernel method. Furthermore, we apply the method to train
ODM, a kernel machine enjoying better statistical property
than SVM, so that we can reduce the risk of compromising
the performance while encouraging the sparsity. We conduct
extensive experiments on several large-scale datasets and the
results verify that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art
coreset approximation method in both efficiency and generalization, while simultaneously achieving significant speed-up
compared to non-approximation baselines.

Introduction
The kernel method provides a powerful and unified framework for applying linear methods to general learning problems. The key idea is to map data to a higher dimensional
kernel feature space, where linear relationships correspond
to nonlinear relationships in the original data. In the past
decades, quite a lot of kernel methods have been developed,
among which the representatives are kernel SVMs (Cortes
and Vapnik 1995), kernel regression (Smola and Schölkopf
2004), kernel PCA (Schölkopf, Smola, and Müller 1998),
Gaussian process (Rasmussen 2004), and so on.
Given m data points x1 , . . . , xm , the m × m kernel matrix K is formed where Kij is the inner product between
φ(xi ) and φ(xj ) in the high-dimensional space, computed
by the kernel function k(·, ·). Then all inner product required
by linear methods are performed by the kernel matrix K.
Unfortunately, the kernel method brings huge cost. Specifically, just generating the entries of K requires Θ(m2 ) comCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5083

