The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

DEFSI: Deep Learning Based Epidemic Forecasting with Synthetic Information
Lijing Wang,1 Jiangzhuo Chen,2 Madhav Marathe2,3
1

2

Computer Science, Virginia Tech
Biocomplexity Institute & Initiative, University of Virginia
3
Computer Science, University of Virginia
lijingw9@vt.edu,{chenj,marathe}@virginia.edu

Abstract

tion as the surveillance data; and high-resolution forecasting to denote the forecasting with a higher geographical resolution than provided in surveillance data. To be concrete,
in this paper flat-resolution means state level while highresolution means county level, since the highest resolution
CDC surveillance data is at state level.
A challenge in high-resolution disease forecasting is
the lack of surveillance data at a finer spatial scale. The
data driven methods suffer from this limitation, including statistical methods such as ARIMA (Benjamin, Rigby,
and Stasinopoulos 2003), ARGO (Yang, Santillana, and
Kou 2015; Yang et al. 2017) and artificial neural networks (ANN) methods such as Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM) (Volkova et al. 2017; Venna et al. 2017; Wu et al.
2018). Even for a few states where county level surveillance
data is available, training ANN methods for them is difficult due to the small size of the data. Causal methods have
recently been introduced to enable high-resolution forecasting (Yang, Karspeck, and Shaman 2014; Nsoesie et al. 2013;
Zhao et al. 2015). They estimate the parameters of the underlying disease model from the surveillance data. Then ILI
incidence prediction is made from the output of simulations
using the identified disease model. Calibrating these models
is challenging due to the high dimensionality of the parameter space.
Another challenge to the epidemic forecasting domain is
the generalization and physical consistency of data driven
models due to the paucity of representative samples in nature. Meanwhile it is difficult for causal models to represent complex processes that are not conceptually well understood using known scientific knowledge. This motivates our
work to address the shortcomings of data driven and causal
models by using synthetic data generated by epidemiological theories in conjunction with observed data to improve
epidemic forecasts. In a recent independent effort, Karpatne
et al. (Karpatne et al. 2017) formally conceptualized the
paradigm of theory-guided data science (TGDS) that seeks
to exploit the promise of data science without ignoring the
treasure of knowledge accumulated in scientific principles.
Our work starts from a similar perspective but is different in
that multi-agent models enable high-resolution forecasting
and better generalizability of our models. This is important
due to behavioral uncertainty of a social technical system.
To address the above challenges, we propose a novel epi-

Influenza-like illness (ILI) is among the most common diseases worldwide. Producing timely, well-informed, and reliable forecasts for ILI is crucial for preparedness and optimal
interventions. In this work, we focus on short-term but highresolution forecasting and propose DEFSI (Deep Learning
Based Epidemic Forecasting with Synthetic Information), an
epidemic forecasting framework that integrates the strengths
of artificial neural networks and causal methods. In DEFSI,
we build a two-branch neural network structure to take both
within-season observations and between-season observations
as features. The model is trained on geographically highresolution synthetic data. It enables detailed forecasting when
high-resolution surveillance data is not available. Furthermore, the model is provided with better generalizability and
physical consistency. Our method achieves comparable/better
performance than state-of-the-art methods for short-term ILI
forecasting at the state level. For high-resolution forecasting
at the county level, DEFSI significantly outperforms the other
methods.

Introduction
Influenza-like illness (ILI) poses a serious threat to global
public health. Worldwide seasonal influenza causes three to
five million cases of severe illness and 290,000 to 650,000
deaths annually. Traditionally, ILI surveillance data from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has been
used as reference data to predict future ILI incidence. The
surveillance data is provided with a coarse resolution and
is usually updated regularly. For example, in the USA it
has been provided previously at HHS region level and recently at state level. Considering the heterogeneity between
different subregion locations and populations, accurate predictions with a finer resolution, e.g. at county level in the
USA, is crucial for local public health decision making, optimal mitigation resource allocation among subregions, as
well as household or individual level preventive actions informed by neighboring prevalence. We focus on the problem
of high-resolution ILI incidence forecasting based on ILI
surveillance data of coarse resolution.
In this paper we use flat-resolution forecasting to denote the forecasting of ILI incidence with the same resoluCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9607

