The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Temporal Deformable Convolutional
Encoder-Decoder Networks for Video Captioning∗
Jingwen Chen,1 Yingwei Pan,2 Yehao Li,1 Ting Yao,2 Hongyang Chao,1,3 Tao Mei2
1

Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
3
The Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University),
Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, China
{chenjingwen.sysu, panyw.ustc, yehaoli.sysu, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, isschhy@mail.sysu.edu.cn, tmei@live.com
Abstract
It is well believed that video captioning is a fundamental
but challenging task in both computer vision and artificial
intelligence fields. The prevalent approach is to map an input video to a variable-length output sentence in a sequence
to sequence manner via Recurrent Neural Network (RNN).
Nevertheless, the training of RNN still suffers to some degree from vanishing/exploding gradient problem, making the
optimization difficult. Moreover, the inherently recurrent dependency in RNN prevents parallelization within a sequence
during training and therefore limits the computations. In this
paper, we present a novel design — Temporal Deformable
Convolutional Encoder-Decoder Networks (dubbed as TDConvED) that fully employ convolutions in both encoder and
decoder networks for video captioning. Technically, we exploit convolutional block structures that compute intermediate states of a fixed number of inputs and stack several
blocks to capture long-term relationships. The structure in encoder is further equipped with temporal deformable convolution to enable free-form deformation of temporal sampling.
Our model also capitalizes on temporal attention mechanism
for sentence generation. Extensive experiments are conducted
on both MSVD and MSR-VTT video captioning datasets,
and superior results are reported when comparing to conventional RNN-based encoder-decoder techniques. More remarkably, TDConvED increases CIDEr-D performance from
58.8% to 67.2% on MSVD.

Figure 1: An illustration of (a) CNN or RNN plus RNN architecture and (b) our Temporal Deformable Convolutional
Encoder-Decoder Networks, for video captioning.

encode a video and a decoder of RNN is utilized to generate
the sentence, one word at each time step till the end. Regardless of different versions of CNN or RNN plus RNN video
captioning framework, a common practice is the use of sequential RNN, which may result in two limitations. First,
RNN powered by Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) alleviates the issue of vanishing or exploding gradients to some
extent, nevertheless the problem still exists. Moreover, the
utilization of RNN on a long path between the start and end
of a sequence will easily forget the long-range information.
Second, the training process of RNN is inherently sequential due to the recurrent relation in time and thus prevents
parallel computations in a sequence.
We propose to mitigate the aforementioned two issues via
convolutions in an encoder-decoder architecture. Compared
to the chain structure in RNN, feed-forward convolutions
produce representations of fixed-length inputs and could
easily capture long-term dependencies by stacking several
layers on the top of each other. Unlike RNN in which the
inputs are fed through a variable number of non-linearities
and the number depends on the input length, the operation
of convolution fixes the number of non-linearities and thus
eases the optimization. Furthermore, feed-forward convolutions are without any recurrent functions and do not rely on
the computation of the previous time step. Therefore, com-

Introduction
The recent advances in deep neural networks have convincingly demonstrated high capability in learning vision models particularly for recognition. The achievements make a
further step towards the ultimate goal of video understanding, which is to automatically describe video content with a
complete and natural sentence or referred to as video captioning problem. The typical solutions (Pan et al. 2016;
Venugopalan et al. 2015a; 2015b; Yao et al. 2015; Yu et al.
2016) of video captioning are inspired by machine translation and equivalent to translating a video to a text. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), the basic idea is to perform sequence to
sequence learning, where a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) or Recurrent Neural Network is usually exploited to
∗

This work was performed at JD AI Research.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8167

