The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Proppy: A System to Unmask Propaganda in Online News
Alberto Barrón-Cedeño,1 Giovanni Da San Martino,1 Israa Jaradat,2 Preslav Nakov1
1

Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU, Qatar
2
University of Texas Arlington, USA
{albarron, gmartino, pnakov}@hbku.edu.qa,
israa.jaradat@mavs.uta.edu

Abstract
We present proppy, the first publicly available real-world,
real-time propaganda detection system for online news,
which aims at raising awareness, thus potentially limiting
the impact of propaganda and helping fight disinformation.
The system constantly monitors a number of news sources,
deduplicates and clusters the news into events, and organizes
the articles about an event on the basis of the likelihood that
they contain propagandistic content. The system is trained on
known propaganda sources using a variety of stylistic features. The evaluation results on a standard dataset show stateof-the-art results for propaganda detection.

Figure 1: The architecture of proppy.
To the best of our knowledge, proppy2 is the first publicly available real-world, real-time monitoring and propaganda detection system for online news, which aims at raising awareness about propaganda.

Introduction
Propaganda is the expression of an opinion or an action
by individuals or groups deliberately designed to influence
the opinions or the actions of other individuals or groups
with reference to predetermined ends (Institute for Propaganda Analysis 1938). We are interested in propaganda from
a journalistic point of view: how news management lacking neutrality shapes information by emphasizing positive or
negative aspects purposefully (Jowett and O’Donnell 2012,
p. 1). Propaganda uses psychological and rhetorical techniques that are intended to go unnoticed to achieve maximum effect. As a result, malicious propaganda news outlets have proven to be able to achieve large-scale impact. In
particular, the power of disinformation and propaganda was
arguably demonstrated during recent events, such as Brexit
and the 2016 U.S. Presidential campaign.1
With the rise of the Web, a combination of freedom of
expression and ease of publishing contents online has nurtured a number of news outlets that produce or distribute
propagandistic content. Social media further amplified the
problem by making it possible to reach millions of users almost instantaneously. Thus, with the aim of helping fight the
rise of propaganda, here we introduce proppy, a system
to unmask articles with propagandistic content, which can
(i) help investigative journalists to study propaganda online
and (ii) raise awareness that a news article, or a news outlet
in general, might be trying to influence people’s mindset.

Architecture of the System
Figure 1 shows the architecture of proppy. We describe its
four modules next.
1. Article retrieval. Proppy regularly monitors a variety of news outlets and extracts the content of the latest
news articles from their websites. We use GDELT3 to obtain
links to news articles and the Newspaper3k Python library4
to extract their content. Proppy then analyzes the articles
in batches every 24 hours, and performs the remaining three
steps.
2. Event identification. We use the DBSCAN clustering
algorithm (Ester et al. 1996) for event identification, as it
does not require information related to the expected number of events. We use doc2vec embeddings (Le and Mikolov
2014) for article representation, pre-trained on articles from
Associated Press. We compute the pairwise distances for
DBSCAN as 1 minus the cosine similarity. DBSCAN has
two hyper-parameters: the minimum number of members in
a cluster and the maximum distance between two members
of the same cluster, . We set the former parameter to 2, thus
discarding singletons. We estimate the parameter  = 0.55
on the METER corpus (Clough, Gaizauskas, and Piao 2002).
2

Visit the proppy project at http://proppy.qcri.org
http://gdeltproject.org
4
https://newspaper.readthedocs.io

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.justice.gov/file/1035477/

3

9847

