The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Zero-Shot Adaptive Transfer for Conversational Language Understanding
Sungjin Lee, Rahul Jha
Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA
{sule,rajh}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Conversational agents such as Alexa and Google Assistant
constantly need to increase their language understanding capabilities by adding new domains. A massive amount of labeled data is required for training each new domain. While
domain adaptation approaches alleviate the annotation cost,
prior approaches suffer from increased training time and suboptimal concept alignments. To tackle this, we introduce a
novel Zero-Shot Adaptive Transfer method for slot tagging
that utilizes the slot description for transferring reusable concepts across domains, and enjoys efficient training without
any explicit concept alignments. Extensive experimentation
over a dataset of 10 domains relevant to our commercial personal digital assistant shows that our model outperforms previous state-of-the-art systems by a large margin, and achieves
an even higher improvement in the low data regime.

(a)

Introduction
(b)

Recently, there is a surge of excitement in adding numerous
new domains to conversational agents such as Alexa, Google
Assistant, Cortana and Siri to support a myriad of use cases.
However, building a slot tagger, which is a key component for natural language understanding (NLU) (Tur and
De Mori 2011), for a new domain requires massive amounts
of labeled data, hindering rapid development of new skills.
To address the data-intensiveness problem, domain adaptation approaches have been successfully applied. Previous approaches are roughly categorized into two groups:
data-driven approaches (Kim, Stratos, and Sarikaya 2016b;
2016a) and model-driven approaches (Kim, Stratos, and
Kim 2017; Jha et al. 2018).
In the data-driven approach, new target models are trained
by combining target domain data with relevant data from a
repository of arbitrary labeled datasets using domain adaptation approaches such as feature augmentation (Kim, Stratos,
and Sarikaya 2016b). A disadvantage of this approach is
the increase in training time as the amount of reusable data
grows. The reusable data might contain hundreds of thousands of samples, making iterative refinement prohibitive. In
contrast, the model-driven approach utilizes “expert” models for summarizing the data for reusable slots (Kim, Stratos,
and Kim 2017; Jha et al. 2018). The outputs of the expert

Figure 1: (a) Traditional slot tagging approaches with the
BIO representation. (b) For each slot, zero-shot models independently detect spans that contain values for the slot. Detected spans are then merged to produce a final prediction.
models are directly used when training new domains, allowing for faster training. A drawback of this approach is
that it requires explicit concept alignments which itself is
not a trivial task, potentially missing lots of reusable concepts. Additionally, it’s not easy to generalize these models
to new, unseen slots.
In this paper, we present a new domain adaptation technique for slot tagging inspired by recent advances in zeroshot learning. Traditionally, slot tagging is formulated as a
sequence labeling task using the BIO representation (Figure 1a). Our approach formulates this problem as detecting
spans that contain values for each slot as shown in Figure 1b.
For implicit transfer of reusable concepts across domains,
we represent slots in a shared latent semantic space by embedding the slot description. With the shared latent space,
domain adaptation can simply be done by fine-tuning a base
model, which is trained on massive data, with a handful of
target domain data without any explicit concept alignments.
A similar idea of utilizing zero-shot learning for slot tagging

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6642

