The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving One-Class Collaborative Filtering
via Ranking-Based Implicit Regularizer
Jin Chen,1 Defu Lian,∗2,3 Kai Zheng1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
3
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
{chenjin.uestc,dove.ustc}@gmail.com, zhengkai@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract

The absence of negative feedback (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008) is another problem for the case of implicit
feedback. In unobserved data, there are dislike items and
the items not exposed but potentially preferred. In most
cases, the unobserved data is treated as missing data. Some
other interpretations are put on the missing data (Devooght,
Kourtellis, and Mantrach 2015; Steck 2010). The state-ofthe-art algorithm(Devooght, Kourtellis, and Mantrach 2015)
sets a prior on the unobserved data, resulting to a smaller
weight of unobserved data. The WRMF method sets the approximate rating 0 for the missing data but in the real word
the ratings are not single.
In this paper, we focus on the unobserved data depending
on the real-world data. There is no doubt that the items with
1 ratings are more likely to be preferred than the items with
0 ratings. However, the difference between the unobserved
data is hard to formalize to help rank the items. In most
cases, the interaction between the unobserved data is omitted. The 0 ratings are not unique and the unobserved items
contains both dislike items and potentially preferred items.
There are certain similarities between the unobserved data.
As a result, we aim to catch the link between these data to
improve the performance of ranking. We propose a rankingbased implicit regularizer which penalizes the large difference between the unobserved data. In this way, we avert the
estimation for unobserved data of ground-truth dataset and
we can deal with the origin data without approximation.
Besides proposing the regularizer, we design a rankingbased framework for one-class collaborative filtering problems based on matrix factorization. The framework captures
the comparison for two cases: the comparison between the
observed and the unobserved data, and the inner comparison between the unobserved data which corresponds with
the regular form of objective function.
Our main contributions are:

One-class collaborative filtering (OCCF) problems are vital
in many applications of recommender systems, such as news
and music recommendation, but suffers from sparsity issues
and lacks negative examples. To address this problem, the
state-of-the-arts assigned smaller weights to unobserved samples and performed low-rank approximation. However, the
ground-truth ratings of unobserved samples are usually set to
zero but ill-defined. In this paper, we propose a ranking-based
implicit regularizer and provide a new general framework for
OCCF, to avert the ground-truth ratings of unobserved samples. We then exploit it to regularize a ranking-based loss
function and design efficient optimization algorithms to learn
model parameters. Finally, we evaluate them on three realworld datasets. The results show that the proposed regularizer
significantly improves ranking-based algorithms and that the
proposed framework outperforms the state-of-the-art OCCF
algorithms.

Introduction
Recommender system has become more and more popular
to satisfy the user and increase the revenue for providers.
With the development of digital media, the form of information is becoming various and lots of research has shifted attention from explicit feedback to implicit feedback. Implicit
feedback is everywhere, such as click, purchase or browsing history which covers the user’s interest and preference.
Recommender system aims to infer from the abundant implicit feedback to provide the user a rank list of the items.
One-class collaborative filtering (OCCF) problem refers to
a strategy which relies on the implicit feedback and OCCF
problem is common and vital in many application scenarios.
However, learning from implicit feedback is expensive.
There is some hidden information behind the ratings both for
observed ratings and unobserved ratings. As a result, recommender system should consider the interaction between each
user-item pair and the unobserved data, which is time consuming. Moreover, it is difficult to minimize the objective
function in linear time due to the sparsity of the data. Some
methods sacrifice the accuracy by sampling for efficiency
(Rendle et al. 2009).

• We propose a ranking-based regularizer to penalize the
discrepancy of estimated preferences for different unobserved items, and thus avert the use of ill-defined groundtruth ratings of unobserved items.
• We propose a general ranking-based framework for one
class collaborative filtering, and design a highly effective
optimization algorithm to dramatically improve scalability of the framework .

∗

Corresponding author
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

37

