The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Devil in the Details: Towards Accurate Single and Multiple Human Parsing
Tao Ruan,1∗ Ting Liu,1∗ Zilong Huang,3 Yunchao Wei,† Shikui Wei,1 Yao Zhao1
1

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
3
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China

Abstract

information. Due to consecutive spatial pooling and convolution strides, the resolution of the final feature maps is reduced significantly that the finer image information is lost.
To generate high-resolution features, there are two typical
solutions, i.e. cutting several down-sampling (e.g. max pooling) operations (Chen et al. 2016a) and introducing details
from low-level feature maps (Chen et al. 2018b). For the
latter case, it is usually embedded in an encoder-decoder architecture, in which the high-level semantic information is
captured in the encoder and the details and spatial information are recovered in the decoder. 2) Context Information
Embedding This kind of approaches is devoting to capture
rich context information to handle the objects with multiple scales. Feature pyramid is one of the effective ways to
mitigate the problem caused by various scales of objects,
and atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP) based on dilated convolution (Chen et al. 2018a) and pyramid scene
parsing (PSP) (Zhao et al. 2017) are two popular structures. ASPP utilizes parallel dilated convolution layers with
different rates to incorporate multi-scale context. PSP designs pyramid pooling operation to integrate the local and
global information together for more reliable prediction. Beyond these two typical types, some other works also propose
to advantage the segmentation performance by introducing additional information such as edge (Liang et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2017) or more effective learning strategy such as
cascaded training (Li et al. 2017b).
Compare with the general semantic segmentation tasks,
the challenges of human parsing is to produce finer predictions for every detailed region belonging to a person. Besides, the arms, legs and shoes are further divided into the
left side and right side for more precise analysis, which
makes the parsing more difficult. Despite the approaches
mentioned above showing impressive results in semantic
segmentation, it remains unclear how to develop an accurate human parsing system upon these solutions and most
previous works did not explore and analyze how to leverage
them to unleash the full potential in human parsing. In this
work, we target on answering such a question: can we simply formulate a powerful framework for human parsing by
exploiting the recent advantages in the semantic segmentation area?
To answer such a question, we conduct a great deal of
rigorous experiments to clarify the key factors affecting the

Human parsing has received considerable interest due to its
wide application potentials. Nevertheless, it is still unclear
how to develop an accurate human parsing system in an efficient and elegant way. In this paper, we identify several useful
properties, including feature resolution, global context information and edge details, and perform rigorous analyses to reveal how to leverage them to benefit the human parsing task.
The advantages of these useful properties finally result in a
simple yet effective Context Embedding with Edge Perceiving (CE2P) framework for single human parsing. Our CE2P
is end-to-end trainable and can be easily adopted for conducting multiple human parsing. Benefiting the superiority
of CE2P, we won the 1st places on all three human parsing
tracks in the 2nd Look into Person (LIP) Challenge. Without
any bells and whistles, we achieved 56.50% (mIoU), 45.31%
p
(mean AP r ) and 33.34% (AP0.5
) in Track 1, Track 2 and
Track 5, which outperform the state-of-the-arts more than
2.06%, 3.81% and 1.87%, respectively. We hope our CE2P
will serve as a solid baseline and help ease future research in
single/multiple human parsing. Code has been made available
at https://github.com/liutinglt/CE2P.

Introduction
Human parsing is a fine-grained semantic segmentation
task which aims at identifying the constituent parts (e.g.
body parts and clothing items) for a human image on
pixel-level. Understanding the contents of the human image
makes sense in several potential applications including ecommerce, human-machine interaction, image editing and
virtual reality to name a few. Currently, human parsing has
gained remarkable improvement with the development of
fully convolutional neural networks on semantic segmentation.
For the semantic segmentation, researchers have developed many solutions from different views to tackle the challenging dense prediction task. In general, current solutions
can be grossly divided into two types: 1) High-resolution
Maintenance This kind of approaches are attempting to obtain high-resolution features to recover the desired detailed
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4814

