The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

EA-CG: An Approximate Second-Order
Method for Training Fully-Connected Neural Networks
Sheng-Wei Chen

Chun-Nan Chou

Edward Y. Chang

HTC Research & Healthcare
sw chen@htc.com

HTC Research & Healthcare
jason.cn chou@htc.com

HTC Research & Healthcare
edward chang@htc.com

Abstract

the common practice is to use the Gauss-Newton matrix with
a convex criterion function (Schraudolph 2002) or the Fisher
matrix to measure curvature since both are guaranteed to be
positive semi-definite (PSD).
Although these two kinds of matrices can alleviate the issue of negative curvature, computing either the exact GaussNewton matrix or Fisher matrix even for a modestly-sized
fully-connected neural network (FCNN) is intractable. Intuitively, the analytic expression for the second derivative
requires O(N 2 ) computations if O(N ) complexity is required to compute the first derivative. Thus, several pioneer
works (LeCun et al. 1998; Amari, Park, and Fukumizu 2000;
Schraudolph 2002) have used different methods to approximate either matrix. However, none of these methods have
been shown to be computationally feasible and fundamentally more effective than first-order methods as reported
in (Martens 2010). Thus, there has been a growing trend
towards conceiving more computationally feasible secondorder methods for training FCNNs.
We outline several notable works in chronological order herein. Martens proposed a truncated-Newton method
for training deep auto-encoders. In this work, Martens used
an R-operator (Pearlmutter 1994) to compute full GaussNewton matrix-vector products and made good progress
within each update. Martens and Grosse developed a
block-diagonal approximation to the Fisher matrix for FCNNs, called Kronecker-factored Approximation Curvature
(KFAC). They derived the update directions by exploiting
the inverse property of Kronecker products. KFAC features
that its cost in storing and inverting the devised approximation does not depend on the amount of data used to estimate
the Fisher matrix. The idea is further extended to convolutional nets (Grosse and Martens 2016). Recently, Botev,
Ritter, and Barber presented a block-diagonal approximation to the Gauss-Newton matrix for FCNNs, referred to
as Kronecker-Factored Recursive Approximation (KFRA).
They also utilized the inverse property of Kronecker products to derive the update directions. Similarly, Zhang et al.
introduced a block-diagonal approximation of the GaussNewton matrix and used conjugate gradient (CG) method
to derive the update directions.
However, these prior works either impose constraints on
their applicability or require considerable computation in
terms of memory or running time. On the one hand, sev-

For training fully-connected neural networks (FCNNs), we
propose a practical approximate second-order method including: 1) an approximation of the Hessian matrix and 2) a conjugate gradient (CG) based method. Our proposed approximate
Hessian matrix is memory-efficient and can be applied to any
FCNNs where the activation and criterion functions are twice
differentiable. We devise a CG-based method incorporating
one-rank approximation to derive Newton directions for training FCNNs, which significantly reduces both space and time
complexity. This CG-based method can be employed to solve
any linear equation where the coefficient matrix is Kroneckerfactored, symmetric and positive definite. Empirical studies
show the efficacy and efficiency of our proposed method.

Introduction
Neural networks have been applied to solving problems in
several application domains such as computer vision (He
et al. 2016), natural language processing (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997), and disease diagnosis (Chang et al.
2017). Training a neural network requires tuning its model
parameters using Backpropagation. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD), Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno and onestep secant are representative algorithms that have been employed for training in Backpropagation.
To date, SGD is widely used due to its low computational
demand. SGD minimizes a function using the function’s first
derivative, and has been proven to be effective for training large models. However, stochasticity in the gradient will
slow down convergence for any gradient method such that
none of them can be asymptotically faster than simple SGD
with Polyak averaging (Polyak and Juditsky 1992). Besides
gradients, second-order methods utilize the curvature information of a loss function within the neighborhood of a given
point to guide the update direction. Since each update becomes more precise, such methods can converge faster than
first-order methods in terms of update iterations.
For solving a convex optimization problem, a secondorder method can always converge to the global minimum
in much fewer steps than SGD. However, the problem of
neural-network training can be non-convex, thereby suffering from the issue of negative curvature. To avoid this issue,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3337

