The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

View Inter-Prediction GAN: Unsupervised Representation Learning for 3D
Shapes by Learning Global Shape Memories to Support Local View Predictions
Zhizhong Han,1,2 Mingyang Shang,1 Yu-Shen Liu,1∗ Matthias Zwicker2
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
h312h@umd.edu, smy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, zwicker@cs.umd.edu
2

Abstract

Achlioptas et al. 2018; Han et al. 2018) by training deep
learning models using “supervised” information mined from
the unsupervised scenario. This mining procedure is usually
implemented using different prediction strategies, such as
the prediction of a shape from itself by minimizing reconstruction error or embedded energy, the prediction of a shape
from its context given by views or local shape features, or the
prediction of a shape from views and itself together. These
methods use multiple views to provide a holistic context of
3D shapes, and they make a single global shape prediction
based on all views.
In contrast, our approach called View Inter-Prediction
GAN (VIP-GAN) learns to make multiple local view interpredictions among neighboring views. The view interprediction task is designed to mimic human perception of
view-dependent patterns. That is, based on changes between
neighbor views, humans can easily imagine the center view
between, while the neighbor views can also be reversely
imagined based on the center. As a key idea, our network
architecture implements the shape representation as a shapespecific global memory whose contents are learned to support all local view inter-prediction tasks for each shape. Intuitively, the memory aggregates information over all view
inter-prediction tasks, which leads to a view-independent
shape representation. Our experimental results indicate that
the obtained representation is highly discriminative and outperforms competing techniques on several standard shape
classification benchmarks.
More specifically, VIP-GAN considers multiple views
taken around a 3D shape in sequence as the context of the
3D shape, and it separates each view sequence into several
overlapping sections of equal length. It then learns to predict
the center view from its neighbors in each section, and the
neighbors from the center. Crucially, VIP-GAN includes a
memory shared by all view predictions of each shape. We
show that the system uses this memory to improve its view
prediction performance, in effect by learning a view independent shape representation. VIP-GAN employs an RNNbased generator with an encoder-decoder structure to implement the view inter-prediction strategy in different spaces.
The encoder RNN captures the content information and spatial relationship of the neighbors to predict the center in 2D
view space, while the decoder RNN predicts the neighbors
in a low-level feature space according to the center predicted

In this paper, we present a novel unsupervised representation learning approach for 3D shapes, which is an important research challenge as it avoids the manual effort required
for collecting supervised data. Our method trains an RNNbased neural network architecture to solve multiple view
inter-prediction tasks for each shape. Given several nearby
views of a shape, we define view inter-prediction as the task
of predicting the center view between the input views, and
reconstructing the input views in a low-level feature space.
The key idea of our approach is to implement the shape representation as a shape-specific global memory that is shared
between all local view inter-predictions for each shape. Intuitively, this memory enables the system to aggregate information that is useful to better solve the view inter-prediction
tasks for each shape, and to leverage the memory as a viewindependent shape representation. Our approach obtains the
best results using a combination of L2 and adversarial losses
for the view inter-prediction task. We show that VIP-GAN
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in unsupervised 3D feature learning on three large-scale 3D shape benchmarks.

Introduction
Feature learning for 3D shapes is crucial for 3D shape
analysis, including classification (Sharma, Grau, and Fritz
2016; Wu et al. 2016; Han et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2018;
Achlioptas et al. 2018; Han et al. 2018), retrieval (Sharma,
Grau, and Fritz 2016; Wu et al. 2016; Han et al. 2016;
Yang et al. 2018; Achlioptas et al. 2018; Han et al. 2018),
correspondence (Han et al. 2016; 2018) and segmentation (Qi et al. 2017a; 2017b). In recent years, supervised
3D feature learning has produced remarkable results under
large-scale 3D benchmarks by training deep neural networks
with supervised information (Qi et al. 2017a; 2017b), such
as class labels and point correspondences. However, obtaining supervised information requires intense manual labeling effort. Therefore, unsupervised 3D feature learning with
deep neural networks is an important research challenge.
Several studies have addressed this challenge (Sharma,
Grau, and Fritz 2016; Wu et al. 2016; Han et al. 2016;
Girdhar et al. 2016; Rezende et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2018;
∗

Corresponding author: Yu-Shen Liu
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8376

