The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fully Convolutional Video Captioning
with Coarse-to-Fine and Inherited Attention
Kuncheng Fang,1 Lian Zhou,1 Cheng Jin,1 Yuejie Zhang,1
Kangnian Weng,2 Tao Zhang,2 Weiguo Fan3
1

School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Shanghai Institute of Intelligent Electronics & Systems, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{17210240084, 16110240019, jc, yjzhang}@fudan.edu.cn
2
School of Information Management and Engineering, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Financial Information Technology,
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China
weng.kangnian@163.sufe.edu.cn, taozhang@mail.shufe.edu.cn
3
Department of Management Sciences, Tippie College of Business, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA, 52242
weiguo-fan@uiowa.edu

Abstract

guage generation model that can express the semantic understanding with accurate and meaningful descriptions for
videos, has received considerable attentions.
Some pioneering methods try to address video captioning through hard-coded visual concepts and sentence templates (Kojima et al. 2002). However, these methods are
highly human-crafted and the generated sentences are less
natural. Recently, inspired by the advances of neural machine translation model (Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever et al.
2014), the combination of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) is widely
adopted, which has significantly improved the quality of
video textual description. Generally, the CNN-RNN models first encode the video into a fixed-length feature vector
using CNN, and then feed the feature vector into a RNN
decoder to generate captions.
Despite the existing progress, the fundamental CNNRNN model is still a “rough” one. For video captioning, its
input and output are sequential structures which contain
temporal information. Due to the outstanding performance
of RNN especially Long Short Term Memory network
(LSTM), RNN naturally becomes an essential part in the
sequence generation tasks (Venugopalan et al. 2015a;
2015b). However, its shortcomings in captioning tasks
have been discovered. LSTM requires the previous output
as the input at each moment, which makes the training extremely slow. The memory unit of LSTM is complex and
requires the significant storage because of the fairly long
path of back-propagation. All of these make the training of
LSTM difficult. Thus some researchers have tried to solve
the sequence generation via new model architecture without LSTM, and made some breakthroughs in neural machine translation (Gehring et al. 2017; Vaswani et al.
2017).

Automatically generating natural language description for
video is an extremely complicated and challenging task. To
tackle the obstacles of traditional LSTM-based model for
video captioning, we propose a novel architecture to generate the optimal descriptions for videos, which focuses on
constructing a new network structure that can generate sentences superior to the basic model with LSTM, and establishing special attention mechanisms that can provide more
useful visual information for caption generation. This
scheme discards the traditional LSTM, and exploits the fully
convolutional network with coarse-to-fine and inherited attention designed according to the characteristics of fully
convolutional structure. Our model cannot only outperform
the basic LSTM-based model, but also achieve the comparable performance with those of state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
With the explosive growth of video data on the Web, how
to seamlessly handle the complex structures of various videos to achieve effective description generation becomes a
research focus (Venugopalan et al. 2015b; Yao et al. 2015).
Although it’s easy for human to describe a video with a
quick glance, it needs more complicated designs for computers to do the same task (Venugopalan et al. 2015a; Pan
et al. 2016). The caption generation model must identify
what objects appear in a video, the attributes of these objects, and the relationships among objects. All of these
tasks are the fundamental challenges in computer vision.
Thus video captioning, which aims at constructing a lanCopyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8271

