The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Matching Network for Multiple Choice Reading Comprehension
Min Tang, Jiaran Cai, Hankz Hankui Zhuo∗
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
{tangm28, caijr5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhuohank@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

2017), RACE is more challenging and requires more inferences compared to the above-mentioned datasets.
For example, in Table 1, we can see that there is contradiction between ”Mike never washed them well” in the passage and combination of ”Mike” in Question 1 and ”washed
them clean” in candidate answer A; there is entailment between ”Mike never washed them well” in the passage and
combination of ”Mike” in Question 1 and ”never washed
them clean” in candidate answer C.
To address this problem, (Wang et al. 2018) propose to
jointly model the sequence triplets (i.e. passage, question
and candidate answer) assuming that questions and candidate answers are equally important in reading comprehension. Triplet matching, however, usually encodes the locational information of the question and the candidate answer
matched to a specific context of the passage (Wang et al.
2018), which ignores scenarios that there are multiple evidence snippets in the passage, which are significant for answering the questions. For example, in Question 2, “the main
idea of this passage” depends on the evidence snippets as described by all sentences in the passages, which produces the
answer ”D”, i.e., ”The job market has changed dramatically
over the past 4 years”. In this paper, we aim to build a novel
framework to capture multiple evidence snippets and entailment relationships among passages, questions and answers,
which is challenging since we cannot find answers by locally
matching words among passages, questions and answers.
To overcome the challenge, we observe that humans usually answer multiple choice questions by two ways. The first
one is to extract evidence snippets from passages according
to questions, and then match evidence snippets with candidate answers. The other way is to read candidate answers
and questions together to form pseudo statements and then
recognize entailment relationships between pseudo statements and passages. After that, human fuse different considerations to verify answers and make final decisions.
Inspired by how humans answer multiple choice questions, we propose a novel approach, called MMN, which
stands for Multi-Matching Network. Corresponding to
above-mentioned two ways, our MMN approach contains
two types of matching between multiple sequences, namely,
(1) Evidence-Answer Matching and (2) Question-PassageAnswer Matching, which are designed under the unified
compose-match framework. We first encode the context in-

Multiple-choice machine reading comprehension is an important and challenging task where the machine is required
to select the correct answer from a set of candidate answers given passage and question. Existing approaches either match extracted evidence with candidate answers shallowly or model passage, question and candidate answers with
a single paradigm of matching. In this paper, we propose
Multi-Matching Network (MMN) which models the semantic relationship among passage, question and candidate answers from multiple different paradigms of matching. In our
MMN model, each paradigm is inspired by how human think
and designed under a unified compose-match framework.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our model, we evaluate
MMN on a large-scale multiple choice machine reading comprehension dataset (i.e. RACE). Empirical results show that
our proposed model achieves a significant improvement compared to strong baselines and obtains state-of-the-art results.

Introduction
As a fundamental task and a long-standing goal in the field
of natural language processing, machine reading comprehension (MRC) aims to enable machines to automatically
answer questions according to passages in hand. There have
been many researches on machine reading comprehension.
For example, (Yin et al. 2016) proposed to match passages
against sequences that concatenate both questions and candidate answers; (Dhingra et al. 2017; Chen, Bolton, and Manning 2016; Lai et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2018) proposed to
first match passages to questions and then select answers
based on the matching result; etc. Despite the success of previous approaches on reading-comprehension scenarios that
answers can be directly extracted from the given passages,
such as SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) and CNN/Daily
Mail (Hermann et al. 2015), they do not work on questions
whose answers need to be inferred from the given questions
and passages, i.e., answers cannot be directly extracted from
passages. One example of such reading-comprehension scenarios is RACE, which was recently released by (Lai et al.
2017). RACE was built from middle and high school English examinations in China. As mentioned in (Lai et al.
∗

Corrsponding Author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7088

