The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Coverage Centrality Maximization in Undirected Networks
Gianlorenzo D’Angelo

Martin Olsen

Lorenzo Severini

Gran Sasso Science Institute
L’Aquila, Italy
gianlorenzo.dangelo@gssi.it

Department of Business Development
and Technology
Aarhus University, Denmark
martino@btech.au.dk

ISI Foundation
Turin, Italy
lorenzo.severini@isi.it

Abstract

ample, closeness centrality is significantly correlated with
the influence of users in a social network (Crescenzi et al.
2016; Macdonald et al. 2012), while shortest-path-based
metrics are correlated with the number of passengers passing trough an airport in transportation networks (Ishakian et
al. 2012; Malighetti et al. 2009). The coverage centrality of
a node v is the number of distinct pairs of nodes for which
a shortest path passes through v. Nodes with high coverage
centrality are pivotal to the communication between many
other nodes of the network.
Generally speaking, centrality metrics are positively correlated with many desirable properties of nodes, therefore,
there has been a recent considerable interest on finding
strategies to increase the centrality value of a given node
in order to maximize the benefits for the node itself. In
this paper we focus on the most used strategy which is
that of modifying the network by adding a limited number of new edges incident to the node itself. In detail we
study the following optimization problem: given a graph
G, a node v of G, and an integer k, find k edges to be
added incident to v maximising the centrality value of v
in the graph G augmented with these edges. The problem
is usually referred to as the centrality maximization problem and it can be instantiated by using different centrality
metrics such as: PageRank (Avrachenkov and Litvak 2006;
Olsen and Viglas 2014), eccentricity (Demaine and Zadimoghaddam 2010; Perumal, Basu, and Guan 2013), coverage centrality (Ishakian et al. 2012; Medya et al. 2018), betweenness (Bergamini et al. 2018; D’Angelo, Severini, and
Velaj 2016), information centrality (Shan, Yi, and Zhang
2018), closeness and harmonic centrality (Crescenzi et al.
2016). The centrality maximization problem is in general
N P -hard but in all the mentioned cases the authors were
able to devise algorithms ensuring a constant approximation
factor. In Table 1 we list the bounds on the approximation
ratio reported in these references.
Most of these approximation algorithms are based on
a fundamental result on submodular optimization due to
Nemhauser et al. (Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher 1978).
Given a monotone submodular set function f 1 and an integer k the problem of finding a set S with |S| ≤ k that

Centrality metrics are among the main tools in social network
analysis. Being central for a user of a network leads to several
benefits to the user: central users are highly influential and
play key roles within the network. Therefore, the optimization problem of increasing the centrality of a network user recently received considerable attention. Given a network and a
target user v, the centrality maximization problem consists in
creating k new links incident to v in such a way that the centrality of v is maximized, according to some centrality metric.
Most of the algorithms proposed in the literature are based on
showing that a given centrality metric is monotone and submodular with respect to link addition. However, this property
does not hold for several shortest-path based centrality metrics if the links are undirected.
In this paper we study the centrality maximization problem in
undirected networks for one of the most important shortestpath based centrality measures, the coverage centrality. We
provide several hardness and approximation results. We first
show that the problem cannot be approximated within a factor greater than 1 − 1/e, unless P = N P , and, under the
stronger gap-ETH hypothesis, the problem cannot be approximated within a factor better than 1/no(1) , where n is the
number of users. We then propose two greedy approximation
algorithms, and show that, by suitably combining
√ them, we
can guarantee an approximation factor of Ω(1/ n). We experimentally compare the solutions provided by our approximation algorithm with optimal solutions computed by means
of an exact IP formulation. We show that our algorithm produces solutions that are very close to the optimum.

Introduction
Determining what are the most important nodes in a network is one of the main goals of network analysis (Newman
2010). Several so-called centrality metrics have been proposed in the literature to try to quantitatively measure the
importance of a node according to network properties like:
distances between nodes (e.g. closeness or harmonic centrality), number of shortest paths passing through a node (e.g.
betweenness or coverage centrality), or on spectral graph
properties (e.g. PageRank or information centrality).
It has been experimentally observed that nodes with high
centrality values play key roles within the network. For ex-

1
A set function f is is submodular if for any pair of sets A ⊆ B
and any element e ̸∈ B, f (A∪{e})−f (A) ≥ f (B ∪{e})−f (B).

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

501

