The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Neural Network Quantization via
Layer-Wise Optimization Using Limited Training Data
Shangyu Chen,1 Wenya Wang,1 Sinno Jialin Pan1
1

Nanyang Technological University
schen025@e.ntu.edu.sg, wangwy@ntu.edu.sg, sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

(2015) and Hubara et al. (2016) proposed to binarize weights
to be in {±1}. Rastegari et al. (2016) introduced a float value
αl known as the scaling factor in layer l, turning binarized
weights as αl × {±1}. To accelerate inference, αl is multiplied by layer input, such that weights become integer values
{±1}, converting float-point multiplication into float-point
to integer computation. Li, Zhang, and Liu (2016) extended
binary weights to ternary values, and Leng et al. (2017) further proposed to quantize the models with more bits in order to provide more flexibility. Apart from above mentioned
training-based method, direct quantization methods also exist that don’t require training data: Gong et al. (2014) clustered weights using Kmeans. Jacob et al. (2017), Vanhoucke,
Senior, and Mao (2011) projected weights to nearest discrete points. Li et al. (2017) proposed convergence analysis
of quantization training.
However, most prevailing low bits compression methods
relied on a heavy training process with large amount of labeled data. Specifically, given a pre-trained full-precision
deep neural network as the initial parameters, which is usually trained in a cloud environment, most methods carry the
compression process in a supervised learning manner with
sufficient training data by minimizing the error between the
compressed network outputs and the ground-truth labels.
However, practical scenarios pose more strict challenges. On
the one hand, excessive training data for a specific application is inaccessible due to data privacy, especially in commercial models with high confidential requirement (Wu et al.
2016). On the other hand, many real cases require the compression conducted on edge devices, which greatly limit the
storage space to deploy large amount of training data (e.g.
ImageNet dataset occupies over 500Gb). Therefore, compression under limited instances is crucial in practice.
In these situations, existing training-based compression
methods fail to proceed as they need abundant data to train
a compressed model. Direct quantization methods show
considerable gap. To overcome this limitation, we develop
a quantization method, which only uses a small portion
of training data while is still able to preserve the performance of the original network after quantization. The proposed method is named Layer-wise/Limited training data
Deep Neural Network Quantization (L-DNQ), which aims
to achieve the following goals: 1) For each layer, parameters are quantized while the layer output is similar to that of

The advancement of deep models poses great challenges to
real-world deployment because of the limited computational
ability and storage space on edge devices. To solve this problem, existing works have made progress to prune or quantize
deep models. However, most existing methods rely heavily on
a supervised training process to achieve satisfactory performance, acquiring large amount of labeled training data, which
may not be practical for real deployment. In this paper, we
propose a novel layer-wise quantization method for deep neural networks, which only requires limited training data (1% of
original dataset). Specifically, we formulate parameters quantization for each layer as a discrete optimization problem,
and solve it using Alternative Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM), which gives an efficient closed-form solution.
We prove that the final performance drop after quantization is
bounded by a linear combination of the reconstructed errors
caused at each layer. Based on the proved theorem, we propose an algorithm to quantize a deep neural network layer by
layer with an additional weights update step to minimize the
final error. Extensive experiments on benchmark deep models are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method using 1% of CIFAR10 and ImageNet datasets.
Codes are available in: https://github.com/csyhhu/L-DNQ

Introduction
Deep neural networks have been extensively employed with
promising results in various applications especially in computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016). However,
high performance comes with huge cost brought by enormous amount of parameters and tremendous computational
cost. Consider a very deep model which is fully well-trained
and deployed, to use it for making predictions, most of the
computations involve multiplications of a real-valued weight
by a real-valued activation in forward propagation. These
multiplications are expensive as they are all float-point to
float-point multiplication operations. To alleviate this problem, a number of approaches have been proposed to compress deep models by pruning or quantization. Han et al.
(2015) proposed to sparsify weights to reduce the number
of multiplications directly. Courbariaux, Bengio, and David
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3329

