The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Resolving Ambiguous Anaphoric Expressions in Imperative Discourse
Vasanth Sarathy

Matthias Scheutz

Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
200 Boston Ave.
Medford, MA 02155
vasanth.sarathy@tufts.edu

Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
200 Boston Ave.
Medford, MA 02155
matthias.scheutz@tufts.edu

Abstract
Anaphora resolution is a central problem in natural language
understanding. We study a subclass of this problem involving object pronouns when they are used in simple imperative
sentences (e.g., “pick it up.”). Specifically, we address cases
where situational and contextual information is required to
interpret these pronouns. Current state-of-the art statisticallydriven coreference systems and knowledge-based reasoning
systems are insufficient to address these cases. In this paper, we introduce, with examples, a general class of situated
anaphora resolution problems, propose a proof-of-concept
system for disambiguating situated pronouns, and discuss
some general types of reasoning that might be needed.

Figure 1: Consider instructing a robot the following: “Pick
up block1. Put it on block2. Pick up block3. Put it on block1.”
Which block does the second “it” refer to? This question is
trivial for humans, but not so for many artificial systems.
Pick up [block1]b1 . Put itb1 on [block2]b2 . Pick up
[block3]b3 . Put itb1,b2,b3 on block1.”

Introduction

(1)

Many current coreference systems do not resolve (1) because it is not the statistical relationships that undergirds disambiguation, but instead extra-linguistic knowledge. Recognizing the importance of commonsense knowledge (Cassimatis 2008), Winograd Schemas (WS) were proposed as
a gold standard evaluation dataset for these types of more
difficult problems (Levesque, Davis, and Morgenstern 2012;
Morgenstern and Ortiz Jr 2015). Here’s an example:

Anaphors are linguistic referring expressions whose interpretation depends on objects and entities introduced earlier
in a discourse (Mitkov 2014). For example, in the sentence:
“pick up the parcel and give it to me,” the pronoun “it” is
an anaphor that relies on its antecedent “the parcel” for its
meaning; both mentions likely pointing to the same realworld parcel. Pronouns (and anaphors more generally) are
used extensively in dialogue and discourse and there are often multiple antecedent candidates for an anaphor, leading
to ambiguity, a problem that humans handle quite gracefully
(Grosz and Sidner 1986).
Naturally, artificial agents equipped with natural language
capabilities must also be able to resolve these ambiguous
expressions, if they are to perform commands issued to
them, whether it be a home kitchen helper robot or a voiceactivated personal assistant (Tellex et al. 2013). Contemporary approaches to anaphora resolution aim at solving
the sister-problem of coreference resolution, which requires
linking different mentions that reference the same entity or
object (Ng 2010; Mitkov 2014). The state of the art methods
are statistically driven machine learners that have learned
these associations from expansive datasets (Clark and Manning 2016; Wiseman et al. 2015). Unfortunately, when extralinguistic information is needed, a situation all too common
in imperative task-oriented dialog, these systems are much
less accurate. Consider the simple example of the following
command to a robot to move blocks shown in Figure 1:

“The sculpture rolled off the shelf because [it]sc,sh
wasn’t [anchored/level].”

(2)

Resolving “it” in (2) requires at least some commonsense
knowledge about the physics of cause-and-effect, gravity
and friction. A number of computational approaches have
been proposed that formalize such knowledge. and then
use it for disambiguating pronouns. So these systems are
likely to be able to resolve (1), however, in many realistic
settings, what is needed is an ability to be able to reason
with situation-specific knowledge that can change dynamically. Consider these three examples, all situated in a kitchen
where a robot is assisting a human with a cooking task:

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6957

“Pick up the [knife]k . Cut the [tomato]t . Put itk,t
down.”

(3)

“Pick up the [knife]k . Cut the [tomato]t . Put itk,t,b
in the [bowl]b .”

(4)

[Speaker context - A:Washing dishes, B: Cooking]
“Pick up the [knife]k . Cut the [tomato]t . Pass itk,t to
me.”

(5)

