The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Horizontal Pyramid Matching for Person Re-Identification
Yang Fu,1 Yunchao Wei,1∗ Yuqian Zhou,1 Honghui Shi,1,2
Gao Huang,3 Xinchao Wang,4 Zhiqiang Yao,5 Thomas Huang1
1
IFP, Beckman Institute, UIUC, 2 IBM Research,
Cornell University, 4 Stevens Institute of Technology, 5 CloudWalk Technology
{yangfu2, yunchao, yuqian2, t-huang1}@illinois.edu, honghui.shi@ibm.com
gh349@cornell.edu, xinchao.wang@stevens.edu, yaozhiqiang@cloudwalk.cn

3

Horizontal Pyramid

Abstract
Despite the remarkable progress in person re-identification
(Re-ID), such approaches still suffer from the failure cases
where the discriminative body parts are missing. To mitigate
this type of failure, we propose a simple yet effective Horizontal Pyramid Matching (HPM) approach to fully exploit
various partial information of a given person, so that correct
person candidates can be identified even if some key parts
are missing. With HPM, we make the following contributions
to produce more robust feature representations for the Re-ID
task: 1) we learn to classify using partial feature representations at different horizontal pyramid scales, which successfully enhance the discriminative capabilities of various person parts; 2) we exploit average and max pooling strategies
to account for person-specific discriminative information in a
global-local manner. To validate the effectiveness of our proposed HPM method, extensive experiments are conducted on
three popular datasets including Market-1501, DukeMTMCReID and CUHK03. Respectively, we achieve mAP scores of
83.1%, 74.5% and 59.7% on these challenging benchmarks,
which are the new state-of-the-arts.

Convolutional Layers
GAP

2x

4x

8x

GMP

2x

4x

8x

Person ID

Person ID

Person ID

Person ID

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed Horizontal Pyramid
Matching. We split a person into different horizontal parts
of multiple scales. The feature representations produced by
Global Average Pooling (GAP) and Global Max Pooling
(GMP) of each part are then leveraged to learn to the person Re-ID independently.

Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims at re-identifying a
query person from a collection of images, which are taken
by multiple cameras across time. It is challenging to learning robust feature representations (Yang et al. 2009) for each
person because of large variations of human attributes like
poses, gaits, clothes, as well as the environmental settings
like illumination, complex background, and occlusions.
To address the complexities of visual cues, deep-based
approaches (Ahmed, Jones, and Marks 2015; Hermans,
Beyer, and Leibe 2017; Ding et al. 2015; Chen et al. 2017;
Li et al. 2014) provide promising solutions. However, these
approaches only take advantage of global person features,
which turns out to be sensitive to the missing key parts.
To relieve such issues, many recent approaches have been
focusing on learning partial discriminative feature representations. These methods usually take advantage of both global
features like body size and local ones like cloths logo, to
enhance the robustness of the Re-ID methods. They can

be categorized into three types by local-region generation
schemes. In the first type, prior knowledge like poses or
body landmarks are estimated and extracted to localize the
discriminative regions (Su et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2017;
Wei et al. 2017). However, the performance of Re-ID in this
case highly relies on the robustness of the pose or landmark
estimation models. Unexpected errors like erroneous estimation of poses may greatly influence the identification result. The second type, attention-based approaches (Liu et al.
2016; 2017; Zhao et al. 2017b; Li, Zhu, and Gong 2018;
Fu et al. 2019), focuses on extracting the salient regions
of interest(ROI) adaptively by localizing the high activations in the deep feature maps. The selected regions however lack semantic interpretation. The third type crops deep
feature maps into pre-defined patches or stripes assuming the images are perfectly aligned (Sun et al. 2017b;
Li et al. 2017), and thus prone to errors introduced by outliers.
To effectively learn partial discriminative features and
eliminate the negative effect caused by unexpected pose-

∗

corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8295

