The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Randomized Strategies for Robust Combinatorial Optimization∗
Yasushi Kawase

Hanna Sumita

Tokyo Institute of Technology
RIKEN AIP Center
kawase.y.ab@m.titech.ac.jp

Tokyo Metropolitan University
sumita@tmu.ac.jp

Abstract

another example. Krause, Roper, and Golovin (2011) and
Chen et al. (2017) formulated such problems as the following robust combinatorial optimization problem; given an independence system (E, I) (where I ⊆ 2E ) and set functions f1 , . . . , fn : 2E → R+ , the goal is to find a minimax
randomized strategy p that maximizes
the worst case perP
formance, i.e., mink∈{1,...,n} X∈I pX fk (X). Throughout
this paper, we denote [n] = {1, . . . , n} for a positive integer n. An independence system is a set system generalizing families of knapsack solutions and matroids; we give the
formal definition in the preliminaries. The above problem
is regarded as the problem of computing the game value in
a two-person zero-sum game where one player (Algorithm)
selects a feasible solution and the other player (Adversary)
selects an objective function.
The robust optimization problem has also widespread application in game theory and combinatorial optimization.
One is the problem of computing the Stackelberg equilibrium of the (zero-sum) security games. This game models
the interaction between a system defender (Algorithm) and
a malicious attacker (Adversary) to the system. The model
and its game-theoretic solution have various applications in
the real world (Tambe 2011).
Another application is the problem of maximizing the
cardinality robustness for the maximum weight independent set problem (Hassin and Rubinstein 2002; Fujita,
Kobayashi, and Makino 2013; Kakimura and Makino
2013; Matuschke, Skutella, and Soto 2018; Kobayashi and
Takazawa 2016). The goal is to choose an independent set
of size at most k with as large total weight as possible, but
the cardinality bound k is not known in advance. We refer
this problem to the maximum cardinality robustness problem (MCRP). We can regard MCRP as the game where Algorithm chooses an independent set X and then Adversary
chooses k knowing X. We will describe details of these applications in the preliminaries.
One most standard way to solve the robust optimization
problem is to use the linear programming (LP). In fact,
it is known that we can compute the exact game value in
polynomial time with respect to the numbers of deterministic (pure) strategies for both players (see, e.g., Nisan et
al.; Bowles (2007; 2009) for more details). However, in our
setting, direct use of the LP formulation is not effective. The
set of deterministic strategies for the algorithm has exponen-

In this paper, we study the following robust optimization
problem. Given an independence system and candidate objective functions, we choose an independent set, and then
an adversary chooses one objective function, knowing our
choice. The goal is to find a randomized strategy (i.e., a probability distribution over the independent sets) that maximizes
the expected objective value in the worst case. This problem
is fundamental in wide areas such as artificial intelligence,
machine learning, game theory and optimization. To solve
the problem, we propose two types of schemes for designing approximation algorithms. One scheme is for the case
when objective functions are linear. It first finds an approximately optimal aggregated strategy and then retrieves a desired solution with little loss of the objective value. The approximation ratio depends on a relaxation of an independence
system polytope. As applications, we provide approximation
algorithms for a knapsack constraint or a matroid intersection by developing appropriate relaxations and retrievals. The
other scheme is based on the multiplicative weights update
(MWU) method. The direct application of the MWU method
does not yield a strict multiplicative approximation algorithm
but yield one with an additional additive error term. A key
technique to overcome the issue is to introduce a new concept called (η, γ)-reductions for objective functions with parameters η and γ. We show that our scheme outputs a nearly
α-approximate solution if there exists an α-approximation algorithm for a subproblem defined by (η, γ)-reductions. This
improves approximation ratios in previous results. Using our
result, we provide approximation algorithms when the objective functions are submodular or correspond to the cardinality
robustness for the knapsack problem.

1

Introduction

Optimization under uncertainty about the objective is a fundamental task in artificial intelligence and machine learning. For example, consider the problem of controlling
pan-tilt-zoom cameras to protect against adversarial intrusions (Krause, Roper, and Golovin 2011). We need to choose
where to point the cameras under some scenarios of intrusions. Thus, we aim to maximize the chance of detecting
intrusions in the worst case. See also (Chen et al. 2017) for
∗

A full version appears in (Kawase and Sumita 2018).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7876

