The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Knowledge Distillation with
Adversarial Samples Supporting Decision Boundary
Byeongho Heo,1∗ Minsik Lee,2∗ Sangdoo Yun,3 Jin Young Choi1
{bhheo, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr, mleepaper@hanyang.ac.kr, sangdoo.yun@navercorp.com
1
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
2
Division of EE, Hanyang University, Korea
3
Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp, Korea
Abstract

Many of recent studies are focusing on manipulating the
KD loss for various purposes. Romero et al. (2015) and
Zagoruyko and Komodakis (2016) proposed new distillation losses to transfer the hidden layer response of the network and used it with the KD loss. Chen et al. (2017) and
Wang and Lan (2017) designed new distillation losses for
other applications based on the KD loss. In contrast to these
existing approaches that concentrate on how to manipulate
various parts of a network in order to improve the effect of
knowledge distillation, in this paper, we investigate informative samples for an effective knowledge transfer. In general,
samples near the decision boundary of a classifier have a
larger impact on the performance than those far apart from
it (Cortes and Vapnik 1995). Therefore, if we can generate
samples close to the decision boundary, the knowledge of
a teacher network would be transferred more effectively by
utilizing those samples.
To obtain the informative samples close to the decision boundary, we utilize an adversarial attack (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and
Frossard 2016). An adversarial attack is a technique to tamper with the result of a classifier by adding a small perturbation to an input image. Although an adversarial attack is
not particularly aimed at finding a decision boundary, they
are closely related to each other (Cao and Gong 2017). An
adversarial attack tries to find a small modification that can
change the class of a sample, i.e., it tries to move the sample beyond a nearby decision boundary. Inspired by this fact,
we propose to perform knowledge distillation with the help
of an adversarial attack. To get samples beneficial to knowledge distillation, we modify an attack scheme to search an
adversarial sample supporting a decision boundary. The resulting sample is referred to as the boundary supporting sample (BSS) in this paper. A new loss function using BSSs is
suggested for knowledge distillation that transfers decision
boundary to a student classifier. In order to verify whether
the proposed method actually transfers the decision boundaries, we also propose two similarity metrics that compares
the decision boundaries of two classifiers and use these metrics to examine the decision boundaries of a teacher and a
student.
The proposed method is verified through experiments.
First, we show that the use of BSSs could improve the
knowledge distillation scheme of Hinton, Vinyals, and

Many recent works on knowledge distillation have provided
ways to transfer the knowledge of a trained network for improving the learning process of a new one, but finding a good
technique for knowledge distillation is still an open problem.
In this paper, we provide a new perspective based on a decision boundary, which is one of the most important component
of a classifier. The generalization performance of a classifier
is closely related to the adequacy of its decision boundary,
so a good classifier bears a good decision boundary. Therefore, transferring information closely related to the decision
boundary can be a good attempt for knowledge distillation.
To realize this goal, we utilize an adversarial attack to discover samples supporting a decision boundary. Based on this
idea, to transfer more accurate information about the decision boundary, the proposed algorithm trains a student classifier based on the adversarial samples supporting the decision
boundary. Experiments show that the proposed method indeed improves knowledge distillation and achieves the stateof-the-arts performance.

Introduction
Knowledge distillation is a method to enhance the training of a new network based on an existing, already trained
network. In a teacher-student framework, the existing network is considered as a teacher and the new network becomes a student. Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean (2015), a pioneer in knowledge distillation, proposed a loss minimizing the cross-entropy between the outputs of the student and
the teacher, which referred to as the knowledge distillation
loss (KD loss). Due to the KD loss, the student network is
trained to be a better classifier than the network trained without knowledge distillation. Although the goals of the knowledge distillation are diverse, recent studies (Yim et al. 2017;
Chen et al. 2017) focus on improving a small student network using a large network as a teacher using a large teacher
network. These studies aim to create a small network with
the speed of a small network and the performance of a large
network. This paper, too, focuses on knowledge distillation
in the respect of enhancing the performance of a small network using a large network.
∗

Authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3771

