The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Universal Approximation Property and Equivalence of Stochastic
Computing-Based Neural Networks and Binary Neural Networks
Yanzhi Wang,1 Zheng Zhan,2 Liang Zhao,3 Jian Tang,2 Siyue Wang,1 Jiayu Li,2
Bo Yuan,4 Wujie Wen,5 Xue Lin1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244
3
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Lehman College of CUNY, Bronx, NY 10468
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854
5
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199
2

Abstract

2017b; Umuroglu et al. 2017; Han et al. 2016; Chen et al.
2014; Moons et al. 2017). These hardware accelerations are
based on FPGA and ASIC devices and can achieve a significant improvement on energy efficiency, along with small
form factor, compared with traditional CPU or GPU based
computing of deep neural networks. Both characteristics are
critical for the battery-powered embedded and autonomous
systems.
Hardware systems, including FPGAs and ASICs, have
much higher peak performance for binary operations compared to floating point ones. Besides, it is also desirable to
reduce the model size of deep neural network such that the
whole model can be stored using on-chip memory, thereby
reducing the timing and energy overheads of off-chip storage and communications. As a result, the Binary Neural
Networks (BNNs), proposed by (Courbariaux, Bengio, and
David 2015), are particularly appealing since they can be
implemented almost entirely with binary operations, with
the potential to attain performance in the tera-operations per
second (TOPS) range on FPGAs or ASICs.
Besides BNNs, reference work (Ren et al. 2017; Yu et
al. 2017; Kyounghoon Kim 2015; Merolla et al. 2014;
Li et al. 2018; Neftci 2016; Andreou and Chatzis 2016)
have also proposed to utilize the hardware-oriented Stochastic Computing (SC) technique for developing (large-scale)
deep neural networks, i.e., SCNNs. The SC technique represents a number using the portion of 1’s in a bit sequence.
Many key operations in neural networks, such as multiplications and additions, can be implemented in a single gate in
SC. For example, multiplication of two stochastic numbers
can be implemented using a single AND gate or XNOR gate
(depending on unipolar or bipolar representations). It enables the efficient implementation of deep neural networks
with extremely small hardware footprint.
The BNNs and SCNNs are essentially alike: Both rely on
binary operations and very simple calculations in hardware
such as AND, XNOR gates, multiplexers and counters. For
their distinctions, SCNNs ”stretch” in the temporal domain
and use a bit sequence (stochastic number) to approximate
a real number, whereas BNNs ”span” in the spatial domain
and require more input and hidden neurons to maintain the
desired accuracy.

Large-scale deep neural networks are both memory and
computation-intensive, thereby posing stringent requirements
on the computing platforms. Hardware accelerations of deep
neural networks have been extensively investigated. Specific forms of binary neural networks (BNNs) and stochastic
computing-based neural networks (SCNNs) are particularly
appealing to hardware implementations since they can be implemented almost entirely with binary operations.
Despite the obvious advantages in hardware implementation,
these approximate computing techniques are questioned by
researchers in terms of accuracy and universal applicability.
Also it is important to understand the relative pros and cons
of SCNNs and BNNs in theory and in actual hardware implementations. In order to address these concerns, in this paper we prove that the ”ideal” SCNNs and BNNs satisfy the
universal approximation property with probability 1 (due to
the stochastic behavior), which is a new angle from the original approximation property. The proof is conducted by first
proving the property for SCNNs from the strong law of large
numbers, and then using SCNNs as a “bridge” to prove for
BNNs. Besides the universal approximation property, we also
derive an appropriate bound for bit length M in order to provide insights for the actual neural network implementations.
Based on the universal approximation property, we further
prove that SCNNs and BNNs exhibit the same energy complexity. In other words, they have the same asymptotic energy
consumption with the growth of network size. We also provide a detailed analysis of the pros and cons of SCNNs and
BNNs for hardware implementations and conclude that SCNNs are more suitable.

Introduction
Large-scale neural networks are both memory-intensive
and computation-intensive, thereby posing stringent requirements on the computing platforms when deploying those
large-scale neural network models on memory-constrained
and energy-constrained embedded devices. In order to overcome these limitations, the hardware accelerations of deep
neural networks have been extensively investigated in both
industry and academia (Mahajan et al. 2016; Zhao et al.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5369

