The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Making Money from What You Know - How to Sell Information?
Shani Alkoby,1 Zihe Wang,2 David Sarne,3 Pingzhong Tang4
1

The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China
3
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel 4 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
shani.alkoby@gmail.com, wzh5858588@163.com, sarned@cs.biu.ac.il, kenshinping@gmail.com
2

Abstract

the true state of the world, out of several possible states, and
provide this information to prospective information buyers.
This setting is common in real life. For example, the information can relate to the true value of a car (e.g., by Kelley
Blue Book or Carfax), the true worth of a company the buyer
is interested in taking over, the exact weather for one’s wedding day and the true amount of oil buried in a given land
a firm owns. Common to all these examples, that the true
state of the world is a priori uncertain, and by disambiguating the uncertainty associated with it the information buyer
can make better decisions hence increase her profit.
The analysis provided considers and compares three information selling methods for the above archetypal setting.
The first is the traditional method, according to which the
exact state of the world is delivered for a fee. The second
enables the information buyer to query about any specific
potential world state for a fee (different for each world state,
and changing as the process progresses). The third offers the
elimination of one world state randomly picked from the set
of non-true world states, for a fee (which changes as the process progresses). If considering the above mentioned oil example, assuming there are several a priori estimates for the
amount of oil buried under the ground, an expert can use the
first method and set a price for selling the exact information.
Alternatively, the seller can offer the buyer to ask specifically whether a certain value is the true one or not. Finally,
the seller can also offer to eliminate one non-true option chosen randomly and by doing so to decrease the number of
states the buyer should further consider.
The first part of the paper provides a game-theoretic based
analysis of information selling using the three methods. We
show that all three methods are equivalent in the sense that
the information provider’s expected profit in equilibrium is
the same regardless of the method used. In the second part,
we report the result of extensive experiments with the three
methods when selling the information to people rather than
fully rational agents. Here, we show that the three methods result in quite different outcomes in terms of the information provider’s profit. Furthermore, using a standard
machine learning technique (decision trees) we show that
the information provider can benefit much from selectively
choosing the method to be used (and the corresponding pricing of the information offered) based on the problem setting.
These results are of great importance both to information

Information plays a key role in many decision situations. The
rapid advancement in communication technologies makes information providers more accessible, and various information providing platforms can be found nowadays, most of
which are strategic in the sense that their goal is to maximize
the providers’ expected profit. In this paper, we consider the
common problem of a strategic information provider offering
prospective buyers information which can disambiguate uncertainties the buyers have, which can be valuable for their
decision making. Unlike prior work, we do not limit the information provider’s strategy to price setting but rather enable
her flexibility over the way information is sold, specifically
enabling querying about specific outcomes and the elimination of a subset of non-true world states alongside the traditional approach of disclosing the true world state. We prove
that for the case where the buyer is self-interested (and the
information provider does not know the true world state beforehand) all three methods (i.e., disclosing the true worldstate value, offering to check a specific value, and eliminating
a random value) are equivalent, yielding the same expected
profit to the information provider. For the case where buyers
are human subjects, using an extensive set of experiments we
show that the methods result in substantially different outcomes. Furthermore, using standard machine learning techniques the information provider can rather accurately predict
the performance of the different methods for new problem
settings, hence substantially increase profit.

1
1.1

Introduction

Discussion

One interesting trend reflected in the Fortune 500 lists in recent years is the increase in the number of companies whose
primary business is producing and selling information rather
than traditional tangible goods. The types and natures of the
information offered and the business models used for selling it greatly vary. Yet the goal of all the firms offering it is
similar - maximizing their profit. Hence there is a growing
interest in finding ways for improving the effectiveness of
information offerings and their pricing.
In this paper we consider the problem of a strategic information provider who can obtain (or calculate or predict)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2421

