The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Finding All Bayesian Network Structures within a Factor of Optimal
Zhenyu A. Liao,1 Charupriya Sharma,1 James Cussens,2 Peter van Beek1
1

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
2
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York, United Kingdom
{z6liao, c9sharma, vanbeek}@uwaterloo.ca, james.cussens@york.ac.uk

Abstract

and Friedman 2009). In the context of knowledge discovery,
Bayesian model averaging allows one to estimate, for example, the posterior probability that an edge is present, rather
than just knowing whether the edge is present in the bestscoring network. Previous work has proposed Bayesian and
frequentist model averaging approaches to network structure learning that enumerate the space of all possible DAGs
(Koivisto and Sood 2004), sample from the space of all possible DAGs (He, Tian, and Wu 2016, Madigan and Raftery
1994), consider the space of all DAGs consistent with a
given ordering of the random variables (Buntine 1991, Dash
and Cooper 2004), consider the space of tree-structured or
other restricted DAGs (Madigan and Raftery 1994, Meilă
and Jaakkola 2000), and consider only the k-best scoring
DAGs for some given value of k (Chen, Choi, and Darwiche 2015, Chen, Choi, and Darwiche 2016, Chen, Darwiche, and Choi 2018, Chen and Tian 2014, He, Tian, and
Wu 2016, Tian, He, and Ram 2010). Unfortunately, these
existing approaches either severely restrict the structure of
the Bayesian network, such as only allowing tree-structured
networks or only considering a single ordering, or have only
been shown to scale to small Bayesian networks with fewer
than 30 random variables.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to model averaging for BN structure learning that is inspired by performance guarantees in approximation algorithms. Let OPT be
the score of the optimal BN and assume without loss of generality that the optimization problem is to find the minimumscore BN. Instead of finding the k-best networks for some
fixed value of k, we propose to find all Bayesian networks G
that are within a factor ρ of optimal; i.e.,

A Bayesian network is a widely used probabilistic graphical
model with applications in knowledge discovery and prediction. Learning a Bayesian network (BN) from data can be cast
as an optimization problem using the well-known score-andsearch approach. However, selecting a single model (i.e., the
best scoring BN) can be misleading or may not achieve the
best possible accuracy. An alternative to committing to a single model is to perform some form of Bayesian or frequentist
model averaging, where the space of possible BNs is sampled or enumerated in some fashion. Unfortunately, existing
approaches for model averaging either severely restrict the
structure of the Bayesian network or have only been shown
to scale to networks with fewer than 30 random variables. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach to model averaging
inspired by performance guarantees in approximation algorithms. Our approach has two primary advantages. First, our
approach only considers credible models in that they are optimal or near-optimal in score. Second, our approach is more
efficient and scales to significantly larger Bayesian networks
than existing approaches.

Introduction
A Bayesian network is a widely used probabilistic graphical
model with applications in knowledge discovery, explanation, and prediction (Darwiche 2009, Koller and Friedman
2009). A Bayesian network (BN) can be learned from data
using the well-known score-and-search approach, where a
scoring function is used to evaluate the fit of a proposed BN
to the data, and the space of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
is searched for the best-scoring BN. However, selecting a
single model (i.e., the best-scoring BN) may not always be
the best choice. When one is using BNs for knowledge discovery and explanation with limited data, selecting a single
model may be misleading as there may be many other BNs
that have scores that are very close to optimal and the posterior probability of even the best-scoring BN is often close
to zero. As well, when one is using BNs for prediction, selecting a single model may not achieve the best possible accuracy.
An alternative to committing to a single model is to perform some form of Bayesian or frequentist model averaging (Claeskens and Hjort 2008, Hoeting et al. 1999, Koller

OPT ≤ score(G) ≤ ρ · OPT ,

(1)

for some given value of ρ ≥ 1, or equivalently,
OPT ≤ score(G) ≤ OPT + ,

(2)

for  = (ρ − 1) · OPT . Instead of choosing arbitrary values for ,  ≥ 0, we show that for the two scoring functions
BIC/MDL and BDeu, a good choice for the value of  is
closely related to the Bayes factor, a model selection criterion summarized in (Kass and Raftery 1995).
Our approach has two primary advantages. First, our approach only considers credible models in that they are optimal or near-optimal in score. Approaches that enumerate

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7892

