The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CNN-Cert: An Efficient Framework for
Certifying Robustness of Convolutional Neural Networks
Akhilan Boopathy,1 Tsui-Wei Weng,1 Pin-Yu Chen,2 Sijia Liu,2 Luca Daniel1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research

Abstract

difference in real-valued vector representations (e.g., pixel
values for images or embeddings for texts). Popular norm
choices are `1 (Chen et al. 2018), `2 (Carlini and Wagner
2017b), and `∞ (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017).
The methodology of evaluating model robustness against
adversarial attacks can be divided into two categories: gamebased or verification-based. Game-based approaches measure the success in mitigating adversarial attacks via mounting empirical validation against a (self-chosen) set of attacks. However, many defense methods have shown to be
broken or bypassed by attacks that are adaptive to these
defenses under the same threat model (Carlini and Wagner 2017a; Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018), and therefore their robustness claims may not extend to untested attacks. On the other hand, verification-based approaches provide certified defense against any possible attacks under a
threat model. In the case of an `p norm-ball bounded threat
model, a verified robustness certificate  means the (top-1)
model prediction on the input data cannot be altered if the
attack strength (distortion measured by `p norm) is smaller
than . Different from game-based approaches, verification
methods are attack-agnostic and hence can formally certify
robustness guarantees, which is crucial to security-sensitive
and safety-critical applications.
Although verification-based approaches can provide robustness certification, finding the minimum distortion (i.e.,
the maximum certifiable robustness) of NNs with ReLU activations has been shown to be an NP-complete problem
(Katz et al. 2017). While minimum distortion can be attained
in small and shallow networks (Katz et al. 2017; Lomuscio and Maganti 2017; Cheng, Nührenberg, and Ruess 2017;
Fischetti and Jo 2017), these approaches are not even scalable to moderate-sized NNs. Recent works aim to circumvent the scalability issue by efficiently solving a non-trivial
lower bound on the minimum distortion (Kolter and Wong
2018; Weng et al. 2018a; Dvijotham et al. 2018). However,
existing methods may lack generality in supporting different network architectures and activation functions. In addition, current methods often deal with convolutional layers
by simply converting back to fully-connected layers, which
may lose efficiency if not fully optimized with respect to
the NNs, as demonstrated in our experiments. To bridge this
gap, we propose CNN-Cert, a general and efficient verification framework for certifying robustness of a broad range

Verifying robustness of neural network classifiers has attracted great interests and attention due to the success of
deep neural networks and their unexpected vulnerability to
adversarial perturbations. Although finding minimum adversarial distortion of neural networks (with ReLU activations)
has been shown to be an NP-complete problem, obtaining
a non-trivial lower bound of minimum distortion as a provable robustness guarantee is possible. However, most previous works only focused on simple fully-connected layers
(multilayer perceptrons) and were limited to ReLU activations. This motivates us to propose a general and efficient
framework, CNN-Cert, that is capable of certifying robustness on general convolutional neural networks. Our framework is general – we can handle various architectures including convolutional layers, max-pooling layers, batch normalization layer, residual blocks, as well as general activation
functions; our approach is efficient – by exploiting the special structure of convolutional layers, we achieve up to 17
and 11 times of speed-up compared to the state-of-the-art certification algorithms (e.g. Fast-Lin, CROWN) and 366 times
of speed-up compared to the dual-LP approach while our algorithm obtains similar or even better verification bounds.
In addition, CNN-Cert generalizes state-of-the-art algorithms
e.g. Fast-Lin and CROWN. We demonstrate by extensive experiments that our method outperforms state-of-the-art lowerbound-based certification algorithms in terms of both bound
quality and speed.

Introduction
Recently, studies on adversarial robustness of state-of-theart machine learning models, particularly neural networks
(NNs), have received great attention due to interests in
model explainability (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015) and rapidly growing concerns on security implications (Biggio and Roli 2017). Take image recognition as a
motivating example, imperceptible adversarial perturbations
of natural images can be easily crafted to manipulate the
model predictions, known as prediction-evasive adversarial
attacks. One widely-used threat model to quantify the attack strengths is the norm-ball bounded attacks, where the
distortion between an original example and the corresponding adversarial example is measured by the `p norm of their
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3240

