The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Augmenting Markov Decision Processes with Advising
Loı̈s Vanhée,∗ Laurent Jeanpierre,∗ Abdel-Illah Mouaddib∗
GREYC, Université de Caen, France

Abstract

Available MIPS suffer from three major limitations: 1)
OW costs are linear to system use (e.g. a check for each
generated plan), 2) no flexibility on OW management (operator support must be performed last minute, causing time
pressure, frustration, and stress (Hart and Staveland 1988)),
and 3) the system requires an expensive training phase. Planvalidation based approaches suffer from limitations 1 and 2,
while learning-based approaches suffer from all three limitations. This paper aims to answer the following research
question: how to decrease OW costs and enable flexible OW
management, with limited training phase? The key novelty
brought by this paper lies in covering environmental irregularities by providing means for the user to augment the planning model using (prescriptive) advising. This way, operator
support is required only once for multiple plan generations
(thus lowering OW costs), can be performed both a priori
and on-demand (before and when plans are to be generated),
and no expensive training is required for the system to be operational.
This paper proposes a new formalism for overcoming
these issues, which we call Advice-MDPs (Advice Markov
Decision Processes). Advice-MDPs are Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs (Puterman 1994)) expanded with advising, for defining situationally-forbidden actions and augmenting state definition with an external information on
whether it is desired, undesired, or forbidden. The various
types of advice are interpreted following an order, from the
hardest (forbidden) to the softest (desired): we aim to generate advice-compliant policies that first avoid performing
forbidden situational actions, then optimize the compromise
between reaching goals and avoiding forbidden states, and
then optimize the compromise between reaching desirable
states and avoiding undesirable states.
In addition to the formalism, this paper proposes a fast
approximate algorithm for solving Advice-MDPs. This algorithm is based on a lexicographic multi-criteria valueiteration algorithm using Ordered Weighted Regret (Sigaud
and Buffet 2010)
Finally, this paper demonstrates the relevance of AdviceMDPs for solving real-world problems, by deploying them
for a professional-class application. Our industry partner
seeks to deploy mobile-robots in unexpected and complex
environments, for contexts such as supporting the evacuation
of civilians in harmful situations, disaster recovery (Ram-

This paper introduces Advice-MDPs, an expansion of
Markov Decision Processes for generating policies that take
into consideration advising on the desirability, undesirability, and prohibition of certain states and actions. AdviceMDPs enable the design of designing semi-autonomous systems (systems that require operator support for at least handling certain situations) that can efficiently handle unexpected complex environments. Operators, through advising,
can augment the planning model for covering unexpected
real-world irregularities. This advising can swiftly augment
the degree of autonomy of the system, so it can work without
subsequent human intervention.
This paper details the Advice-MDP formalism, a fast AdviceMDP resolution algorithm, and its applicability for real-world
tasks, via the design of a professional-class semi-autonomous
robot system ready to be deployed in a wide range of unexpected environments and capable of efficiently integrating
operator advising.

Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are one of the most
classic model for planning under uncertainty. However,
MDPs are difficult to deploy for many real-world problems
(e.g. robots in public space, military operations, disasterrecovery). These problems introduce irregularities that are
difficult to foresee at design time (e.g. path-finding hardened
by wind, water, glass, acid, armed threats). These irregularities cause discrepancies between the planning model and the
real-world, thus entailing the generation of irrelevant plans
and failures.
Mixed-Initiative Planning Systems (MIPS) aim to overcome these issues by providing means for human operators to improve plan generation through the validation of
actions and plans, and by providing information that the
system cannot access or infer otherwise (e.g. presence of
threat) (Zilberstein 2015). However, operator support should
be requested with care, as it burdens the operators, causing
Operator-Workload (OW), which is costly.
∗

Contact author: lois.vanhee@unicaen.fr. Funded by the
Agence Nationale de la Recherche and the Direction Générale de
l’Armement (ANR-14-ASTR-0018).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2531

