The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Super Sparse Convolutional Neural Networks
Yao Lu,1 Guangming Lu,∗1 Bob Zhang,2 Yuanrong Xu,1 Jinxing Li3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
2
Department of Computer and Information Science,University of Macau, Macau
3
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
yaolu 1992@126.com, luguangm@hit.edu.cn, bobzhang@umac.mo, xuyuanrong1988@126.com, csjxli@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

in the networks, such as (Han et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2017;
Dong, Chen, and Pan 2017; Hubara et al. 2016; Lin, Zhao,
and Pan 2017). However, these methods are not flexible during training and they do not perform well in terms of accuracy. The second category of methods are proposing more
efficient structures to remove the redundancy of the parameters. One of the most popular structures is the branchy network, such as the latest MobileNet family (Howard et al.
2017; Sandler et al. 2018) and IGCV family (Xie et al. 2018;
Sun et al. 2018) networks. These branchy architectures
are implemented by “group convolutions” and also called
group-conv mobile CNNs.

To construct small mobile networks without performance loss
and address the over-fitting issues caused by the less abundant
training datasets, this paper proposes a novel super sparse
convolutional (SSC) kernel, and its corresponding network
is called SSC-Net. In a SSC kernel, every spatial kernel has
only one non-zero parameter and these non-zero spatial positions are all different. The SSC kernel can effectively select
the pixels from the feature maps according to its non-zero
positions and perform on them. Therefore, SSC can preserve
the general characteristics of the geometric and the channels’
differences, resulting in preserving the quality of the retrieved
features and meeting the general accuracy requirements. Furthermore, SSC can be entirely implemented by the “shift” and
“group point-wise” convolutional operations without any spatial kernels (e.g., “3 × 3”). Therefore, SSC is the first method
to remove the parameters’ redundancy from the both spatial extent and the channel extent, leading to largely decreasing the parameters and Flops as well as further reducing the
img2col and col2img operations implemented by the low leveled libraries. Meanwhile, SSC-Net can improve the sparsity
and overcome the over-fitting more effectively than the other
mobile networks. Comparative experiments were performed
on the less abundant CIFAR and low resolution ImageNet
datasets. The results showed that the SSC-Nets can significantly decrease the parameters and the computational Flops
without any performance losses. Additionally, it can also improve the ability of addressing the over-fitting problem on the
more challenging less abundant datasets.

Group convolutions
It is generally known that a regular convolutional kernel has
spatial extent and channel extent, where the former value is
always much smaller than the latter, for instance, a kernel
with a size of “3 × 3 × 32 × 32”. Therefore, “group convolutions” is proposed to remove the redundancy from the
channel extent. It equally divides the input channels and the
convolutional filters into several groups, and in every group ,
it performs the corresponding filters. “Group convolutions”
can effectively reduce parameters and computations. However, there are no interactions among the groups. This leads
to the less accurate approximations of the regular kernel.
To resolve this issue, the “shuffle channel” was proposed in
ShuffleNet (Zhang et al. 2017).

Introduction and related works

Shuffle channel operation

The models’ size of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
is usually too large to be deployed on the mobile devices and
they often suffer from the over-fitting problem caused by the
less abundant datasets. As illustrated in (Wu et al. 2018),
most of the learned parameters are close to zero and the activated feature maps from different channels in a layer share
similar geometric characteristics. This implies the parameters of the convolutional kernel are very redundant. Therefore, numerous methods, which can be classified into two
categories, have been proposed to compress the networks.
The algorithms in the first category are mostly based on
pruning the weights or neurons and quantizing the weights

Shuffle channel operation was used between two “group
convolutions” to shuffle the out feature maps from all the
groups along the channel extent. The general process is
shown in Figure 1. Suppose it first splits the input channels to G parts and every part has C channels. Then, every
part is fed to the first corresponding group convolutions (G
groups). Next, all the output feature maps are concatenated
together and permuted to be divided into C partitions. Finally, another “group convolutions” with C groups are performed separately on C partitions and concatenate all the
output feature maps. Although this operation can remedy the
no connections for different groups along the channel extent,
it still needs the convolutional kernels with a spatial size of
“3 × 3”, which is redundant in the spatial dimensions .

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4440

