The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Quantization for Neural Networks
with Binary Weights and Low Bitwidth Activations
Kun Huang,1 Bingbing Ni,1,2,3∗ Xiaokang Yang1,3
1

Binary weight

𝑤
𝑔𝑤

𝑤
෥

Multi-level
binarization

gradient of Loss

𝑥

Linear/Logarithmic quantizer

Real-valued activation
Feed Forward

…

Loss

…

Real-valued weight

CReLU

Input

Quantization has shown stunning efficiency on deep neural network, especially for portable devices with limited
resources. Most existing works uncritically extend weight
quantization methods to activations. However, we take the
view that best performance can be obtained by applying different quantization methods to weights and activations respectively. In this paper, we design a new activation function dubbed CReLU from the quantization perspective and
further complement this design with appropriate initialization
method and training procedure. Moreover, we develop a specific quantization strategy in which we formulate the forward
and backward approximation of weights with binary values
and quantize the activations to low bitwdth using linear or
logarithmic quantizer. We show, for the first time, our final
quantized model with binary weights and ultra low bitwidth
activations outperforms the previous best models by large
margins on ImageNet as well as achieving nearly a 10.85×
theoretical speedup with ResNet-18. Furthermore, ablation
experiments and theoretical analysis demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of CReLU in comparison with other
activation functions.

CReLU

Abstract

BatchNorm

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
SJTU-UCLA Joint Research Center on Machine Perception and Inference, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science
hunterkun94@gmail.com, {nibingbing, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Convolution

2

𝑥෤

Low bitwidth activation

Back propagate

Figure 1: A graphical illustration of the training process of
our quantized neural networks with binarized weights and
low bitwidth activations.

Some prior works first focus on quantizing weights to
reduce the model size. In particular, (Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015) introduce BinaryConnect, a method
which forces the weights to be binary during the forward
and backward propagations. They obtained near state-ofthe-art results on the small datasets like MNIST, CIFAR-10.
Later, (Li, Zhang, and Liu 2016) proposed ternary weight
networks (TWNs) with weights quantized to {−α, 0, +α},
which achieved better performance on large dataset due to
the increased weight precision and scaling factors. However, it is less effective from the computation saving perspective due to the activations are still left to be full-precision
(i.e., the input to convolution layers). Recently, BNN (Courbariaux et al. 2016) and XNOR-Net (Rastegari et al. 2016)
explored both weights and activations binarization, which
can not only reduce model size 32 times compared to fullprecision version but cut down execution time since expensive dot-products can be replaced by bitwise operations.
However, they directly quantize both weights and activations
in the same manner without considering different characteristics of them. As a result, both works suffer from nontrivial
losses in large-scale classification tasks on ImageNet (from
56.6% to 27.9% and 44.2% respectively). In this paper, we
argue that best performance can be obtained by applying different quantization methods to weights and activations respectively.
For the issue of activations quantization, we observe that
the unbounded output of ReLU function is disadvantageous
for upcoming quantization. Hence, it is necessary to limit
the dynamic range of activations to minimize quantization
error. Motivated by this observation, we propose a novel ac-

Introduction
Deep neural networks have made unparalleled progress in
a variety of computer vision tasks such as image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), object detection (Girshick 2015) and semantic segmentation (Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015). The promising results DNNs
have achieved are often built on a vast number of parameters (e.g., AlexNet comes along with nearly 61 million
real-valued parameters and 1.5 billion floating-point operations to classify an image (Guo et al. 2017)). However, their
complexity is an impediment to widespread deployment on
portable devices with limited memory or computational resources. Recently, substantial research efforts are invested to
alleviate this problem. One common method proven effective is to quantize the full-precision network directly, which
can greatly save memory requirement and speed up models
using specialized hardware implementation (e.g. FPGA and
Google’s TPU (Jouppi et al. 2017)).
∗

Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3854

