The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

When Do Words Matter? Understanding the Impact of Lexical
Choice on Audience Perception Using Individual Treatment Effect Estimation
Zhao Wang, Aron Culotta
Department of Computer Science
Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL 60616
zwang185@hawk.iit.edu, aculotta@iit.edu

Abstract

does changing the word “excited” to “stoked” in the example above increase the chance that a reader will infer the user
to be male? Being able to answer such questions has implications not only for marketing and public messaging campaigns, but also for author obfuscation (Hagen, Potthast, and
Stein 2017) and stylistic deception detection (Afroz, Brennan, and Greenstadt 2012).
A standard empirical approach is to conduct a Randomized Control Trial (RCT), in which subjects are shown texts
that differ only in a single linguistic change, and are subsequently asked to rate their perception with respect to a
particular attribute. By controlling for the context, we can
then attribute changes in perception to the single linguistic
change.
Unfortunately, it is impractical to scale such RCTs to the
many possible word substitutions across thousands of sentences, making applications based on such methods infeasible. The goal of this paper is to instead investigate automated
methods that estimate how a specific lexical choice affects
perception of a single sentence. Our approach builds upon
a type of causal inference called Individual Treatment Effect
(ITE) estimation. An ITE estimation algorithm estimates the
effect of an intervention on an individual; e.g., how effective a drug will be for a specific person. Recently, a number
of ITE estimators have been proposed that require only observational data, based on Rubin’s potential outcome framework (Rubin 1974). In this paper, we formulate our problem
as a type of ITE estimation, which we call Lexical Substitution Effect (LSE) estimation. We propose two classes of
LSE estimators. The first class adapts previous algorithms in
ITE estimation to the task of LSE estimation. These methods take as input sentences labeled according to attributes
of interest (e.g., a tweet labeled by the gender of the author)
and then produces tuples of the form (wi , wj , s, τ̂ ), indicating the estimated LSE (τ̂ ) of changing the word wi to wj for
sentence s, with respect to the attribute of interest. The second class of estimator is inspired by recent work that frames
causal inference as a classification problem (Lopez-Paz et
al. 2015). This approach requires some labeled examples of
the form (wi , wj , s, τ ), where τ is the “true” LSE according to a RCT. It then fits a classifier based on properties of
(wi , wj , s) to produce LSE estimates for new sentences.
We conduct studies using three data sources: Airbnb listings, Yelp reviews, and Twitter messages. For Airbnb, we

Studies across many disciplines have shown that lexical
choice can affect audience perception. For example, how
users describe themselves in a social media profile can affect their perceived socio-economic status. However, we lack
general methods for estimating the causal effect of lexical
choice on the perception of a specific sentence. While randomized controlled trials may provide good estimates, they
do not scale to the potentially millions of comparisons necessary to consider all lexical choices. Instead, in this paper, we
first offer two classes of methods to estimate the effect on perception of changing one word to another in a given sentence.
The first class of algorithms builds upon quasi-experimental
designs to estimate individual treatment effects from observational data. The second class treats treatment effect estimation as a classification problem. We conduct experiments
with three data sources (Yelp, Twitter, and Airbnb), finding
that the algorithmic estimates align well with those produced
by randomized-control trials. Additionally, we find that it is
possible to transfer treatment effect classifiers across domains
and still maintain high accuracy.

1

Introduction1

Numerous examples from cognitive science, linguistics, and
marketing show that lexical choice can affect audience perception (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2012; Ludwig et al.
2013; Thibodeau and Boroditsky 2013; Riley and Luippold
2015; Reddy and Knight 2016; Preoţiuc-Pietro, Guntuku,
and Ungar 2017; Packard and Berger 2017; Nguyen et al.
2017). For example, a social media user who writes “I’m
excited!” may be more likely to be perceived as female than
one who writes “I’m stoked!” (Reddy and Knight 2016).
Similarly, a book with a review containing the sentence “I
loved this book!” may be perceived as more desirable than
one with a review stating “An excellent novel.” (Ludwig et
al. 2013).
Despite this prior work, we still lack general methods for
estimating the causal effect on perception of a single linguistic change in a specific sentence. For example, how much
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
An expanded version of this paper is available at:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.04890 ; replication files and data are
available at: https://github.com/tapilab/aaai-2019-words

7233

