The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Controllable Image-to-Video Translation:
A Case Study on Facial Expression Generation
Lijie Fan,1 Wenbing Huang,2 Chuang Gan,3 Junzhou Huang,2 Boqing Gong2
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2 Tencent AI Lab, 3 MIT-Watson Lab
lijiefan@mit.edu, hwenbing@126.com, chuangg@mit.edu, jzhuang@uta.edu, boqinggo@outlook.com

Abstract

The image-to-video translation might seem like an illposed problem because the output has much more unknowns
to fill in than the input values. Although there have been
some works on video generation (Oh et al. 2015; Mathieu,
Couprie, and LeCun 2015; Lotter, Kreiman, and Cox 2016;
Villegas et al. 2017; Tulyakov et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017;
Vondrick and Torralba 2017), they usually take as input multiple video frames and then extrapolate the future from the
recurrent pattern inferred from the input, preventing them
from tackling the image-to-video translation whose input supplies no temporal cue at all. Moreover, it is especially difficult
to generate satisfying video clips of facial expressions for
the following two reasons. One is that humans are familiar
with and sensitive about the facial expressions. Any artifacts,
no matter in the spatial dimensions or along the temporal
dimension, could be noticed by users. The other is that the
face identity is supposed to be preserved in the generated
video clips. In other words, the neural network cannot remember the faces seen in the training stage but instead learn
the “imagination” capabilities so as to handle new faces in
the deployment stage.
Despite the difficulties discussed above, we believe it is
feasible to tackle the image-to-video translation at least in
the particular domain of facial expression generation. First,
different people express emotions in similar manners. For instance, one often opens its mouth when s/he becomes excited
or surprised. Second, the expressions are often “unimodal”
for a fixed type of emotion. In other words, there exists a procedure of gradual change from the neutral mode to the peak
state of an expression. For instance, one increases her/his degree of happiness monotonically until s/he reaches the largest
degree of expression. Third, the human face of a profile photo
draws a majority of users’ attention, leaving the quality of
the generated background less important. All these characteristics significantly reduce the variability of the video frames,
making the image-to-video translation plausible.
In this paper, we propose a user-controllable approach
to the image-to-video translation. Given a single profile
photo as input and a target expression (e.g., happiness), our
model generates several video clips of various lengths. We
allow users to conveniently control the length of a video
clip by specifying an array of real numbers between 0 and
1. Each number indicates the expression degree (e.g., 0.6
out of 1) the corresponding frame is supposed to depict.

The recent advances in deep learning have made it possible
to generate photo-realistic images by using neural networks
and even to extrapolate video frames from an input video clip.
In this paper, for the sake of both furthering this exploration
and our own interest in a realistic application, we study imageto-video translation and particularly focus on the videos of
facial expressions. This problem challenges the deep neural
networks by another temporal dimension comparing to the
image-to-image translation. Moreover, its single input image
fails most existing video generation methods that rely on recurrent models. We propose a user-controllable approach so
as to generate video clips of various lengths from a single
face image. The lengths and types of the expressions are controlled by users. To this end, we design a novel neural network
architecture that can incorporate the user input into its skip
connections and propose several improvements to the adversarial training method for the neural network. Experiments
and user studies verify the effectiveness of our approach. Especially, we would like to highlight that even for the face images
in the wild (downloaded from the Web and the authors’ own
photos), our model can generate high-quality facial expression
videos of which about 50% are labeled as real by Amazon
Mechanical Turk workers.

Introduction
Upon observing the accomplishments of deep neural networks in a variety of subfields of AI, researchers have gained
keen interests in pushing its boundaries forward. Among the
new domains in which they have recently achieved remarkable results, photo-realistic image generation (Goodfellow
et al. 2014; Karras et al. 2017) and image-to-image translation (Isola et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2017) are two well-known
examples — they were considered very difficult in general
as the desired output is extremely high-dimensional, incurring the curse of dimensionality to conventional generative
models. In this paper, for the sake of both furthering this
exploration and our interest in a realistic application, we propose to study image-to-video translation which challenges the
deep models by yet another temporal dimension. We focus
on a special case study: how to generate video clips of rich
facial expressions from a single profile photo of the neutral
expression.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3510

