The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Explainable Recommendation through Attentive Multi-View Learning
Jingyue Gao,1,2 Xiting Wang,2 * Yasha Wang,1 Xing Xie2
1

Peking University, {gaojingyue1997, wangyasha}@pku.edu.cn
2
Microsoft Research Asia, {xitwan, xingx}@microsoft.com

Food

Abstract

Food
High Fiber Food

Meat

Recommender systems have been playing an increasingly important role in our daily life due to the explosive growth of information. Accuracy and explainability are two core aspects
when we evaluate a recommendation model and have become
one of the fundamental trade-offs in machine learning. In this
paper, we propose to alleviate the trade-off between accuracy
and explainability by developing an explainable deep model
that combines the advantages of deep learning-based models
and existing explainable methods. The basic idea is to build
an initial network based on an explainable deep hierarchy
(e.g., Microsoft Concept Graph) and improve the model accuracy by optimizing key variables in the hierarchy (e.g., node
importance and relevance). To ensure accurate rating prediction, we propose an attentive multi-view learning framework.
The framework enables us to handle sparse and noisy data by
co-regularizing among different feature levels and combining
predictions attentively. To mine readable explanations from
the hierarchy, we formulate personalized explanation generation as a constrained tree node selection problem and propose
a dynamic programming algorithm to solve it. Experimental results show that our model outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in terms of both accuracy and explainability.

Vegetable
Seafood
Oyster
Shrimp

Dessert
Steak

Bread

Fruit

Cake

Gelato

Green

Pear
Croissant

Tomato

Arugula

Figure 1: Multi-level user interest extracted using our
method. The hierarchies correspond to a 26-year-old female
Yelp user (left) and a 30-year-old male Yelp user (right). The
features users care most about are highlighted in orange.

and Yu 2017) achieve state-of-the-art accuracy due to
their capacity to model complex high-level features. However, the high-dimensional high-level features they learn
are beyond the comprehension of ordinary users.
• Explainable but shallow. Although many explainable
recommendation methods have been proposed, the explainable components in the models are usually shallow.
Typical explainable components include one or two layers
of attention networks (Chen et al. 2017), matrix factorization (Zhang et al. 2014a), and topic modeling (McAuley
and Leskovec 2013). They have achieved considerable
success in improving explainability. However, the lack
of an effective mechanism to model high-level explicit
features limits their accuracy and/or explainability. These
methods can only select explanations from a pre-defined
level of candidates. They cannot identify which level of
features best represents a user’s true interest. For example,
they are not able to tell whether a user only likes shrimps
(lower level) or is interested in seafood (higher level).
In this paper, we aim to mitigate the trade-off between
accuracy and explainability by developing an explainable
deep model for recommendation. The model achieves stateof-the-art accuracy and is highly explainable. Moreover, it
enables us to accurately portray hierarchical user interest. As
shown in Figure 1, the model can automatically infer multilevel user profiles and identify which level of features best
captures a user’s true interest, e.g., whether s/he is interested
in lower-level features such as shrimp or higher-level features such as seafood.

Introduction
Personalized recommendation has become one of the most
effective techniques to help users sift through massive
amounts of web content and overcome information overload. Recently, the recommendation community has reached
a consensus that accuracy can only be used to partially
evaluate a system. Explainability of the model, which is
the ability to provide explanations for why an item is recommended, is considered equally important (Wang et al.
2018a). Appropriate explanations may persuade users to try
the item, increase users’ trust, and help users make better
decisions (Zhang et al. 2014a).
Determining whether to optimize towards accuracy or explainability poses a fundamental dilemma for practitioners.
Currently, their choices are limited to two types of models:
• Deep but unexplainable. Deep learning-based recommendation models (Wang et al. 2017; Zheng, Noroozi,
* Xiting Wang is the corresponding author
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3622

