The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Sign-Full Random Projections
Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab (CCL)
Baidu Research USA
Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
pingli98@gmail.com

Abstract

Vempala 2004; Papadimitriou et al. 1998; Dasgupta 1999;
Datar et al. 2004; Li, Hastie, and Church 2006).
A popular variant is the “1-bit” random projections (Goemans and Williamson 1995; Charikar 2002), which we refer
to as “sign-sign” random projections, based on the following
result of “collision probability”

The method of 1-bit (“sign-sign”) random projections has
been a popular tool for efficient search and machine learning
on large datasets. Given two D-dim data vectors u, v ∈ RD ,
PD
P
one can generate x = D
i=1 vi ri , where
i=1 ui ri , and y =
ri ∼ N (0, 1) iid. Then one can estimate the cosine similarity ρ from sgn(x) and sgn(y). In this paper, we study a
series of estimators for “sign-full”
random projections. First
q

P (sgn(x) = sgn(y)) = 1 −

2
we prove E(sgn(x)y) =
ρ, which provides an estimaπ
tor for ρ. Interestingly this estimator can be substantially improved by normalizing y. Then we study estimators based
on E (y− 1x≥0 + y+ 1x<0 ) and its normalized version. We
analyze the theoretical limit (using the MLE) and conclude
that, among the proposed estimators, no single estimator can
achieve (close to) the theoretical optimal asymptotic variance,
for the entire range of ρ. On the other hand, the estimators can
be combined to achieve the variance close to that of the MLE.
In applications such as near neighbor search, duplicate detection, knn-classification, etc, the training data are first transformed via random projections and then only the signs of the
projected data points are stored (i.e., the sgn(x)). The original training data are discarded. When a new data point arrives,
we apply random projections but we do not necessarily need
to quantize the projected data (i.e., the y) to 1-bit. Therefore,
sign-full random projections can be practically useful. This
gain essentially comes at no additional cost.

PD

i=1 ui

Introduction

x=

i=1

ui ri ,

y=

D
X

2
i=1 vi

(1)

is the “cosine” similarity be-

tween the two original data vectors u and v. The method
of sign-sign random projections has become popular, for example, in many search related applications (Henzinger 2006;
Manku, Jain, and Sarma 2007; Grimes 2008; Hajishirzi, Yih,
and Kolcz 2010; Türe, Elsayed, and Lin 2011; Manzoor, Milajerdi, and Akoglu 2016).
Note that by using only the signs of the projected data,
we lose the information about the norms of the original vectors. Thus, in this context, with no loss of generality, we
assume that the original data vectors are normalized, i.e.,
PD 2
PD 2
i=1 ui =
i=1 vi = 1. In other words, we can assume
the projected data to be x ∼ N (0, 1) and y ∼ N (0, 1).
Interestingly, one can take advantage of E(sgn(x)y) and
several variants to considerably improve 1-bit random projections. This gain essentially comes at no additional cost.
Basically, the training data after projections are stored using
signs (e.g., sgn(x)). When a new data vector arrives, however, we need to generate its random projections (y) but do
not necessarily have to quantize them.

Consider two high-dimensional data vectors, u, v ∈ RD .
Suppose we generate a D-dim random vector whose entries
are iid standard normal, i.e., ri ∼ N (0, 1), and compute
D
X

u v

√iPiD
where ρ = √PD i=1
2

cos−1 ρ
π

Related Work
The idea of “1-bit” projections has been extended to
“sign cauchy projections” for estimating χ2 similarity (Li,
Samorodnitsky, and Hopcroft 2013), and to “1-bit minwise
hashing” (Broder 1997; Li and König 2010) for estimating
the resemblance between sets. More general quantization
schemes of random projections have been studied in, for example, (Li and Slawski 2017).
In the context of random projections, the idea of estimating ρ from sgn(x) and y was explored in (Dong, Charikar,
and Li 2008). Similar ideas were also studied in the quantization literature (without using random projections) (Jégou,
Douze, and Schmid 2011).

vi ri

i=1

PD
We have in expectation E(xy) = hu, vi =
i=1 ui vi .
If we generate x and y independently for k times, then
Pk
1
j=1 xj yj ≈ E(xy) = hu, vi, and the quality of apk
proximation improves as k increases. This idea of random projections has been widely used for large-scale search
and machine learning (Johnson and Lindenstrauss 1984;
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4205

