The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Querying NoSQL with Deep Learning to Answer Natural Language Questions
Sebastian Blank,1 Florian Wilhelm,1 Hans-Peter Zorn,1 Achim Rettinger2
inovex GmbH,1 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,2
sblank@inovex.de, fwilhelm@inovex.de, hzorn@inovex.de, rettinger@kit.edu

Abstract

To enable the application of a KBQueryBot in real-world
use-cases, it needs to satisfy two conditions. Firstly, it needs
to be trainable in an end-to-end fashion. Labelled data is
always a scarce resource and any kind of additional intermediate labelling to fulfil this task is too costly for practical applications since it requires expert knowledge about the
query language and scales poorly (Liang et al. 2016). On the
other hand, judging the correctness of a retrieved result can
be conducted having only domain knowledge and thus even
active learning-powered techniques can be applied.
Typically, there are two different ways how to interact
with a KB. Agents can either query an external KB with
the corresponding query language or make use of an internal memory that allows for more flexible means of lookups,
e.g. probabilistic lookup. This requires a conversion of the
externally available database into the internal memory rendering the user management and access control capabilities
of modern databases useless. However, lacking these capabilities results in severe issues regarding data security and
privacy. Therefore, our second requirement is that a KBQueryBot needs to cope with today’s prevalent databases
like Elasticsearch, MongoDB and PostgreSQL.
This work contributes to engineering efforts to establish
a standard machine learning model and training procedure
for all kinds of structured database queries via natural language questions. We propose a KBQueryBot which relies
on a sequence-to-sequence model (Sutskever, Vinyals, and
Le 2014) that is augmented with pointer attention (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly
2015). We apply the REINFORCE-algorithm (Williams
1992) which enables us to overcome the problem of nondifferentiable database operations and train our model on
question-answer pairs. Our approach is closely related to
Zhong, Xiong, and Socher (2017) and also uses policy gradient but differs in avoiding the usage of intermediate labels. Our model integrates with Elasticsearch (ES) which is
one of the most popular NoSQL databases1 and dominant in
search-related applications. Typically, users query ES with
the help of graphical user interfaces designed for the specific use-case. However, we notice an increased interest of
business customers to make their KBs accessible by natural
language input to provide an improved user experience.

Almost all of today’s knowledge is stored in databases and
thus can only be accessed with the help of domain specific query languages, strongly limiting the number of people which can access the data. In this work, we demonstrate
an end-to-end trainable question answering (QA) system that
allows a user to query an external NoSQL database by using natural language. A major challenge of such a system
is the non-differentiability of database operations which we
overcome by applying policy-based reinforcement learning.
We evaluate our approach on Facebook’s bAbI Movie Dialog
dataset and achieve a competitive score of 84.2% compared
to several benchmark models. We conclude that our approach
excels with regard to real-world scenarios where knowledge
resides in external databases and intermediate labels are too
costly to gather for non-end-to-end trainable QA systems.

Introduction
Almost all of today’s knowledge is stored and organized
in various types of databases but the ability to access this
knowledge is limited to the ones who have mastered the corresponding query language. Conversational agents promise
to overcome this barrier by allowing humans to query these
resources with natural language thus fostering the democratization of knowledge. The broad domain of conversational
agents can be further subdivided by looking at the complexity of human-machine interaction. Goal-oriented dialog systems follow the purpose of gaining information through conversation in order to complete a specific task. Hence, they
are typically applied in short dialogs that are domain specific. In contrast, non-goal-oriented agents are designed to
have extended conversations without any restriction to a specific domain.
In our opinion, both categories represent long-term goals
in artificial intelligence, but they depend on the practical feasibility of another type of natural language processing (NLP)
task that is much simpler. We define a KBQueryBot as an
agent that fulfils the task of translating a query, posed in natural language, into the domain-specific query language of
an external knowledge base (KB) in order to retrieve factoid
answers in a single-shot manner. This task can also be seen
as a semantic parsing problem.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9416

https://db-engines.com/en/ranking

