The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Answer Identification from Product Reviews for User Questions
by Multi-Task Attentive Networks
Long Chen,1 Ziyu Guan,1∗ Wei Zhao,2 Wanqing Zhao,1 Xiaopeng Wang,1 Zhou Zhao,3 Huan Sun4
1

Northwest University, Xi’an, China
2
Xidian University, Xi’an, China
3
Zhejiang University, Hang Zhou, China
4
Ohio State University, Columbus, USA
1
{longchen@stumail., ziyuguan@, zhaowq@, wangxiaopeng@stumail.}nwu.edu.cn
2
ywzhao@mail.xidian.edu.cn, 3 zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn, 4 sun.397@osu.edu
Abstract

Moghaddam and Ester 2011; Yu, Zha, and Chua 2012),
which cannot well handle sophisticated human language.
Recently, the accumulation of QA data in the QA systems of
e-commerce Websites has motivated research about supervised PRQA methods (McAuley and Yang 2016; Wan and
McAuley 2016). However, these methods just used reviews
as supporting data for answer prediction. They do not try
to identify answers from reviews. To our knowledge, we are
the first to address PRQA by detecting answers from reviews
based on supervision on user generated QA data.

Online Shopping has become a part of our daily routine, but
it still cannot offer intuitive experience as store shopping.
Nowadays, most e-commerce Websites offer a Question Answering (QA) system that allows users to consult other users
who have purchased the product. However, users still need to
wait patiently for others’ replies. In this paper, we investigate
how to provide a quick response to the asker by plausible answer identification from product reviews. By analyzing the
similarity and discrepancy between explicit answers and reviews that can be answers, a novel multi-task deep learning
method with carefully designed attention mechanisms is developed. The method can well exploit large amounts of user
generated QA data and a few manually labeled review data
to address the problem. Experiments on data collected from
Amazon demonstrate its effectiveness and superiority over
competitive baselines.

Table 1: Questions (Q) with answers (A) and positively labeled review sentences (R) for two products (P) in Amazon.
P
Emerson EM510 Stereo Wireless Headset - Bluetooth Headset - Retail Packaging - Black
Q: How long does the battery last?
A:
Around 8+ hours - I use it and approx one hour
a day M-F and only charge it every other week at
the earliest.
R: I work long hours and the battery last
10 to 12 hours .
P
Cheerwing Syma X5SW-V3 FPV Explorers2
2.4Ghz 4CH 6-Axis Gyro RC Headless Quadcopter Drone UFO with HD Wifi Camera (White)
Q: What happens when drone flies out of range of
controller?
A: It will just fall so keep it at a low level if it goes
too far.
R: After the drone went out of range and didn’t stop
and was lost in the woods, I contacted the company and they are issuing a new one to us.

Introduction
Today, people become used to online shopping for convenience. However, such kind of virtual services cannot give
customers the same intuitive experience as store shopping in
which they can directly interact with the real products and
salesclerks. This makes the shopping process in online services less efficient and less trustworthy. To this end, most ecommerce Websites now offer a Question Answering (QA)
system that allows users to consult other users who have purchased the product. Despite its helpfulness, users still need
to wait patiently for others’ replies. On the other hand, customer reviews are an invaluable source of information where
the user question may happen to be addressed therein. Nevertheless, it is unrealistic for a user to browse through the
massive customer reviews for answers. It would greatly enhance user experience that we identify possible answers automatically from reviews and present them to users instantly.
Product-Related Question Answering (PRQA) in ecommerce Websites has received attention. Traditional
PRQA works were focused on generating answers from reviews by unsupervised heuristic methods (Li et al. 2009;

However, the distributions of explicit answers and review
contents that can address the corresponding questions are
not quite the same. The key difference is that, when explicitly answering a question, people tend to omit keywords
about the focus of the question. By “focus”, we mean the
specific topic the asker is concerned with. This is intuitive,
since repeating the focus of the question is usually unnecessary. Table 1 shows two examples. Words related to the focus
are in bold face. The focus of the two questions are “battery

∗

Corresponding author
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

45

