The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Low-Distortion Social Welfare Functions
Gerdus Benadè

Ariel D. Procaccia

Mingda Qiao

Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Computer Science Department
Stanford University

Abstract

From that viewpoint, the best method is the one that minimizes a measure called distortion, defined by Procaccia and
Rosenschein (2006) as the ratio between the social welfare
of the best alternative, and the social welfare of the alternative selected by the method, in the worst case over all utility
functions that are consistent with the observed rankings. Put
another way, this is the approximation ratio to the welfaremaximizing solution, and the need for approximation stems
from lack of information about the true utilities.
In recent years, implicit utilitarian voting has emerged as
a practical approach for helping groups of people make joint
decisions. In particular, optimal social choice functions and
social choice correspondences, based on the implementation of Caragiannis et al. (2017), are deployed on the notfor-profit website RoboVote.org for the case where the
desired output is a single alternative or a subset of winning
alternatives, respectively.
However, RoboVote also has a third output type, a ranking of the alternatives, and for this case the website currently
does not take the same approach — instead it uses the wellknown rule by Kemeny (1959). Indeed, it is unclear how to
even view the problem of designing a social welfare function, which returns a ranking, through the lens of implicit
utilitarian voting — if a voter has a utility for each alternative, what is his utility for a ranking of the alternatives? One
could assume that a voter i has a weight wi,j for each positionP
j, so his utility for the ranking (a1 , a2 , . . . , am ) would
m
be j=1 wi,j ui (aj ); but any particular choice of weights
would be ad hoc.

Work on implicit utilitarian voting advocates the design of
preference aggregation methods that maximize utilitarian social welfare with respect to latent utility functions, based only
on observed rankings of the alternatives. This approach has
been successfully deployed in order to help people choose a
single alternative or a subset of alternatives, but it has previously been unclear how to apply the same approach to the design of social welfare functions, where the desired output is a
ranking. We propose to address this problem by assuming that
voters’ utilities for rankings are induced by unknown weights
and unknown utility functions, which, moreover, have a combinatorial (subadditive) structure. Despite the extreme lack of
information about voters’ preferences, we show that it is possible to choose rankings such that the worst-case gap between
their social welfare and that of the optimal ranking, called distortion, is no larger (up to polylogarithmic factors) than the
distortion associated with much simpler problems. Through
experiments, we identify practical methods that achieve nearoptimal social welfare on average.

1

Introduction

Classical social choice theory typically approaches the problem of preference aggregation from an axiomatic viewpoint,
that is, researchers formulate attractive properties, and ask
whether there are methods that satisfy them. By contrast, research in computational social choice (Brandt et al. 2016)
is often guided by optimization, in that researchers specify
quantitative measures of the desirability of different alternatives, and construct methods that optimize them.
One such approach is known as implicit utilitarian voting (Procaccia and Rosenschein 2006; Boutilier et al. 2015;
Caragiannis et al. 2017). In a nutshell, the idea is that each
voter i has a utility function ui that assigns a value to each
alternative. However, these utility functions are implicit, in
the sense that they cannot be communicated by the voters
(because they are unknown or difficult to pin down). Instead,
voters report rankings of the alternatives that are consistent
with the underlying utility functions, that is, each voter sorts
the alternatives in non-increasing order of utility. The goal
is to choose an alternative a that maximizes
(utilitarian) soP
cial welfare — the sum of utilities i ui (a) — using the
reported rankings as a proxy for the latent utility functions.

1.1

Our Approach and Results

The insight underlying our approach is that the worst-case
perspective also extends to the choice of weights. That is,
when we measure the social welfare of an output ranking
given reported input rankings, we consider the worst case
over both utility functions and weights.
Of course, this is a very conservative approach, and one
might worry that it would lead to massive distortion. But
our main theoretical result is that the distortion of optimal
social welfare functions is asymptotically identical to that of
optimal social choice functions (where there are no weights
whatsoever), up to a polylogarithmic factor — in both cases
√
it is Θ̃( m), where m is the number of alternatives.
In fact, we establish a significantly stronger result, as we

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1788

