The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Predicting Urban Dispersal Events: A Two-Stage
Framework through Deep Survival Analysis on Mobility Data
Amin Vahedian, Xun Zhou, Ling Tong, W. Nick Street
The University of Iowa
{amin-vahediankhezerlou,xun-zhou,ling-tong,nick-street}@uiowa.edu
And

Yanhua Li
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
yli15@wpi.edu
Abstract

the time of dispersion often has a high level of uncertainty due to varying occasions, attendees, and other factors such as weather. Moreover, many events are not planned
or have much higher attendance than expected, such as social protests and gatherings. In addition, many events are not
public and only known to special interest groups and it is not
possible for the public to collect schedules of such events.
For example, large groups of Pokemon Go game players
gather for special events in the game. Social activities organized through instant messaging tools are not public, either. Finally, collecting and verifying schedule information
from various sources often requires costly human labor and
cannot be done in a fully automated manner.
In recent years many big mobility datasets such as taxi
trip data and For-Hire Vehicle (FHV) requests (e.g., Uber),
have become available. Automatic dispersal event prediction, therefore, has become feasible. A typical solution is to
build models to predict taxi demand using the above datasets
and identify high-demand locations as dispersal events. Related research shows taxi demand has a highly predictable
pattern, when predicting near future (Zhao et al. 2016;
Xu et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2016; Zhao et al. 2016;
Moreira-Matias et al. 2013; Davis, Raina, and Jagannathan
2016). However, that is often true only for regular demand
prediction rather than abnormally high demand. In such a
case, the assumptions of pattern repetitiveness are violated
and the methods will fail to provide a timely and accurate
prediction. In particular, their ability to make long-term forecast of abnormally high demand is weak due to assumptions
that demand changes smoothly (auto-correlated) over time.
In this paper, we focus on predicting such non-periodic
and unexpected large dispersal events with abnormally high
taxi demand. Specifically, given the historical taxi trip
records and other relevant features (e.g., weather, POI), we
predict (1) when and where abnormally high taxi demand
will occur, and (2) the volume of demand in the predicted
time span of the dispersal event.
To address the limitations of related work, we propose
an alternative solution. Firstly, we treat dispersal event prediction as a “Survival Analysis” problem, where we learn a
model to predict the probability of “death” (event occurs) at
each location in the future. Secondly, we argue that there
is evidence of demand abnormality during the time leading to it, which can be used to train the survival analysis

Urban dispersal events are processes where an unusually
large number of people leave the same area in a short period.
Early prediction of dispersal events is important in mitigating
congestion and safety risks and making better dispatching decisions for taxi and ride-sharing fleets. Existing work mostly
focuses on predicting taxi demand in the near future by learning patterns from historical data. However, they fail in case of
abnormality because dispersal events with abnormally high
demand are non-repetitive and violate common assumptions
such as smoothness in demand change over time. Instead, in
this paper we argue that dispersal events follow a complex
pattern of trips and other related features in the past, which
can be used to predict such events. Therefore, we formulate
the dispersal event prediction problem as a survival analysis problem. We propose a two-stage framework (DILSA),
where a deep learning model combined with survival analysis is developed to predict the probability of a dispersal event
and its demand volume. We conduct extensive case studies
and experiments on the NYC Yellow taxi dataset from 20142016. Results show that DILSA can predict events in the next
5 hours with F1-score of 0.7 and with average time error of
18 minutes. It is orders of magnitude better than the state-ofthe-art deep learning approaches for taxi demand prediction.

Introduction
An urban dispersal event is the process where an abnormally large crowd leaves the same area within a short period. Dispersal events can be observed after large gathering
events, such as concerts, sporting events, or protests. Unexpected dispersal events often cause public safety risks,
congestion, and high demands of public transportation resources (e.g., taxis) within a short period. Therefore, early
prediction of large dispersal events as well as the crowd size
are of great importance to a number of different parties. (1)
Public safety officials and traffic administrators can benefit
from such a technique since they could allocate resources
and make plans to mitigate potential risks or congestion.
(2) Transportation stakeholders such as taxi drivers and fleet
managers are enabled to improve profit by dispatching more
taxis to such events if they can be predicted in advance.
Thus, dispersal event prediction is non-trivial and necessary. While most of the large events have schedules,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5199

