The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

HERS: Modeling Influential Contexts with
Heterogeneous Relations for Sparse and Cold-Start Recommendation
Liang Hu,1,2 Songlei Jian,1,3 Longbing Cao,1 Zhiping Gu,4 Qingkui Chen,2 Artak Amirbekyan5
1

2

Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, China, 3 National University of Defense Technology, China
4
Shanghai Technical Institute of Electronics Information, China, 5 Commonwealth Bank of Australia
rainmilk@gmail.com, jiansonglei@163.com, longbing.cao@uts.edu.au
guzhiping@stiei.edu.cn, chenqingkui@usst.edu.cn, artak.amirbekyan@cba.com.au
Abstract

User-item Relation

User-user Relation

Classic recommender systems face challenges in addressing
the data sparsity and cold-start problems with only modeling
the user-item relation. An essential direction is to incorporate
and understand the additional heterogeneous relations, e.g.,
user-user and item-item relations, since each user-item interaction is often influenced by other users and items, which
form the user’s/item’s influential contexts. This induces important yet challenging issues, including modeling heterogeneous relations, interactions, and the strength of the influence
from users/items in the influential contexts. To this end, we
design Influential-Context Aggregation Units (ICAU) to aggregate the user-user/item-item relations within a given context as the influential context embeddings. Accordingly, we
propose a Heterogeneous relations-Embedded Recommender
System (HERS) based on ICAUs to model and interpret the
underlying motivation of user-item interactions by considering user-user and item-item influences. The experiments on
two real-world datasets show the highly improved recommendation quality made by HERS and its superiority in handling
the cold-start problem. In addition, we demonstrate the interpretability of modeling influential contexts in explaining the
recommendation results.

Item-item Relation

Cis

Cus
us

Cut

ut

is

it

Ci t

Figure 1: An HERS consists of three heterogeneous relations: user-user, item-item, and user-item. Each user’s
choice is relevant to the corresponding user’s and item’s influential contexts.

the influences from friends’ friends may transitively influence ut ’s choice. Cut signifies the influential context w.r.t.
ut , which outlines ut ’s influential neighbors and the relationships between them. Those users in Cut have the considerable influence on ut ’ selection. Similarly, user selection on an item it is also influenced by it ’s relevant items
which form it ’s influential context Cit . For example, we can
infer that ut more probably selects it (Android watch) than
is (Apple watch) if we consider the corresponding influential contexts Cut , Cit and Cis , i.e., the choices from ut ’s
friends and the compatibility of electronic products. This example shows that the influential contexts of users and items
indicate how a user’s choice on items is made, thus making
recommendation more accurate and interpretable. The viewpoint of HERSs and influential contexts can further address
the sparsity of user-item interactions and both user and item
cold-start problems by referring to the influential users and
items in the contexts.
Modeling an HERS with influential contexts involves various challenges. In this work, we focus on two major ones:
(1) How to model a user’s and an item’s influential contexts behind an observed user-item interaction? (2) How to
learn the strength of influence from different users or items
in the different contexts? These two questions are important
and challenging because the influential contexts for different
user-item interactions are different, and the influence from

Introduction
Recommender systems (RSs) are essentially embedded with
heterogeneous relations: user-user couplings, item-item couplings, and user-item couplings (Cao 2015), with which we
call Heterogeneous relations Embedded Recommender Systems (HERS). It is increasingly recognized that modeling
such multiple heterogeneous relations is essential for understanding the non-IID nature and characteristics of RSs
(Cao 2016) and addressing such challenges as social, groupbased, context-based, cross-domain, sparse, cold-start, dynamic and deep recommendation (Tang, Hu, and Liu 2013;
Hu et al. 2014; 2017b; 2016; Do and Cao 2018a; 2018b;
Zhang et al. 2018).
Figure 1 illustrates the concept and motivation of a HERS
containing user-user relations (e.g., friendship), item-item
relations (e.g., the same category), and user-item relations
(e.g., users’ purchase or feedback on items). Given a user
ut in the user social network, her/his selections are often influenced by friends (Friedkin and Johnsen 2011). Moreover,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3830

