The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

What’s Most Broken? A Tool to Assist Data-Driven
Iterative Improvement of an Intelligent Tutoring System
Mononito Goswami∗

Shiven Mian∗

Jack Mostow

Delhi Technological University
New Delhi, India
mononitog@hotmail.com
+91-8800592994

IIIT-Delhi
New Delhi, India
shiven15094@iiitd.ac.in
+91-8130562083

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
mostow@cs.cmu.edu

• Reliability: How often and under what conditions does
RoboTutor crash or hang? How fast does a child recover
from the crash or hang?

Abstract
Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) have great potential to
change the educational landscape by bringing scientifically
tested one-to-one tutoring to remote and under-served areas.
However, effective ITSs are too complex to perfect. Instead, a
practical guiding principle for ITS development and improvement is to fix what’s most broken. In this paper we present
SPOT (Statistical Probe of Tutoring): a tool that mines data
logged by an Intelligent Tutoring System to identify the ‘hot
spots’ most detrimental to its efficiency and effectiveness in
terms of its software reliability, usability, task difficulty, student engagement, and other criteria. SPOT uses heuristics and
machine learning to discover, characterize, and prioritize such
hot spots in order to focus ITS refinement on what matters
most. We applied SPOT to data logged by RoboTutor, an ITS
that teaches children basic reading, writing and arithmetic.

• Recognition: How accurately does RoboTutor recognize
both written and spoken input?
• Usability: How easily and efficiently can children operate RoboTutor? Which activities do they find hard to navigate?
• Engagement: When are the children disengaged the
most, and why?
To answer these questions we present Statistical Probe of
Tutoring (SPOT): an Educational Data Mining tool intended
to help ITS developers identify ‘what’s most broken’ – i.e,
‘hot spots’ with respect to design criteria such as software
reliability, student engagement etc. SPOT uses metrics to
identify and predict the occurrence of undesirable events,
and trains a decision tree to discover hot spots. A hot spot is
a subtree with a high proportion of undesirable events.
The intuitions that inspired this approach are as follows:

INTRODUCTION
An Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) is a computer system
that enables learning in an effective and meaningful manner by providing personalized instruction to learners. Prior
research has demonstrated that ITSs take extensive time to
author, with reported estimates of 200-300 hours of development per hour of instruction (Aleven et al. 2006). As a
result, many authoring tools such as the Cognitive Tutor Authoring Tool (CTAT) have been built to make ITS development more efficient. But, despite our growing understanding
of human cognition and the tutor authoring process, developing effective tutoring systems with limited development
resources remains hard. In this situation, a practical guiding
principle towards ITS development and improvement is to
fix what is most broken.
The design of RoboTutor (RoboTutor 2015) was inspired
by this principle. RoboTutor is an ITS developed as an opensource Android application that teaches children aged 7-10
in developing countries basic reading, writing, and arithmetic. In this paper, we address the question: is there a way
to use data from RoboTutor to automate discovery of design issues and highlight them? To best address this issue,
we must answer the following subquestions pertaining to the
development and design process of RoboTutor:

• Within a decision tree, undesirable events in the same subtree are likely to have the same underlying cause.
• The feature combination associated with a subtree - that
is, the sequence of tests from the root to the subtree - characterizes when the undesirable events tend to occur and
may reflect this underlying cause.
• Screen capture videos of a random sample of undesirable
events in the subtree may shed further light on a certain
cause and inspire ideas for how to address it.
Henry et al (Henry, Lin, and Park 2017) designed a UI/UX
for SPOT and prototyped it using simulated data. Here we
describe an implementation that uses automated decision
tree learning and runs on real data from RoboTutor. We
briefly describe the SPOT workflow and its findings on
RoboTutor data in the next sections.

Methodology
Data Collection
RoboTutor uses a variety of activities such as story reading,
math activities etc. to teach children. The dataset used by
SPOT to discover hot spots is derived from student attempt

∗

authors contributed equally
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9941

