The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Enhancing Evolutionary Conversion Rate
Optimization via Multi-Armed Bandit Algorithms
Xin Qiu,1 Risto Miikkulainen1,2
1

2

Sentient Technologies, Inc
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract

eral open issues remain in evolutionary CRO. First, candidate designs are expensive to evaluate, and traffic is often
wasted on bad designs. Second, only weak statistical evidence is available to select a winner design, reducing reliability of the optimization outcome. Third, in some cases, the
target is to maintain a high overall conversion rate during
the optimization process instead of identifying a single best
design at the end of the optimization.
To overcome these issues, this paper proposes augmenting
EAs with multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithms (Agrawal
and Goyal 2012; Audibert and Bubeck 2010; Auer, CesaBianchi, and Fischer 2002). First, a new framework for traffic allocation during fitness evaluation is developed based
on MAB, called MAB-EA. This framework aims at reducing the evaluation cost while maintaining the optimization
performance. Second, an enhanced variant of MAB-EA is
designed to select the winner reliably. The main idea is to
include an addtional verification phase, based on MAB algorithms, to the end of the evolution process. Third, another
variant of MAB-EA is developed by introducing a new concept called asynchronous statistics into MAB algorithms.
The new variant is particularly well suited for situations
where overall conversion rate during optimization needs to
be maximized. Empirical studies with simulated traffic in
Sentient Ascend demonstrate that the MAB techniques are
effective in Evolutionary CRO. The techniques proposed in
the paper are general, however, and it should be possible to
adapt them to other optimization problems in uncertain environments.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First,
background knowledge regarding evolutionary CRO and
MAB algorithms is provided. The technical details of the
new approaches are then explained, and the underlying rationale is discussed. After that, the proposed techniques are
evaluated experimentally with Sentient Ascend on simulated
traffic. Evaluation of the results and suggestions for future
work conclude the paper.

Conversion rate optimization means designing web interfaces
such that more visitors perform a desired action (such as register or purchase) on the site. One promising approach, implemented in Sentient Ascend, is to optimize the design using evolutionary algorithms, evaluating each candidate design online with actual visitors. Because such evaluations are
costly and noisy, several challenges emerge: How can available visitor traffic be used most efficiently? How can good
solutions be identified most reliably? How can a high conversion rate be maintained during optimization? This paper
proposes a new technique to address these issues. Traffic is
allocated to candidate solutions using a multi-armed bandit
algorithm, using more traffic on those evaluations that are
most useful. In a best-arm identification mode, the best candidate can be identified reliably at the end of evolution, and
in a campaign mode, the overall conversion rate can be optimized throughout the entire evolution process. Multi-armed
bandit algorithms thus improve performance and reliability of
machine discovery in noisy real-world environments.

Introduction
Conversion rate optimization (CRO) is an emerging field of
applied AI (Salehd and Shukairy 2011). Web interface designs are optimized to increase the percentage of visitors
who perform a desired action such as making a purchase,
registering a new account, or clicking on a desired link. The
true conversion rate of a web interface is unknown, but can
be estimated via a number of user interactions, which are
usually noisy. CRO is therefore a challenging application of
optimization under uncertainty.
Recently, a new technology for CRO was developed in a
system called Sentient Ascend (Miikkulainen et al. 2017a;
2018). Each website design is represented as a genome, and
evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are used to search for designs
that convert well. Evolutionary CRO provides considerable
advantages over traditional A/B or multivariant testing: Exploration in EA covers a large design space; evolution discovers and utilizes effective interactions among variables;
optimization of website design is fully automated.
Although this approach leads to impressive improvements
over human design (Miikkulainen et al. 2017a; 2018), sev-

Background
This section describes the basic concepts and existing challenges in evolutionary CRO. A brief introduction of MAB
problem and representative MAB algorithms is then provided.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9581

