The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hierarchical Classification Based on Label Distribution Learning
Changdong Xu, Xin Geng∗
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration,
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{changdongxu, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

a classifier for each local module. Early research uses the
taxonomy to train independent classifiers at each node, and
makes a prediction by the top-down manner (Koller and Sahami 1997). Since the local classifier approach often encounters the error propagation issue, some methods have
been proposed to solve it. A method changes the training
distribution, and utilizes the output of the lower-level classifier to improve the performance of the top-level classifier
(Bennett and Nguyen 2009). Then a novel framework is proposed to make the Bayes-optimal prediction by minimizing
the designed risks (Bi and Kwok 2015). Correspondingly, an
approach uses a surrogate loss to replace the tree-distance
loss, and constructs a convex optimization problem which
can be solved using binary SVM (Ramaswamy, Tewari, and
Agarwal 2015). Another method exploits the correlation between the label and its ancestors in the hierarchy by considering the label of the parent node as an additional attribute. Moreover, the method calculates a score for each
path, and makes the final prediction according to the scores
(Ramı́rez-Corona, Sucar, and Morales 2016). Besides, a local hierarchical ensemble framework is proposed to model
the relationship between the global prediction and the local
prediction as a regression problem (Zhang, Shah, and Kakadiaris 2017). Different from the local classifier approach,
the global classifier approach considers the hierarchy as a
whole, and learns a single classification model on the training set. Several large-margin methods are adapted to deal
with the hierarchical classification problems by defining the
different mis-classification penalization in the hierarchy (Cai
and Hofmann 2004; Dekel, Keshet, and Singer 2004). Correspondingly, a novel large-margin method is designed to utilize the hierarchical information by enforcing the orthogonality between the parent node and its children (Xiao, Zhou,
and Wu 2011). Nevertheless, these methods are quite timeconsuming, which can not solve the problems with massive
labels. In order to deal with the large-scale hierarchical classification problems, one possible solution is to encourage the
model parameters among the nearby labels in the hierarchy
to be similar by the recursive regularization (Gopal and Yang
2013). The other possible solution is to transform the hierarchical problem to the cost-sensitive classification problem
by defining the mis-classification cost based on the hierarchy (Charuvaka and Rangwala 2015). Recently, a deep neural network is designed to deal with the hierarchical clas-

Hierarchical classification is a challenging problem where the
class labels are organized in a predefined hierarchy. One primary challenge in hierarchical classification is the small training set issue of the local module. The local classifiers in the
previous hierarchical classification approaches are prone to
over-fitting, which becomes a major bottleneck of hierarchical classification. Fortunately, the labels in the local module
are correlated, and the siblings of the true label can provide
additional supervision information for the instance. This paper proposes a novel method to deal with the small training
set issue. The key idea of the method is to represent the correlation among the labels by the label distribution. It generates
a label distribution that contains the supervision information
of each label for the given instance, and then learns a mapping from the instance to the label distribution. Experimental results on several hierarchical classification datasets show
that our method significantly outperforms other state-of-theart hierarchical classification approaches.

Introduction
In many classification problems, the class labels are organized in a predefined hierarchical structure. For example, the
documents are organized with the topic hierarchies in some
large-scale text datasets, such as Wikipedia, DMOZ, and Yahoo! Directory; the music is often organized in an audio taxonomy; a gene is arranged by its functions with the tree or
the graph structure (Vens et al. 2008). These problems are
defined as the hierarchical classification problems (Jr. and
Freitas 2011). In this paper, we deal with the hierarchical
classification problems where each instance is assigned only
one label.
According to a survey on hierarchical classification (Jr.
and Freitas 2011), the hierarchical classification approaches
can be roughly grouped into three families, i.e., the flat classification approach, the local classifier approach, and the
global classifier approach. The flat classification approach
is the simplest one to deal with the hierarchical classification problems, which completely discards the hierarchical
information. This approach is equivalent to those traditional
classification methods. The local classifier approach trains
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5533

