The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dynamic Learning of Sequential
Choice Bandit Problem under Marketing Fatigue
Junyu Cao

Wei Sun

University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, California 94720
jycao@berkeley.edu

IBM Research
Yorktown Height, New York 10591
sunw@us.ibm.com

Abstract

When a user abandons, the platform incurs a penalty cost
c from losing that user. Based on users’ feedback, the platform learns two pieces of information in order to determine
the optimal sequence, namely, users’ valuations of individual messages and users’ abandonment distribution. The objective of the platform is to maximize its expected payoff
which is the revenue after subtracting the penalty cost due to
abandonment. We refer to the online learning task which the
platform faces as the sequential choice bandit (SC-Bandit)
problem.
To draw a connection between this problem and the earlier motivating example, messages can represent digital marketing content such as an email or app notification regarding a product or service that a marketer wishes to promote.
He1 earns revenue whenever a user interacts with the content
(e.g., click or purchase). The interaction is an indication that
the content is of interest to that user. When the user ignores
the content, there is a possibility that she will unsubscribe or
delete the app. We can think of the abandonment cost c as
the cost of user acquisition as the marketer replenishes his
customer base. Based on a survey2 , the cost of customer acquisition is estimated to be 5 to 25 times higher than keeping
an existing customer. Therefore, fatigue control is a critical
component of digital marketing content dissemination.
There are several challenges associated with analyzing the
SC-Bandit problem. Firstly, even in the offline setting where
users’ valuations and abandonment distribution are known,
the sequence optimization problem is combinatorial in nature without an obvious efficient algorithm. Secondly, the
sequential behavior of users complicates the learning task:
while one can observe the response to the first offered message, the feedback to subsequent messages is not guaranteed
due to abandonment. Thirdly, one needs to simultaneously
learn valuations and abandonment distribution from users’
feedback which depends on these two pieces of information
jointly. The contribution of our work is fourfold:

Motivated by the observation that overexposure to unwanted
marketing activities leads to customer dissatisfaction, we consider a setting where a platform offers a sequence of messages to its users and is penalized when users abandon the
platform due to marketing fatigue. We propose a novel sequential choice model to capture multiple interactions taking
place between the platform and its user: Upon receiving a
message, a user decides on one of the three actions: accept the
message, skip and receive the next message, or abandon the
platform. Based on user feedback, the platform dynamically
learns users’ abandonment distribution and their valuations of
messages to determine the length of the sequence and the order of the messages, while maximizing the cumulative payoff
over a horizon of length T . We refer to this online learning
task as the sequential choice bandit problem. For the offline
combinatorial optimization problem, we show a polynomialtime algorithm. For the online problem, we propose an algorithm that balances exploration and exploitation, and characterize its regret bound. Lastly, we demonstrate how to extend
the model with user contexts to incorporate personalization.

1

Introduction

Service providers and retailers routinely rely on emails and
app notifications to interact with their users. When it is done
well, these messages act as digital reminders that increase
customer engagement, raise brand awareness and conversion. However, frequent messaging can easily backfire. Marketing fatigue, which refers to an overexposure to unwanted
marketing messages, could aggravate users and prompt them
to forgo receipt of future messages by unsubscribing or
deleting the app.
Motivated by this dilemma, we consider a setting where a
platform needs to learn a policy which consists of a sequence
of messages for its users. It has to decide the order of the
messages as well as the length of the sequence from a pool of
available messages. The messages are presented to a user sequentially. Upon reviewing a message i, a user takes one of
the three actions: 1) accept the message and exit. In this case,
the platform earns a reward ri . If the user does not select the
current message, she can either 2) receive the next message
unless the sequence runs out, or 3) abandon the platform.

1. We propose a novel sequential choice model which captures multiple interactions including abandonment between users and a platform.
2. We prove that the offline combinatorial optimization
1

We refer to a marketer as he, and a user as she.
https://hbr.org/2014/10/the-value-of-keeping-the-rightcustomers
2

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3264

