The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Ensemble Machine Learning for
Estimating Fetal Weight at Varying Gestational Age
Yu Lu,1 Xi Zhang,1 Xianghua Fu,1 Fangxiong Chen,2 Kelvin K. L. Wong3,∗
1

Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen, China
School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
∗
Corresponding author: kelvin.wong@siat.ac.cn
2

Abstract

can result in an improved delivery outcome during labour
and further reduce complications for mothers and infants after labour (Pressman et al. 2000). Moreover, if the FGR and
adverse conditions such as intrauterine hypoxia can be detected in time, it would be greatly beneficial to further reduce
the possibility of perinatal mortality of fetuses (Miller and
Huppi 2016). Therefore, it is desired that the EFW can be
accurate as possible not only at the end of the third trimester
but also at any gestational week during pregnancy.
Several methods can be used to predict fetal weight in
clinical practice, consisting of abdominal palpation, parturient symphysio-fundal height and abdominal girth measurements, and obstetric ultrasound. Among them, the ultrasound based estimation method is most reliable and objective, and has been used extensively by obstetricians in China.
Its principle lies is the use of a class of well-established regression models with multiple parameters standards for fetuses. But, there a number of limitations of such method.
First, these regression models were proposed by different
clinicians, and are not generally applicable to all populations in the world. As a result, the direct use of such class
of models on Chinese population may result in inaccuracy,
particularly for excessive or low fetal birth weight. Second,
there are also strict requirements for sonographers and specific standards for equipment for performing ultrasound examinations. Factors like deformed fetal head, existence of
oligohydramnios and abdominal fat, and poor image quality
may all affect the final estimation. Another limitation is that
access to obstetric ultrasound remains poor in some most
low-resource rural areas and this has significantly affected
fetal weight estimation (Wanyonyi and Mutiso 2018).
Other than the traditional methods introduced, machine
learning techniques can be applied in this field (Naimi,
Platt, and Larkin 2018; Podda, Bacciu, and Micheli 2018;
Zhu et al. 2018). The historical data of prenatal examinations
can be analysed and the relationship between conceptual entities can be explored through their own training, generalisation, self-organisation, and learning ability. Thus, they are a
preferable candidate to make more efficient and reasonable
decisions such as fetal weight estimation.
The main contributions of this paper are threefold. First,
we establish a dataset consisting of 4,212 clinical records
based on the electronic health record of pregnant women
from a large hospital in China. Second, we establish a tem-

Obstetric ultrasound examination of physiological parameters has been mainly used to estimate the fetal weight during pregnancy and baby weight before labour to monitor fetal
growth and reduce prenatal morbidity and mortality. However, the problem is that ultrasound estimation of fetal weight
is subject to populations’ difference, strict operating requirements for sonographers, and poor access to ultrasound in
low-resource areas. Inaccurate estimations may lead to negative perinatal outcomes. We consider that machine learning
can provide an accurate estimation for obstetricians alongside
traditional clinical practices, as well as an efficient and effective support tool for pregnant women for self-monitoring.
We present a robust methodology using a data set comprising 4,212 intrapartum recordings. The cubic spline function
is used to fit the curves of several key characteristics that are
extracted from ultrasound reports. A number of simple and
powerful machine learning algorithms are trained, and their
performance is evaluated with real test data. We also propose
a novel evaluation performance index called the intersectionover-union (loU) for our study. The results are encouraging
using an ensemble model consisting of Random Forest, XGBoost, and LightGBM algorithms. The experimental results
show an loU of 0.64 between predicted range of fetal weight
at any gestational age from the ensemble model and that from
ultrasound. Comparing with the ultrasound method, the estimation accuracy is improved by 12%, and the mean relative
error is reduced by 3%.

Introduction
In obstetrics, both abnormal fetal growth and fetal development are monitored via prenatal testing. However, there are
few biomarkers that can be used to accurately predict the fetal growth restrictions (FGR) (Conde-Agudelo et al. 2013),
macrosomia, and other abnormalities. Currently, estimated
fetal weight (EFW) has became a central indicator for this
purpose. It is essential to obtain an accurate estimation of
antenatal fetal weight because potential complications may
arise from excessive or low fetal birth weight during and after delivery.
The prediction of a fetal birth weight just before the delivery is able to effectively guide obstetricians to choose a
more reasonable delivery mode for pregnant women. This
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9522

