The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bayesian Fairness
Christos Dimitrakakis,1,2 Yang Liu,3 David C. Parkes,4 Goran Radanovic4
1

University of Oslo; 2 Chalmers; 3 University of California, Santa Cruz; 4 Harvard
christos.dimitrakakis@gmail.com, yangliu@ucsc.edu, jparkes@eecs.harvard.edu, gradanovic@g.harvard.edu

the existence of some underlying probability law P , so that
the decision problem, when P is known, can be written as:

Abstract
We consider the problem of how decision making can be fair
when the underlying probabilistic model of the world is not
known with certainty. We argue that recent notions of fairness
in machine learning need to explicitly incorporate parameter
uncertainty, hence we introduce the notion of Bayesian fairness as a suitable candidate for fair decision rules. Using balance, a definition of fairness introduced in (Kleinberg, Mullainathan, and Raghavan 2016), we show how a Bayesian perspective can lead to well-performing and fair decision rules
even under high uncertainty.

max(1 − λ) EπP u − λ EπP f,
π

(1)

where λ is the DM’s trade-off between fairness and utility.1
We adopt a Bayesian viewpoint and assume the DM has belief β over some family of distributions P , { Pθ | θ ∈ Θ },
which may contain the actual law, i.e. Pθ∗ = P for some θ∗ .
The DM’s policy π defines the actions at ∈ A the DM
takes at different (discrete) times t depending on the available information. More precisely, at time t the DM observes
some data xt ∈ X , and depending on her belief βt makes
a decision at ∈ A, so that π(at | βt , xt ) defines a probability over actions for every possible belief and observation.
The DM has a utility function, modeled here with structure
u : A × Y → R, where Y is a set of outcomes (in a loan
setting, was the loan repaid on time?). The fairness concept
we focus on is a Bayesian version of balance (Kleinberg,
Mullainathan, and Raghavan 2016), which is also a generalization of the equality of opportunity (Hardt, Price, and
Srebro 2016).
The amount of uncertainty about the model parameters directly influences the interpretation of the balance condition.
Informally, the more uncertain we are, the more stochastic
the decision rule will need to be.

Introduction
Fairness is an important property of algorithmic systems in
settings where decisions are made that affect individuals in
a population, for example in the context of loan decisions,
college admissions, hiring decision, or bail decisions.
Recognizing this, there has been considerable emphasis
in recent work on developing definitions of fairness in the
context of machine learning algorithms. In this paper, we
take a closer look at informational aspects of fairness. In
particular, by adopting a Bayesian viewpoint, we explicitly
take into account model uncertainty, something that turns
out to be crucial for fairness.
Uncertainty about the underlying probabilistic model of
the world has two main effects. Firstly, many notions of fairness have been defined with respect to latent variables, including model parameters. This means that we need to take
into account uncertainty about these latent variables and parameters. Secondly, in many problems our decisions determine the data that we will collect in the future. Ignoring uncertainty may magnify subtle biases in our model.
By viewing fairness through a Bayesian perspective, we
avoid these problems. In particular, we demonstrate that
Bayesian policies can allow for suitable trade offs to be
made between utility and fairness, taking into account uncertainty about model parameters.
We consider a setting where a decision maker (DM)
makes a sequence of decisions through some chosen policy
π to maximize her expected utility u. However, the DM must
trade off utility with some fairness criterion f . We assume

Our contributions. In this paper, we develop a Bayesian
framework for fairness that recognizes that there can be a
high degree of uncertainty about model parameters and latent variables, and especially when not a lot of data has been
collected, or in sequential settings. In particular, we propose
that the DM should take into account how unfair she would
be under all possible models, weighted by their probability.
Fairness is a property of the decision rule with respect to the
true model, and it is this that is used to measure fairness. On
the other hand, the appropriate way to achieve fairness depends on the DM’s information, and it is this that is used to
derive algorithms. In order to work without model approximations, we illustrate the approach in a simple setting. We
show that the policies that are obtained are qualitatively and
1
We do not consider the alternative constrained problem,
i.e. max { EπP u | EπP f ≤ ϵ }, in the present paper.

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

509

