The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Understanding Persuasion Cascades in Online Product Rating Systems
Hong Xie,1,2 Yongkun Li,3 John C.S. Lui2
1

College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
hongx87@gmail.com, ykli@ustc.edu.cn, cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract

that subsequent consumers can refer to them for making purchasing decisions. One main functionality of consumer contributed ratings (or reviews) is to reveal the product quality
via the collective wisdoms (Xie and Lui 2015). If consumers
provide ratings to reveal their true opinions (or we call “unbiased”), a consensus will be reached when a sufficient number of ratings are collected (Xie and Lui 2015). As dictated
by the statistical law of large numbers, this consensus is an
accurate estimate of the product quality.
However, a well-known psychological phenomenon
called the message-based persuasion (Wood 2000) can
change consumers’ opinions and lead to “biased” ratings (or
reviews). Evidences of this phenomenon include a number
of survey studies (Agag and El-Masry 2017; Rudolph 2016;
Shrestha 2016) and empirical studies (Li et al. 2013; Zhao
et al. 2013). In fact, reading a product review can be interpreted as exposing to a persuasion message, which may
lead to opinion changes as psychology theory has indicated
(Hovland, Janis, and Kelley 1953; Wood 2000). This biased
review will further serve as a persuasion message to change
subsequent consumers’ opinions in a cascading manner, and
we call this phenomenon persuasion cascades.
Let us use two simple examples to illustrate persuasion cascades. For simplicity, the overall opinion of
each consumer is summarized by a binary rating set
{−1(“bad”), 1(“good”)}. Suppose that intrinsically 20% of
consumers have an overall opinion of −1, while 80% have
1 toward a product. In practice, many online product rating
systems use the average scoring rule to measure the intrinsic
quality, i.e., 1 × 0.8 − 1 × 0.2 = 0.6.

Online product rating systems have become an indispensable component for numerous web services such as Amazon,
eBay, Google play store and TripAdvisor. One functionality
of such systems is to uncover the product quality via product ratings (or reviews) contributed by consumers. However,
a well-known psychological phenomenon called “messagebased persuasion” lead to “biased” product ratings in a cascading manner (we call this the persuasion cascade). This
paper investigates: (1) How does the persuasion cascade influence the product quality estimation accuracy? (2) Given a
real-world product rating dataset, how to infer the persuasion cascade and analyze it to draw practical insights? We
first develop a mathematical model to capture key factors of a
persuasion cascade. We formulate a high-order Markov chain
to characterize the opinion dynamics of a persuasion cascade
and prove the convergence of opinions. We further bound the
product quality estimation error for a class of rating aggregation rules including the averaging scoring rule, via the matrix
perturbation theory and the Chernoff bound. We also design a
maximum likelihood algorithm to infer parameters of the persuasion cascade. We conduct experiments on the data from
Amazon and TripAdvisor, and show that persuasion cascades
notably exist, but the average scoring rule has a small product
quality estimation error under practical scenarios.

Introduction
Online product rating systems have become an indispensable component for numerous web services, i.e., Amazon,
TripAdvisor, Yelp, Google Play Store, ..., etc. The online
product rating systems reduce the information asymmetry in
the sense that product ratings reveal the product quality to
consumers while exposing consumer preferences to sellers.
Reducing this information asymmetry benefits both the consumers and sellers, i.e., it improves the purchasing experience (Lackermair, Kailer, and Kanmaz 2013; Li et al. 2013;
Zhao et al. 2013) and it generates more revenues for sellers
(Berger 2012; Luca 2016; Zaroban 2015).
In general, online product rating systems realize the idea
of “wisdom of the crowds”. Each consumer provides ratings
(or reviews) to only a subset of products, and share their experiences or opinions toward these products. These product
reviews, once posted, are made public to all consumers, so

Example 1 (Unbiased ratings) With probability 0.8 (or
0.2) a consumer has an opinion of “good” (or “bad”) and
provides a rating 1 (or −1). Using the average scoring rule,
around 100 ratings can produce an accurate estimator of the
intrinsic quality (Xie and Lui 2015), i.e., 0.6. Results in (Xie
and Lui 2015) also showed that we can still reveal the intrinsic quality under a small fraction of misbehaving ratings,
i.e., intentionally inject 1 to promote or −1 to bad-mouth a
product. In this case, a small number of ratings can give a
high accuracy to reveal the product quality.
Example 2 (Ratings under persuasion) For simplicity of
illustration, each consumer only reads one review, i.e., the
latest review, and provides the same rating as the read re-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5490

