The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robust Facial Landmark Localization
Based on Two-Stage Cascaded Pose Regression
Ziye Tong,1 Junwei Zhou,1,∗ Yanchao Yang,1 Lee-Ming Cheng2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, PRC
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, PRC
∗
Corresponding Author, Email: junweizhou@msn.com

Abstract

calization and occlusion detection results of the original facial and its mirror, respectively. Then, we use the localization difference between the original facial and its mirror to
determine whether the landmarks are reliable and adjust the
unreliable localization results. In the second stage, the adjusted global results are divided into four parts including left
eye, right eye, nose and mouse to learn different regressors,
respectively. Then, the four results including local localization and occlusion detection are integrated. Finally, the results are evaluated and adjusted again according to mirror
error.
The framework of the proposed TSCPR is illustrated in
Figure. 1, which includes the global stage and the local
stage. At each stage, we use the mirrorability of face align-

In this paper, we propose a two-stage cascaded pose regression for facial landmark localization under occlusion. In the
first stage, a global cascaded pose regression with robust initialization is performed to get localization results for the original face and its mirror image. The localization difference between the original image and the mirror image is used to determine whether the localization of each landmark is reliable,
while unreliable localization with a large difference can be
adjusted. In the second stage, the global results are divided
into four parts, which are further refined by local regressions.
Finally, the four refined local results are integrated and adjusted to get the final output.

Introduction
(l)Global Stage

Many studies about facial landmark localization achieved
desirable performances(Burgos-Artizzu, Perona, and Dollar
2013). However, it still has obstacles for facials with large
variations including pose, expression, especially occlusions.
Cascaded pose regression (CPR) has emerged as one of
the most famous methods of facial landmark localization
since its superior performance. To localize facial landmarks
under occlusion, Burgos-Artizzu et al. proposed the scheme
of Robust CPR (RCPR)(Burgos-Artizzu, Perona, and Dollar
2013), which can detect occlusion information and localize
the facial landmarks simultaneously. Robust Initialization
for CPR (RICPR)(Pan et al. 2018) improved performance
by providing texture and pose correlated initial shapes for
the testing face. However, these methods including RCPR,
DRDA(Zhang et al. 2016), SLPD(Wu, Gou, and Ji 2017),
RICPR usually take the entire facial as a whole to make a
global regression, while partial occlusions break the structure of the facial and bring obstacles to process the local
variations. Moreover, the existed methods directly take the
mean of all predictions as the final estimation without evaluating individuals.

Image I

(a)Global Regression Model
Initial shape PIo

Face Fo

(b) Global Correction
Model

Results Pog

'

Results Pog
Robust

RICPR

Initialization

Regression

Robust

RICPR

Inverse

MFA
Initialization
Mirror Face Fm

Regression
Mirror Initial Shape PIm

Mirror Results Pmg

(ll)Local Stage

Inverse

RCPR

MFA

Regression

Results Pgr
Final Results
P

Local Results
Pgri

Shape of Local
Face P i

Pg

g

RCPR
Inverse
Results P 'gmr
(d) Local Correction
Model

Regression
Mirror Results
Local Mirror (c) Local RegresPgmr
sion Model
Results Pgimr

Shape of Local
Face P i
gm

Mirror Results
Pgm

Global Final
Results Pg

Figure 1: The pipeline of the proposed method TSCPR for
facial landmark localization under occlusion.
ment method(MFA) (Yang and Patras 2015) to adjust the
unreliable localizations, which gave the clue that the mirror
error is strongly correlated to the localization/alignment error. We first describe the design of the global stage and the
local stage, then introduce implementation details of the entire model.

TSCPR Architecture
In this paper, we propose a Two-Stage CPR (TSCPR) for facial landmark localization under occlusion. Firstly, we perform a global regression using RICPR to get first-stage lo-

Regression Model
RCPR divides the face image into 9 zones. At each iteration
t, the image features are calculated as f t = ht (I, S t−1 ) and

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10055

