The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

RSA: Byzantine-Robust Stochastic Aggregation
Methods for Distributed Learning from Heterogeneous Datasets
Liping Li,1 Wei Xu,1 Tianyi Chen,2 Georgios B. Giannakis,2 Qing Ling3
1

Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
Digital Technology Center, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
3
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

2

Abstract

and computation tasks are distributed across multiple workers such as Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices in a smart home,
which are programmed to collaboratively learn a model.
Parallel implementations of popular machine learning algorithms, such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD), are applied to learning from the distributed data (Bottou 2010).
However, federated learning still faces two significant
challenges: high communication overhead and serious security risk. While several recent approaches have been developed to tackle the communication bottleneck of distributed
learning (Li et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2017; Smith et al. 2017;
Chen et al. 2018b), the security issue has not been adequately addressed. In federated learning applications, a number of devices may be highly unreliable or even easily compromised by hackers. We call these devices as Byzantine
workers. In this scenario, the learner lacks secure training
ability, which makes it vulnerable to failures, not mentioning adversarial attacks (Lynch 1996). For example, SGD, the
workhorse of large-scale machine learning, is vulnerable to
even one Byzantine worker (Chen, Su, and Xu 2017).
In this context, the present paper studies distributed machine learning under a general Byzantine failure model,
where the Byzantine workers can arbitrarily modify the messages transmitted from themselves to the master. With such
a model, it simply does not have any constraints on the communication failures or attacks. We aim to develop efficient
distributed machine learning methods tailored for this setting with provable performance guarantee.

In this paper, we propose a class of robust stochastic subgradient methods for distributed learning from heterogeneous
datasets at presence of an unknown number of Byzantine
workers. The Byzantine workers, during the learning process, may send arbitrary incorrect messages to the master
due to data corruptions, communication failures or malicious
attacks, and consequently bias the learned model. The key
to the proposed methods is a regularization term incorporated with the objective function so as to robustify the learning task and mitigate the negative effects of Byzantine attacks. The resultant subgradient-based algorithms are termed
Byzantine-Robust Stochastic Aggregation methods, justifying
our acronym RSA used henceforth. In contrast to most of
the existing algorithms, RSA does not rely on the assumption that the data are independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) on the workers, and hence fits for a wider class of applications. Theoretically, we show that: i) RSA converges to
a near-optimal solution with the learning error dependent on
the number of Byzantine workers; ii) the convergence rate
of RSA under Byzantine attacks is the same as that of the
stochastic gradient descent method, which is free of Byzantine attacks. Numerically, experiments on real dataset corroborate the competitive performance of RSA and a complexity
reduction compared to the state-of-the-art alternatives.

Introduction
The past decade has witnessed the proliferation of smart
phones and Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices. They generate a huge amount of data every day, from which one can
learn models of cyber-physical systems and make decisions
to improve the welfare of human being. Nevertheless, standard machine learning approaches that require centralizing the training data on one machine or in a datacenter
may not be suitable for such applications, as data collected
from distributed devices and stored at clouds lead to significant privacy risks (Sicari et al. 2015). To alleviate user
privacy concerns, a new distributed machine learning framework called federated learning has been proposed by Google
and become popular recently (McMahan and Ramage 2017;
Smith et al. 2017). Federated learning allows the training
data to be kept locally on the owners’ devices. Data samples

Related work
Byzantine-robust distributed learning has received increasing attention in recent years. Most of the existing algorithms extend SGD to incorporate the Byzantine-robust setting and assume that the data are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) on the workers. Under this assumption, stochastic gradients computed by regular workers are
presumably distributed around the true gradient, while those
sent from the Byzantine workers to the master could be arbitrary. Thus, the master is able to apply robust estimation
techniques to aggregate the stochastic gradients. Typical gradient aggregation rules include geometric median (Chen, Su,
and Xu 2017), marginal trimmed mean (Yin et al. 2018a;
Xie, Koyejo, and Gupta 2018b), dimensional median (Xie,
Koyejo, and Gupta 2018a; Alistarh, Allen-Zhu, and Li

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1544

