The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Generalized Planning via Abstraction: Arbitrary Numbers of Objects
León Illanes, Sheila A. McIlraith
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
{lillanes, sheila}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

advance in speed and efficiency, they cannot solve problems
of the massive scale demanded by these industries.
In this paper we advance a vision for a new approach to
sequential decision making that leverages the power and efficiency of state-of-the-art automated planning techniques,
while exploiting abstraction and generalization to automatically generate what can be seen as domain-specific, but
instance-independent planners that can be instantiated – offline or at execution time – to perform sequential decision
making at a massive scale for families of planning problems. These domain-specific and instance independent planners are compact, simple programs with looping structures
and conditionals that follow different control flow depending on the problem instance.
Our work realizes this vision by leveraging ideas from
a number of different areas of research including generalized planning (e.g., (Levesque 2005; Hu and Levesque
2009; Srivastava, Immerman, and Zilberstein 2008; Hu and
Levesque 2010; Hu and De Giacomo 2011)), numeric planning (e.g., (Srivastava et al. 2011; Illanes and McIlraith
2017)), and techniques for recognizing indistinguishable
objects in planning domains (Riddle et al. 2015; 2016;
Fuentetaja and de la Rosa 2016).
We introduce L OOM, a planning algorithm that solves
families of problems where separate instances differ in the
number of objects present. Our approach ignores the distinctions between certain objects of the same type and computes a cyclic policy for the resulting abstract problem. The
resulting policy is a form of domain-specific but instanceindependent planner that can be applied over concrete problem instances. We evaluate L OOM over a suite of generalized planning problems. The results show our approach is
capable of quickly finding general solutions, and that these
can be instantiated into plans for specific problems orders of
magnitude faster than planning from scratch, without significant changes in plan quality.

We consider a class of generalized planning problems based
on the idea of quantifying over sets of similar objects. We
show how we can adapt fully observable nondeterministic
planning techniques to produce generalized solutions that are
easy to instantiate over particular problem instances. We also
describe how we can reformulate a classical planning problem into a quantified one. The reformulation allows us to
solve the original planning task without grounding every action with respect to all objects in the problem, and a single
solution can be applied to a possibly infinite set of related
classical planning tasks. We report experimental results that
show our approach is a practical and promising technique for
solving an interesting class of problems.

1

Introduction

The potential for broad applicability of sequential decision
making, and in particular for AI automated planning, is burgeoning with increased automation in key sectors including transportation, fulfillment, and e-commerce. A common
property of many of these decision-making tasks is that they
are addressing the same basic problem from day to day. For
example, each day, UPSTM must decide how to ship packages of varying numbers, sizes, and types, to varying locations, via different modes of transportation. Fulfillment centres similarly restock shelves daily. What changes from day
to day is the number and types of objects, how they need to
be moved, and where they are shelved in the fulfillment centre. These businesses typically operate at a massive scale.
In 2015 UPS delivered roughly 4.7 billion packages to 10
million customers, via 110,000 delivery vehicles and 1,955
daily flight segments (UPS 2016).
If we look at these decision-making problems as a collective, we see that UPS’s package delivery problems, or
Amazon’s restocking problems, each correspond to a family of problems that, when viewed abstractly, share a common solution form. Solving such problems using automated
planning has two limitations: the first is that automated planning treats each problem instance as a new planning problem
without leveraging patterns that are common to all solutions.
More critically, while AI planning algorithms continue to

2

Preliminaries

The families of planning problems we consider can be
viewed as a form of generalized planning problem (e.g.,
(Srivastava et al. 2011; Hu and De Giacomo 2011)). We in
turn define these generalized planning problems in terms of
basic planning problems. Here, a basic planning problem
comprises a domain description and specifics of the prob-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7610

