The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Greedy Maximization of Functions with
Bounded Curvature under Partition Matroid Constraints
Tobias Friedrich,1 Andreas Göbel,1 Frank Neumann,2 Francesco Quinzan,1 Ralf Rothenberger1
1

2

Chair of Algorithm Engineering, Hasso Plattner Institute, Potsdam, Germany
Optimisation and Logistics, School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia

this work we will assume that, given a set U ⊆ V , the
value f (U ) is returned from an oracle. This is a reasonable assumption as in most applications f (U ) can be computed efficiently. Often in these applications, a realistic solution is subject to some constraints. Among the most common constraints are Matroid and Knapsack constraints —
see (Lee et al. 2009). From these families of constraints
the most natural and common type of constraints are uniform matroid constraints also known as cardinality constraints. Optimizing a submodular function given k as a
cardinality constraint is equivalent to finding a set U , with
|U | ≤ k, that maximizes f (U ). In this paper we consider submodular maximization under partition matroid constraints. These constraints are in the intersection of matroid
and knapsack constaints and generalize uniform matroid
constraints. In partition matroid constraints we are given
a collection B1 , . . . , Bk of disjoint subsets of V , integers
d1 . . . dk . Every feasible solution to our problem must then
include at most di elements from each set Bi . Submodular
maximization under partition matroid constraints are considered in various applications, e.g. see (Lin and Bilmes 2010;
Jegelka and Bilmes 2011).
As the literature in submodular optimization is immense,
we will only review the results on submodular maximization under matroid and knapsack constraints. The classical
result of (Cornuejols, Fisher, and Nemhauser 1977) shows
that a greedy algorithm achieves a 1/2 approximation ration
when maximizing monotone submodular functions under
partition matroid constraints. (Nemhauser and Wolsey 1978)
showed that no-polynomial time algorithm can achieve a
better approximation ratio than (1 − 1/e). Many years later
(Călinescu et al. 2011) where able to achieve this upper
bound using a randomized algorithm. Recently (Buchbinder,
Feldman, and Garg 2018) achieved a deterministic 0.5008approximation ratio by derandomizing search heuristics.
The previous approximation ratios can be further improved when assuming that the rate of change of the
marginal values of f is bounded. This is expressed by the
curvature α of a function as in Definition 1. The results of
(Conforti and Cornuéjols 1984; Vondrák 2010) show that a
continuous greedy algorithm gives a α1 (1 − e−α ) approximation when maximizing a monotone submodular function
under any matroid constraint. Thus, when α ≤ 1.58933 the
the continuous greedy outperforms the algorithm of (Buch-

Abstract
We investigate the performance of a deterministic G REEDY
algorithm for the problem of maximizing functions under
a partition matroid constraint. We consider non-monotone
submodular functions and monotone subadditive functions.
Even though constrained maximization problems of monotone submodular functions have been extensively studied, little is known about greedy maximization of non-monotone
submodular functions or monotone subadditive functions.
We give approximation guarantees for G REEDY on these
problems, in terms of the curvature. We find that this simple
heuristic yields a strong approximation guarantee on a broad
class of functions.
We discuss the applicability of our results to three real-world
problems: Maximizing the determinant function of a positive
semidefinite matrix, and related problems such as the maximum entropy sampling problem, the constrained maximum
cut problem on directed graphs, and combinatorial auction
games.
We conclude that G REEDY is well-suited to approach these
problems. Overall, we present evidence to support the idea
that, when dealing with constrained maximization problems
with bounded curvature, one needs not search for (approximate) monotonicity to get good approximate solutions.

Introduction
Submodular functions capture the notion of diminishing returns, i.e. the more we acquire the less our marginal gain will
be. This notion occurs frequently in the real world, thus, the
problem of maximizing a submodular function finds applicability in a plethora of scenarios. Examples of such scenarios
include: maximum cut problems (Goemans and Williamson
1995), combinatorial auctions (Maehara et al. 2017), facility
location (Cornuejols, Fisher, and Nemhauser 1977), problems in machine learning (Elenberg et al. 2017), coverage
functions (Krause, Singh, and Guestrin 2008), online shopping (Tschiatschek, Singla, and Krause 2017). As such, the
literature on submodular functions contains a vast number
of results spanning over three decades.
Formally, a set function f : 2V → R is submodular if for
all U, W ⊆ V , f (U ) + f (W ) ≥ f (U ∪ W ) + f (U ∩ W ).
As these functions come from a variety of applications, in
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2272

