The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Moral Permissibility of Action Plans
Felix Lindner, Robert Mattmüller, Bernhard Nebel
University of Freiburg, Germany
{lindner, mattmuel, nebel}@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract

der to be able to make moral judgments in the context of
different ethical theories. Secondly, we will propose methods to judge the ethical acceptability of a plan. We will test
the proposed notions using examples from the literature on
moral dilemmas. Thereby, we do not limit ourselves to one
particular ethical principle, but will consider a number of
different principles that have the potential to be treated computationally, similar to the HERA (Lindner, Bentzen, and
Nebel 2017) approach. Third, we will analyze the computational complexity of assessing the moral permissibility of a
plan.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In the
next section, we introduce different ethical principles that
have been discussed in the literature. Then, the planning
formalism we will use throughout the paper will be specified. This is basically a propositional planning formalism
extended by variables with non-binary domains, exogenous
events, and moral valuations of actions and consequences.
We then formalize the notions of causation and means to
an end in the framework of our planning formalism. Based
on that, we can then formalize different ethical principles,
which we will use to analyze the computational problem of
ethically validating a given plan. Finally, we sketch related
work and conclude.

Research in classical planning so far was mainly concerned
with generating a satisficing or an optimal plan. However, if
such systems are used to make decisions that are relevant to
humans, one should also consider the ethical consequences
generated plans can have. We address this challenge by analyzing in how far it is possible to generalize existing approaches of machine ethics to automatic planning systems.
Traditionally, ethical principles are formulated in an actionbased manner, allowing to judge the execution of one action.
We show how such a judgment can be generalized to plans.
Further, we study the computational complexity of making
ethical judgment about plans.

Introduction
With the advent of autonomous machines that drive on the
streets or act as household robots, it has been argued that we
need to add an ethical dimension to such machines leading to
the development of the research area machine ethics (Anderson, Anderson, and Armen 2005; Anderson and Anderson
2011). One important question is how we can align the behavior of autonomous machines with the moral judgment of
humans. In this context, most often the question is whether a
particular action is morally obligatory, permissible or impermissible, given a particular ethical principle (Driver 2006).
Judging one action is, of course, important. However, automated planning systems (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2016)
are faced with the problem of making a huge number of decisions about including actions into a plan. And it does not
necessarily make sense to analyze the ethical contents of
each such decision in isolation, but it may be necessary to
take an ethical perspective on an entire plan (and perhaps alternative plans). As an example, consider utilitarian reasoning: if every action in a plan were judged in isolation, one
would not be allowed to perform an action that temporarily
decreases the utility, even if this action is a necessary prerequisite for later earning a lot of utility in a globally optimal
final reachable state. Judging a plan as a whole allows considering this early investment for the sake of a later benefit
as permissible from a utilitarian perspective.
In this paper, we address these problems. First, we will
look at what kind of additional information we need in or-

Ethical Principles
In moral philosophy, various ethical principles are investigated. Ethical principles are descriptions of abstract rules
that can be used to determine the moral permissibility of
concrete courses of actions. In this section, we introduce
ethical principles which embrace different views on how to
assess moral permissibility of actions: utilitarianism, deontology, three versions of the do-no-harm principle, and the
principle of double effect.
The utilitarian principle focuses on consequences of actions. It says that an agent ought to perform the action
amongst the available alternatives with the overall maximal
utility. Thus the action which the agent ought to perform is
the one which leads to the best possible situation, i.e., the
highest utility. The utilitarian principle is often contrasted
with deontology. According to deontology, an action does
not get its moral value from its consequences. An action is
permissible according to deontology if and only if the act
itself is intrinsically morally good or indifferent.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7635

