The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

A Machine Learning Suite for Machine Components’ Health-Monitoring
Ramin Hasani,1∗ Guodong Wang,1∗ Radu Grosu1
1

Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), 1040 Vienna, Austria
∗
Equal Contributions

Abstract

The main attributes of an ideal health-condition monitoring
and prognostic method are described as follows: The method
is able to autonomously collect useful unsupervised features
from the available sensory data, regardless of its size. Such
data-driven procedures should enable users to monitor both
online, and offline tests, while providing an intelligent trend
on the machine’s health, as well as identify its degradation
starting point. It is highly desirable that the method automatically combine the steps of the CBM process and be entirely
human-labor independent. Moreover, the ideal approach is
universal and can be feasibly applied to the prognoses of
various key machine components such as bearings, gears and
spindles.
In the present study, we propose a novel prognostic method
for machine bearings, as a critical machine component which
reasonably satisfies the main characteristics of an ideal CBM
method. The technique is called autoencoder correlationbased (AEC) prognostic algorithm. We train a sparse autoencoder for extracting unsupervised features from collected
sensory data in several test-to-failure experiments and correspondingly, compute the Pearson correlation of the extracted
features of the initial samples, with the upcoming samples.
The output is then passed through a moving average (MA)
filter. AEC algorithm then normalizes the output of the filter
and accurately illustrates the health condition of the system.
We evaluate the performance of our algorithm over several
run-to-failure tests of machine bearings and prove its superiority in finding the degradation starting point compared to
the existing methods.

This paper studies an intelligent technique for the healthmonitoring and prognostics of common rotary machine components, with regards to bearings in particular. During a
run-to-failure experiment, rich unsupervised features from
vibration sensory data are extracted by a trained sparse autoencoder. Then, the correlation of the initial samples (presumably healthy), along with the successive samples, are calculated and passed through a moving-average filter. The normalized output which is referred to as the auto-encoder correlation
based (AEC) rate, determines an informative attribute of the
system, depicting its health status. AEC automatically identifies the degradation starting point in the machine component.
We show that AEC rate well-generalizes in several run-tofailure tests. We demonstrate the superiority of the AEC over
many other state-of-the-art approaches for the health monitoring of machine bearings.

1

Introduction

Machine health management plays a key role in almost all industries. A key subsidiary of health management is condition
based monitoring (CBM) where one prognoses abnormal status of a machine based on extracted features from a group of
implemented sensors and parameters. The CBM procedure,
therefore, includes two steps; 1) Feature extraction during a
run-to-failure experiment and 2) Data processing for predicting the degradation starting point and monitoring the defect
propagation during the test.
Numerous methods have been proposed for the prognostic
of key machine components. In many cases, handcrafted timeand frequency-domain features are derived from the sensors
mounted on the machine are used directly or post-processed
by numerous methods in order to predict the condition of the
machine component (Lee et al. 2014). Recently, on the other
hand, artificial intelligence (AI) solutions have been vastly
utilized in fault classification and condition monitoring (Jia
et al. 2016; Sun et al. 2016; Thirukovalluru et al. 2016). AI
techniques significantly enhance the quality of the feature
extraction and data processing. However, they have not yet
realized a fully-automated method without the use of prior
knowledge for health monitoring tests.

2

Related Works

Comprehensive reviews on useful prognostic methods for
industrial machines including bearings have been proposed
(Jardine, Lin, and Banjevic 2006; Lee et al. 2014). Traditionally, time domain statistical features such as root mean
squared (RMS), Kurtosis, and Spectral Kurtosis have been
utilized for monitoring the status of key machine components (Qiu et al. 2006). Although such features can capture
regularities in the data, in low signal to noise ratios (SNR) environments with high dimensional prediction properties, they
face difficulties concerning predicting the status of the system
under test. Unsupervised feature extraction techniques such
as principle component analysis (PCA)-based methods (He,
Kong, and Yan 2007), followed by a post-processing stage,

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9472

