The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Disentangled Representation with Pairwise Independence
Zejian Li,1 Yongchuan Tang,1,2∗ Wei Li,1 Yongxing He1
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
2
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou 310027, China
{zejianlee, yctang, liwei 2014, heyongxing}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Ghahramani, and Weller (2018) consider side information
in the learning process. However, real-world data is often
raw data without labels or attributes, and thus the unsupervised learning of disentangled representation is an important
and challenging problem. Most existing methods are based
on the prior assumption that the learned codes should be
mutually independent. It is believed that interpretable factors tend to change independently in the data, so by inferring independent codes, the model may capture those interpretable factors backward. To model this independence,
Higgins et al. (2017) and Burgess et al. (2018) limit the
capacity of learning model. Kumar, Sattigeri, and Balakrishnan (2018) match the code distribution to the standard
normal distribution. Kim and Mnih (2018) and Chen et al.
(2018) optimize the term of total correlation to enable the
distribution to be factorial. Other works (Chen et al. 2016;
Li, Tang, and He 2018) take the principle of mutual information minimization. Most of these methods are built on top of
variational autoencoder (Kingma and Welling 2014).
However, we find interpretable factors are pairwise independent in experiments. We perform Pearson’s chi-squared
test on the CelebA attributes (Liu et al. 2015) and find that
some attributes pairs are independent. However, only a group
of three attributes is three-wise independent and no four-wise
independent group is observed. Therefore, we assume the
latent codes of data are pairwise independence in the design
of our model. Notice that pairwise independence is different
from mutual independence. A finite set of k random variables {Z1 , . . . , Zk } are pairwise independent when any two
of them are independent. However, they are mutually independent only when the joint cumulative distribution function
is always the product of the marginal cumulative functions,
Qk
namely FZ1 ,...,Zk (z1 , . . . , zk ) = i=1 FZi (zi ). Since mutual independence is a special case of pairwise independence,
our assumption is more general.
The pairwise independence assumption cannot be incorporated with variational autoencoder directly. This is because
variational autoencoder is based on the evidence lower bound,
which implicitly encourages mutual independence among
codes (Hoffman and Johnson 2016). We introduce another
lower bound of log-likelihood according to the principle of
variational inference. Similar to the evidence lower bound, it
enables the model to recover the sample given the inferred
code. However, it restricts the marginal distribution instead

Unsupervised disentangled representation learning is one of
the foundational methods to learn interpretable factors in the
data. Existing learning methods are based on the assumption
that disentangled factors are mutually independent and incorporate this assumption with the evidence lower bound. However, our experiment reveals that factors in real-world data
tend to be pairwise independent. Accordingly, we propose a
new method based on a pairwise independence assumption
to learn the disentangled representation. The evidence lower
bound implicitly encourages mutual independence of latent
codes so it is too strong for our assumption. Therefore, we
introduce another lower bound in our method. Extensive experiments show that our proposed method gives competitive
performances as compared with other state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

This paper is concerned with the unsupervised learning of
disentangled representation. The disentangled representation
is a distributed data representation in which latent codes
represent interpretable attributes. Disjoint dimensions of the
representation change independently in the variation of the
data and are associated with different high-level data factors (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). One example
of the disentangled representation is the task of generating
hand-written digits. The hand-written digits are generated by
the generator according to the latent codes, while different
codes control rotation, stroke width, writing style and other
different attributes. These attributes interact non-linearly in
the data. However, when one factor varies but all others
are fixed, the generated sequence of samples can show an
interpretable change to human beings. Due to its interpretability, disentangled representations are useful in many downstream tasks such as supervised learning (Liu et al. 2018;
Hadad, Wolf, and Shahar 2018) and transfer learning (Zamir
et al. 2018).
Many recent works have been devoted to the supervised learning of disentangled representation. Bouchacourt,
Tomioka, and Nowozin (2018) and Hadad, Wolf, and Shahar (2018) assume the group division of samples is given.
Liu et al. (2018) require the predefined attributes. Adel,
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4245

