The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Bottom-Up Clustering Approach to Unsupervised Person Re-Identification
Yutian Lin,1 Xuanyi Dong,1 Liang Zheng,2 Yan Yan,3 Yi Yang1∗
1

CAI, University of Technology Sydney, 2 Australian National University
3
Department of Computer Science, Texas State University
yutian.lin@student.uts.edu.au, xuanyi.dxy@gmail.com
liangzheng06@gmail.com, y y34@txstate.edu, yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract

Stage 3
Clustering
C=2

Most person re-identification (re-ID) approaches are based
on supervised learning, which requires intensive manual annotation for training data. However, it is not only resourceintensive to acquire identity annotation but also impractical
to label the large-scale real-world data. To relieve this problem, we propose a bottom-up clustering (BUC) approach to
jointly optimize a convolutional neural network (CNN) and
the relationship among the individual samples. Our algorithm
considers two fundamental facts in the re-ID task, i.e., diversity across different identities and similarity within the same
identity. Specifically, our algorithm starts with regarding individual sample as a different identity, which maximizes the
diversity over each identity. Then it gradually groups similar samples into one identity, which increases the similarity within each identity. We utilizes a diversity regularization term in the bottom-up clustering procedure to balance
the data volume of each cluster. Finally, the model achieves
an effective trade-off between the diversity and similarity. We
conduct extensive experiments on the large-scale image and
video re-ID datasets, including Market-1501, DukeMTMCreID, MARS and DukeMTMC-VideoReID. The experimental results demonstrate that our algorithm is not only superior to state-of-the-art unsupervised re-ID approaches, but
also performs favorably than competing transfer learning and
semi-supervised learning methods.

1

CNN training

Stage 2
Clustering
C=4
CNN training
Stage 1
Clustering
C=8
CNN training

Stage 0
N=15

Figure 1: The bottom-up clustering method. Each circle denotes an individual image for training. N denotes the number of training samples, while C denotes the number of clusters after clustering. After the current stage of network training, we apply clustering based on the previous clustering result and the feature similarity of the current stage. By clustering from bottom to up, individual pedestrian samples are
gathered to represent an identity.

Introduction

Person re-identification (re-ID) aims at matching a target
person in a set of query pedestrian images. In recent years,
the widespread adoption of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) has led to impressive progress in the field of
re-ID (Yi et al. 2014; Li et al. 2014; Varior, Haloi, and Wang
2016). However, supervised re-ID methods require intensive manual labeling. It is expensive and not applicable to
the real-world applications. The limited generalization ability motivates the research into unsupervised approaches for
person re-ID.
Traditional unsupervised methods focus on hand-crafted
features (Farenzena et al. 2010; Liao et al. 2015; Lisanti
et al. 2015), salience analysis (Zhao, Ouyang, and Wang

2013; Wang, Gong, and Xiang 2014) and dictionary learning (Kodirov, Xiang, and Gong 2015). These methods produce much lower performance than supervised methods and
are not applicable to large-scale real-world data. In recent
years, some transfer learning methods (Hehe et al. 2018;
Peng et al. 2016; Deng et al. 2018) are proposed upon
the success of deep learning (Dong et al. 2018a; Li, Tang,
and Mei 2018). These methods usually learn an identitydiscriminative feature embedding on the source dataset, and
transfer the learned features to the unseen target domain.
However, these methods require a large amount of annotated
source data, which cannot be regarded as pure unsupervised
approaches.
Previous deep learning based “unsupervised” person reID approaches leverage the prior knowledge learned from
other re-ID datasets. However, we aim to solve the problem

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8738

