The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Large-Scale Interactive
Recommendation with Tree-Structured Policy Gradient
Haokun Chen,1 Xinyi Dai,1 Han Cai,1 Weinan Zhang,1
Xuejian Wang,1 Ruiming Tang,2 Yuzhou Zhang,2 Yong Yu1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{chenhaokun,xydai,hcai,wnzhang,xjwang,yyu}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn
{tangruiming,zhangyuzhou3}@huawei.com
Abstract

challenging scenarios that require both dynamic interaction and long-run planning such as playing games (Mnih
et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016) and regulating ad bidding
(Cai et al. 2017; Jin et al. 2018), has been introduced to
model the recommendation process and shows its potential
to handle the interactive nature in IRS (Zheng et al. 2018;
Zhao et al. 2018b; 2018a).
However, most existing RL techniques cannot handle the
large discrete action space problem in IRS as the time complexity of making a decision is linear to the size of the action space. Specifically, all Deep Q-Network (DQN) based
methods (Zheng et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2018b) involve a
maximization operation taken over the action space to make
a decision, which becomes intractable when the size of the
action space, i.e., the number of available items, is large
(Dulac-Arnold et al. 2015), which is very common in IRS.
Most Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) based
methods (Zhao et al. 2018a; Hu et al. 2018) also suffer from
the same problem as a specific ranking function is applied
over all items to pick the one with highest score when making a decision. To reduce the time complexity, Dulac-Arnold
et al. (2015) propose to select the proto-action in a continuous hidden space and then pick the valid item via a nearestneighbor method. However, such a method suffers from the
inconsistency between the learned continuous action and the
actually desired discrete action, and thereby may lead to unsatisfied results (Tavakoli, Pardo, and Kormushev 2018).
In this paper, we propose a Tree-structured Policy Gradient Recommendation (TPGR) framework which achieves
high efficiency and high effectiveness at the same time. In
the TPGR framework, a balanced hierarchical clustering tree
is built over the items and picking an item is thus formulated
as seeking a path from the root to a certain leaf of the tree,
which dramatically reduces the time complexity in both the
training and the decision making stages. We utilize policy
gradient technique (Sutton et al. 2000) to learn how to make
recommendation decisions so as to maximize long-run rewards. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
of building tree-structured stochastic policy for large-scale
interactive recommendation.
Furthermore, to justify the proposed method using public available offline datasets, we construct an environment
simulator to mimic online environments with principles derived from real-world data. Extensive experiments on two

Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently been introduced to
interactive recommender systems (IRS) because of its nature
of learning from dynamic interactions and planning for longrun performance. As IRS is always with thousands of items
to recommend (i.e., thousands of actions), most existing RLbased methods, however, fail to handle such a large discrete
action space problem and thus become inefficient. The existing work that tries to deal with the large discrete action
space problem by utilizing the deep deterministic policy gradient framework suffers from the inconsistency between the
continuous action representation (the output of the actor network) and the real discrete action. To avoid such inconsistency and achieve high efficiency and recommendation effectiveness, in this paper, we propose a Tree-structured Policy Gradient Recommendation (TPGR) framework, where a
balanced hierarchical clustering tree is built over the items
and picking an item is formulated as seeking a path from
the root to a certain leaf of the tree. Extensive experiments
on carefully-designed environments based on two real-world
datasets demonstrate that our model provides superior recommendation performance and significant efficiency improvement over state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Interactive recommender systems (IRS) (Zhao, Zhang, and
Wang 2013) play a key role in most personalized services,
such as Pandora, Musical.ly and YouTube, etc. Different
from the conventional recommendation settings (Mooney
and Roy 2000; Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009), where the
recommendation process is regarded as a static one, an IRS
consecutively recommends items to individual users and receives their feedbacks which makes it possible to refine its
recommendation policy during such interactive processes.
To handle the interactive nature, some efforts have been
made by modeling the recommendation process as a multiarmed bandit (MAB) problem (Li et al. 2010; Zhao, Zhang,
and Wang 2013). However, these works pre-assume that the
underlying user preference remains unchanged during the
recommendation process (Zhao, Zhang, and Wang 2013)
and do not plan for long-run performance explicitly.
Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto
1998), which has achieved remarkable success in various
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3312

