The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Session-Based Recommendation with Graph Neural Networks
Shu Wu,1,2 Yuyuan Tang,3 Yanqiao Zhu,4 Liang Wang,1,2 Xing Xie,5 Tieniu Tan1,2
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
4
School of Software Engineering, Tongji University
5
Microsoft Research Asia
shu.wu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, tangyyuanr@gmail.com, sxkdz@tongji.edu.cn,
wangliang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, xing.xie@microsoft.com, tnt@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

developed. Based on Markov chains, some work (Shani,
Brafman, and Heckerman 2002; Rendle, Freudenthaler, and
Schmidt-Thieme 2010) predicts the user’s next behavior
based on the previous one. With a strong independence assumption, independent combinations of the past components
confine the prediction accuracy.
In recent years, the majority of research (Hidasi et al.
2016a; Tan, Xu, and Liu 2016; Tuan and Phuong 2017; Li
et al. 2017a) apply Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) for
session-based recommendation systems and obtain promising results. The work (Hidasi et al. 2016a) proposes a recurrent neural network approach at first, then the model is enhanced by data augmentation and considering temporal shift
of user behavior (Tan, Xu, and Liu 2016). Recently, NARM
(Li et al. 2017a) designs a global and local RNN recommender to capture user’s sequential behavior and main purposes simultaneously. Similar to NARM, STAMP (Liu et al.
2018) also captures users’ general interests and current interests, by employing simple MLP networks and an attentive
net.
Although the methods above achieve satisfactory results
and become the state-of-the-arts, they still have some limitations. Firstly, without adequate user behavior in one session, these methods have difficulty in estimating user representations. Usually, the hidden vectors of these RNN methods are treated as the user representations, such that recommendations can be then generated based on these representations, for instance, the global recommender of NARM. In
session-based recommendation systems, however, sessions
are mostly anonymous and numerous, and user behavior implicated in session clicks is often limited. It is thus difficult
to accurately estimate the representation of each user from
each session. Secondly, previous work reveals that patterns
of item transitions are important and can be used as a local factor (Li et al. 2017a; Liu et al. 2018) in session-based
recommendation, but these methods always model singleway transitions between consecutive items and neglect the
transitions among the contexts, i.e. other items in the session. Thus, complex transitions among distant items are often overlooked by these methods.
To overcome the limitations mentioned above, we propose a novel method for Session-based Recommendation

The problem of session-based recommendation aims to predict user actions based on anonymous sessions. Previous
methods model a session as a sequence and estimate user representations besides item representations to make recommendations. Though achieved promising results, they are insufficient to obtain accurate user vectors in sessions and neglect
complex transitions of items. To obtain accurate item embedding and take complex transitions of items into account, we
propose a novel method, i.e. Session-based Recommendation
with Graph Neural Networks, SR-GNN for brevity. In the
proposed method, session sequences are modeled as graphstructured data. Based on the session graph, GNN can capture complex transitions of items, which are difficult to be
revealed by previous conventional sequential methods. Each
session is then represented as the composition of the global
preference and the current interest of that session using an
attention network. Extensive experiments conducted on two
real datasets show that SR-GNN evidently outperforms the
state-of-the-art session-based recommendation methods consistently.

1

Introduction

With the rapid growth of the amount of information on the
Internet, recommendation systems become fundamental for
helping users alleviate the problem of information overload
and select interesting information in many Web applications, e.g., search, e-commerce, and media streaming sites.
Most of the existing recommendation systems assume that
the user profile and past activities are constantly recorded.
However, in many services, user identification may be unknown and only the user behavior history during an ongoing session is available. Thereby, it is of great importance
to model limited behavior in one session and generate the
recommendation accordingly. Conversely, conventional recommendation methods relying on adequate user-item interactions have problems in yielding accurate results under this
circumstance.
Due to the highly practical value, increasing research interests in this problem can be observed, and many kinds
of proposals for session-based recommendation have been
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

346

