The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Word Embedding as Maximum A Posteriori Estimation∗
Shoaib Jameel,1 Zihao Fu,2 Bei Shi,3 Wai Lam,2 Steven Schockaert4
1
School of Computing, Medway Campus, University of Kent, UK
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
3
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
4
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University, UK
M.S.Jameel@kent.ac.uk, zhfu@se.cuhk.edu.hk, beishi@tencent.com, wlam@se.cuhk.edu.hk, schockaerts1@cardiff.ac.uk
2

Abstract

for a natural way to represent textual input to neural networks. Word embeddings have similarly transformed related
fields such as information retrieval (Zamani and Croft 2017),
(Dehghani et al. 2017), (Ensan 2018), knowledge base completion (Yang, Tang, and Cohen 2016), (Wang et al. 2014),
(Zhong et al. 2015) and recommender systems (Musto et al.
2015), (Zhao et al. 2017).
The approach we follow in this paper is based on GloVe
(Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014). This model aims
to find two vector representations, denoted by wi and w̃i ,
and two bias terms bi and b˜i for each word i such that
wi · w̃j + bi + b˜j approximates log xij , with xij the number
of times words i and j co-occur1 that co-occurrence counts
are weighted based on how closely together the words i and
j appear. Given GloVe’s formulation as a least squares regression problem, it can be naturally interpreted in terms of
maximum likelihood estimation. Specifically, it is easy to
see that the basic2 GloVe objective is equivalent to maximizing the following expression:
Y
N (log xij ; wi · w̃j + bi + b˜j , σ 2 )
(1)

The GloVe word embedding model relies on solving a global
optimization problem, which can be reformulated as a maximum likelihood estimation problem. In this paper, we propose to generalize this approach to word embedding by considering parametrized variants of the GloVe model and incorporating priors on these parameters. To demonstrate the
usefulness of this approach, we consider a word embedding
model in which each context word is associated with a corresponding variance, intuitively encoding how informative it
is. Using our framework, we can then learn these variances
together with the resulting word vectors in a unified way. We
experimentally show that the resulting word embedding models outperform GloVe, as well as many popular alternatives.

Introduction
Word embedding models learn low-dimensional vector representation of words based on co-occurrence information
obtained from some large text corpus. The aim of such models is to learn representations which capture word similarities, analogies, and other lexical relationships. Various word
embedding models have already been proposed in the literature, including approaches inspired by neural language
models, such as Skipgram (SG) and the Continuous Bagof-Word (CBOW) model (Mikolov et al. 2013), regression
based models, such as the least squares regression model
GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) and the ordinal regression model from (Jameel and Schockaert 2017)
and different kinds of probabilistic models, such as Gaussian embeddings (Vilnis and McCallum 2014), a Bayesian
version of Skipgram (Barkan 2017) and an approach using
Dirichlet-Multinomial language models (D-GloVe) (Jameel
and Schockaert 2016).
Word embeddings play a crucial role in deep learning approaches to natural language processing tasks, as they allow

i,j

where we write N (.; µ, σ 2 ) for the Normal distribution with
mean µ and variance σ 2 . The variance σ 2 encodes how
closely we expect wi · w̃j + bi + b˜j to approximate log(xij ).
In GloVe, this variance is assumed to be fixed for every word
pair (i, j). In such cases, σ 2 can be chosen arbitrarily, as the
choice of σ 2 does then not affect which word vectors and
bias terms maximize (1). Intuitively, however, it seems desirable to use a variance σj2 which depends on how informative the context word j is: if j is a highly informative
context word, it should have a strong influence on the word
vector representation of i and thus we intuitively want the
associated variance σj2 to be low. On the other hand, if j is a
stop word, we may not want it to influence the word vector
representation of i at all, and thus want σj2 to be high.
The method we develop in this paper will allow us to learn
a suitable variance σj2 for each context word j. To this end,
we will put priors on these variances, and maximize the resulting posterior distribution instead of (1), which will allow

∗

Experiments in this work were performed using the ICARUS
computational facility from Information Services and the School
of Computing Hydra Cluster at the University of Kent. The work
described in this paper is partially supported by a grant from the
Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project Code: 14203414). Steven Schockaert
is supported by ERC Starting Grant 637277.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

As usual, we will assume throughout the paper
The full GloVe model also includes a weight f (xij ), which
we do not consider here for simplicity.
2

6562

