The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robustness Can Be Cheap: A Highly Efficient
Approach to Discover Outliers under High Outlier Ratios
Siqi Wang,1,2 En Zhu,1 Xiping Hu,2 Xinwang Liu,1 Qiang Liu,1 Jianping Yin,3 Fei Wang4
1
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Science, Shenzhen, China
3
Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan, 523808, Guangdong, China
4
Healthcare Policy and Research, Weill Cornell Medical School, Cornell University, New York, NY 10065, USA
2

Abstract
Efficient detection of outliers from massive data with a high
outlier ratio is challenging but not explicitly discussed yet. In
such a case, existing methods either suffer from poor robustness or require expensive computations. This paper proposes
a Low-rank based Efficient Outlier Detection (LEOD) framework to achieve favorable robustness against high outlier ratios with much cheaper computations. Specifically, it is worth
highlighting the following aspects of LEOD: (1) Our framework exploits the low-rank structure embedded in the similarity matrix and considers inliers/outliers equally based on this
low-rank structure, which facilitates us to encourage satisfying robustness with low computational cost later; (2) A novel
re-weighting algorithm is derived as a new general solution to
the constrained eigenvalue problem, which is a major bottleneck for the optimization process. Instead of the high space
and time complexity (O((2n)2 )/O((2n)3 )) required by the
classic solution, our algorithm enjoys O(n) space complexity
and a faster optimization speed in the experiments; (3) A new
alternative formulation is proposed for further acceleration of
the solution process, where a cheap closed-form solution can
be obtained. Experiments show that LEOD achieves strong
robustness under an outlier ratio from 20% to 60%, while it
is at most 100 times more memory efficient and 1000 times
faster than its previous counterpart that attains comparable
performance. The codes of LEOD are publicly available at
https://github.com/demonzyj56/LEOD.

Figure 1: Top images returned by Google on “apple”.

crawled from Internet are often mixed with massive outliers
from a host of unknown classes, which may occupy nearly
50% of the top search results (see Fig. 1). As handling a
high outlier ratio is vital for practical applications but has
not been specifically discussed by prior literature, this paper
will focus on this problem and formally formulate it later.
Under a high outlier ratio, existing methods are faced with
some important challenges: As traditional outlier detection
methods often explicitly or implicitly assume outliers to be
minority, they suffer from poor robustness, which refers to
a very high vulnerability to the high outlier ratio, so their
performance will be severely degraded when the outlier ratio gets higher (see Fig. 2a). In the meantime, despite that
our experiments show that the recent method Unsupervised
One-class Learning (UOCL) (Liu, Hua, and Smith 2014) obtains satisfying robustness under high outlier ratios since it
no longer assumes “few” outliers in the first place (blue line
in Fig. 2a), it requires intolerably expensive computations
(see Fig. 2b): It costs 50 minutes and 12 GiB memory to process merely n = 7000 128-dimension data on a benchmark
dataset. What is worse, the growth rate of its memory/time
cost is quadratic/cubic. Such fatal flaw in efficiency makes
it only applicable to small-scale problems. Thus, a solution
that can preserve good outlier detection performance under
a high outlier ratio (“robust”) but require low memory and
time cost (“cheap”) remains open to be explored.
To address the aforementioned challenges, this paper proposes Low-rank based Efficient Outlier Detection (LEOD).
Specifically, our approach (1) introduces a novel framework
that utilizes the low-rank structure embedded in the simi-

Introduction
Outlier detection aims to identify the unusual patterns that
do not conform to frequently-seen behaviors in a data set.
As outliers cannot be defined by any specific class, classic
methods are usually based on the “few and different” assumption (Chandola and Kumar 2007): (1) “Few”: The ratio
of outliers is much lower than inliers. (2) “Different”: Outliers evidently differ from inliers. However, this commonlyused assumption will fail when the proportion of outliers is
large, i.e. a high outlier ratio. In fact, a high outlier ratio
is frequently seen in many real-life scenarios since outliers
may originate from a variety of different underlying causes
and account for a high overall outlier ratio. For example,
online reviews of Yelp contain up to 30% outlying faked reviews from various sources (Luca and Zervas 2016); Images
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5313

