The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Non-Compensatory Psychological Models for Recommender Systems
Chen Lin,1,3 Xiaolin Shen,1 Si Chen,1 Muhua Zhu,3 Yanghua Xiao2,3
1

Department of Computer Science, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
chenlin@xmu.edu.cn, {xlshen, sichen}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, muhua.zmh@alibaba-inc.com, shawyh@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

pensatory rules. Under compensatory rules a consumer evaluates an item over all relevant aspects. A good performance
on one aspect of an item compensates for poor performances
on other aspects. For example, there are concerns about three
aspects: battery life, price and storage space when Alice
wants to buy a cellphone. A compensatory rule to evaluate
a cellphone is to score its performance on each aspect separately and compute a weighted summation over all aspects.
However, in the study of human choice behavior, it is well
regarded that consumers more frequently make consumption
related choices based on non-compensatory rules (Engel,
Blackwell, and Miniard 1986). For example, (Hauser, Ding,
and Gaskin 2009) reviews 132 empirical surveys in the literature and concludes that more than 70% of consumers adopt
non-compensatory rules when buying air-conditioners, automobiles, computers, cameras and so on.
Non-compensatory rules do not allow the shortcomings of
a product to be balanced out by its attractive features. The
literature has proposed different non-compensatory rules,
among which lexicographic rule and conjunctive rule are
the most commonly used. For example, in a survey interviewing consumption decisions about beer brands and fastfood outlets (Laroche, Kim, and Matsui 2003), conjunctive
rule has a success rate of 62.0% in predicting brand consideration and lexicographic rule has a success rate of 34.6%
which is the second highest non-compensatory rule. We next
illustrate lexicographic rule and conjunctive rule by the cellphone example in Table 1.
Example. Lexicographic rule assumes that aspects of
products can be ordered in terms of importance and alternative brands are evaluated sequentially from the most prominent to the least prominent aspects. If Alice’s priority is
long-lasting battery, then she will adopt lexicographic rule to
rank phones first based on battery life. In this case Honor and
iPhone will be ranked higher than Galaxy. The other benefits
offered by Galaxy do not outweigh her desire for a long-life
battery. Conjunctive rule establishes a minimally acceptable
threshold for each aspect. Evaluation is made on the basis
of whether or not the products satisfy the threshold. If Alice wants the phone to be cheap and with plenty of storage
space, then she will adopt conjunctive rule to set thresholds
(e.g. 600$ and 64GB on the corresponding aspects). In this

The study of consumer psychology reveals two categories of
consumption decision procedures: compensatory rules and
non-compensatory rules. Existing recommendation models
which are based on latent factor models assume the consumers follow the compensatory rules, i.e. they evaluate an
item over multiple aspects and compute a weighted or/and
summated score which is used to derive the rating or ranking
of the item. However, it has been shown in the literature of
consumer behavior that, consumers adopt non-compensatory
rules more often than compensatory rules. Our main contribution in this paper is to study the unexplored area of utilizing
non-compensatory rules in recommendation models.
Our general assumptions are (1) there are K universal hidden aspects. In each evaluation session, only one aspect is
chosen as the prominent aspect according to user preference.
(2) Evaluations over prominent and non-prominent aspects
are non-compensatory. Evaluation is mainly based on item
performance on the prominent aspect. For non-prominent aspects the user sets a minimal acceptable threshold. We give
a conceptual model for these general assumptions. We show
how this conceptual model can be realized in both pointwise rating prediction models and pair-wise ranking prediction models. Experiments on real-world data sets validate that
adopting non-compensatory rules improves recommendation
performance for both rating and ranking models.

Introduction
The majority of state-of-the-art recommendation models are
based on latent factor models. Generally, latent factor models transform both user preferences and item features into the
same hidden feature spaces with K aspects. To recover the
observations (i.e. ratings or rankings) in any recommender
system, they adopt the inner products of the user preferences
and the item features. There are fruitful applications of latent
factor models in rating predictions (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009; Koren 2010; Lee et al. 2014) and ranking reconstructions (Rendle et al. 2009; Steck 2015; Zhao et al. 2018;
Shi, Larson, and Hanjalic 2010).
From the perspective of consumer decision making, all
existing latent factor models fall into the category of comCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4304

