The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Reinforcement Learning for Syntactic Error Repair in Student Programs
Rahul Gupta, Aditya Kanade, Shirish Shevade
Department of Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, KA 560012, India
{rahulg, kanade, shirish}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

Figure 1 illustrates an erroneous programming submission implementing a tax calculation algorithm in an introductory course on C programming. It has two syntactic errors: (1) incorrect use of semicolon within the scanf function call in line 4 and (2) a missing closing brace at the end
of line 12. The Clang compiler generates the following error
message for it:

Novice programmers often struggle with the formal syntax of
programming languages. In the traditional classroom setting,
they can make progress with the help of real time feedback
from their instructors which is often impossible to get in the
massive open online course (MOOC) setting. Syntactic error
repair techniques have huge potential to assist them at scale.
Towards this, we design a novel programming language correction framework amenable to reinforcement learning. The
framework allows an agent to mimic human actions for text
navigation and editing. We demonstrate that the agent can
be trained through self-exploration directly from the raw input, that is, program text itself, without either supervision
or any prior knowledge of the formal syntax of the programming language. We evaluate our technique on a publicly
available dataset containing 6975 erroneous C programs with
typographic errors, written by students during an introductory programming course. Our technique fixes 1699 (24.4%)
programs completely and 1310 (18.8%) program partially,
outperforming DeepFix, a state-of-the-art syntactic error repair technique, which uses a fully supervised neural machine
translation approach.

ex.c:4:12: error: expected ’)’
scanf("%f"; &ti);
ˆ
ex.c:4:7: note: to match this ’(’
scanf("%f"; &ti);
ˆ
ex.c:4:17: error: extraneous ’)’ before ’;’
scanf("%f"; &ti);
ˆ
ex.c:13:2: error: expected expression
else if(ti>1000000){
ˆ
ex.c:16:12: error: expected ’}’
return 0;}
ˆ
ex.c:2:11: note: to match this ’{’
int main(){
ˆ
4 errors generated.

Introduction
Programming oriented massive open online courses have
gained huge popularity in the last few years. Due to the large
number of student enrollments in these courses, providing
real time personalized feedback is infeasible for instructors.
Addressing this issue, a number of automated feedback generation techniques for programming assignments have been
developed in recent years. However, most of the existing
techniques focus on fixing semantic errors and work only
for programs that compile successfully (Piech et al. 2009;
Singh, Gulwani, and Solar-Lezama 2013; Kaleeswaran et al.
2016). These techniques require either SAT solving or test
execution, both of which are not possible for the programs
with syntactic errors.
Programmers rely on compilers to get feedback for syntactic errors. However, compiler error messages do not always localize the errors accurately and are often difficult to
understand (Traver 2010). This makes syntactic errors very
time consuming to fix and a major learning hurdle for students of introductory programming courses.

Note that the above error message does not pinpoint either of
the errors precisely1 . While the error message may be sufficiently helpful for an expert programmer, a novice programmer may even end up introducing more errors in the program
by following the suggested fixes.
Our aim in this work is to develop a syntactic error repair technique that can assist novice programmers by automatically correcting common syntactic errors in programs.
When faced with an error, a programmer navigates through
the program text to arrive at a possible location of error and
then performs an edit to fix the error. Intuitively, this is like
playing a game, in which an agent starts with an incorrect
program as initial state and takes navigation and edit actions
to reach the goal state (error-free program).
Deep reinforcement learning has enjoyed great success in
1

The GCC compiler precisely pinpoints both the errors in this
program but fails on many others. One such example is shown in
(Gupta et al. 2017).

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

930

