The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A PAC Framework for Aggregating Agents’ Judgments
Hanrui Zhang

Vincent Conitzer

Computer Science Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
hrzhang@cs.duke.edu

Computer Science Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
conitzer@cs.duke.edu

Abstract

then, use techniques from social choice theory (Brandt et al.
2015) to aggregate this into a single decision policy for the
AI system. For example, the “Moral Machine” website developed at MIT invites visitors to consider various scenarios
in which the car will necessarily end up killing one group
of people (and/or animals) or another, and ask them which
they would choose.1 Indeed, these responses have been aggregated into policies via a voting-based approach (Noothigattu et al. 2018). In a similar project, MTurkers were asked
such comparison queries in the context of kidney exchanges
and their responses were aggregated into a policy (Freedman
et al. 2018).
Human subject responses are not freely available. They
either require compensation (e.g., MTurkers) or a gamified
design that makes it enjoyable to participate but may come
at other costs.2 This raises several related questions for the
purpose of designing similar systems. How many responses
should we aim to get? Do we need to recruit many distinct
subjects, or does it suffice to have many responses from
a few subjects? Do random queries suffice or should we
actively design them? In this paper, we propose a formal
learning-theoretic framework for this problem, building on
the framework of Probably Approximately Correct (PAC)
learning (Valiant 1984). In our model, there is a single correct concept c∗ that we attempt to learn.3 Each human subject j has her own concept cj , which is a noisy estimate of
the correct concept. When we ask subject j query xj,k , the
subject will respond with y j,k according to her own concept
cj . From these responses, we aim to learn the correct concept c∗ .

Specifying the objective function that an AI system should
pursue can be challenging. Especially when the decisions
to be made by the system have a moral component, input
from multiple stakeholders is often required. We consider approaches that query them about their judgments in individual
examples, and then aggregate these judgments into a general
policy. We propose a formal learning-theoretic framework for
this setting. We then give general results on how to translate
classical results from PAC learning into results in our framework. Subsequently, we show that in some settings, better results can be obtained by working directly in our framework.
Finally, we discuss how our model can be extended in a variety of ways for future research.

Introduction
As AI systems are being broadly deployed in the world, the
problem of specifying the objective functions that they pursue is becoming ever more complex. Simple objective functions that are sensible for the purpose of evaluating techniques in the lab often cause unwanted outcomes in practice.
For example, one might try to simply minimize error rate in
a speech recognition system, only to realize that the resulting system performs extremely well on the majority dialect
but poorly on the minority dialect. This may socially not be
acceptable.
More generally, AI systems increasingly need to make
difficult tradeoffs. Should a self-driving car take an action
that increases the risk for a nearby pedestrian, but reduces
it for the occupant of the car? Should an algorithm that
matches patients and donors in a kidney exchange prioritize younger patients even if this reduces the total number
of matches? Given that today’s AI systems do not have a
broad understanding of the world, they cannot appropriately
make these tradeoffs themselves; human input is required.
But these problems are difficult for humans too, and they
will not always agree.
One approach to doing so is the following (Conitzer et al.
2017; Noothigattu et al. 2018). Ask multiple human subjects
what option they would choose in certain situations in the
domain at hand; from this, learn a model for each of them,
predicting what they would choose in other situations; and

1

This project has been much maligned for focusing on an unrealistic problem. But there is no doubt that self-driving cars will face
some problems where they will have to make such tradeoffs, for example in deciding how aggressive to be in merging lanes (Sadigh
et al. 2016).
2
The Moral Machine team has been open about prioritizing the
site going viral over other objectives.
3
In the context of moral decision making, it is of course a matter
of philosophical debate whether there is truly a correct concept,
and we will not resolve this debate here. However, belief that such
a correct concept exists is not necessary to use our methodology;
one might also see it as merely a useful fiction to proceed with the
analysis, as is sometimes done in voting theory as well (Elkind and
Slinko 2015).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2237

