The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deliberate Attention Networks for Image Captioning
Lianli Gao,1 Kaixuan Fan,1 Jingkuan Song,1 Xianglong Liu,2 Xing Xu,1 Heng Tao Shen1∗
1

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China. 2 Beihang University, China. {lianli.gao,201722060722,xing.xu}@uestc.edu.cn,
{jingkuan.song}@gmail.com, xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn,shenhengtao@hotmail.com

Abstract
DA-De+RF: a little girl holding a hair with a hair
DA+De+RF: a little girl brushing her hair with a
pink brush

In daily life, deliberation is a common behavior for human to improve or refine their work (e.g., writing, reading and drawing). To date, encoder-decoder framework with
attention mechanisms has achieved great progress for image captioning. However, such framework is in essential an
one-pass forward process while encoding to hidden states
and attending to visual features, but lacks of the deliberation action. The learned hidden states and visual attention
are directly used to predict the final captions without further polishing. In this paper, we present a novel Deliberate
Residual Attention Network, namely DA, for image captioning. The first-pass residual-based attention layer prepares the
hidden states and visual attention for generating a preliminary version of the captions, while the second-pass deliberate residual-based attention layer refines them. Since the
second-pass is based on the rough global features captured
by the hidden layer and visual attention in the first-pass, our
DA has the potential to generate better sentences. We further equip our DA with discriminative loss and reinforcement
learning to disambiguate image/caption pairs and reduce exposure bias. Our model improves the state-of-the-arts on the
MSCOCO dataset and reaches 37.5% BELU-4, 28.5% METEOR and 125.6% CIDEr. It also outperforms the-state-ofthe-arts from 25.1% BLEU-4, 20.4% METEOR and 53.1%
CIDEr to 29.4% BLEU-4, 23.0% METEOR and 66.6% on
the Flickr30K dataset.

DA-De+RF: a yellow bus parked on the side of a
city street
DA+De+RF: a yellow food truck parked on the
side of a city street
DA-De+RF: a dog looking out of a car mirror
DA+De+RF: a woman taking a picture of a dog
in a car mirror
DA-De+RF: a bus driving down a street next to
a city
DA+De+RF: a green and white bus driving down
a city street

Figure 1: Examples of image captions generated by our DA.
For each image, the first and second sentences are generated
by the first-pass (DA-De+RF) and the second-pass respectively (DA+De+RF). This demonstrates that our deliberate
attention can generate more precise concepts (e.g., “food
truck” vs “bus”) and more reasonable descriptions (e.g., “a
women taking a picture of a dog in a car mirror” vs “a dog
looking out of a car mirror”) by using a deliberate process.

Introduction
Image captioning is to automatically generate a natural language sentence given an image. The sentence is required to
be fluent and describe objects and scene in the image. Image captioning can facilitate lots of practical applications.
For example, visually impaired people can get help from image captioning to understand the content of image. To date,
encoder-decoder framework with attention mechanisms has
achieved great progress for image captioning. Generally,
CNN extracts image features as encoder and RNN predicts words as decoder. When each word is generated, attention mechanism (Anderson et al. 2018; Lu et al. 2017;
Song et al. 2018b; Gao et al. 2018) decides which regions to
attend to.

Besides, the encoder-decoder framework with attention mechanisms has been widely applied to solve
other sequence generation tasks, e.g., machine translation
(Denkowski and Lavie 2014), image annotation (Krishna et
al. 2017) and video captioning (Song et al. 2018a; Zhang
et al. 2019; Song et al. 2017). However, such a framework
is in essential an one-pass forward process. When a model
predicts the next word, it can only leverage the generated
words but not the future unknown words. To humans, deliberation action is a common behavior in their daily, e.g., reading, writing or understanding an image. During the process,
global information of both the past and future are leveraged.
Xia et. al. (Xia et al. 2017) designed a deliberation network
which included two levels of decoders, and it is proved to be
effective for neural machine translation. The first one generates a coarse sentence and corresponding hidden states. The

∗

Jingkuan Song and Heng Tao Shen are corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8320

