The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Automatic Construction of Parallel Portfolios via Explicit Instance Grouping∗
Shengcai Liu,1 Ke Tang,2† Xin Yao2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
2
University Key Laboratory of Evolving Intelligent Systems of Guangdong Province, Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
liuscyyf@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tangk3, xiny}@sustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Typically, this requires almost redesign of existing sequential solvers to involve new mechanisms to handle specific
tasks emerged in parallel solving, such as problem decomposition, information sharing and cooperative solving, which
is non-trivial as identified as the challenge of starting from
scratch in (Hamadi and Wintersteiger 2013).
Recently, (Lindauer et al. 2017) studied generic methods
for building parallel solvers from existing sequential solvers.
The work adopts a simple approach to parallelize a set of sequential solvers — running them independently in parallel
on a given problem instance until the first of them solves it.
Such parallel solvers are called parallel portfolios (Gomes
and Selman 2001). To determine the solvers in the portfolio (called component solvers), a specific problem dubbed
automatic construction of parallel portfolios (ACPP) needs
to be addressed (Lindauer et al. 2017). More precisely, in
ACPP all component solvers are selected from a configuration space, with the goal that the performance of the resulting portfolio on a given problem instance set is optimized.
The configuration space is induced by a set of parameterized
sequential solvers (called base solvers). As illustrated in Figure 1, if there is only one base solver, the configuration space
is exactly the solver’s parameter space; otherwise the configuration space takes each base solver’s parameter space as a
subspace, and would include an additional top-level parameter to decide which subspace (base solver) would be used.
The problem instances in the instance set (called training set)
are given by the portfolio user, and should be representative
of the target use cases to which the portfolio is expected to be
applied. More formally, the ACPP problem could be stated
as follow. Given a set of base solvers B and a training set
I, let C denote the configuration space induced by B. The
parallel portfolio P with k component solvers is denoted as
a k-tuple, i.e., P = (c1 , ..., ck ), in which ci represents the ith component solver of P and is an individual configuration
selected from C, i.e., ci ∈ C. The goal of ACPP is to find
c1 , ..., ck from C, such that the performance of P on I according to a given performance metric m (e.g., computation
time or solution quality) is optimized.
It is conceivable that any parallel portfolio’s effectiveness relies heavily on the complementarity among its component solvers. In other words, different component solvers
of a high-quality parallel portfolio should be good at solving different kinds of problem instances. Hence, in the con-

Exploiting parallelism is becoming more and more important
in designing efficient solvers for computationally hard problems. However, manually building parallel solvers typically
requires considerable domain knowledge and plenty of human effort. As an alternative, automatic construction of parallel portfolios (ACPP) aims at automatically building effective
parallel portfolios based on a given problem instance set and
a given rich configuration space. One promising way to solve
the ACPP problem is to explicitly group the instances into different subsets and promote a component solver to handle each
of them. This paper investigates solving ACPP from this perspective, and especially studies how to obtain a good instance
grouping. The experimental results on two widely studied
problem domains, the boolean satisfiability problems (SAT)
and the traveling salesman problems (TSP), showed that the
parallel portfolios constructed by the proposed method could
achieve consistently superior performances to the ones constructed by the state-of-the-art ACPP methods, and could
even rival sophisticated hand-designed parallel solvers.

Introduction
Over the last decade, due to the great development and the
wide application of parallel computing architectures (e.g.,
multi-core CPUs and GPUs) (Asanovic et al. 2009), the
available computing power has been dramatically improved.
As a consequence, exploiting parallelism is now becoming
more and more important in designing efficient solvers for
computationally hard problems. Indeed, in some fundamental problem domains such as SAT, the mixed integer linear programming (MILP), and black-box continuous optimization, parallel solvers (Biere 2016; Ralphs et al. 2018;
Tang et al. 2014) have contributed a lot to the state of the
art. However, despite the notable success achieved, the manual design of parallel solvers still remains a laborious work.
∗
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No.
2017YFB1003102), the Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant Nos. 61672478 and 61806090), Shenzhen Peacock Plan
(Grant No. KQTD2016112514355531), and the Program for
University Key Laboratory of Guangdong Province(Grant No.
2017KSYS008).
†
Corresponding author
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1560

