The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Automating Analysis and Feedback to
Improve Mathematics Teachers’ Classroom Discourse
Abhijit Suresh, Tamara Sumner, Jennifer Jacobs, Bill Foland, Wayne Ward
Institute of Cognitive Science
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado Boulder

Abstract

the coming decade as more teachers ”self-record” using advances in classroom robotics (e.g., SWIVL, Panopto) and
other audio/video recording technologies (e.g., improved
smart-phone capabilities). Our goal is to utilize this data to
provide valuable feedback to teachers on their effective use
of discourse practices. Our efforts to develop a deep learning
framework for classifying discourse serves as an example
of the type of innovative application that can be built using
large scale repositories of classroom teaching.
We take our motivation from Vygotsky’s theory (Vygotsky 1978) that deliberative social interaction is essential
to the development of individuals’ mental processes. This
theory still resonates within the education community, and
has heavily influenced the literature on effective classroom
talk (Michaels, O’Connor, and Resnick 2008). Of particular
relevance is Vygotsky’s argument that instructional moves
should be used to support students to shift from being able to
learn while assisted to becoming independent, and that these
moves should occur at opportune moments within a given
student’s zone of proximal development. In the mathematics
education field, there is widespread agreement that students’
understanding should be constructed through the process of
interacting within a learning community, with discussions
serving as a prominent and normative feature within K-12
classrooms (Evans, Leija, and Falkner 2001). The Common
Core State Standards for Mathematical Practice emphasize
communication as a means of promoting argumentation and
reasoning, and engaging students in the intellectual work of
mathematics by vocalizing their thinking and making sense
of others’ ideas (Franke et al. 2015).
In this paper, we describe the development of a talk
moves classification model, based on transcribed audio from
teacher and student classroom interactions. This classification model will eventually be incorporated into a larger application (TalkBack) that draws on recorded audio tracks
to detect specified discourse moves, and generates personalized feedback through a web-based interface. The TalkBack application and its potential to support instructional
improvement is possible due to convergent advances in three
areas: the increasingly widespread availability of a new big
data source, advances in deep learning for speech and language processing tasks that can be achieved with high levels
of reliability, and consensus in mathematics education research on the types of mathematics discussion and teacher

Our work builds on advances in deep learning for natural language processing to automatically analyze transcribed
classroom discourse and reliably generate information about
teachers’ uses of specific discursive strategies called ”talk
moves.” Talk moves can be used by both teachers and learners to construct conversations in which students share their
thinking, actively consider the ideas of others, and engage in
sustained reasoning. Currently, providing teachers with detailed feedback about the talk moves in their lessons requires
highly trained observers to hand code transcripts of classroom
recordings and analyze talk moves and/or one-on-one expert
coaching, a time-consuming and expensive process that is unlikely to scale. We created a bidirectional long short-term
memory (bi-LSTM) network that can automate the annotation process. We have demonstrated the feasibility of this
deep learning approach to reliably identify a set of teacher
talk moves at the sentence level with an F1 measure of 65%.

Introduction
Classroom recordings can be understood as a new form
of big data: they are now common practice and rapidly
becoming a highly utilized resource for teacher learning.
These recordings consist of video, audio, and/or transcripts
of teaching episodes, including entire lessons or portions
of lessons. They may capture whole class discussions,
teacher facilitated-group work, or online instruction. For
instance, a recent search for ”video in teacher education”
yielded 1,630,000 results in Google Scholar. Furthermore,
an increasing number of websites host large collections of
videos of teaching episodes, either collected by research
teams or uploaded by teachers themselves; see for example The Teaching Channel, Teacher Tube, The Teaching
and Learning Exploratory, and Inside Mathematics. TeacherTube, based on YouTube, contains over 400,000 classroom
videos, the majority of which were uploaded by teachers.
These sites reflect calls for curated digital video libraries as
a means of systematically sharing classroom practice and
generating a knowledge base that can support instructional
improvement (Hiebert, Gallimore, and Stigler 2002). There
is likely to be exponential growth in classroom recordings in
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9721

