The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Segmentation Masks with the Independence Prior
Songmin Dai, Xiaoqiang Li,∗ Lu Wang, Pin Wu, Weiqin Tong, Yimin Chen
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, China
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science, Shanghai University, China
{laodar, xqli, luwang, wupin, wqtong, ymchen}@shu.edu.cn

Abstract

instance
providers

An instance with a bad mask might make a composite image
that uses it look fake. This encourages us to learn segmentation by generating realistic composite images. To achieve
this, we propose a novel framework that exploits a new proposed prior called the independence prior based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). The generator produces
an image with multiple category-specific instance providers,
a layout module and a composition module. Firstly, each
provider independently outputs a category-specific instance
image with a soft mask. Then the provided instances’ poses
are corrected by the layout module. Lastly, the composition
module combines these instances into a final image. Training
with adversarial loss and penalty for mask area, each provider
learns a mask that is as small as possible but enough to cover
a complete category-specific instance. Weakly supervised semantic segmentation methods widely use grouping cues modeling the association between image parts, which are either
artificially designed or learned with costly segmentation labels or only modeled on local pairs. Unlike them, our method
automatically models the dependence between any parts and
learns instance segmentation. We apply our framework in two
cases: (1) Foreground segmentation on category-specific images with box-level annotation. (2) Unsupervised learning of
instance appearances and masks with only one image of homogeneous object cluster (HOC). We get appealing results
in both tasks, which shows the independence prior is useful
for instance segmentation and it is possible to unsupervisedly
learn instance masks with only one image.

scene image generator

layout
module

𝑳𝒂𝒓𝒆𝒂

compositon
module

𝑳𝒂𝒅𝒗

Figure 1: Our GAN based framework generates scene images by compositing instances with independent appearances and specific categories, which is trained with adversarial loss and mask area penalty.
possible to learn image segmentation with low-cost annotation or even just one image of HOC without any annotation?
The answer suggested by our work is yes.
A natural image consists of multiple separated coherent
objects. And objects often appear, move and change independently. It seems that the image segmentation task is just
to group the coherent pixels into independent components,
which can be treated as a independent component analysis (ICA) or blind source separation problem. But thoughts
like grammar of images (Zhu, Mumford, and others 2007),
scene graph (Newell and Deng 2017; Johnson, Gupta, and
Fei-Fei 2018) and geometric relationship (Hu et al. 2018;
Lin et al. 2018) imply that objects seeming disentangled
are actually weakly interrelated by their poses (position,
scale and orientation) at larger spatial scales. To formalize
and better understand these intuitions, a graphical model for
scene images is developed firstly. Then we point out that
the real independent factors among objects are their appearances. Actually the appearances of objects are conditionally
independent given the categories of objects. We call it as the
independence prior.
We argue that the independence prior is important for
building a strong connection between the quality of a composite image and the quality of the instance masks it uses.
To exploit it for unsupervised instance segmentation, we
propose a framework based on generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), which learns instance segmentation by optimizing the composite images
from instances with specific categories, independent appear-

Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) have been
widely used and have achieved remarkable success in supervised semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Chen et al. 2014; Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox
2015; Güçlü et al. 2017). But their training needs a large
amount of images with pixel-level annotation. Such annotation is much more time consuming than box-level or imagelevel annotation, especially for the images of homogeneous
object cluster (HOC) (Wu et al. 2018) because of densely
distributed objects with various degrees of occlusion. Is it
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3429

