The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

A Neural Network Approach for
Birds of a Feather Solvability Prediction
Benjamin Sang, Sejong Yoon
The College of New Jersey
Ewing Township, New Jersey 08618

Abstract
Solvable

Birds of a Feather is a single player, perfect information card
game. The game can have multiple board sizes with larger
boards introducing larger search spaces that grow exponentially. In this paper, we investigate the solvability of the game,
aiming at building a machine learning method to automatically classify whether a given board state has a solution path
or not. We propose a method based on image-based features
of the board state and deep neural network. Experimental results show that the proposed method can make reasonable
predictions of the solvability of a game at an arbitrary stage
of the game.

?

Multi-channel
Image features

Introduction

Step Encoding
Neural Network

Unsolvable

Output Label

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed classification framework

Birds of a Feather (BoF) is a single-player, perfect information card game that was introduced for a student-faculty
research challenge at EAAI 2019 (Neller 2018). The goal of
the game is to find a deterministic solution sequence given
an initial board state following a list of rules. The initial
state consist of cards dealt from a shuffled, basic 52 card
deck, which consists of four suits (Club, Diamond, Heart,
and Spade) and thirteen ranks per suit (A to K). A board
state is partitioned into square grids, which can vary in sizes
from 1 × 1 to 7 × 7. The player must move one card at a
time, on top of the other card, following the rules, until there
are no more movable cards left on the board. There are two
rules that must be followed in the game: a card can be placed
on top of the other (a) if cards share a suit, or (b) if the two
cards have an equal or adjacent ranks. The winning condition is satisfied when only one stack of cards remains on the
board.
The research challenge is open-ended and many topics of
research were suggested by the organizer. In this paper, we
chose to investigate the solvability prediction problem, that
aims to predict whether a game state has a solution path or
not. There are two reasons for this choice. First, it is fairly
straightforward to formulate this problem as a classification
problem which is intuitive to understand for a beginning student researcher. Second, it was possible to collect large scale
data for the problem, both by obtaining from the organizers
and by generating our own dataset.

Particularly, we aim to answer the following three research questions in this work: (a) Is it possible to train a
machine learning model to find a pattern that distinguishes
both trivial and non-trivial unsolvable initial board states
from solvable ones? (b) Is it possible to apply the model
trained by using initial board states to predict the solvability
of the interim (i.e. game-in-progress) board states? (c) What
are effective representations of the board state (or features
extracted from the states) that may improve the prediction
performance?
To this end, we designed a neural network-based classification framework that accepts board states as inputs to the
framework, and solvability as the corresponding binary output of the framework. The main contributions of this paper
are two-fold: (a) We propose a BoF solvability classification framework that utilizes image-based features to represent the board state, (b) We show how the proposed framework can utilize the suggested image-based features, either
individually or in combination, to effectively predict BoF
solvability. Additionally, we provide a dataset with 1 million unique initial board states with solvability information
and (if solvable) solution sequences we used in our study.
Fig. 1 depicts the overview of the proposed framework.
The rest of the paper is organized as following: We first
describe our classification framework, introduce the dataset
we collected, followed by image-based features we propose.
Then, we present our experimental results with analysis. We

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9706

