The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Plan-and-Write: Towards Better Automatic Storytelling
Lili Yao,1,3∗ Nanyun Peng,2∗ Ralph Weischedel,2 Kevin Knight,2 Dongyan Zhao,1 Rui Yan1†
liliyao@tencent.com, {npeng,weisched,knight}@isi.edu
{zhaodongyan,ruiyan}@pku.edu.cn
1
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, 3 Tencent AI Lab

Abstract

Title (Given)
Storyline
(Extracted)
Story
(Human
Written)

Automatic storytelling is challenging since it requires generating long, coherent natural language to describes a sensible
sequence of events. Despite considerable efforts on automatic
story generation in the past, prior work either is restricted in
plot planning, or can only generate stories in a narrow domain. In this paper, we explore open-domain story generation that writes stories given a title (topic) as input. We propose a plan-and-write hierarchical generation framework that
first plans a storyline, and then generates a story based on the
storyline. We compare two planning strategies. The dynamic
schema interweaves story planning and its surface realization
in text, while the static schema plans out the entire storyline
before generating stories. Experiments show that with explicit
storyline planning, the generated stories are more diverse, coherent, and on topic than those generated without creating a
full plan, according to both automatic and human evaluations.

The Bike Accident
Carrie → bike → sneak → nervous →
leg
Carrie had just learned how to ride a
bike. She didn’t have a bike of her
own. Carrie would sneak rides on her
sister’s bike. She got nervous on a
hill and crashed into a wall. The bike
frame bent and Carrie got a deep gash
on her leg.

Table 1: An example of title, storyline and story in our system. A storyline is represented by an ordered list of words.

and Young 2010), we propose to decompose story generation into two steps: 1) story planning which generates plots,
and 2) surface realization which composes natural language
text based on the plots. We propose a plan-and-write hierarchical generation framework that combines plot planning
and surface realization to generate stories from titles.
One major challenge for our framework is how to represent and obtain annotations for story plots so that a reasonable generative model can be trained to plan story plots.
Li et al. [2013] introduces plot graphs which contain events
and their relations to represent a storyline. Plot graphs are
comprehensive representations of story plots, however, the
definition and curation of such plot graphs require highly
specialized knowledge and significant human effort. On the
other hand, in poetry composition, Wang et al. [2016] provides a sequence of words to guide poetry generation. In
conversational systems, Mou et al. [2016] takes keywords
as the main gist of the reply to guide response generation.
We take a similar approach to represent a story plot with
a sequence of words. Specifically, we use the order that the
words appear in the story to approximate a storyline. Table 1
shows an example of the title, storyline, and story.
Though this representation seems to over-simplify story
plots, it has several advantages. First, because the storyline representation is simple, there are many reliable tools
to extract high-quality storylines from existing stories and
thus automatically generate training data for the plot planning model. Our experiments show that by training plot
planning models on automatically extracted storylines, we

Introduction
A narrative or story is anything which is told in the form
of a causally/logically linked set of events involving some
shared characters (Mostafazadeh et al. 2016a). Automatic
storytelling requires composing coherent natural language
texts that describe a sensible sequence of events. This seems
much harder than text generation where a plan or knowledge fragment already exists. Thus, story generation seems
an ideal testbed for advances in general AI. Prior research
on story generation mostly focused on automatically composing a sequence of events that can be told as a story by
plot planning (Lebowitz 1987; Perez and Sharples 2001;
Porteous and Cavazza 2009; Riedl and Young 2010; Li et
al. 2013) or case-based reasoning (Turner 1994; Gervas et
al. 2005). These approaches rely heavily on human annotation and/or are restricted to limited domains. Moreover, most
prior work is restricted to the abstract story representation
level without surface realization in natural language.
In this paper, we study generating natural language stories
from any given title (topic). Inspired by prior work on dialog
planning (Nayak et al. 2017) and narrative planning (Riedl
∗

Equal contribution: Lili Yao and Nanyun Peng
Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@pku.edu.cn)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

7378

