The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Be Inaccurate but Don’t Be Indecisive:
How Error Distribution Can Affect User Experience
Rafael R. Padovani,1 Lucas N. Ferreira,2 Levi H. S. Lelis1
1

2

Departamento de Informática, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Brazil
Department of Computational Media, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA
rafael.rpadovani@gmail.com, lferreira@ucsc.edu, levi.lelis@ufv.br
Dungeons and Dragons (D&D),1 a storytelling-based tabletop game. Bardo chooses a background song to be played
according to the identified emotion. The domain of background music selection for tabletop games is interesting because it allows one to evaluate intelligent systems interacting
with humans in a scenario in which system errors are inevitable and directly affect the users’ perceived experience.
In this paper we show that supervised learning algorithms
that solely optimize for prediction accuracy can make the selection system “indecisive”. That is, the system’s errors can
be sparsely distributed throughout the game session. We call
these sparsely distributed errors short misclassifications. We
hypothesize that short misclassifications can harm the user’s
perceived experience and that it is preferable to use classification models that are somewhat inaccurate but decisive,
than models that are accurate but often indecisive.
In order to test our hypothesis we introduce an ensemble classifier (Dietterich 2000), which we name EC, to minimize short misclassifications. EC changes the background
music only if all models composing its ensemble agree with
the change. As a result of its voting rule, instead of erring
sparsely throughout a game session, EC tends to err consistently for a period of time. In addition to showing that EC
is expected to reduce the number of short misclassifications,
we derive the conditions in which EC is expected to be more
accurate than a classifier c. Namely, we show that if the emotion of the story does not change “too often” and c is “not
too accurate”, then EC will be more accurate than c.
Empirical results on Call of the Wild (CotW), a set of
game sessions of D&D available on Youtube,2 show that EC
is able to dramatically reduce short misclassifications while
being slightly more accurate than the models in the ensemble. We test our hypothesis that short misclassifications can
harm the user’s perceived experience with a user study. In
our study, people watched video excerpts of CotW with the
background music selected by EC and by Bardo’s original
model. In order to test our hypothesis, we select excerpts in
which Bardo’s model is either as accurate or more accurate
than EC and performs more short misclassifications than EC,
thus giving Bardo’s model an advantage in terms of accuracy. We approximate the user’s perceived experience with

Abstract
System accuracy is a crucial factor influencing user experience in intelligent interactive systems. Although accuracy is
known to be important, little is known about the role of the
system’s error distribution in user experience. In this paper
we study, in the context of background music selection for
tabletop games, how the error distribution of an intelligent
system affects the user’s perceived experience. In particular,
we show that supervised learning algorithms that solely optimize for prediction accuracy can make the system “indecisive”. That is, it can make the system’s errors sparsely distributed throughout the game session. We hypothesize that
sparsely distributed errors can harm the users’ perceived experience and it is preferable to use a model that is somewhat
inaccurate but decisive, than a model that is accurate but often indecisive. In order to test our hypothesis we introduce an
ensemble approach with a restrictive voting rule that instead
of erring sparsely through time, it errs consistently for a period of time. A user study in which people watched videos of
Dungeons and Dragons sessions supports our hypothesis.

Introduction
System accuracy is a crucial factor influencing user experience in interactive and autonomous systems. For example, de Vries, Midden, and Bouwhuis (2003) and Desai
et al. (2012) have linked system accuracy to trust in autonomous systems, and according to Lee and See (2004),
the wrong level of trust can lead to system misuse or disuse.
While it is known that system accuracy can affect user experience in terms of trust, little is known about how the distribution of system errors affects user experience. For example,
if system errors are inevitable, should one prefer a system
whose errors are distributed uniformly during the system’s
execution or a system whose errors occur in a period of time
and is accurate for the rest of its execution?
In this paper we study how the error distribution of an
intelligent system affects the user’s perceived experience.
Our work is motived by the application domain of automatic
background music selection for tabletop games. Padovani,
Ferreira, and Lelis (2017) introduced Bardo, a system that
uses supervised learning to identify through the players’
speech the emotion in the story being told in sessions of

1

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

2604

http://dnd.wizards.com
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tZWU5iPjQpI

