The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Similarity Preserving Deep Asymmetric Quantization for Image Retrieval
Junjie Chen, William K. Cheung
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
{csjjchen, william}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

2011; Liu et al. 2012; Shen et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2018b;
Chen, Wang, and Cheung 2018) learn the hashing function based on some pre-defined features. With the progress
of deep learning (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012),
deep learning based hashing methods have been proposed
(Zhu et al. 2016; Li, Wang, and Kang 2015; Li et al. 2017;
Qiu et al. 2017; Lai et al. 2015), where compatible visual features and binary hash codes can be simultaneously
learned from raw pixel images using one deep network.
Nevertheless, the Hamming distance is less distinct and
would lose much fine-grained information as discussed in
(Chen, Cheung, and Wang 2018; He et al. 2018), leading to
unsatisfactory retrieval performance. In parallel, quantization is another popular coding approach that can avoid these
two problems as it tries to minimize the distance between
items with learned binary indexes and their corresponding
real-value codewords, resulting in more accurate ranking
and fine-grained information preserved. Existing quantization methods like vector quantization (VQ) (Gray 1984),
production quantization (PQ) (Jegou, Douze, and Schmid
2011) and composite quantization (CQ) (Zhang, Du, and
Wang 2014) are designed for unsupervised coding based on
some predefined features. Recently, a number of deep supervised quantization methods have been proposed (Cao et al.
2016; 2017; Yu et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018a) to incorporate
quantization into a deep supervised learning framework so
that the feature learning and quantization can be jointly optimized. Thus, the extracted visual features from a deep model
(e.g. deep convolution network) can result in more compatible codebooks, leading to a higher retrieval accuracy.
Most of the deep quantization methods use deep convolution network as the backbone for image representations
learning. As a large amount of parameters is needed for convolution networks, training deep quantization models given
a large-scale database is time-consuming. For example, the
complexity of triplet training in DVSQ (Cao et al. 2017) is
O(N 3 ), which grows cubically as N increases. To make it
tractable, existing deep quantization models only sample a
subset from the database for training. Unfortunately, discarding a large portion of the supervision information often leads to poor retrieval performance as the inferred codebooks will not good enough for quantizing the whole largescale database. In this paper, we propose a novel quantization model named Similarity Preserving Deep Asymmetric

Quantization has been widely adopted for large-scale multimedia retrieval due to its effectiveness of coding highdimensional data. Deep quantization models have been
demonstrated to achieve the state-of-the-art retrieval accuracy. However, training the deep models given a large-scale
database is highly time-consuming as a large amount of parameters are involved. Existing deep quantization methods
often sample only a subset from the database for training,
which may end up with unsatisfactory retrieval performance
as a large portion of label information is discarded. To alleviate this problem, we propose a novel model called Similarity
Preserving Deep Asymmetric Quantization (SPDAQ) which
can directly learn the compact binary codes and quantization
codebooks for all the items in the database efficiently. To do
that, SPDAQ makes use of an image subset as well as the
label information of all the database items so the image subset items and the database items are mapped to two different
but correlated distributions, where the label similarity can be
well preserved. An efficient optimization algorithm is proposed for the learning. Extensive experiments conducted on
four widely-used benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our proposed SPDAQ model.

Introduction
The sheer volume of high dimensional multimedia data like
images and videos in search engines and social networks
makes precise and yet efficient retrieval a challenging research problem which has attracted a lot of attention in recent years (Wang et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2018).
To achieve the two often conflicting objectives of precision and efficiency, hashing and quantization, as two
most popular Approximated Nearest Neighbor (ANN)(Andoni and Indyk 2006) approaches, have been widely used
due to their low storage cost and computational efficiency.
Basically, hashing and quantization both encode highdimensional data items with compact binary codes, where
the similarities between items can be preserved, i.e., indexing semantically similar images with similar binary codes.
Image hashing aims to learn a mapping function that
projects real-valued visual features into a binary vector
space. More conventional methods (Gong and Lazebnik
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8183

