The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Envisioning AI for K-12: What Should Every Child Know about AI?
David Touretzky,1 Christina Gardner-McCune,2 Fred Martin,3 Deborah Seehorn4
1Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
2University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32611
3University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, 01854
4CSTA Curriculum Committee, Cary, NC, 27513

dst@cs.cmu.edu; gmccune@ufl.edu; fred_martin@uml.edu; deborah.seehorn@outlook.com

Allen 2018). We must consider the role we play as AI
researchers and educators in helping people understand the
science behind our research, its limits, and its potential
societal impacts. On the graduate level, courses have been
keeping pace with advances in the field. In undergraduate
education, we’ve sought to provide fun and inspiring ways
to engage students in various aspects of AI, such as robotics,
modeling and simulation, game playing, and machine
learning (Dodds, Hirsh, and Wagstaff 2018). In addition,
we’ve sought to write textbooks and design tools, nifty and
model AI assignments, and curricula that help students learn
and apply the fundamentals of AI. More recently,
companies have been making AI API’s such as IBM
Watson, Google Web Speech, DialogFlow, and Azure
Cognitive Services publicly available to educators and
students.
Our hope for undergraduates is to prepare them for a
bright future in the computing industry, or spur them on to
graduate studies. But it is just as important now to think
about what AI education should look like in K-12, not only
to ensure a more informed populace that understands the
technologies they interact with every day, but also to inspire
the next generation of AI researchers and software
developers. For many in this generation, AI will be an oftoverlooked, magical force that powers their lives much as
electricity, the internal combustion engine, and networking
technology power ours.

Abstract
The ubiquity of AI in society means the time is ripe to
consider what educated 21st century digital citizens should
know about this subject. In May 2018, the Association for the
Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) and the
Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) formed a
joint working group to develop national guidelines for
teaching AI to K-12 students. Inspired by CSTA's national
standards for K-12 computing education, the AI for K-12
guidelines will define what students in each grade band
should know about artificial intelligence, machine learning,
and robotics. The AI for K-12 working group is also creating
an online resource directory where teachers can find AIrelated videos, demos, software, and activity descriptions
they can incorporate into their lesson plans. This blue sky talk
invites the AI research community to reflect on the big ideas
in AI that every K-12 student should know, and how we
should communicate with the public about advances in AI
and their future impact on society. It is a call to action for
more AI researchers to become AI educators, creating
resources that help teachers and students understand our
work.

Introduction
Advances in AI have led to both beneficial and unintended
negative effects, which have not escaped our research
publications or mainstream media. For example: machine
learning has greatly improved pattern recognition for
medical diagnosis, but bias in a training set can lead to
fairness issues in evaluating loan applications or problems
with non-Caucasian facial recognition. These stories drive
the imaginations and the fears of the general public. Despite
the increased frequency of AI headlines in the media, there
is a persistent lack of understanding of AI (West and

Background
Over the past five years there has been a rapid expansion of
CS education into formal K-12 curricula for all students,
both nationally and internationally. In the United States this
work has been undertaken by the National Science

1

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9795

