The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Randomized Wagering Mechanisms∗
Yiling Chen,1 Yang Liu,2 Juntao Wang1
1

Harvard University, 2 University of California, Santa Cruz
yiling@seas.harvard.edu, yangliu@ucsc.edu, juntaowang@g.harvard.edu

Abstract

for agents with immutable beliefs who “agree to disagree”
and who do not update their beliefs. In a wagering mechanism, each agent submits a prediction for the event and
specifies a wager, which is the maximum amount of money
that the agent is willing to lose. Then after the event outcome is revealed, the total wagered money will be redistributed among the participants. Researchers have developed
wagering mechanisms with various theoretical properties. In
particular, Lambert et al. (2008; 2015) proposed a class of
weighted score wagering mechanisms (WSWM) that satisfy
a set of desirable properties, including budget balance, individual rationality, incentive compatibility, sybilproofness,
among others.1 Chen et al. (2014) later proposed a noarbitrage wagering mechanism (NAWM) that removes opportunities for participating agents to risklessly profit.
However, in both WSWM and NAWM, it has been observed that a participant only loses a very small fraction of
his total wager even in the worst case. This seems to be undesirable in practice as it is against the spirit of betting and a
wager effectively loses its meaning as a budget. Freeman,
Pennock, and Vaughan (2017) first formalized this observation by indicating that these mechanisms are not Pareto
optimal, where Pareto optimality requires that there is no
profitable side bet among participants before the allocation
of a wagering mechanism is realized. They also proved an
impossibility result: Pareto optimality cannot be satisfied
together with individual rationality, weak budget balance
and weak incentive compatibility. A double clinching auction (DCA) wagering mechanism (Freeman, Pennock, and
Vaughan 2017) was hence proposed to improve Pareto efficiency. The parimutuel consensus mechanism (PCM) has
been shown to satisfy Pareto optimality (Freeman and Pennock 2018), but violates incentive compatibility.
This paper is another quest of wagering mechanisms with
better theoretical properties. We expand the design space
of wagering mechanisms to allow randomization on agent
payoffs and ask whether we can achieve all aforementioned
desirable properties, including Pareto optimality. We give a
positive answer to this question: Our randomized wagering
mechanisms are the first ones to achieve Pareto optimality
along with other properties.
We first show that a simple randomized lottery-type im-

Wagering mechanisms are one-shot betting mechanisms that
elicit agents’ predictions of an event. For deterministic wagering mechanisms, an existing impossibility result has shown
incompatibility of some desirable theoretical properties. In
particular, Pareto optimality (no profitable side bet before allocation) can not be achieved together with weak incentive
compatibility, weak budget balance and individual rationality.
In this paper, we expand the design space of wagering mechanisms to allow randomization and ask whether there are randomized wagering mechanisms that can achieve all previously considered desirable properties, including Pareto optimality. We answer this question positively with two classes of
randomized wagering mechanisms: i) one simple randomized
lottery-type implementation of existing deterministic wagering mechanisms, and ii) another family of randomized wagering mechanisms, named surrogate wagering mechanisms,
which are robust to noisy ground truth. Surrogate wagering
mechanisms are inspired by an idea of learning with noisy
labels (Natarajan et al. 2013) as well as a recent extension
of this idea to the information elicitation without verification
setting (Liu and Chen 2018). We show that a broad set of
randomized wagering mechanisms satisfy all desirable theoretical properties.

1

Introduction

Wagering mechanisms (Lambert et al. 2008; 2015; Chen et
al. 2014; Freeman, Pennock, and Vaughan 2017; Freeman
and Pennock 2018) are one-shot betting mechanisms that allow a principal to elicit participating agents’ beliefs about
an event of interest without paying out of pocket or incurring a risk. Compared with prediction-market type of dynamic elicitation mechanisms, one-shot wagering is possibly preferred due to its simplicity. It is particularly designed
∗

This research is based upon work supported in part by the
Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), via 201717061500006. The views and conclusions contained herein are
those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily
representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of
ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is
authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for governmental
purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation therein.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1845

Definitions of some properties can be found in Section 3.

