The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An SVM-Based Framework for Long-Term Learning Systems
Diana Benavides-Prado
Department of Computer Science
The University of Auckland
dben652@aucklanduni.ac.nz

Abstract
In our research, we study the problem of learning a sequence
of supervised tasks. This is a long-standing challenge in machine learning. Our work relies on transfer of knowledge
between hypotheses learned with Support Vector Machines.
Transfer occurs in two directions: forward and backward. We
have proposed to selectively transfer forward support vector coefficients from previous hypotheses as upper-bounds on
support vector coefficients to be learned on a target task. We
also proposed a novel method for refining existing hypotheses
by transferring backward knowledge from a target hypothesis learned recently. We have improved this method through a
hypothesis refinement approach that refines whilst encouraging retention of knowledge. Our contribution is represented
in a long-term learning framework for binary classification
tasks received sequentially one at a time.

1

Figure 1: The lifelong machine learning problem (top) and a
framework based on SVM (bottom).
built on top of Support Vector Machines (SVM) for classification tasks and some of its variants. The first characteristic is tackled by a method that transfers selected knowledge from a set of source hypotheses to a target task. Experimentally we demonstrated that our method speeds the
convergence rate of the target task. A second method proposed to transfer backward, a novel ability of lifelong learning systems that aims to refine hypotheses from previous
tasks. These hypotheses are stored in a knowledge base. Experiments with small real-world datasets denoted a potential
of this approach for continuously improving performance of
existing hypotheses. We have extended this method to systems composed of any number of tasks. This novel approach
encourages retention of knowledge while refining existing
hypotheses. Experiments with large synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrated the feasibility of this approach. Figure
1 sketches a framework based on selective transfer forward
and backward. A brief explanation of the two main components of this framework is provided in Sections 2 and 3.

Introduction

Learning a sequence of tasks is a long-standing challenge
in machine learning. Paradigms such as learning to learn,
early lifelong learning and metalearning have acknowledged
this problem. Recently, Chen and Liu (2016) formalised lifelong machine learning as a process composed of a set of
related tasks that arrive sequentially and share knowledge.
They identified three core characteristics of these systems:
1) to learn new tasks better, supported by existing knowledge; 2) to store knowledge continuously and incrementally
in a knowledge base; 3) to perform continuous learning.
A variety of research in transfer, hypothesis transfer, multitask, meta and deep learning has explored the first characteristic. Research in lifelong learning and related areas
have studied the second characteristic. The last property,
that should ideally pursue refinement of existing knowledge,
has only been explored recently (Ruvolo and Eaton 2013;
Fei, Wang, and Liu 2016). Continual learning with deep neural networks has focused on the challenge of learning new
tasks without forgetting existing knowledge (Yoon, Yang,
and others 2017). Nevertheless, the problem of refining existing knowledge has been scarcely explored.
In our research we study a framework for lifelong machine learning with these three properties. Our framework is

2

Selective Transfer Forward

For transferring forward, we have proposed to use elements
of existing hypotheses fs ∈ S to aid learning of a target task
Tt . Support vectors from previous SVM hypotheses are selected, and their coefficients aggregated and used to upperbound coefficients of support vectors to be learned as part
of a target hypothesis ft on Tt . This problem has been formalised as an SVM classification problem with a modified

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9915

