The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Supervised User Ranking in Signed Social Networks
Xiaoming Li, Hui Fang,∗ Jie Zhang
∗

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences and School of Information Management and Engineering
∗
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, China
lixiaoming@ntu.edu.sg, fang.hui@mail.shufe.edu.cn, zhangj@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

approaches have been proposed by revising the traditional
models, which can be summarized into two main types. One
representative type of approaches ranks user pairs based on
heuristic similarity scores (Symeonidis and Tiakas 2014),
which merely consider local node/edge attributes but fail to
capture the global network structure. Thus, they cannot guarantee a satisfying performance. The other type is derived
from random walk, which is a dominant technique for user
ranking in networks. For example, Shams et al. (2016) revise
random walk to be computable and applicable in signed networks by firstly converting signed networks into unsigned
ones and then obtaining ranking scores accordingly.
However, these approaches aim to generate a global ranking list for the whole network, which could easily lead to
a relatively unfair scenario where some users might have a
large number of potential links in the ranking list while most
users have very few or even no links. In this case, they cannot
be easily adapted for many real-world applications such as
social recommendation or social-aware product recommendation. In contrast, personalized user ranking, which generates a ranking list for each individual, is more practical and
realistic (Jung et al. 2016). Besides, the ranking list for a user
provided by existing random walk methods is fixed given a
certain network snapshot (i.e. the network structure). They
inappropriately assume all the links have the same weights
(i.e. social strengths, a.k.a. link strengths). In other words,
they cannot learn each individual’s own opinions towards
her neighbors, such as what kind of user link (i.e. neighbors)
is more important.
To fill the research gap, we propose Signed Supervised
Random Walk (SSRW), through which we learn social
strengths that capture a user’s different preferences towards
different neighbors, and thus to better facilitate the task of
personalized user ranking. More specifically, instead of considering the random walk in a given network snapshot (i.e.
training data), we split the training data into two parts in
terms of the timestamp (denoted as A and B), and learn
social strengths (i.e. transition probabilities) so that random walk more likely visits those newly positively connected nodes (i.e. in B compared to A) whereas more reluctantly visits the newly negatively connected nodes. We
conduct experiments on four real-world datasets and the results show that SSRW’s performance has an improvement of
6.05% compared to the state-of-the-art approaches. To im-

The task of user ranking in signed networks, aiming to predict potential friends and enemies for each user, has attracted
increasing attention in numerous applications. Existing approaches are mainly extended from heuristics of the traditional models in unsigned networks. They suffer from two
limitations: (1) mainly focus on global rankings thus cannot provide effective personalized ranking results, and (2)
have a relatively unrealistic assumption that each user treats
her neighbors’ social strengths indifferently. To address these
two issues, we propose a supervised method based on random walk to learn social strengths between each user and her
neighbors, in which the random walk more likely visits “potential friends” and less likely visits “potential enemies”. We
learn the personalized social strengths by optimizing on a particularly designed loss function oriented on ranking. We further present a fast ranking method based on the local structure
among each seed node and a certain set of candidates. It much
simplifies the proposed ranking model meanwhile maintains
the performance. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our approach over the state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Signed social networks have become increasingly popular (Tang et al. 2016), in which relationship between online users is not limited to be positive (e.g. friend and trust)
anymore, but also includes the negative one which is much
more consistent with the real social life. More and more
online platforms are built based on signed structures, such
as Slashdot (friend or foe), Epinions (trust or distrust), and
Wikipedia RFA (agree or disagree). The ever-growing interest in signed networks has heightened the need to rethink the
user ranking problem, which becomes non-trivial because of
the existence of the negative links.
Traditional ranking methods in unsigned networks only
consider positive links, which rank user pairs by the probability of forming positive links (i.e. link prediction). In
signed networks, however, the task of ranking users transforms to that of ranking potential ‘friends’ on the top of
the list whereas ranking ‘enemies’ on the bottom. Therefore,
traditional methods in unsigned networks cannot be directly
applied to the signed scenarios. For signed networks, several
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

184

