The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Forbidden Nodes Aware Community Search
Chaokun Wang,∗ Junchao Zhu
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
chaokun@tsinghua.edu.cn, zhu-jc17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Community search is an important problem in network analysis, which has attracted much attention in recent years. It
starts with some given nodes, pays more attention to local
network structures, and gets personalized resultant communities quickly. In this paper, we argue that there are many
real scenarios where some nodes are not allowed to appear in
the community. Then, we introduce a new concept called forbidden nodes and present a new problem of forbidden nodes
aware community search to describe these scenarios.
To address the above problem, three methods are proposed,
i.e., k-core based FORTE (Forbidden nOdes awaRe communiTy sEarch), k-truss based FORTE and CW based FORTE,
where the effects of both forbidden nodes and query nodes are
thoroughly considered for each node in the resultant community. The former two methods are able to make use of popular
community structures, while the latter is based on a new metric called weighted conductance. The extensive experiments
conducted on real data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed methods.

A
B

(b) Both A and B are query
nodes, and there is no forbidden node. The subgraph in the
solid box is the resultant community.

(a) A sample network.

L

A
C
B

A
C

H
J

B

E
D

F

(c) Both A and B are query
nodes. C and D are forbidden
nodes. Subgraphs (excluding C
and D) in the solid and dotted boxes are possible resultant
communities.

Motivation
Complex networks (e.g., social networks) never fail to fascinate human beings. As an important approach to giving insights into a complex network, the research on community structures attracts more and more attention these
years. One of the important topics in this field is community search, a.k.a. local community detection, which aims to
find out a cohesive subnetwork (i.e., subgraph) containing
given nodes.
Community search enables users to get personalized local cohesive structures faster, especially in large scale networks. A large number of methods for community search
have been proposed so far, such as topology-based methods
and semantics-enhanced methods. Topology-based methods
focus on the topological structure of communities in a network, such as k-core and k-truss. Semantics-enhanced methods consider both attributes of nodes or edges of the network
and the topology of the network, and then define communities in a more semantic way.

(d) Both A and B are query
nodes. L, H and J are forbidden nodes. Subgraphs in the
solid and dotted boxes are possible resultant communities.

Figure 1: Examples for community search with forbidden
nodes. Nodes in gray color form a cohesive subgraph.
However, to the best of our knowledge, all existing methods for community search just emphasize the occurrence
of some nodes (called query nodes in this work), i.e., only
nodes that should be included in the resultant community are
considered as the input. Then, users are not able to express
lot of real and appropriate needs, such as preventing some
specific objects from appearing in the resultant communities. Therefore, in this study we argue that the nonexistence
of some nodes (called forbidden nodes in this work) should
also be considered as the input of the community search task.
Example 1. A sample network is given in Figure 1(a). As
shown in Figure 1(b), nodes A and B are treated as the
query nodes of a community search task. Here, the cohesive-

∗

Corresponding author: Chaokun Wang.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

758

