The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robust Optimization over Multiple Domains
Qi Qian, Shenghuo Zhu, Jiasheng Tang, Rong Jin, Baigui Sun, Hao Li
Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA, 98004, USA
{qi.qian, shenghuo.zhu, jiasheng.tjs, jinrong.jr, baigui.sbg, lihao.lh}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
In this work, we study the problem of learning a single model
for multiple domains. Unlike the conventional machine learning scenario where each domain can have the corresponding
model, multiple domains (i.e., applications/users) may share
the same machine learning model due to maintenance loads
in cloud computing services. For example, a digit-recognition
model should be applicable to hand-written digits, house
numbers, car plates, etc. Therefore, an ideal model for cloud
computing has to perform well at each applicable domain.
To address this new challenge from cloud computing, we develop a framework of robust optimization over multiple domains. In lieu of minimizing the empirical risk, we aim to
learn a model optimized to the adversarial distribution over
multiple domains. Hence, we propose to learn the model and
the adversarial distribution simultaneously with the stochastic
algorithm for efficiency. Theoretically, we analyze the convergence rate for convex and non-convex models. To our best
knowledge, we first study the convergence rate of learning a
robust non-convex model with a practical algorithm. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the robustness of the framework
and the convergence rate can be further enhanced by appropriate regularizers over the adversarial distribution. The empirical study on real-world fine-grained visual categorization
and digits recognition tasks verifies the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed framework.

Figure 1: Illustration of optimizing over multiple domains.
In this example, a digit-recognition model provided by cloud
service carrier should be applicable for multiple domains,
e.g., handwritten digits, printed digits.

A satisfied model has to deal with both domains (i.e.,
handwritten digits, printed digits) well in the modern architecture of cloud computing services. This problem is illustrated in Fig. 1. Note that the problem is different from
multi-task learning (Zhang and Yang 2017) that aims to
learn different models (i.e., multiple models) for different
tasks by exploiting the shared information between related
tasks.
In a conventional learning procedure, an algorithm may
mix the data from multiple domains by assigning an adhoc weight for each example, and then learn a model accordingly. The weight is pre-defined and can be uniform for
each example, which is known as empirical risk minimization (ERM). Explicitly, the learned model can handle certain domains well but perform arbitrarily poor on the others.
The unsatisfied performance in certain domains will result in
business interruption from users. Moreover, assigning even
weights for all examples can suffer from the data imbalance
problem when the examples from certain domains dominate.
Recently, distributionally robust optimization has attracted much attention (Chen et al. 2017; Namkoong and
Duchi 2016; Shalev-Shwartz and Wexler 2016). Unlike the
conventional strategy with the uniform distribution, it aims
to optimize the performance of the model in the worst case
distribution over examples. The learned model is explicitly
more robust by focusing on the hard examples. To learn
a robust model, many existing work apply the convex loss
functions, while the state-of-the-art performance for several
important practical problems are reported from the meth-

Introduction
Learning a single model for multiple domains becomes a
fundamental problem in machine learning and has found applications in cloud computing services. Cloud computing
witnessed the development of machine learning in recent
years. Apparently, users of these cloud computing services
can benefit from sophisticated models provided by service
carrier, e.g., Aliyun. However, the robustness of deployed
models becomes a challenge due to the explosive popularity of the cloud computing services. Specifically, to maintain the scalability of the cloud computing service, only a
single model will exist in the cloud for the same problem
from different domains. For example, given a model for digits recognition in cloud, some users may call it to identify
the handwritten digits while others may try to recognize the
printed digits (e.g., house number).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4739

