The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

General Robustness Evaluation of Incentive Mechanism
against Bounded Rationality Using Continuum-Armed Bandits
Zehong Hu,1 Jie Zhang,2 Zhao Li1,
1

2

Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
zehong.hzh@alibaba-inc.com, zhangj@ntu.edu.sg, lizhao.lz@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

become incompatible (Jurca and Faltings 2007; Liu et al.
2015). A general robustness formulation is thus needed to set
a common ground for the comparison of different incentive
mechanisms and to avoid reinventing the wheel. Secondly,
most studies focus only on the incentive compatibility (IC)
objective, but ignore the performance objective. However,
the performance of an incentive mechanism is also very important. For example, if an auctioneer cannot gain enough
revenue to cover the cost, there is no point for him to employ
the auction. Thirdly, when computing robustness through
Monte Carlo simulation, existing studies often set an arbitrarily large number of simulations. Without the guarantee
of error rate, the reliability of their computation is uncertain.
In this paper, we propose a general framework to reliably compute the robustness of incentive mechanisms. More
specifically, we first propose a general robustness formulation as the maximum bounded rationality level satisfying
the conditions that all agents have the incentive to follow
the desired strategies and the performance is acceptable by
mechanism designers. Since the robustness is formulated using the expected incentives or performance, the empirical
robustness computation requires us to balance between the
exploration of more bounded rationality levels to more accurately identify the maximum and the exploitation of the
current bounded rationality level to more reliably judge the
conditions mentioned above. We thus develop a continuumarmed bandit solver to adaptively adjust the exploration and
the simulation scheme according to accumulated simulation
data. We also derive the error rate upper bound for our solver
and prove it to be more efficient than existing methods. To
further validate our solver, we compare with other methods
in a testbed where accurate solutions are known. To illustrate
the applicability of our framework, we apply it to evaluate
the robustness of various popular mechanisms.

Incentive mechanisms that assume agents to be fully rational,
may fail due to the bounded rationality of agents in practice.
It is thus crucial to evaluate to what extent mechanisms can
resist agents’ bounded rationality, termed robustness. In this
paper, we propose a general empirical framework for robustness evaluation. One novelty of our framework is to develop a
robustness formulation that is generally applicable to different types of incentive mechanisms and bounded rationality
models. This formulation considers not only the incentives to
agents but also the performance of mechanisms. The other
novelty lies in converting the empirical robustness computation into a continuum-armed bandit problem, and then developing an efficient solver that has theoretically guaranteed error rate upper bound. We also conduct extensive experiments
using various mechanisms to verify the advantages and practicability of our robustness evaluation framework.

Introduction
Incentive mechanism has been widely adopted to coordinate
a group of self-interested agents, with two common objectives: 1) incentivize agents to follow the strategies desired by
mechanism designers; 2) maximize a certain performance
(e.g. social welfare). Current mechanism design often assumes agents to be fully rational, neglecting the uncertainties in agents’ decision-making processes. However, in many
real-world situations, practical agents are observed to violate this assumption, causing incentive mechanisms to fail
in achieving the two objectives. To overcome this problem,
various bounded rationality models have been built to depict practical agents (Simon 1979; Ortega and Braun 2013;
Wang and Tang 2015). Then, the robustness against bounded
rationality is measured as to what extent incentive mechanisms can resist the uncertainties overlooked in the design
phase (Cabrales and Serrano 2011; Rivas 2015; Liu et al.
2015; Shnayder, Frongillo, and Parkes 2016). It provides
a quantitative indication for the practicability of incentive
mechanisms.
However, there is still a large room for existing studies
on quantitative robustness analysis to improve. Firstly, focusing only on a specific type of incentive mechanisms and
bounded rationality models, their robustness formulations

Related Work
Existing quantitative studies on the robustness of incentive mechanisms have focused only on one specific type
of incentive mechanisms or bounded rationality models,
so that different robustness formulations have been proposed. For example, targeting on the adverse effects of
agents’ belief error, Jurca and Faltings (2007) propose the
-robustness which requires peer-prediction mechanisms always to keep agents reporting truthfully when agents’ be-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6070

