The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

eRevise: Using Natural Language Processing to Provide
Formative Feedback on Text Evidence Usage in Student Writing
H. Zhang, A. Magooda, D. Litman, R. Correnti, E. Wang, L.C. Matsmura, E. Howe, R. Quintana
Learning Research and Development Center
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260

Abstract

designed for students in grades 5-6 taking the Response to
Text Assessment (RTA) (Correnti et al. 2013), where students first write an essay in response to a source text and
are then assessed using a detailed Evidence scoring rubric.1
In particular, eRevise has been developed for deployment
in a formative/classroom environment over two class periods (in contrast to a summative/high-stakes usage). Students write their essays in the first period, then revise their
essays in the second period after receiving formative feedback automatically selected based on first draft AES. In contrast to many AES systems that achieve high scoring reliability but do not address construct validity (Condon 2013;
Perelman 2012), eRevise uses a rubric-based AES system to
ensure that dimensions of the construct are well represented
by the indicators used for scoring (Loukina et al. 2015). This
in turn enables the development of an AWE algorithm for
converting internal AES data structures into formative feedback messages that are both tailored to each student’s writing needs and aligned to the constructs of the scoring rubric.
eRevise is also notable in focusing on evidence usage rather
than on surface writing features, and on upper elementary
rather than middle or high school students, which makes the
application of NLP techniques particularly challenging.
The next two sections describe the eRevise workflow,
and the NLP techniques supporting eRevise’s AES and
AWE components, respectively. This is followed by a classroom deployment and evaluation section demonstrating the
promise of eRevise in supporting essay revision. Our deployment tested whether eRevise helped students: 1) improve the overall quality of their drafts when evaluated by
human scorers using the RTA evidence rubric, and 2) increase the quantity and relevance/specifity of their text evidence usage when evaluated using NLP. Analyses of 143
essays created by 5th and 6th grade students from 7 different classes support both hypotheses.

Writing a good essay typically involves students revising an
initial paper draft after receiving feedback. We present eRevise, a web-based writing and revising environment that uses
natural language processing features generated for rubricbased essay scoring to trigger formative feedback messages
regarding students’ use of evidence in response-to-text writing. By helping students understand the criteria for using text
evidence during writing, eRevise empowers students to better revise their paper drafts. In a pilot deployment of eRevise
in 7 classrooms spanning grades 5 and 6, the quality of text
evidence usage in writing improved after students received
formative feedback then engaged in paper revision.

Introduction
With benefits such as minimizing human effort and assuring scoring consistency, natural language processing (NLP)
has been used to develop many Automatic Essay Scoring
(AES) systems that can reliably assess the content, structure,
and quality of written prose (Shermis and Burstein 2003;
2013). However, before providing students with final essay
scores, engaging students in cycles of essay drafting and
revising after feedback is also essential (Graham, Harris,
and Santangelo 2015). This is because scoring without feedback is typically not enough to guide students on how to
revise an essay for further improvement. Standalone AES
systems are thus increasingly being incorporated into Automated Writing Evaluation (AWE) systems (Dikli 2006;
Roscoe et al. 2014; Weigle 2013), which provide students
with formative feedback in addition to (or instead of) essay
scores. Formative feedback can guide students during revision in ways that help students compensate for identified
essay weaknesses. Although Foltz and Rosenstein (2015)
showed that student writing could improve with revisions
based on AWE feedback and Chapelle, Cotos, and Lee
(2015) showed that successful revising is related to feedback
accuracy, much AWE research remains to be done.
This paper presents the design and first classroom evaluation of eRevise, an AWE system for improving students’
ability to use text evidence – a dimension of writing that is
important for college and career readiness. eRevise has been

System Usage and Architecture
During the first class, a teacher reads an article aloud (with
students following along on a hardcopy) about an effort by
1
Although eRevise currently focuses only on the Evidence
rubric, the full RTA as scored by humans comprises five dimensions: Analysis, Evidence, Organization, Academic Style, and
MUGS (Mechanics, Usage, Grammar, Spelling).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9619

