The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Transfer Learning for Spoken
Language Understanding in Intelligent Agents
Aditya Siddhant,1 Anuj Goyal,2 Angeliki Metallinou2
asiddhan@cs.cmu.edu, anujgoya@amazon.com, ametalli@amazon.com
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Amazon Alexa AI

Abstract

to learn effectively from unlabeled text is crucial to alleviating the bottlenecks of supervised learning.
The machine learning community is actively exploring
transfer learning and unsupervised learning for low resource
tasks. Goyal, Metallinou, and Matsoukas (2018) explored
transfer learning from existing annotated SLU domains for
building models for related, low-resource domains for artificial agents. However, such transfer learning techniques
rely on large annotated resources from a related functionality. Recent work has used language modeling (LM) as a
proxy task for learning context dependent word embeddings
from large unlabeled text corpora (Peters et al. 2018). These
embeddings allow for unsupervised knowledge transfer and
have been shown to bring performance gains for various
downstream natural language processing (NLP) tasks.
In this work, we propose an unsupervised transfer learning technique inspired from ELMo and Universal Language
Model Fine Tuning (ULMFiT) to leverage unlabeled text
for building SLU models (Peters et al. 2018; Howard and
Ruder 2018). We also explore the combination of unsupervised and supervised knowledge transfer for SLU. We evaluate our methods on various tasks and datasets, including
data from Alexa, a popular commercial intelligent agent.
Our results show that unsupervised transfer using unlabeled
utterances can outperform both training from scratch and supervised pre-training. Additionally, the gains from unsupervised transfer can further be improved by supervised transfer. These improvements are more pronounced in low resource setting and when only 1K labeled in-domain samples are available, the proposed techniques match the performance of training from scratch on 10-15x more labeled
data. Concretely, our contributions are:

User interaction with voice-powered agents generates large
amounts of unlabeled utterances. In this paper, we explore
techniques to efficiently transfer the knowledge from these
unlabeled utterances to improve model performance on Spoken Language Understanding (SLU) tasks. We use Embeddings from Language Model (ELMo) to take advantage of
unlabeled data by learning contextualized word representations. Additionally, we propose ELMo-Light (ELMoL), a
faster and simpler unsupervised pre-training method for SLU.
Our findings suggest unsupervised pre-training on a large corpora of unlabeled utterances leads to significantly better SLU
performance compared to training from scratch and it can
even outperform conventional supervised transfer. Additionally, we show that the gains from unsupervised transfer techniques can be further improved by supervised transfer. The
improvements are more pronounced in low resource settings
and when using only 1000 labeled in-domain samples, our
techniques match the performance of training from scratch
on 10-15x more labeled in-domain data.

Introduction
Voice-powered artificial virtual agents have become popular amongst consumer devices, as they enable their users to
perform everyday tasks through intuitive and natural user interfaces. SLU tasks such as intent classification and entity
tagging are critical functionalities of these agents. Fast expansion of these functionalities to new domains is important
for achieving engaging and informative interactions, as it increases the range of capabilities that their users enjoy.
For SLU tasks, most of the current methods use supervised learning, which relies on manually labeled data
for building high quality models. The supervised learning paradigm is therefore costly, time-consuming and does
not scale well for cases where the label space is continuously expanding as new functionality is added to an agent.
Also, user interaction with voice-powered agents generates
large amounts of unlabeled text, produced by the Automatic
Speech Recognition (ASR) engine. This ASR output text
is a large and valuable resource of conversational data that
is available in practically unlimited quantities and could be
used to improve the agent’s SLU accuracy. Thus, the ability

• We apply ELMo embeddings for unsupervised knowledge
transfer from raw ASR text and show SLU accuracy gains.
• We propose ELMo-Light (ELMoL), a light-weight ELMo
alternative that is well-suited for commercial settings,
with comparable accuracy to ELMo for most SLU tasks.
• We combine unsupervised and supervised transfer learning, and show the additive effect of the two techniques.
• We extensively evaluate our methods on benchmark SLU
datasets and data from a commercial agent (Alexa), across
various resource conditions.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4959

