The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Temporal Anomaly Detection: Calibrating the Surprise
Eyal Gutflaish,1 Aryeh Kontorovich,1 Sivan Sabato,1 Ofer Biller,2 Oded Sofer2
1

Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel
2
IBM Security Division, Israel
eyalgutf@gmail.com, {karyeh, sabatos}@cs.bgu.ac.il, {ofer.biller, odedso}@il.ibm.com

Abstract

events as anomalies, will tend to trigger many false alarms.
The latter issue is exacerbated further by the problem of cold
start (Su and Khoshgoftaar 2009) — that is, the activity of
previously unseen users (say, new employees). This activity
should not automatically be classified as an anomaly, or else
too many false alarms will be issued. Additionally, unseen
accesses invoked by known users and tables could also cause
a similar problem. Thus, a key difficulty in anomaly detection
of temporal events from a complex system is to calibrate the
surprise level associated with incoming events — and this is
the central challenge that we address.

We propose a hybrid approach to temporal anomaly detection
in access data of users to databases — or more generally,
any kind of subject-object co-occurrence data. We consider a
high-dimensional setting that also requires fast computation
at test time. Our methodology identifies anomalies based on a
single stationary model, instead of requiring a full temporal
one, which would be prohibitive in this setting. We learn a
low-rank stationary model from the training data, and then fit a
regression model for predicting the expected likelihood score
of normal access patterns in the future. The disparity between
the predicted likelihood score and the observed one is used
to assess the “surprise” at test time. This approach enables
calibration of the anomaly score, so that time-varying normal
behavior patterns are not considered anomalous. We provide a
detailed description of the algorithm, including a convergence
analysis, and report encouraging empirical results. One of
the data sets that we tested is new for the public domain. It
consists of two months’ worth of database access records from
a live system. This data set and our code are publicly available
at https://github.com/eyalgut/TLR anomaly detection.git.

1

Problem description. We address the problem of unsupervised anomaly detection in a high-dimensional temporal
sequence of user-object access events. The events might be
company employees accessing database tables, users interacting with a website, customers executing transactions, and so
on. We assume that the users and the objects are atomic (that
is, known by a name or identification number only). Time is
discretized into fixed units (such as hours), and for each time
unit, the access activity is recorded in a binary user-object
incidence matrix.
Our goal is to develop an anomaly detection method which
allows identifying distributed attacks. Such attacks cannot be
characterized by a single suspicious access event — the latter
can be handled by more direct means, such as a permissions
system; instead, they are characterized by system-wide suspicious access patterns. Thus, our goal is to detect anomalous
time intervals, i.e., segments of activity that contain atypical
behavior. Our proposed method can also be adapted to diagnosing a specific user’s behavior, or a specific object’s access
pattern, as anomalous within a time interval. We leave the
details of this extension to future work.
Our setting is similar to the problem of anomaly detection
in sequences of traffic matrices in communication engineering (Roughan et al. 2012), where typically the traffic matrix
of each time unit contains the number of packets (or bytes)
transferred from source to destination IP. In our problem, we
consider more general user-object incidence matrices (but,
being binary, these only register the presence or absence of
an access). In addition, we assume high-dimensional data,
and require a fast and efficient computation at test time.
From a bird’s eye view, our approach consists of two orthogonal components: (1) fitting a generative model of the

Introduction

Consider a security analyst examining user access logs of a
large database system. A blatant security breach might involve a user with insufficient clearance attempting to access
a restricted database table. However, there could be more
subtle indicators of suspicious activity, such as users accessing database tables that are atypical of their past behavioral
pattern, or at unusual times. Moreover, in a distributed attack,
perhaps no single user has done anything particularly out of
the ordinary, but the general pattern of access to different
database tables is atypical in terms of frequency, time of day,
identity of the users involved, and so forth.
The difficulty stemming from the nebulous definition of
potentially suspicious activity is compounded by the fact
that severe anomalies, by their very nature, are extremely
rare occurrences, and when the goal is to learn to identify
them, we generally do not expect the available training data
to contain any positive examples. Furthermore, due to the
large number of users and database tables in a typical system,
a naive solution, which classifies all previously unseen access
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3755

