The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Unified Framework for Planning in
Adversarial and Cooperative Environments
Anagha Kulkarni, Siddharth Srivastava, Subbarao Kambhampati
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281 USA
{anaghak, siddharths, rao} @ asu.edu

Abstract
Users of AI systems may rely upon them to produce plans for
achieving desired objectives. Such AI systems should be able
to compute obfuscated plans whose execution in adversarial
situations protects privacy, as well as legible plans which are
easy for team members to understand in cooperative situations. We develop a unified framework that addresses these
dual problems by computing plans with a desired level of
comprehensibility from the point of view of a partially informed observer. For adversarial settings, our approach produces obfuscated plans with observations that are consistent
with at least k goals from a set of decoy goals. By slightly
varying our framework, we present an approach for producing legible plans in cooperative settings such that the observation sequence projected by the plan is consistent with at
most j goals from a set of confounding goals. In addition, we
show how the observability of the observer can be controlled
to either obfuscate or convey the actions in a plan when the
goal is known to the observer. We present theoretical results
on the complexity analysis of our approach. We also present
an empirical evaluation to show the feasibility and usefulness
of our approaches using IPC domains.

(a)

(b)

1

Introduction
Figure 1: The differences in belief sequences induced by different plans for an observer with noisy sensors.

AI systems have become quite ubiquitous. As users, we
heavily rely on these systems to plan our day-to-day activities. Since all these systems have logging and tracking abilities, an observer can get access to our data and our actions.
Such observers can be of two types: adversarial or cooperative. In adversarial settings, like mission planning, military intelligence, reconnaissance, etc., protection of sensitive
data can be of utmost importance to the agent. In such situations, it is necessary for an AI system to produce plans that
reveal neither the intentions nor the activities of the agent.
On the other hand, in case of a cooperative observer, the AI
system should be able to produce plans that help convey its
intent to the observer. Therefore, it is desirable for an AI
system to be capable of computing both obfuscated plans in
adversarial settings and legible plans in cooperative settings.
In this work, we propose a new unifying formalization,
and algorithms for computing obfuscated plans as well as
legible plans. In our framework, we consider two agents:

an acting agent and an observer. The acting agent has full
observability of its activities. The observer is aware of the
agent’s planning model but has partial observability of the
agent’s activities. The observations are emitted as a side effect of the agent’s activities and are received by the observer.
An adversarial observer may be able to use the information
gleaned from observations to interfere with or hamper the
agent’s activities. On the other hand, in cooperative scenarios, an agent is required to communicate its intentions to the
observer as quickly and clearly as possible.
Example Consider a situation where the agent is a port
management system and the observer has sensors or informants at the port who provide partial information about the
nature of activity being carried out at the port (refer Figure 1). For instance, when a specific crate is loaded onto
the ship, the observer finds out that something was loaded,

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2479

