The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Building Trust in Deep Learning System towards Automated Disease Detection
Zhan Wei Lim,1 Mong Li Lee,1 Wynne Hsu,1 Tien Yin Wong2
1

School of Computing 2 Duke-NUS Medical School
National University of Singapore

Abstract

From a machine learning perspective, the failure of a neural network on images arising from real-world deployment
can be attributed to overfitting. That is, the deep neural network has overfitted to the training data and unable to generalize to the true data distribution. To prevent overfitting, the
validation set should be close to real-world data distribution
by covering a wide range variations that may appear in the
real-world. However, without knowledge of the variations
that matter, it is hard to construct an all encompassing validation dataset. Even if the deep learning system is restricted
to a domain it is familiar with, such as a particular patient
profile and camera, there is no guarantee that there will be
no domain shift during its deployment.
Building trust is a crucial step towards the deployment of
deep learning system in automated disease detection and can
contribute to better validation methods. Diabetic retinopathy
(DR) is a medical condition of the eye that arises due to
diabetes. Deep learning systems have shown high accuracy
in predicting the severity of DR from retina fundus images
on a range of validation datesets. In this paper, we describe
how we can build user trust in a deep learning system for a
real-life application, specifically the screening of DR.
To enhance trust in the deep learning system, there should
be measures that let the user knows when the output of the
system is reliable and when it is not. We propose to use uncertainty estimation as a measure to know when to trust the
deep learning system output. A well-calibrated deep neural
network may be uncertain about its output when it is applied
to an image that comes from a different camera, or from a
poorly taken photo, or rare phenotype of the disease that is
not well represented in training data, etc.
We apply stochastic batch normalization (Atanov et al.
2018) to obtain uncertainty estimation on a deep neural network trained for detecting diabetic retinopathy. Unlike previous works that demonstrate out-of-dataset detection by artificially splitting a dataset by classes (CIFAR5) or generating new images by rotation (notMINIST), we observe that
domain shift in real-world dataset is more subtle. The neural
network may still generalize properly on a subset of a new
dataset but make mistakes on another part of the dataset. We
present novel analysis of uncertainty estimation and propose
new uncertainty estimate on a real-world dataset. We show
that uncertainty estimates can be a used to inform us about
the reliability of the deep neural network on images.

Though deep learning systems have achieved high accuracy
in detecting diseases from medical images, few such systems
have been deployed in highly automated disease screening
settings due to lack of trust in how well these systems can
generalize to out-of-datasets. We propose to use uncertainty
estimates of the deep learning system’s prediction to know
when to accept or to disregard its prediction. We evaluate the
effectiveness of using such estimates in a real-life application for the screening of diabetic retinopathy. We also generate visual explanation of the deep learning system to convey
the pixels in the image that influences its decision. Together,
these reveal the deep learning system’s competency and limits to the human, and in turn the human can know when to
trust the deep learning system.

Introduction
Recent progress in deep learning has enabled many medical imaging applications to achieve high accuracy in detecting diseases such as tuberculosis, skin cancer and diabetic retinopathy (Ting et al. 2017; Gulshan, Peng, and others 2016). Deep learning systems can potentially replace human to look at these medical images to reduce waiting time
and cost, expand coverage of screening program, and deliver
better outcome in public. Despite many advantages, they are
rarely deployed in highly automated situations. A major obstacle to adoption of automated disease detection models is
that it is difficult for human to trust the deep learning systems.
In contrast to deep learning systems, typical diagnostic
tests are often well-understood at every step, from chemical
reactions, responses measurement, to the final interpretation.
Protocols can be established to control for variables that are
known to interfere with the test to ensure its accuracy. The
inherent complexity and “black box” nature of deep learning systems mean that it is difficult for human to grasp the
computation applied to arrive at its prediction. We are left to
guess the variables that may cause a deep learning system
to fail such as camera model and parameters, photo-taking
techniques, patient population, etc. Thus, we do not know
when a deep learning system may fail.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9516

