The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Symmetrization for Embedding Directed Graphs
Jiankai Sun, Srinivasan Parthasarathy
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University
sun.1306@osu.edu, srini@cse.ohio-state.edu

metrization will not connect f and g in the resulting undirected graph. However, f and g should be connected and
form a natural cluster as they can reach the same nodes and
are also reached by the same nodes. We refer to the nodes
which can reach a target node i as i’s predecessors, and the
nodes which can be reached by i as i’s successors. Transitive
closure (TC) of a directed graph is a methodology (usually
housed in a simple data structure) that makes it possible to
answer reachability questions. Let G be the initial directed
graph with adjacency matrix A. The TC of G is a graph
G+ = (V, E + ) such that for all v, w in V there is an edge
(v, w) in E + if and only if there is a non-null path from
v to w in G. The adjacency matrix of G+ is represented as
AG+ . Similar to out-link similarity B out defined by Satuluri
et al. (Satuluri and Parthasarathy 2011), we define out-reach
similarity B o (i, j) as:

Recently, one has seen a surge of interest in developing
such methods including ones for learning such representations for (undirected) graphs (while preserving important
properties) (Liang et al. 2018). However, most of the work to
date on embedding graphs has targeted undirected networks
and very little has focused on the thorny issue of embedding
directed networks. In this paper, we instead propose to solve
the directed graph embedding problem via a two-stage approach: in the first stage, the graph is symmetrized in one
of several possible ways, and in the second stage, the soobtained symmetrized graph is embedded using any state-ofthe-art (undirected) graph embedding algorithm. Note that it
is not the objective of this paper to propose a new (undirected) graph embedding algorithm or discuss the strengths
and weaknesses of existing ones; all we are saying is that
whichever be the suitable graph embedding algorithm, it will
fit in the above proposed symmetrization framework.
Satuluri et al. proposed various ways (such as Bibliometric and Degree-discounted symmetrization) of symmetrizing
a directed graph into an undirected graph, while information about directionality is incorporated via weights on the
edges of the transformed graph (or applying a re-weighting
scheme in case of already weighted graphs) (Satuluri and
Parthasarathy 2011).

f

h

e

g

i

G+

G

α

+

(D G
i (k))

k

β

(1)

+

is the diagonal matrix of out-degrees in G+ ,
where D G
o
G+
D i is the diagonal matrix of in-degrees in G+ , α and β are
the discounting parameters. α = β = 0.5 is found to work
the best empirically. The above expression is symmetric in i
and j. And B o is represented as:

.

d

α

(D o (i)) (D o (j))

Bibliometric/degree-discounted Symmetrization

+

−α

B o = (D G
o )

.

.

X AG+ (i, k)AT + (k, j)

1
G+

+

−β

AG+ (D G
i )

+

−α

ATG+ (D G
o )

(2)

And in-reach similarity C i is defined as:

?
.

+

−β

C i = (D G
i )

Figure 1: Bibliometric and degree-discounted symmetrization will not connect f and g in the resulting undirected
graph. However, f and g should form a natural cluster as
they have close common successors and predecessors.

+

−α

ATG+ (D G
o )

+

AG+ (D G
i )

−β

(3)

The resulting symmetrized undirected graph is represented as GU . and its associated adjacency matrix is AU
which is the sum of B o and C i :
AU = B o + C i

However, both bibliometric and degree-discounted symmetrization only consider first order graph structure while
failing to take higher order graph structure into account. As
shown in Figure 1, bibliometric and degree-discounted sym-

(4)

However, computing TC for large directed graphs with
cycles is expensive. Instead, we propose to do a breadth first
search (BFS) with a depth constraint l to compute a node’s
local reachability, as shown in Figure 2. This approach generalizes Bibliometric and Degree-discounted. For example,

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10043

