The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Group Fairness for the Allocation of Indivisible Goods
Vincent Conitzer

Rupert Freeman

Duke University
conitzer@cs.duke.edu

Microsoft Research
rupert.freeman@microsoft.com

Nisarg Shah

Jennifer Wortman Vaughan

University of Toronto
nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

Microsoft Research
jenn@microsoft.com

Abstract

this envy can be eliminated by removing a single good from
the envied player’s bundle.
In this paper, we ask whether such individual-level guarantees can be strengthened to ensure that algorithmically
generated allocations are fair with respect to arbitrary segments of the population. We consider a setting in which a
set of indivisible goods must be divided among players with
heterogeneous, additive preferences. As an example, consider a manager in a corporate setting who needs to allocate
resources (interns, conference rooms, time slots for shared
machines, equipment, etc.) to employees. She may want to
simultaneously ensure that no business team envies another
team, that the women do not envy the men, that people in one
location do not envy those in another, that people in one role
do not envy those in another, and so on. Envy-freeness alone
is not enough in this setting, in the sense that an allocation
that is envy-free up to one good may still yield significant
levels of inequality and envy between groups of players.
To address this problem, we introduce a notion of group
fairness. Loosely speaking, an allocation is said to be group
fair if no group of players would prefer to receive and redistribute among themselves the goods allocated to any other
group in place of the goods that they were originally allocated, modulo some scaling to account for possibly different
group sizes. Group fairness is a stronger property than envyfreeness, so it is not satisfiable in general. We therefore relax
group fairness by requiring that any unfairness can be eliminated by removing a single good per player from the envied
allocation. We obtain two distinct relaxations by distinguishing between removing one good per player in the more favored group before redistributing goods, and removing one
good per player in the less favored group after goods have
been redistributed among them.
Our main theoretical result is algorithmic. We first show
that certain local optima of the Nash welfare function (the
product of players’ utilities) satisfy both relaxations of group
fairness. In particular, we show this for locally Nash-optimal
allocations, in which transferring a single good from one
player to another does not increase the product of those
players’ utilities. Thus although local Nash optimality only
imposes a requirement on pairs of individuals, it is strong
enough to guarantee fairness to groups of arbitrary size.
We then show that a locally Nash-optimal allocation, and
therefore an allocation satisfying both group fairness relax-

We consider the problem of fairly dividing a collection of indivisible goods among a set of players. Much of the existing literature on fair division focuses on notions of individual
fairness. For instance, envy-freeness requires that no player
prefer the set of goods allocated to another player to her own
allocation. We observe that an algorithm satisfying such individual fairness notions can still treat groups of players unfairly, with one group desiring the goods allocated to another.
Our main contribution is a notion of group fairness, which implies most existing notions of individual fairness. Group fairness (like individual fairness) cannot be satisfied exactly with
indivisible goods. Thus, we introduce two “up to one good”
style relaxations. We show that, somewhat surprisingly, certain local optima of the Nash welfare function satisfy both
relaxations and can be computed in pseudo-polynomial time
by local search. Our experiments reveal faster computation
and stronger fairness guarantees in practice.

1

Introduction

Algorithms have come to play an increasingly prominent
role in our everyday lives, augmenting, or even replacing,
traditional human decision making. As our dependence on
algorithms in high-stakes domains has increased, the spotlight has been placed on the potential for algorithms to exacerbate inequalities, highlighting the need to design algorithms with fairness in mind to ensure that some segments
of the population are not treated differently than others.
While fairness is a relatively new design criterion in many
areas of algorithmic decision making, it has a long history of
study in the literature on resource allocation, in which a set
of goods or resources must be divided among players with
competing needs. In the context of resource allocation—
often referred to as fair division—fairness is usually considered at an individual level. For instance, the classic definition of envy-freeness (Foley 1967) requires that no player
should prefer another’s allocation to her own. When goods
are indivisible, envy-freeness cannot always be guaranteed;
consider a single good that must be given to one of two players. Therefore, it is often relaxed to envy-freeness “up to one
good,” which allows for a player to envy another as long as
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1853

