The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dynamic Layer Aggregation for Neural Machine Translation
with Routing-by-Agreement
Zi-Yi Dou

Zhaopeng Tu*

Xing Wang

Carnegie Mellon University
zdou@andrew.cmu.edu

Tencent AI Lab
zptu@tencent.com

Tencent AI Lab
brightxwang@tencent.com

Longyue Wang

Shuming Shi

Tong Zhang

Tencent AI Lab
vinnylywang@tencent.com

Tencent AI Lab
shumingshi@tencent.com

Tencent AI Lab
bradymzhang@tencent.com

Abstract

exploited in the subsequent processes. Fusing information
across layers for deep NMT models, however, has received
substantially less attention. A few recent studies reveal that
simultaneously exposing all layer representations outperforms methods that utilize just the top layer for natural language processing tasks (Peters et al. 2018; Shen et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2018; Dou et al. 2018). However, their methods
mainly focus on static aggregation in that the aggregation
mechanisms are the same across different positions in the sequence. Consequently, useful context of sequences embedded in the layer representations are ignored, which could be
used to further improve layer aggregation.
In this work, we propose dynamic layer aggregation approaches, which allow the model to aggregate hidden states
across layers for each position dynamically. We assign a distinct aggregation strategy for each symbol in the sequence,
based on the corresponding hidden states that represent both
syntax and semantic information of this symbol. To this end,
we propose several strategies to model the dynamic principles. First, we propose a simple dynamic combination mechanism, which assigns a distinct set of aggregation weights,
learned by a feed-forward network, to each position. Second, inspired by the recent success of iterative routing on
assigning parts to wholes for computer vision tasks (Sabour,
Frosst, and Hinton 2017; Hinton, Sabour, and Frosst 2018),
here we apply the idea of routing-by-agreement to layer
aggregation. Benefiting from the high-dimensional coincidence filtering, i.e. the agreement between every two internal neurons, the routing algorithm has the ability to extract
the most active features shared by multiple layer representations.
We evaluated our approaches upon the standard T RANS FORMER model (Vaswani et al. 2017) on two widely-used
WMT14 English⇒German and WMT17 Chinese⇒English
translation tasks. We show that although static layer aggregation strategy indeed improves translation performance,
which indicates the necessity and effectiveness of fusing
information across layers for deep NMT models, our proposed dynamic approaches outperform their static counterpart. Also, our models consistently improve translation performance over the vanilla T RANSFORMER model across language pairs. It is worth mentioning that T RANSFORMER -

With the promising progress of deep neural networks, layer
aggregation has been used to fuse information across layers in various fields, such as computer vision and machine
translation. However, most of the previous methods combine
layers in a static fashion in that their aggregation strategy
is independent of specific hidden states. Inspired by recent
progress on capsule networks, in this paper we propose to
use routing-by-agreement strategies to aggregate layers dynamically. Specifically, the algorithm learns the probability of
a part (individual layer representations) assigned to a whole
(aggregated representations) in an iterative way and combines parts accordingly. We implement our algorithm on
top of the state-of-the-art neural machine translation model
T RANSFORMER and conduct experiments on the widely-used
WMT14 English⇒German and WMT17 Chinese⇒English
translation datasets. Experimental results across language
pairs show that the proposed approach consistently outperforms the strong baseline model and a representative static
aggregation model.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have advanced the state of the art in
various communities, from computer vision to natural language processing. Researchers have directed their efforts
into designing patterns of modules that can be assembled
systematically, which makes neural networks deeper and
wider. However, one key challenge of training such huge
networks lies in how to transform and combine information
across layers. To encourage gradient flow and feature propagation, researchers in the field of computer vision have proposed various approaches , such as residual connections (He
et al. 2016), densely connected network (Huang et al. 2017)
and deep layer aggregation (Yu et al. 2018).
State-of-the-art neural machine translation (NMT) models generally implement encoder and decoder as multiple
layers (Wu et al. 2016; Gehring et al. 2017; Vaswani et
al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018), in which only the top layer is
*
Zhaopeng Tu is the corresponding author. Work was done
when Zi-Yi Dou was interning at Tencent AI Lab.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

86

