The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Extension Removal in Abstract Argumentation – An Axiomatic Approach
Ringo Baumann, Gerhard Brewka
Computer Science Institute, Leipzig University, Germany
{baumann,brewka}@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

Abstract

which is far from surprising as argumentation is an inherently dynamic process. Much of this work has been influenced – in one way or another – by the famous AGM
theory (Alchourrón, Gärdenfors, and Makinson 1985), the
leading formal account of revision and contraction in the
context of propositional logic. Whereas revision potentially
replaces information with new knowledge, contraction removes information from a given knowledge base. In contrast to revision where several works already exist (CosteMarquis et al. 2014a; 2014b; Baumann and Brewka 2015;
Diller et al. 2018) to mention a few, contraction in AFs as
yet has not received much attention. A notable exception is
(Bisquert et al. 2011) which investigates the removal of a
single argument.
An intensively studied issue in argumentation is the socalled enforcing problem (Baumann and Brewka 2010; Baumann 2012; Dupin de Saint-Cyr et al. 2016). Enforcement
is concerned with manipulating argumentation frameworks
(in a certain minimal way) such that a certain desired set of
arguments becomes an extension. Recently, (Haret, Wallner,
and Woltran 2018) presented a first axiomatic treatment of
this manipulating operation and showed its close relationship to classical AGM revision. However, from a conceptual point of view there are still differences. For instance,
whereas revision operates on the level of single beliefs, enforcement operates on sets of arguments representing complete views of the world.
The topic of this paper is the inverse problem to extension
enforcement, namely the problem of extension removal, that
is: given an AF F and a set of extensions E, identify an AF
H that is as close as possible to F but has none of the extensions in E. In the same way as enforcement shifts revision to
the level of extensions, extension removal shifts contraction
to the level of extensions.
To the best of our knowledge the extension removal problem has not been studied in the literature before – which is
surprising since removal appears to be as important as enforcement. Assume an argumentation framework F represents what an agent knows/believes about the world. As discussed earlier, the available arguments may give rise to multiple extensions, that is, multiple equally plausible views of
the world “sanctioned” by the available arguments and their
relations. It may well be that the agent realizes that for some
reason some of these extensions do not reflect adequate op-

This paper continues the rather recent line of research on
the dynamics of non-monotonic formalisms. In particular, we
consider semantic changes in Dung’s abstract argumentation
formalism. One of the most studied problems in this context
is the so-called enforcing problem which is concerned with
manipulating argumentation frameworks (AFs) such that a
certain desired set of arguments becomes an extension. Here
we study the inverse problem, namely the extension removal
problem: is it possible – and if so how – to modify a given
argumentation framework in such a way that certain undesired extensions are no longer generated? Analogously to the
well known AGM paradigm we develop an axiomatic approach to the removal problem, i.e. a certain set of axioms
will determine suitable manipulations. Although contraction
(that is, the elimination of a particular belief) is conceptually
quite different from extension removal, there are surprisingly
deep connections between the two: it turns out that postulates
for removal can be directly obtained as reformulations of the
AGM contraction postulates. We prove a series of formal results including conditional and unconditional existence and
semantical uniqueness of removal operators as well as various impossibility results – and show possible ways out.

Introduction
Computational models of argumentation have received a lot
of interest over the recent years. There are two major lines
of research in the area. Structured argumentation (Besnard
and Hunter 2008), as the name suggests, deals with the formal structure of arguments, their generation from a possibly
inconsistent knowledge base and the identification of relationships among arguments. Abstract argumentation (Baroni
et al. 2018) is concerned with the evaluation of arguments,
viewed as abstract entities. Here the evaluation is most commonly based on the attack relation among arguments. The
leading formal tools in abstract argumentation are Dung’s
abstract argumentation frameworks (AFs) (Dung 1995). An
AF basically is a graph whose nodes represent arguments
whereas the links describe the attack relation. A semantics
assigns to each AF a collection of argument sets which constitute a coherent view of the world.
In recent years dynamic aspects of abstract argumentation have become an important focus of research in the area,
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2670

