The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

EnsNet: Ensconce Text in the Wild
Shuaitao Zhang,∗ Yuliang Liu,∗ Lianwen Jin,† Yaoxiong Huang, Songxuan Lai
School of Electronic and Information Engineering
South China University of Technology
lianwen.jin@gmail.com

Abstract
A new method is proposed for removing text from natural images. The challenge is to first accurately localize text on the
stroke-level and then replace it with a visually plausible background. Unlike previous methods that require image patches
to erase scene text, our method, namely ensconce network
(EnsNet), can operate end-to-end on a single image without
any prior knowledge. The overall structure is an end-to-end
trainable FCN-ResNet-18 network with a conditional generative adversarial network (cGAN). The feature of the former is first enhanced by a novel lateral connection structure
and then refined by four carefully designed losses: multiscale
regression loss and content loss, which capture the global
discrepancy of different level features; texture loss and total variation loss, which primarily target filling the text region
and preserving the reality of the background. The latter is a
novel local-sensitive GAN, which attentively assesses the local consistency of the text erased regions. Both qualitative
and quantitative sensitivity experiments on synthetic images
and the ICDAR 2013 dataset demonstrate that each component of the EnsNet is essential to achieve a good performance.
Moreover, our EnsNet can significantly outperform previous
state-of-the-art methods in terms of all metrics. In addition, a
qualitative experiment conducted on the SBMNet dataset further demonstrates that the proposed method can also preform
well on general object (such as pedestrians) removal tasks.
EnsNet is extremely fast, which can preform at 333 fps on an
i5-8600 CPU device.

Figure 1: Examples of scene text erasing. Given a scene text
image, the goal is to ensconce the text and replace it with
a visually plausible background while retaining the non-text
regions. Left: input images. Right: our results.

reconstruction and visual translation.
Examples of scene text erasing are shown in Fig 1. The
challenges of erasing the scene text are as follows: 1) scene
text erasing methods should be able to perceive the strokelevel position of the text in advance, which is more complicated than bounding-box-level scene text detection methods
that have been comprehensively researched (Liang, Doermann, and Li 2005); 2) after removing text, the original text
region should be filled with a new visually plausible background; 3) the non-text regions should be retained in their
original appearance.
To the best of our knowledge, the method proposed in
(Nakamura et al. 2017) is the first and the only method
that addresses the scene text erasing issue. However, their
method uses cropped image patches as training data, which
limits the erasing performance due to loss of global context
information.
We herein propose a novel method named the ensconce
network (EnsNet) to address this task, which includes the
following characteristics:

1. Introduction
Scene text is ubiquitous in our daily life, and it conveys
valuable information. However, various private information,
such as ID numbers, telephone numbers, car numbers, and
home addresses (Inai et al. 2014) may easily be exposed in
natural scene images. Such important private information
can be easily collected automatically by the machines engaged in fraud, marketing, or other illegal activities. Therefore, a method that can ensconce the text in the wild would
be beneficial. In addition to preventing privacy disclosure,
Scene text erasing can also facilitate many image processing and computer vision applications, such as information
∗

Authors contributed equally as first author
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

801

