The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unseen Word Representation
by Aligning Heterogeneous Lexical Semantic Spaces
Victor Prokhorov,1 Mohammad Taher Pilehvar,1,2 Dimitri Kartsaklis,3∗ Pietro Liò,4 Nigel Collier1
1

Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, University of Cambridge
School of Computer Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology, Tehran, Iran
3
Apple, Cambridge, UK
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Cambridge
vp361@cam.ac.uk, pilehvar@iust.ac.ir, dkartsaklis@apple.com, pl219@cam.ac.uk, nhc30@cam.ac.uk
2

Abstract

models make two assumptions around the unseen word: (1)
variations of the word exist in the training corpus (for instance, occurrences of track—or even untrack—should exist to induce embeddings for untracked); and (2) the semantics of the word can be estimated based on its subword units
(which might not hold for single-morpheme words, e.g.,
galaxy, or for exocentric compounds, e.g., honeymoon). As
a result, they fall short of effectively representing the semantics of unseen single-morpheme words for which no variation has been observed during training, essentially ignoring
most of the rare domain-specific entities which are crucial
for NLP systems when applied to those domains.
Furthermore, distributional techniques generally ignore
the lexical knowledge encoded in dictionaries, ontologies,
or other lexical resources. There exist hundreds of high coverage and domain-specific lexical resources which contain
valuable information for infrequent words. Recently, various
embedding induction techniques have attempted to leverage lexical resources, such as WordNet (Pilehvar and Collier 2017; Bahdanau et al. 2017) or Wikipedia (Lazaridou,
Marelli, and Baroni 2017). Despite their success, they either
rely on word definitions (glosses) or related words extracted
from the the lexical resource while ignoring the knowledge encoded in the semantic structure. Here, we present a
methodology that exploits the semantic structure of the lexical resource for unseen word representation. The technique
first embeds a knowledge base into a vector space and then
maps the embedded words from this space to a corpus-based
space, in order to expand the vocabulary of the latter with
additional representations for rare and unseen words. To our
knowledge, it is the first time that vector space transformation techniques, which are widely used in multilingual settings, are leveraged for aligning heterogeneous monolingual
spaces. We evaluate the reliability of our approach on several
datasets across multiple tasks: six datasets for word similarity measurement and eight sentiment analysis and topic categorization datasets. Experimental results show that, unless
ample occurrences exist in the training data, we can compute more reliable embeddings than the ones generated by
state-of-the-art corpus based embedding techniques.

Word embedding techniques heavily rely on the abundance
of training data for individual words. Given the Zipfian distribution of words in natural language texts, a large number of
words do not usually appear frequently or at all in the training
data. In this paper we put forward a technique that exploits
the knowledge encoded in lexical resources, such as WordNet, to induce embeddings for unseen words. Our approach
adapts graph embedding and cross-lingual vector space transformation techniques in order to merge lexical knowledge encoded in ontologies with that derived from corpus statistics.
We show that the approach can provide consistent performance improvements across multiple evaluation benchmarks:
in-vitro, on multiple rare word similarity datasets, and invivo, in two downstream text classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Word embeddings can be seamlessly integrated into various NLP systems, effectively enhancing their generalisation power (Camacho-Collados and Pilehvar 2018). However, the distributional approach to the semantic representation of words, either in its conventional count-based form or
the recent neural-based paradigm, relies on a multitude of
occurrences for each individual word to enable accurate representations. As a result, these corpus-based methods are unable to provide reliable representations for words that are infrequent or unseen during training, such as domain-specific
terms. This is the case even if massive corpora are used for
training, such as the Wikipedia corpus.1
To address the unseen word representation problem, several techniques have been proposed. Earlier works have
mainly focused on morphologically complex words (Luong, Socher, and Manning 2013; Botha and Blunsom 2014;
Soricut and Och 2015), whereas more recently, characterbased and subword unit information has garnered a lot of attention (Bojanowski et al. 2017). Despite their success, these
∗
Contributed to this work when he was with DTAL, Cambridge.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In the 2015 Wikipedia dump corpus with around 1.6B tokens,
there are slightly over 1.9M word types with at least three occurrences. Of these word types, more than 80% appear at most 50
times in total, whereas more than two thirds of words in the vocabulary have frequency ≤ 20.

2

Methodology

Figure 1 illustrates our procedure for enriching an existing
corpus vector space SC based on the lexical knowledge in an
6900

