The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Estimating the Causal Effect from Partially Observed Time Series
Akane Iseki,1 Yusuke Mukuta,1,2 Yoshitaka Ushiku,1 Tatsuya Harada1,2
1

The University of Tokyo 2 RIKEN AIP
{iseki, mukuta, ushiku, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

original paper does not mention the relationship with causality, (Shibuya, Harada, and Kuniyoshi 2011) showed that by
using the projections of two time series estimated by Partial
CCA, we can calculate Transfer Entropy, which is a causality measure equivalent to Granger Causality when variables
follow a Gaussian distribution (Shibuya, Harada, and Kuniyoshi 2009).
However, these methods require a large number of samples with no missing values. This scenario is not always realized with real data, where missing values often arise because of sensor deficiencies or privacy regulations. Also,
the quantification of a causal effect between two time series requires triplets of variables, i.e., the past value in one
time series and both the current and the past value in the
other time series. So, it is difficult to obtain many samples in
which all the variables are simultaneously observed. Moreover, when causal effects change dynamically, we need to
estimate causal relationships over a short time span where
the causality measure can be assumed to be constant. Additionally, real data tend to contain redundant information
and become high-dimensional. Thus, it is necessary to estimate the causality measure robustly from high-dimensional
small-sample time series in which some values are missing.
A naive way to deal with incomplete data is to ignore samples with missing values. However, complete samples cannot provide enough information to estimate parameters and
lead to overfitting. Few methods for estimating causality address this problem, but several multivariate analysis methods have been proposed to compensate the lack of information. One of these adopts a Bayesian approach; another
is a semi-supervised approach. Bayesian approaches do not
use missing samples but provide a way to cope with small
samples by adding prior information on parameters (Klami,
Virtanen, and Kaski 2013; Bishop 1999). Partial CCA also
has Bayesian extensions (Mukuta and Harada 2014). Semisupervised approaches compensate for the lack of information by exploiting incomplete samples. (Ilin and Raiko 2010)
combines both approaches for principal component analysis
, but it does not provide enough basis for explaining why the
results do not suffer from any bias caused by missing data.
In this work, we propose a causality estimation method
that combines the semi-supervised and Bayesian approaches. We addressed the issue of missing data by using
Rubin’s missing model (Rubin 1974; 1975; 1976), which

Many real-world systems involve interacting time series. The
ability to detect causal dependencies between system components from observed time series of their outputs is essential for understanding system behavior. The quantification of
causal influences between time series is based on the definition of some causality measure. Partial Canonical Correlation Analysis (Partial CCA) and its extensions are examples
of methods used for robustly estimating the causal relationships between two multidimensional time series even when
the time series are short. These methods assume that the input data are complete and have no missing values. However,
real-world data often contain missing values. It is therefore
crucial to estimate the causality measure robustly even when
the input time series is incomplete. Treating this problem
as a semi-supervised learning problem, we propose a novel
semi-supervised extension of probabilistic Partial CCA called
semi-Bayesian Partial CCA. Our method exploits the information in samples with missing values to prevent the overfitting of parameter estimation even when there are few complete samples. Experiments based on synthesized and real
data demonstrate the ability of the proposed method to estimate causal relationships more correctly than existing methods when the data contain missing values, the dimensionality
is large, and the number of samples is small.

Introduction
Understanding the interdependence of multiple time series
is essential in a wide range of fields such as meteorology, finance, and robotics. The interactions between system components are dynamic and complicated. To analyze and predict system behavior, it is important to detect the dependent components from the output time series. We can detect the interdependence of multiple time series by quantifying their pair-wise interdependence. Causality measure, e.g.,
in terms of Granger Causality (Granger 1969) is a powerful approach for revealing such pair-wise interdependences.
It quantifies, within a given pair of time series, the influence of the past value in one time series on the future value
in the other. Among the many types of causality measures
proposed in the literature, Partial CCA (Rao 1969) is a useful multivariate analysis method for estimating the causal
effects between high-dimensional data robustly. While the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3919

