The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Training Deep Neural Networks in Generations:
A More Tolerant Teacher Educates Better Students
Chenglin Yang, Lingxi Xie, Siyuan Qiao, Alan L. Yuille
Johns Hopkins University
{chenglin.yangw,198808xc,joe.siyuan.qiao,alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

Abstract

A fundamental task in computer vision is to optimize
deep networks for image classification. Most existing work
achieved this goal by fitting the outputs of a model to onehot vectors. For each training sample (xn , yn ) where xn
is an image matrix and yn is the class label (out of C
classes), the goal is to find network parameters θ, so that
>
f (xn ; θ) ≈ [0, . . . , 1, . . . , 0] ∈ RC , i.e., only the yn -th dimension is 1 and all others are 0. Despite its effectiveness,
this is not necessarily the optimal target to fit, because except
for maximizing the confidence score of the primary class
(i.e., the ground-truth), allowing for some secondary classes
(i.e., those visually similar ones to the ground-truth) to be
preserved may help to alleviate the risk of over-fitting. Some
proposed to learn a class-level similarity matrix (Deng et al.
2010)(Verma et al. 2012)(Wu, Tygert, and LeCun 2017), but
these approaches are unable to capture inter-class similarities at the image level, e.g., different cat images may be
visually similar to different classes.
We turn to an alternative solution, i.e., extracting knowledge from a trained (teacher) network and guide another
(student) network in an individual training process. This algorithm, known as knowledge distillation, was first used to
network compression (the student network is much smaller
than the teacher network, but can achieve a comparable
accuracy) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015), but later it
was verified effective in the scenario that teacher and student networks have the same architecture, in which the
student is expected to achieve a higher accuracy than the
teacher (Furlanello et al. 2018). Despite its effectiveness,
it remains unclear how teacher-student optimization works,
and if we can find some key factors to guide the design of
such optimization processes.
This paper provides an interesting perspective, focusing
on the strictness of the teacher. We argue that classification
accuracy is not the major goal of the teacher network; instead, it is designed to be tolerant (i.e., producing less peaked
distributions of confidence) so that the students can learn
inter-class similarity and potentially prevent over-fitting. To
achieve this goal, we add an extra term to the standard crossentropy loss in training the teacher network, facilitating it to
distribute confidence to a few secondary classes. Although
this harms the accuracy of the teacher network, it indeed provides more room for the student network(s), and eventually,
the students are better than those educated by a strict teacher.

We focus on the problem of training a deep neural network
in generations. The flowchart is that, in order to optimize the
target network (student), another network (teacher) with the
same architecture is first trained, and used to provide part of
supervision signals in the next stage. While this strategy leads
to a higher accuracy, many aspects (e.g., why teacher-student
optimization helps) still need further explorations.
This paper studies this problem from a perspective of controlling the strictness in training the teacher network. Existing approaches mostly used a hard distribution (e.g., one-hot
vectors) in training, leading to a strict teacher which itself
has a high accuracy, but we argue that the teacher needs to
be more tolerant, although this often implies a lower accuracy. The implementation is very easy, with merely an extra loss term added to the teacher network, facilitating a few
secondary classes to emerge and complement to the primary
class. Consequently, the teacher provides a milder supervision signal (a less peaked distribution), and makes it possible for the student to learn from inter-class similarity and potentially lower the risk of over-fitting. Experiments are performed on standard image classification tasks (CIFAR100
and ILSVRC2012). Although the teacher network behaves
less powerful, the students show a persistent ability growth
and eventually achieve higher classification accuracies than
other competitors. Model ensemble and transfer feature extraction also verify the effectiveness of our approach.

Introduction
•

“Indigo comes from blue, but it is bluer than blue.”
—A N O LD P ROVERB
Deep learning, especially the convolutional neural networks, has been widely applied to computer vision problems. Among them, image classification has been considered the fundamental task which sets the backbones vision
systems for other problems (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012)(Simonyan and Zisserman 2015)(Szegedy et al.
2015)(He et al. 2016), and the knowledge or features extracted from these modules are transferrable for generic image representation purposes (Razavian et al. 2014) or other
vision tasks (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015)(Ren et al.
2015)(Xie and Tu 2015)(Newell, Yang, and Deng 2016).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5628

