The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On the Time Complexity of Algorithm
Selection Hyper-Heuristics for Multimodal Optimisation
Andrei Lissovoi, Pietro S. Oliveto, John Alasdair Warwicker
Rigorous Research, Department of Computer Science
The University of Sheffield, Sheffield S1 4DP, United Kingdom
{a.lissovoi,p.oliveto,j.warwicker}@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract

of hard combinatorial optimisation problems (see (Burke et
al. 2010; 2013) for surveys of results).
Despite their numerous successes, very limited rigorous theoretical understanding of their behaviour and performance is available (Lehre and Özcan 2013; Alanazi and
Lehre 2014). Recently, it has been proved that a simple selection hyper-heuristic called Random Descent (Cowling,
Kendall, and Soubeiga 2001; 2002), choosing between elitist randomised local search (RLS) heuristics with different neighbourhood sizes, optimises a standard unimodal
benchmark function from evolutionary computation called
L EADING O NES in the best possible runtime (up to lower
order terms) achievable with the available low-level heuristics (Lissovoi, Oliveto, and Warwicker 2018). For this to occur, it is necessary to run the selected low-level heuristics
for a sufficient amount of time, called the learning period, to
allow the hyper-heuristic to accurately determine how useful the chosen operator is at the current stage of the optimisation process. If the learning period is not sufficiently
long, the hyper-heuristic fails to identify whether the chosen
low-level heuristics are actually useful, leading to random
choices of which heuristics to apply and a degradation of
the overall performance. Since the optimal duration of the
learning period may change during the optimisation, (Doerr
et al. 2018) have recently introduced a self-adjusting mechanism and rigorously proved that it allows the hyper-heuristic
to track the optimal learning period throughout the optimisation process for L EADING O NES.
In this paper we aim to extend the understanding of the behaviour and performance of hyper-heuristics to multimodal
optimisation problems. In order to evaluate their capability
at escaping local optima, we consider elitist and non-elitist
selection operators that have been used in hyper-heuristics
in the literature. (Cowling, Kendall, and Soubeiga 2001;
2002) introduced two variants of move acceptance operators: the elitist O NLY I MPROVING (OI) operator, which
only accepts moves that improve the current solution, and
the non-elitist A LL M OVES (AM) operator, which accepts
any new solution independent of its quality. Another selection operator that has been considered in the literature
is the I MPROVINGAND E QUAL (IE) acceptance operator
which in addition to accepting improving solutions also accepts solutions of equal quality (Ayob and Kendall 2003;
Bilgin, Özcan, and Korkmaz 2007; Özcan, Bilgin, and Kork-

Selection hyper-heuristics are automated algorithm selection methodologies that choose between different heuristics
during the optimisation process. Recently selection hyperheuristics choosing between a collection of elitist randomised
local search heuristics with different neighbourhood sizes
have been shown to optimise a standard unimodal benchmark
function from evolutionary computation in the optimal expected runtime achievable with the available low-level heuristics. In this paper we extend our understanding to the domain
of multimodal optimisation by considering a hyper-heuristic
from the literature that can switch between elitist and nonelitist heuristics during the run. We first identify the range
of parameters that allow the hyper-heuristic to hillclimb efficiently and prove that it can optimise a standard hillclimbing benchmark function in the best expected asymptotic time
achievable by unbiased mutation-based randomised search
heuristics. Afterwards, we use standard multimodal benchmark functions to highlight function characteristics where
the hyper-heuristic is efficient by swiftly escaping local optima and ones where it is not. For a function class called
C LIFFd where a new gradient of increasing fitness can be
identified after escaping local optima, the hyper-heuristic is
extremely efficient while a wide range of established elitist
and non-elitist algorithms are not, including the well-studied
Metropolis algorithm. We complete the picture with an analysis of another standard benchmark function called J UMPd
as an example to highlight problem characteristics where the
hyper-heuristic is inefficient. Yet, it still outperforms the wellestablished non-elitist Metropolis algorithm.

1

Introduction

Selection hyper-heuristics are automated algorithm selection methodologies designed to choose which of a set of
low-level heuristics to apply in the next steps of the optimisation process (Cowling, Kendall, and Soubeiga 2001).
Rather than deciding in advance which heuristics to apply
for a problem, the aim is to automate the process at runtime. Originally shown to effectively optimise scheduling
problems, such as the scheduling of a sales summit and university timetabling (Cowling, Kendall, and Soubeiga 2001;
2002), they have since been successfully applied to a variety
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2322

