The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Data-to-Text Generation with Content Selection and Planning
Ratish Puduppully, Li Dong, Mirella Lapata
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB
r.puduppully@sms.ed.ac.uk, li.dong@ed.ac.uk, mlap@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Content
Selection
Gate

Recent advances in data-to-text generation have led to the use
of large-scale datasets and neural network models which are
trained end-to-end, without explicitly modeling what to say
and in what order. In this work, we present a neural network
architecture which incorporates content selection and planning without sacrificing end-to-end training. We decompose
the generation task into two stages. Given a corpus of data
records (paired with descriptive documents), we first generate
a content plan highlighting which information should be mentioned and in which order and then generate the document
while taking the content plan into account. Automatic and
human-based evaluation experiments show that our model1
outperforms strong baselines improving the state-of-the-art
on the recently released ROTOW IRE dataset.

1

Content
Planning
Network

Col1 Col2
Row1
Row2

♦
♣

■
♥

Record ♣
Record ♥
Record ■

The Houston Rockets
( 3 - 3 ) stunned the
Los Angeles Clippers
( 3 - 3 ) Thursday in
Game 6 at the
Staples Center …

Text
Decoder

Figure 1: Block diagram of our approach.
al. (2017) show that neural text generation techniques perform poorly at content selection, they struggle to maintain
inter-sentential coherence, and more generally a reasonable
ordering of the selected facts in the output text. Additional
challenges include avoiding redundancy and being faithful
to the input. Interestingly, comparisons against templatebased methods show that neural techniques do not fare well
on metrics of content selection recall and factual output generation (i.e., they often hallucinate statements which are not
supported by facts in the database).
In this paper, we address these shortcomings by explicitly modeling content selection and planning within a neural data-to-text architecture. Our model learns a content plan
from the input and conditions on the content plan in order to
generate the output document (see Figure 1 for an illustration). An explicit content planning mechanism has at least
three advantages for multi-sentence document generation: it
represents a high-level organization of the document structure allowing the decoder to concentrate on the easier tasks
of sentence planning and surface realization; it makes the
process of data-to-document generation more interpretable
by generating an intermediate representation; and reduces
redundancy in the output, since it is less likely for the content plan to contain the same information in multiple places.
We train our model end-to-end using neural networks
and evaluate its performance on ROTOW IRE (Wiseman et
al. 2017), a recently released dataset which contains statistics of NBA basketball games paired with human-written
summaries (see Table 1). Automatic and human evaluation
shows that modeling content selection and planning improves generation considerably over competitive baselines.

Introduction

Data-to-text generation broadly refers to the task of automatically producing text from non-linguistic input (Reiter and
Dale 2000; Gatt and Krahmer 2018). The input may be in
various forms including databases of records, spreadsheets,
expert system knowledge bases, simulations of physical systems, and so on. Table 1 shows an example in the form of a
database containing statistics on NBA basketball games, and
a corresponding game summary.
Traditional methods for data-to-text generation (Kukich
1983; McKeown 1992) implement a pipeline of modules
including content planning (selecting specific content from
some input and determining the structure of the output text),
sentence planning (determining the structure and lexical
content of each sentence) and surface realization (converting
the sentence plan to a surface string). Recent neural generation systems (Lebret et al. 2016; Mei et al. 2016; Wiseman et
al. 2017) do not explicitly model any of these stages, rather
they are trained in an end-to-end fashion using the very successful encoder-decoder architecture (Bahdanau et al. 2015)
as their backbone.
Despite producing overall fluent text, neural systems
have difficulty capturing long-term structure and generating documents more than a few sentences long. Wiseman et
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/ratishsp/
data2text-plan-py.

6908

