The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving GAN with Neighbors Embedding and Gradient Matching
Ngoc-Trung Tran,∗ Tuan-Anh Bui,∗ Ngai-Man Cheung
ST Electronics - SUTD Cyber Security Laboratory
Singapore University of Technology and Design

Abstract

2016; Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Gulrajani et al.
2017). However, mode collapse is still an issue.
In this work, we propose two techniques to improve GAN
training. First, inspired by t-distribution stochastic neighbors embedding (t-SNE) (Maaten and Hinton 2008), which
is a well-known dimensionality reduction method, we propose an inverse t-SNE regularizer to reduce mode collapse. Specifically, while t-SNE aims to preserve the structure of the high-dimensional data samples in the reduceddimensional manifold of latent samples, we reverse the procedure of t-SNE to explicitly retain local structures of latent samples in the high-dimensional generated samples.
This prevents generator from producing nearly identical data
samples from different latent samples, and reduces mode
collapse. Second, we propose a new objective function for
the generator by aligning the real and generated sample distributions, in order to generate realistic samples. We achieve
the alignment via minimizing the difference between the discriminator scores of the real samples and generated ones. By
using the discriminator and its scores, we can avoid working with high-dimensional data distribution. We further constrain the difference between the gradients of discriminator
scores. We derive these constraints from Taylor approximation of the discriminator function. Our principled approach
is significantly different from the standard GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014): our generator does not attempt to directly
fool the discriminator; instead, our generator produces fake
samples that have similar discriminator scores as the real
samples. We found that with this technique the distribution
of the generated samples approximates well that of the real
samples, and the generator can produce more realistic samples.

We propose two new techniques for training Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) in the unsupervised setting. Our
objectives are to alleviate mode collapse in GAN and improve the quality of the generated samples. First, we propose
neighbor embedding, a manifold learning-based regularization to explicitly retain local structures of latent samples in
the generated samples. This prevents generator from producing nearly identical data samples from different latent samples, and reduces mode collapse. We propose an inverse tSNE regularizer to achieve this. Second, we propose a new
technique, gradient matching, to align the distributions of the
generated samples and the real samples. As it is challenging
to work with high-dimensional sample distributions, we propose to align these distributions through the scalar discriminator scores. We constrain the difference between the discriminator scores of the real samples and generated ones. We
further constrain the difference between the gradients of these
discriminator scores. We derive these constraints from Taylor approximations of the discriminator function. We perform
experiments to demonstrate that our proposed techniques are
computationally simple and easy to be incorporated in existing systems. When Gradient matching and Neighbour embedding are applied together, our GN-GAN achieves outstanding
results on 1D/2D synthetic, CIFAR-10 and STL-10 datasets,
e.g. FID score of 30.80 for the STL-10 dataset. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/tntrung/gan

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et
al. 2014; Goodfellow 2016) are popular methods for training
generative models. GAN training is a two-player minimax
game between the discriminator and the generator. While the
discriminator learns to distinguish between the real and generated (fake) samples, the generator creates samples to confuse the discriminator to accept its samples as “real”. This is
an attractive approach. However, stabilizing the training of
GAN is still an on-going important research problem.
Mode collapse is one of the most challenging issues when
training GANs. Many advanced GANs have been proposed
to improve the stability (Nowozin, Cseke, and Tomioka

Related Works
Addressing issues of GANs (Goodfellow 2016), including
gradient vanishing and mode collapse, is an important research topic. A popular direction is to focus on improving the discriminator objective. The discriminator can be
formed via the f-divergence (Nowozin, Cseke, and Tomioka
2016), or distance metrics (Arjovsky and Bottou 2017;
Bellemare et al. 2017). And the generator is trained by fooling the discriminator via the zero-sum game. Many methods in this direction have to regularize their discriminators; otherwise, they would cause instability issues, as the

∗

These authors have contributed equally to this work
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5191

