The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Story Ending Generation with
Incremental Encoding and Commonsense Knowledge
Jian Guan,∗ Yansen Wang,∗ Minlie Huang†
Dept. of Computer Science & Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI), China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
guanj15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;ys-wang15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Today is Halloween .
Jack is so excited to go trick or treating tonight .
He is going to dress up like a monster .
The costume is real scary .

Generating a reasonable ending for a given story context, i.e.,
story ending generation, is a strong indication of story comprehension. This task requires not only to understand the context clues which play an important role in planning the plot,
but also to handle implicit knowledge to make a reasonable,
coherent story. In this paper, we devise a novel model for
story ending generation. The model adopts an incremental encoding scheme to represent context clues which are spanning
in the story context. In addition, commonsense knowledge
is applied through multi-source attention to facilitate story
comprehension, and thus to help generate coherent and reasonable endings. Through building context clues and using
implicit knowledge, the model is able to produce reasonable
story endings. Automatic and manual evaluation shows that
our model can generate more reasonable story endings than
state-of-the-art baselines1 .

He hopes to get a lot of candy .
day

monster

RelatedTo

dress up
beast

Halloween

Halloween RelatedTo trick or treat

trick or treat

RelatedTo

dress

RelatedTo

hallow

RelatedTo

MannerOf

costume

RelatedTo

scare
RelatedTo

candy

scary

...
...

dress up

monster

costume

is scary

get candy

Figure 1: A story example. Words in blue/purple are events
and entities. The bottom-left graph is retrieved from ConceptNet and the bottom-right graph represents how events
and entities form the context clue.

Introduction
Story generation is an important but challenging task because it requires to deal with logic and implicit knowledge
(Li et al. 2013; Soo, Lee, and Chen 2016; Ji et al. 2017;
Jain et al. 2017; Martin et al. 2018; Clark, Ji, and Smith
2018). Story ending generation aims at concluding a story
and completing the plot given a story context. We argue that
solving this task involves addressing the following issues: 1)
Representing the context clues which contain key information for planning a reasonable ending; and 2) Using implicit
knowledge (e.g., commonsense knowledge) to facilitate understanding of the story and better predict what will happen
next.
Comparing to textual entailment or reading comprehension (Dagan, Glickman, and Magnini 2006; Hermann et al.
2015) story ending generation requires more to deal with the
logic and causality information that may span multiple sentences in a story context. The logic information in story can

be captured by the appropriate sequence of events2 or entities occurring in a sequence of sentences, and the chronological order or causal relationship between events or entities.
The ending should be generated from the whole context clue
rather than merely inferred from a single entity or the last
sentence. It is thus important for story ending generation to
represent the context clues for predicting what will happen
in an ending.
However, deciding a reasonable ending not only depends
on representing the context clues properly, but also on the
ability of language understanding with implicit knowledge
that is beyond the text surface. Humans use their own experiences and implicit knowledge to help understand a story. As
shown in Figure 1, the ending talks about candy which can
be viewed as commonsense knowledge about Halloween.
Such knowledge can be crucial for story ending generation.
Figure 1 shows an example of a typical story in the ROCStories corpus (Mostafazadeh et al. 2016b). In this example, the events or entities in the story context constitute the

∗

Authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author: Minlie Huang.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our codes and data are available at https://github.com/
JianGuanTHU/StoryEndGen.
†

2
Event in this paper refers to a verb or simple action such as
dress up, trick or treating as shown in Figure 1.

6473

