The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robust Negative Sampling for Network Embedding
Mohammadreza Armandpour,1 Patrick Ding,1 Jianhua Huang,1 Xia Hu2
1

2

Department of Statistics, Texas A&M University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
{armand, patrickding, jianhua}@stat.tamu.edu, hu@cse.tamu.edu

Abstract

on a multi-layer graph in Struc2Vec (Ribeiro, Saverese, and
Figueiredo 2017).
To assign neighbor nodes close embedding vectors, many
existing network embedding algorithms optimize a variation of the Skip-gram one hidden layer neural net objective (Mikolov et al. 2013a), which originated in the natural language processing (NLP) literature. Due to the computational complexity of the objective these methods rely
on NS (Mikolov et al. 2013b) to approximate the objective. Hierarchical Softmax (Morin and Bengio 2005) and
Noise Contrastive Estimation (Gutmann and Hyvärinen 2012;
Mnih and Teh 2012) are two alternatives to NS, but NS is
preferred to its alternatives because of its better performance
in most cases (Mikolov et al. 2013b; Tang et al. 2015; Grover
and Leskovec 2016; Ribeiro, Saverese, and Figueiredo 2017).
The SGA objective consists of softmax terms and NS approximates each term individually. Each softmax term in the
SGA objective is related to a node and one of its neighbors,
which encourages the node and the neighbor be close to each
other and far from all other nodes. There can be many other
nodes, so in each iteration of stochastic gradient descent for
optimizing the objective NS instead takes a small random
sample of nodes, the negative sample, where high degree
nodes are more likely to be chosen. Then the node only needs
to be far from the members of the negative sample.
NS provides a reasonable estimate for each term in the
SGA objective, but we show the accumulative sum of errors
in the estimated terms can lead to embeddings which do not
satisfy the desired properties encouraged by the SGA objective. We also discuss why NS objective is not a proper
objective for network embedding as a separated objective.
Deriving a vertex-level formula for the whole NS objective
allows us to demonstrate theoretically why this problem happens. This phenomenon can cause poor embedding of high
degree nodes, which leads to low-quality embeddings overall. We refer to this as the ”Popular Neighbor Problem” and
explain and analyze its effect in more detail.
This shortcoming of NS motivated us to propose R-NS.
R-NS uses an adaptive negative sampler without changing the
complexity of the algorithm and has a careful design for norm
penalization of the embedding with predetermined penalty
coefficient. We prove R-NS avoids the Popular Neighbor
Problem and illustrate empirically the superiority of R-NS
over NS by comparing the effectiveness of the learned embed-

Many recent network embedding algorithms use negative sampling (NS) to approximate a variant of the computationally
expensive Skip-Gram neural network architecture (SGA) objective. In this paper, we provide theoretical arguments that
reveal how NS can fail to properly estimate the SGA objective,
and why it is not a suitable candidate for the network embedding problem as a distinct objective. We show NS can learn
undesirable embeddings, as the result of the “Popular Neighbor Problem.” We use the theory to develop a new method
“R-NS” that alleviates the problems of NS by using a more
intelligent negative sampling scheme and careful penalization
of the embeddings. R-NS is scalable to large-scale networks,
and we empirically demonstrate the superiority of R-NS over
NS for multi-label classification on a variety of real-world
networks including social networks and language networks.

Introduction
Network embedding aims to reflect the semantic similarity of
network nodes by learning a low dimensional latent representation for each node which assigns similar nodes closer embeddings (Cui et al. 2018). Learning the embeddings can be
achieved in supervised fashion (Yang, Cohen, and Salakhutdinov 2016; Tu et al. 2016; Huang, Li, and Hu 2017b) or via
unsupervised methods (Cao, Lu, and Xu 2016; Lai et al. 2017;
Tu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018). The embeddings can be
used to facilitate tasks such as structural discovery (Ribeiro,
Saverese, and Figueiredo 2017), node classification (Bhagat,
Cormode, and Muthukrishnan 2011), community detection
(Wang et al. 2017), link prediction (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2003), temporal prediction (Sadeghian et al. 2016), and
network visualization (Maaten and Hinton 2008; Shaw and
Jebara 2009). A common practice to embed similar nodes
close to each other is to define a set of neighbors for each
node. These neighborhoods capture similarity between nodes
and translate the problem to embedding neighbors close to
each other. Some proposed neighborhood definitions for a
node include the immediate neighbors as in LINE (Tang et al.
2015); the result of a random walk on the graph as in DeepWalk and Node2Vec (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014;
Grover and Leskovec 2016); and the result of a random walk
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3191

