The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Asynchronous Delay-Aware Accelerated Proximal
Coordinate Descent for Nonconvex Nonsmooth Problems
Ehsan Kazemi,1∗ Liqiang Wang1
1 Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida

ehsan kazemy@knights.ucf.edu, lwang@cs.ucf.edu

Abstract

where each g j can be nonconvex.
Many problems on (1) correspond to convex model that
can be efficiently optimized by first order algorithm, in particular accelerated proximal gradient (APG) methods which
is proven to be efficient for the class of convex functions.
However, many real applications require the problems to be
nonconvex. The nonconvexity might originate either from
function f (x) or the regularization function. This type of
problems is popular in machine learning, for example, sparse
logistic regression (Liu, Chen, and Ye 2009), and sparse
multi-class classification (Blondel, Seki, and Uehara 2013).
On the other hand regarding the nonsmooth regularization
terms, proximal gradient methods often address solving optimization problems with nonsmoothness. The proximal operator is defined as following

Nonconvex and nonsmooth problems have recently attracted
considerable attention in machine learning. However, developing efficient methods for the nonconvex and nonsmooth
optimization problems with certain performance guarantee
remains a challenge. Proximal coordinate descent (PCD) has
been widely used for solving optimization problems, but the
knowledge of PCD methods in the nonconvex setting is very
limited. On the other hand, the asynchronous proximal coordinate descent (APCD) recently have received much attention
in order to solve large-scale problems. However, the accelerated variants of APCD algorithms are rarely studied. In this
paper, we extend APCD method to the accelerated algorithm
(AAPCD) for nonsmooth and nonconvex problems that satisfies the sufficient descent property, by comparing between
the function values at proximal update and a linear extrapolated point using a delay-aware momentum value. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the first to provide stochastic and
deterministic accelerated extension of APCD algorithms for
general nonconvex and nonsmooth problems ensuring that for
both bounded delays and unbounded delays every limit point
is a critical point. By leveraging Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz property, we will show linear and sublinear convergence rates for
the deterministic AAPCD with bounded delays. Numerical
results demonstrate the practical efficiency of our algorithm
in speed.

Proxηg j (y) = arg minm
x ∈R

where η > 0, and ∥·∥ is l 2 -norm. If the proximal operator
does not have an analytic solution, an algorithm should be
used to solve the proximal operator which might be inexact.
In this paper we consider only algorithms which use exact
proximal mapping.
While the new algorithms for problem (1) provide both
good theoretical convergence and empirical performances,
the investigations on them were mainly conducted in the
sequential setting. In the current big data era, we need to design algorithms to deal with very large scale problems (m is
large). In this case, we need to eliminate sequential updates
which usually take too much costly idle time. This necessitates parallel computation which will not use synchronization
to wait for all others and share their updates. Recently asynchronous parallelization have received huge successes due to
its potential to vastly speed up algorithms (Dean et al. 2012;
Recht et al. 2011). We design and analyze an asynchronous
parallel implementations of the accelerated proximal coordinate descent algorithms with bounded and unbounded delays
for nonconvex nonsmooth problems, which is not well studied in the literature, to the best of our knowledge.

Introduction
For many machine learning and data mining applications,
efficiently solving the optimization problem with nonsmooth
regularization is important. In this paper, we focus on the following composite optimization problem of machine learning
model with nonsmooth regularization term as
min F (x) = f (x) + g(x)

x ∈R m

1
∥ x − y∥ 2 + g j (x j )
2η

(1)

where f : Rm → R captures the empire risk which is smooth
and possibly nonconvex, and g : Rm → R, corresponding to
the regularization term, reduces to a finite-sum
m
∑
g(x) =
g j (x j )
(2)

Contributions

j=1

The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows. We first propose the basic stochastic and deterministic
variants of asynchronous accelerated proximal coordinate

∗ Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1528

