The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dynamic Capsule Attention for Visual Question Answering
Yiyi Zhou,1 Rongrong Ji,1∗ Jinsong Su,2 Xiaoshuai Sun,1 Weiqiu Chen1
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Department of Cognitive Science,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Software Engineering, Xiamen University, China
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China

Abstract
CNN

In visual question answering (VQA), recent advances have
well advocated the use of attention mechanism to precisely
link the question to the potential answer areas. As the difficulty of the question increases, more VQA models adopt multiple attention layers to capture the deeper visual-linguistic
correlation. But a negative consequence is the explosion of
parameters, which makes the model vulnerable to over-fitting,
especially when limited training examples are given. In this
paper, we propose an extremely compact alternative to this
static multi-layer architecture towards accurate yet efficient
attention modeling, termed as Dynamic Capsule Attention
(CapsAtt). Inspired by the recent work of Capsule Network,
CapsAtt treats visual features as capsules and obtains the
attention output via dynamic routing, which updates the attention weights by calculating coupling coefficients between
the underlying and output capsules. Meanwhile, CapsAtt also
discards redundant projection matrices to make the model
much more compact. We quantify CapsAtt on three benchmark VQA datasets, i.e., COCO-QA, VQA1.0 and VQA2.0.
Compared to the traditional multi-layer attention model, CapsAtt achieves significant improvements of up to 4.1%, 5.2%
and 2.2% on three datasets, respectively. Moreover, with
much fewer parameters, our approach also yields competitive results compared to the latest VQA models. To further
verify the generalization ability of CapsAtt, we also deploy it
on another challenging multi-modal task of image captioning,
where state-of-the-art performance is achieved with a simple
network structure.

Questions: What is
the man holding?

Fv
fq

LSTM
Feature Extraction

Step 1

Step 1

fq
Step 2

Fv

1st Attention
Layer
F
nd

2 Attention
Layer

Step 3

fq

Fv
F

Step 2

Dynamic
Attention
Layer
Step 3

F

3rd Attention
Layer

...

...

The Traditional
Multi-step Attentions

The Dynamic Capsule
Framework

...

Figure 1: Comparison between the traditional multi-step attention and the proposed Dynamic Capsule Attention (CapsAtt) in Visual Question Answering. The “F” in cycles denotes feature fusions. The left part describes the procedure
of the traditional multi-step attentions, while the right one
depicts the framework of CapsAtt. Visualized attention results are given on two sides.

The principle behind attention mechanism is to mimic the
process of human cognition, assigning limited attention resources to the most relevant information for a given task (Xu
et al. 2015). In VQA, given a question feature, this mechanism forces the model to attend to the visual feature matrix
and generates a probability distribution to denote the importance of each regional feature, based on which a weightedsum vector is output for the answer prediction. As another
appealing property, it requires no additional label information, and its gradient can be derived from the designed objective function (Xu et al. 2015). These advancements have
pushed attention mechanism to various tasks such as neural machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014;
Vaswani et al. 2017), machine comprehension (Xiong and
Socher 2016), and image captioning (Xu et al. 2015) etc.
However, the increasing difficulty of the question often
goes beyond the capacity of a single-step attention. Therefore, recent models resort to multiple attention layers for
capturing the deeper visual-linguistic correlation. (Yang et

Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) has received extensive
research attention in computer vision and artificial intelligence (Antol et al. 2015; Yang et al. 2016). Similar to
other joint learning tasks of vision and language such as
image captioning (IC), the typical setting of VQA involves
the acquisition of correlated visual entities about the textual information. To this end, the attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) has been widely explored
in VQA (Yang et al. 2016; Lu et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2017;
Teney et al. 2018).
∗

Corresponding Author. E-mail:rrji@xmu.edu.cn
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9324

