The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Polynomial-Time Probabilistic Reasoning with Partial
Observations via Implicit Learning in Probability Logics
Brendan Juba∗
Washington University in St. Louis
bjuba@wustl.edu

Abstract

this model (Gogate and Domingos 2011; Domingos and
Webb 2012). The problem lies in the first stage, in the
“structure learning” problem. When the examples are not
fully specified, existing approaches based on ExpectationMaximization (“E-M”) do not scale well (Koller and Friedman 2009, Section 19.4). Although there are a variety of
proposals for learning, for example, models with bounded
tree-width (Narasimhan and Bilmes 2004; Sesh Kumar and
Bach 2013), the networks encountered in practice often do
not feature low tree-width (Chavira and Darwiche 2008). In
a similar spirit, Poon and Domingos (2011) proposed sumproduct networks as an alternative model for probability distributions. While sum-product networks provide some advantages over standard graphical models, ultimately just as
with standard graphical models, structure learning has been
accomplished by using the E-M meta-algorithm over the
model likelihood. Thus, it falls prey to the same issues.

Standard approaches to probabilistic reasoning require that
one possesses an explicit model of the distribution in question. But, the empirical learning of models of probability distributions from partial observations is a problem for which
efficient algorithms are generally not known. In this work
we consider the use of bounded-degree fragments of the
“sum-of-squares” logic as a probability logic. Prior work has
shown that we can decide refutability for such fragments in
polynomial-time. We propose to use such fragments to decide
queries about whether a given probability distribution satisfies a given system of constraints and bounds on expected values. We show that in answering such queries, such constraints
and bounds can be implicitly learned from partial observations in polynomial-time as well. It is known that this logic is
capable of deriving many bounds that are useful in probabilistic analysis. We show here that it furthermore captures key
polynomial-time fragments of resolution. Thus, these fragments are also quite expressive.

In this work we will consider techniques for reasoning
under partial information that bypass the structure learning
problem and indeed the whole framework of probabilistic
graphical models. The structure learning problem under partial information remains out of reach, so what we achieve
will necessarily be incomparable to what can be achieved
given such a graphical model. Instead, we extend probability
logics, e.g., as proposed by Nilsson (1986) or the generalization to expectation proposed by Halpern and Pucella (2007),
in two ways: First, we observe that these logics that only
consider linear inequalities can be strengthened to logics
that consider polynomial inequalities on the support and moments. For this, we will observe that the “sum-of-squares”
(a.k.a., “Positivstellensatz refutation”) logic introduced by
Grigoriev and Vorobjov (2001) can be interpreted as a probability logic, following work by Lasserre (2001) on deciding
whether or not a probability distribution can be consistent
with a given set of moments (aka, “moment problems”). We
note that this logic has a rather powerful polynomial-time
fragment: in addition to being able to derive and use a wide
variety of standard analytic inequalities and represent conditional probability bounds as considered by Grosof (1986),
we also show that these fragments can simulate some of the
strongest fragments of resolution known to be decidable in
polynomial time. And second, we show how learning from
partial examples can be integrated into answering queries
in such a logic using implicit learning (Juba 2013).

Introduction
Most scientific reasoning is probabilistic. It is quite rare for a
conclusion to hold categorically. Informal conclusions such
as “smoking causes cancer” correspond to formally probabilistic claims that the rate of incidence of cancer is higher in
a population of smokers than another in which participants
are forbidden from smoking. Likewise, our knowledge of the
specific cases that comprise a study is almost necessarily incomplete. We are often interested in latent variables, such as
whether or not a patient has a specific disease, that we seek
to infer based on some observed attributes, e.g., the manifested symptoms. Unfortunately, if we do not already understand the processes that connect the observed attributes to
the latent factors of interest, e.g., in the sense of possessing
a probabilistic graphical model (Pearl 1988) of the system,
the situation is quite challenging.
Indeed, the currently dominant approach to reasoning
from data in such problems, as embodied for example by
Markov Logic Networks (Richardson and Domingos 2006),
is to first learn such a probabilistic graphical model, and
then apply weighted model counting on translations of
∗

Supported by NSF Award CCF-1718380.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7866

