The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Skeleton-Based Gesture Recognition Using Several Fully Connected
Layers with Path Signature Features and Temporal Transformer Module
Chenyang Li, Xin Zhang,∗ Lufan Liao, Lianwen Jin, Weixin Yang
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology
eexinzhang@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
The skeleton based gesture recognition is gaining more popularity due to its wide possible applications. The key issues
are how to extract discriminative features and how to design the classification model. In this paper, we first leverage
a robust feature descriptor, path signature (PS), and propose
three PS features to explicitly represent the spatial and temporal motion characteristics, i.e., spatial PS (S PS), temporal PS (T PS) and temporal spatial PS (T S PS). Considering the significance of fine hand movements in the gesture,
we propose an ”attention on hand” (AOH) principle to define joint pairs for the S PS and select single joint for the
T PS. In addition, the dyadic method is employed to extract
the T PS and T S PS features that encode global and local
temporal dynamics in the motion. Secondly, without the recurrent strategy, the classification model still faces challenges
on temporal variation among different sequences. We propose
a new temporal transformer module (TTM) that can match
the sequence key frames by learning the temporal shifting parameter for each input. This is a learning-based module that
can be included into standard neural network architecture. Finally, we design a multi-stream fully connected layer based
network to treat spatial and temporal features separately and
fused them together for the final result. We have tested our
method on three benchmark gesture datasets, i.e., ChaLearn
2016, ChaLearn 2013 and MSRC-12. Experimental results
demonstrate that we achieve the state-of-the-art performance
on skeleton-based gesture recognition with high computational efficiency.

1

Figure 1: The flowchart of our algorithm.
biguity. In this paper, we focus on the skeleton-based isolated hand gestures recognition, that is, one gesture per one
sequence. The key issues are how to extract discriminative
spatial temporal features and how to design the classification
model.
Hand gestures can be quite different among various users
and application scenario. Since human action and hand gesture are similar in terms of motion representation and problem formulation, here we discuss them together. The gesture
recognition framework usually involves the feature description and temporal dependency based classification model.
Traditional skeleton-based action recognition approaches involve hand-crafted feature extraction. The joint trajectory
covariance matrix (Hussein et al. 2013), pairwise relative positions (Wang et al. 2012), 3D joint histogram (Xia, Chen,
and Aggarwal 2012) and Lie group embedding (Vemulapalli, Arrate, and Chellappa 2014) are used to represent the
skeleton sequences. Human-crafted features are straightforward but with limited representative abilities, which usually require the domain knowledge. Recently, convolutional
neural network (CNN) and its extensions are widely used
for feature extraction, like 2D-CNN, 3D-CNN, C3D etc.
C3D (Tran et al. 2015) is a deep 3D convolutional network model based spatial-temporal feature. It is a generic,
compact and implicit representation but requires the largescale training data. Regarding the action temporal dynamics, Fourier temporal pyramid (FTP) (Veeriah, Zhuang, and
Qi 2015) and hidden Markov model (HMM) (Xia, Chen,
and Aggarwal 2012) are used with hand-crafted features. For
the deep learning method, different structures of Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN), e.g., hierarchical RNN (Du, Wang,
and Wang 2015), RNN with regularization (Zhu et al. 2016)
differential RNN (Veeriah, Zhuang, and Qi 2015), two-

Introduction

With the development of intelligent device (e.g., AR, VR
and smart-home devices), hand gesture interaction is attracting more attention because of its wide applications
for human/computer interaction and communications. Hand
gesture recognition is an important and classic problem.
Recently, the accurate vision based pose/skeleton estimation gains more popularity due to cost-effective depth sensor (like Microsoft Kinect and Intel RealSense) and reliable real-time body pose estimation development (Wei et
al. 2016). Comparing with RGB-D sequence based gesture
recognition, the skeleton based methods are robust to illumination changes and view variations, and avoid motion amCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8585

