The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Tagging Address Queries in Maps Search
Shekoofeh Mokhtari,† Ahmad Mahmoody,‡ Dragomir Yankov,‡ Ning Xie†
smokh004@fiu.edu, ahmahmoo@microsoft.com, dragoy@microsoft.com, nxie@fiu.edu
†
Florida International University, Miami, Florida
‡
Microsoft Corporation, Sunnyvale, California

Abstract
Map search is a major vertical in all popular search engines. It
also plays an important role in personal assistants on mobile,
home or desktop devices. A significant fraction of map search
traffic is comprised of “address queries” - queries where either the entire query or some terms in it refer to an address or
part of an address (road segment, intersection etc.). Here we
demonstrate that correctly understanding and tagging address
queries are critical for map search engines to fulfill them. We
describe several recurrent sequence architectures for tagging
such queries. We compare their performance on two subcategories of address queries - single entity (aka single point)
addresses and multi entity (aka multi point) addresses, and
finish by providing guidance on the best practices when dealing with each of these subcategories.

Introduction
Map search has become an integral part of our everyday experience - users search for locations to visit or just for information. On mobile devices Maps are one of the highest
downloaded and used apps (Comscore 2017). One of the
main categories of queries which map search handles is “address queries”. We use this term loosely to indicate a broad
set of address patterns - cases where either the entire query
or part of it contain address reference. The address reference
itself can constitute a complete point address or partial reference to such. Some common address query patterns which
users issue and expect map search to resolve are:
• {123 Main St, San Francisco, CA 94105} - complete point
address query.
• {30 Rockefeller Plaza}, {350 5th Ave, New York} - partial
queries, with city, post code or other information missing.
• {Pennsylvania Ave Washington DC}, {Fremont, Seattle}
- road or neighborhood queries, missing exact address.
• {Quai Branly et Avenue de la Bourdonnais} - intersection
queries.
• {Bakery near Castro Street, Mountain View} - business or
place with road as location reference. Etc.
Address queries are fulfilled by a special search engine
known as geocoder (Berkhin et al. 2015). Similar to web

Figure 1: Depending on the query interpretation the
geocoder may infer different results: Top Possible results for
the query: {Fremont Seattle}. Bottom Possible results for the
query: {Fremont Ave North Seattle}
search engines, geocoders map the terms of the query to certain documents, in this case known as geo entities which are
subsequently formatted and returned as results with their associated latitude and longitude. Unlike web search however,
geocoders are expected to return very limited (usually only
one) results with very high precision. The cost to users for
returning a bad result can be very high. For example, they
may use the result as driving direction and end up in a wrong
place and incur time or other loss. Therefore, having accurate interpretation of address queries is of critical importance
to geocoding and map search in general.
Tagging the terms in an address query correctly turns out
to be a challenging problem. On one hand, it is very dependent on the user language and market, and on the other
hand, even in the same language there might be different
query interpretations that lead to different geocoded results.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9547

