The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

QADiver: Interactive Framework for Diagnosing QA Models
Gyeongbok Lee∗

Sungdong Kim

Seung-won Hwang

Yonsei University and
Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp.
alias n@yonsei.ac.kr

Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp.
sungdong.kim@navercorp.com

Yonsei University
seungwonh@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Question answering (QA) extracting answers from text to the
given question in natural language, has been actively studied
and existing models have shown a promise of outperforming
human performance when trained and evaluated with SQuAD
dataset. However, such performance may not be replicated in
the actual setting, for which we need to diagnose the cause,
which is non-trivial due to the complexity of model. We thus
propose a web-based UI that provides how each model contributes to QA performances, by integrating visualization and
analysis tools for model explanation. We expect this framework can help QA model researchers to refine and improve
their models.

Figure 1: Snapshot of QADiver Framework

Introduction
With the help of large-scale question answering datasets and
deep learning frameworks released to the public, question
answering (QA) models have been improved rapidly as community efforts. Recently, the reported accuracy of state-ofthe-art models has exceeded human performance in SQuAD
task, where plausible answers are extracted for the given
question and context document pair. However, it is still nontrivial to reproduce such accuracy reported in the paper in
production settings.
This paper proposes a diagnosing tool, for troubleshooting the performance gap. For example, is the performance
lower than expected because of the biased training to certain types of questions or texts? Is the model attending to
wrong words for question or text understanding? Is the embedding suitable for the given task? At the same time, there
is a concerning observation that these models can be easily
perturbed by a simple adversarial example added (Jia and
Liang 2017). A desirable tool may support developers to easily perturb training to identify such vulnerability.
We will demonstrate QADiver, a data-centric diagnosing
framework for QA model, with diverse interactive visualization and analysis tools for a full pipeline of the attentionbased QA model. The framework is connected with the target model to retrieve answer span prediction, inner-model

values (such as attention), and no answer probability for
given context and question from the model.
Our framework targets SQuAD 2.0 dataset (Rajpurkar,
Jia, and Liang 2018), a machine reading comprehension
benchmark that contains both answerable and unanswerable
question for given context. In this task, not only finding plausible answer span in context but predicting question is answerable or not is also crucial. By exploring large questionanswer instances, we expect developers can make a better
diagnosis and find insights, than those made from qualitative
observations of a few instances. The demonstration video for
the framework is available in https://youtu.be/V6c8nls6Qcc.

Key Features
Figure 1 shows a snapshot of our system, where the cause
of low accuracy can be diagnosed as one or more of the following problems:

Dataset Bias
Left-sidebar in Figure 1 shows data instances form SQuAD
2.0 development set instances. To support a quick exploration of how such instances are distributed for answers predicted right or wrong, we color each to blue and red respectively. This color code is used for the entire system.
The top right area in Figure 1 shows more detailed statistics about the instance selected: a question, corresponding
context, gold answers and prediction result from the model

∗
This work was done during an internship at Clova AI Research, NAVER.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9861

