The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Comparing Sample-Wise Learnability across Deep Neural Network Models
Seung-Geon Lee,1∗ Jaedeok Kim,2† Hyun-Joo Jung,2 Yoonsuck Choe2,3
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University
1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, Korea, 08826
2
Machine Learning Lab, Artificial Intelligence Center, Samsung Research, Samsung Electronics Co.
56 Seongchon-gil, Secho-gu, Seoul, Korea, 06765
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, 77843, USA

Abstract

our measure to help automatically generate better curricula
for improved performance in DNN training.

Estimating the relative importance of each sample in a training set has important practical and theoretical value, such as
in importance sampling or curriculum learning. This kind of
focus on individual samples invokes the concept of samplewise learnability: How easy is it to correctly learn each
sample (cf. PAC learnability)? In this paper, we approach
the sample-wise learnability problem within a deep learning context. We propose a measure of the learnability of a
sample with a given deep neural network (DNN) model. The
basic idea is to train the given model on the training set, and
for each sample, aggregate the hits and misses over the entire training epochs. Our experiments show that the samplewise learnability measure collected this way is highly linearly correlated across different DNN models (ResNet-20,
VGG-16, and MobileNet), suggesting that such a measure
can provide deep general insights on the data’s properties.
We expect our method to help develop better curricula for
training, and help us better understand the data itself.

Sample-wise Learnability
Let X be a domain of inputs and Y := {1, · · · , L} be the
set of all possible labels. A DNN model is a prediction function f : X → [0, 1]L over X , f (x) := (f1 (x), · · · , fL (x)),
PL
such that l=1 fl (x) = 1 for x ∈ X . During training, the
weights of the DNN model f is updated by an optimizer. So
we denote by f (t) the DNN model after training step t.
We take a sample (Xc , Yc ), a pair of input and label,
from X × Y as our reference. Then f (t) (Xc ) is the prediction of Xc by the DNN model after t training steps and
{f (t) (Xc ), t ≥ 0} can be considered a stochastic process
of predictions (by the DNN Model) of the tagged sample
(Xc , Yc ) during training. If the tagged sample Xc is easily
learnable, in most training steps a model f (t) should correctly predict the true label Yc of the tagged input Xc .
Based on such an intuition, we define the learnability of
an individual sample Xc with respect to a model f as
"
#
T
1 X (t)
Lf (Xc , Yc ) := E
f (Xc )
(1)
T t=1 Yc

Introduction
The performance of DNN models depends heavily on the
quantity and quality of data. Furthermore, the order in which
the data points are sampled during training makes a big difference in the learning outcome, as shown in latest studies in curriculum learning and self-paced learning (Bengio et al. 2009; Jiang et al. 2015). In this paper, we propose the concept of sample-wise learnability: How easy is
it to learn each individual sample, in general, when multiple learning models are considered. Learnability is a well
known concept in computational learning theory. However,
in the PAC-learning framework for example, learnability is
usually defined over a whole concept class, not over individual samples. We show that sample-wise learnability for
a fixed data set, measured using different DNN models, are
strongly linearly correlated. This way, our approach helps
us gain deeper insights into the data itself, and we expect

where T denotes the total number of training steps. Al(t)
though fYc (Xc ) is the probability that the model predicts
the label of Xc as Yc , it is still a random variable since the
model f (t) is evolved randomly due to the randomness in the
initialization and optimization. Eq. 1 is the expected value
over such a quantity {f (t) , t ≥ 0}.
(t)
So, if Xc is easily learnable, the value of fYc (Xc ) increases rapidly to 1 as the training step t increases. Accordingly, the value of Lf (Xc , Yc ) also increases. Otherwise, the
(t)
value of the probability fYc (Xc ) remains small and so does
the value of Lf (Xc , Yc ). We therefore can say that Eq. 1
faithfully represents the learnability of the sample (Xc , Yc ).
Training of a DNN model is considerably affected by the
order in which the samples are drawn and presented to the
model, e.g. as shown in curriculum learning (Jiang et al.
2015). So it is also worthy to consider the relative order
among training samples in terms of the learnability.
Denoted by D := {(X1 , Y1 ), · · · , (XN , YN )} a training
dataset of size N over X × Y. Let Rf,i be the learnability

∗
This work was performed when Seung-Geon Lee, an undergraduate student, worked as a summer intern at Samsung Research
(2018).
†
Corresponding author (05jaedeok@gmail.com)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9961

