The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Two-Stage Label Embedding via Neural
Factorization Machine for Multi-Label Classification
Chen Chen,1,3∗ Haobo Wang,1,3* Weiwei Liu,4 Xingyuan Zhao,1,3 Tianlei Hu,1,3† Gang Chen2,3
1

The Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Computing of Zhejiang Province, China
2
CAD & CG State Key Lab, Zhejiang University, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
4
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, East China Normal University, China
{cc33, wanghaobo, xyzhao1, htl, cg}@zju.edu.cn, liuweiwei863@gmail.com
Abstract

several independent binary classification tasks. However,
these methods fail to exploit label dependency which may
lead to degenerated performance. The key challenging issue for multi-label learning is how to learn the correlations
between labels, and some methods have been developed to
address this issue. For example, Rank-SVM (Elisseeff and
Weston 2001) learns pairwise label interactions and Classifier Chains (Read et al. 2011) exploit high-order label correlations.
Embedding method (Hsu et al. 2009; Cao et al. 2016;
Yang et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2018a) is one of the most popular frameworks to learn label and feature correlations and
has shown promising results. MMOC (Zhang and Schneider
2012) proposes a max margin formulation to produce discriminative and predictable codewords. LM-kNN (Liu and
Tsang 2015) reduces the exponentially large number of constraints in MMOC to linear order by preserving pairwise distances between only the closest (rather than all) label vectors.
Several state-of-the-art techniques (Zhang and Zhou
2006; Wang et al. 2016; Yeh et al. 2017; Nam et al. 2017)
exploit deep neural network (DNN) for MLC. For instance,
BP-MLL (Zhang and Zhou 2006) is one of the earliest methods to use neural network architectures in MLC. Wang et
al. (2016) propose a unified CNN-RNN framework that linearly embeds labels using recurrent neural network (RNN)
to model label dependency. To discover higher-order label correlations, C2AE (Yeh et al. 2017) learns deep latent
spaces by combining DNN and embedding framework. Although DNN brings about inspiring results, it is difficult to
learn high-order correlations directly due to the sparsity of
labels.
To ameliorate this problem, we propose a novel TwoStage Label Embedding (TSLE) paradigm that involves
Neural Factorization Machine (NFM) (He and Chua 2017)
into embedding framework for MLC. In encoding phase, we
introduce a Twin Encoding Network (TEN) to obtain the
codewords. TEN is comprised of two parts: a feature network and a label network. The two networks share a similar
Two-Stage Label Embedding architecture. As a variant of
NFM, TEN involves Factorization Machines (FMs) (Rendle 2012), which demonstrates great promise in prediction
tasks under sparse setting, to learn pairwise interactions in
the first stage. Then it uses deep neural network to learn

Label embedding has been widely used as a method to exploit label dependency with dimension reduction in multilabel classification tasks. However, existing embedding methods intend to extract label correlations directly, and thus they
might be easily trapped by complex label hierarchies. To
tackle this issue, we propose a novel Two-Stage Label Embedding (TSLE) paradigm that involves Neural Factorization
Machine (NFM) to jointly project features and labels into a
latent space. In encoding phase, we introduce a Twin Encoding Network (TEN) that digs out pairwise feature and label
interactions in the first stage and then efficiently learn higherorder correlations with deep neural networks (DNNs) in the
second stage. After the codewords are obtained, a set of hidden layers is applied to recover the output labels in decoding
phase. Moreover, we develop a novel learning model by leveraging a max margin encoding loss and a label-correlation
aware decoding loss, and we adopt the mini-batch Adam to
optimize our learning model. Lastly, we also provide a kernel
insight to better understand our proposed TSLE. Extensive
experiments on various real-world datasets demonstrate that
our proposed model significantly outperforms other state-ofthe-art approaches.

Introduction
Single-label classification (Gong et al. 2015; 2016; Deng et
al. 2018b) is one of the most well-known machine learning
problems, where each instance x is associated with a single
label. However, in many real-world applications, an object
can be associated with multiple labels simultaneously. For
instance, a document may belong to a set of topics such as
finance and news (Liu et al. 2018); a video can be annotated
with government and policy (Liu and Tsang 2017); an image
can be tagged with various keywords like beach and trees
(Liu, Tsang, and Müller 2017).
Many techniques (Schapire and Singer 2000; Zhang and
Zhou 2007) have been proposed to deal with Multi-Label
Classification (MLC) problems. Binary Relevance (BR)
(Tsoumakas, Katakis, and Vlahavas 2010) is one of the most
popular methods which decomposes the multi-label task into
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3304

