The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Embed Sentences Using Attentive Recursive Trees
Jiaxin Shi,1 Lei Hou,1∗ Juanzi Li,1 Zhiyuan Liu,1 Hanwang Zhang2
1

Tsinghua University
Nanyang Technological University
shijx12@gmail.com, {houlei,lijuanzi,liuzy}@tsinghua.edu.cn, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg
2

interesting

Abstract
Sentence embedding is an effective feature representation for
most deep learning-based NLP tasks. One prevailing line of
methods is using recursive latent tree-structured networks to
embed sentences with task-specific structures. However, existing models have no explicit mechanism to emphasize taskinformative words in the tree structure. To this end, we propose an Attentive Recursive Tree model (AR-Tree), where
the words are dynamically located according to their importance in the task. Specifically, we construct the latent tree for
a sentence in a proposed important-first strategy, and place
more attentive words nearer to the root; thus, AR-Tree can
inherently emphasize important words during the bottomup composition of the sentence embedding. We propose an
end-to-end reinforced training strategy for AR-Tree, which is
demonstrated to consistently outperform, or be at least comparable to, the state-of-the-art sentence embedding methods
on three sentence understanding tasks.

movie
The

me

very

to

.

.

The movie is

to me

very interesting

is
(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Two recursive trees for sentence The movie is very
interesting to me. in the sentiment analysis task. Our ARTree (a) is constructed by recursively selecting the most informative word, e.g., interesting. However, other latent trees
(b) are built by composing adjacent pairs, e.g., very interesting captured by (Choi, Yoo, and goo Lee 2017), which lacks
the potential to emphasize words.
along its parsing tree. Tree-structured Long Short-Term
Memory (Tree-LSTM) (Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015;
Zhu, Sobihani, and Guo 2015) is one of the most renowned
variants of TreeRNNs that is shown to be effective in
learning task-specific sentence embeddings (Bowman et al.
2016).
Tree-LSTM models are motivated by the intuition that in
human languages there are complicated hierarchical structures which contain rich semantics. Latent tree models (Yogatama et al. 2016; Maillard, Clark, and Yogatama 2017;
Choi, Yoo, and goo Lee 2017; Williams, Drozdov, and
Bowman 2017) can learn the optimal hierarchical structure,
which may vary from tasks to tasks, without explicit structure annotations. The training signals to parse and embed
sentences are both from certain downstream tasks. Existing
models place all words in leaves equally and build the tree
structure and the sentence embedding by composing adjacent node pairs bottom up (e.g., Figure 1b). This mechanism
prevents the sentence embedding from focusing on the most
informative words, resulting in a performance limitation on
certain tasks (Shi et al. 2018).
To address this issue, we propose an Attentive Recursive
Tree model (AR-Tree) for sentence embedding, which is
a novel framework that incorporates task-specific attention
mechanism into the latent tree structure learning (dos Santos
et al. 2016). AR-Tree represents a sentence as a binary tree

Introduction
Along with the success of representation learning (e.g.,
word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013)), sentence embedding,
which maps sentences into dense real-valued vectors that
represent their semantics, has received much attention. It is
playing a critical role in many applications such as sentiment
analysis (Socher et al. 2013), question answering (Wang and
Nyberg 2015) and entailment recognition (Bowman et al.
2015).
There are three predominant approaches for constructing sentence embeddings. (1) Recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) encode sentences word by word in sequential order (Dai and Le 2015; Hill, Cho, and Korhonen 2016).
(2) Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) produce sentence embeddings in a bottom-up manner, moving from local n-grams to the global sentence as the receptive fields
enlarge (Blunsom, Grefenstette, and Kalchbrenner 2014;
Hu et al. 2014). However, the above two approaches cannot well encode linguistic composition of natural languages
to some extent. (3) The last approach, on which this paper
focuses, exploits tree-structured recursive neural networks
(TreeRNNs) (Socher et al. 2011; 2013) to embed a sentence
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6991

