The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fine-Grained Search Space Classification for
Hard Enumeration Variants of Subset Problems
Juho Lauri, Sourav Dutta
Nokia Bell Labs, Ireland
{juho.lauri, sourav.dutta}@nokia-bell-labs.com

Abstract

Yeger-Lotem et al. 2004), including the detection of proteinprotein interaction complex, clustering protein sequences,
searching for common cis-regulatory elements (Baldwin et
al. 2004), and others (Bomze et al. 1999).
Unfortunately, in the worst case, NP-hard subset problems like maximum clique are inherently complex even for
small datasets and lack scalable algorithms. To make matters worse, high-throughput data typically creates extremely
large graphs in e.g., data mining and computational biology (Eblen et al. 2012). State-of-the-art solvers employ various heuristics that are effective when the input graph has
certain structural properties, but the detection of such structure can be costly in practice. In addition, the solvers are
general purpose, and are unable to exploit information concerning the input distribution.
We argue that practically relevant problem instances typically come from the same distribution due to e.g., human
nature or laws of physics governing the process the input
models. For instance, it is plausible that humans connect in
similar ways on a social network, or that different human
lungs respond similarly to cigarette smoke. Can we augment existing state-of-the-art solvers to cheaply and automatically leverage such information about the input distribution, which we cannot even describe? In particular, can machine learning be used to cheaply detect and exploit structure in practically relevant instances of NP-hard problems
that come from the same distribution?
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first attempt
at using machine learning to reduce the search space of a
computationally difficult enumeration problem.

We propose a simple, powerful, and flexible machine learning
framework for (i) reducing the search space of computationally difficult enumeration variants of subset problems and (ii)
augmenting existing state-of-the-art solvers with informative
cues arising from the input distribution. We instantiate our
framework for the problem of listing all maximum cliques in
a graph, a central problem in network analysis, data mining,
and computational biology. We demonstrate the practicality
of our approach on real-world networks with millions of vertices and edges by not only retaining all optimal solutions,
but also aggressively pruning the input instance size resulting in several fold speedups of state-of-the-art algorithms. Finally, we explore the limits of scalability and robustness of
our proposed framework, suggesting that supervised learning
is viable for tackling NP-hard problems in practice.

1

Introduction

Computationally challenging (i.e., NP-hard) problems are
ubiquitous and arise naturally in several domains like
scheduling, planning, and design and analysis of networks.
In particular, several such important problems are subset
problems: given an input, what is the largest/smallest subset with a particular property? One of the most central of
such problems is the maximum clique problem. In this problem, we are given an undirected graph G, and asked for the
largest subset of vertices that are pairwise adjacent, i.e., form
a clique. An even harder and more general variant of a subset problem is its enumeration variant, in which the goal is
to list all optimal solutions. This variant of the maximum
clique problem is known as the maximum clique enumeration (MCE) problem. Note that we consider the problem of
listing of all maximum cliques and not maximal cliques.
The MCE problem has numerous applications such as social network analysis (Faust and Wasserman 1995), study of
structures in behavioral networks (Bernard, Killworth, and
Sailer 1979), statistical analysis of financial networks (Boginski, Butenko, and Pardalos 2005), and clustering in citation and dynamic networks (Stix 2004). Moreover, MCE
is also closely tied to various applications in computational biology (Abu-Khzam et al. 2005; Eblen et al. 2012;

1.1

Related work

Indirect approaches “Indirect approaches” are unable to
solve hard problem instances themselves, but instead they
augment existing solvers, for problems such as Boolean
satisfiability and mixed-integer programming. In particular,
such methods have been applied in terms of restart strategies (Gomes, Selman, and Kautz 1998; Gomes et al. 2000),
branching heuristics (Liang et al. 2016; He, Daume III, and
Eisner 2014; Khalil et al. 2016), parameter tuning (Hutter
et al. 2009), and algorithm portfolios (Fitzgerald, Malitsky,
and O’Sullivan 2015; Loreggia et al. 2016). In addition, applications of machine learning to discover algorithms have
also been successful (Khalil et al. 2017), but only for small

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2314

