The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Practical Algorithms for Multi-Stage
Voting Rules with Parallel Universes Tiebreaking
Jun Wang, Sujoy Sikdar, Tyler Shepherd
Zhibing Zhao, Chunheng Jiang, Lirong Xia
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th Street, Troy, NY, USA
{wangj38, sikdas, shepht2, zhaoz6, jiangc4}@rpi.edu, xial@cs.rpi.edu
Abstract

Ties do actually occur in real-world votes under STV. On
Preflib (Mattei and Walsh 2013) data, 9.2% of profiles have
more than one PUT-winner under STV. There are two main
motivations for computing all PUT-winners. First, it is vital
in a democracy that the outcome not be decided by an arbitrary or random tiebreaking rule, which will violate the neutrality of the system (Brill and Fischer 2012). Second, even
for the case of a unique PUT-winner, it is important to prove
that the winner is unique despite ambiguity in tiebreaking.
In an election, we would prefer the results to be transparent
about who all the winners could have been.
A similar problem occurs in the Ranked Pairs (RP) rule,
which satisfies many desirable axiomatic properties in social choice (Schulze 2011). The RP procedure considers every pair of alternatives and builds a ranking by selecting the
pairs with largest victory margins. This continues until every pair is evaluated, the winner being the candidate which
is ranked above all others by this procedure (Tideman 1987).
Like in STV, ties can occur, and the order in which pairs are
evaluated can result in different winners. Unfortunately, like
STV, it is NP-complete to compute all PUT-winners under
RP (Brill and Fischer 2012).
More generally, the tiebreaking problem exists for a larger
class of voting rules called multi-stage voting rules. These
rules eliminate alternatives in multiple rounds, and the difference is in the elimination methods. For example, in each
round, Baldwin’s rule eliminates the alternative with the
smallest Borda score, and Coombs eliminates the alternative with highest veto score. Like STV and RP, computing all PUT winners is NP-complete for these multi-stage
rules (Mattei, Narodytska, and Walsh 2014).
To the best of our knowledge, no algorithm beyond bruteforce search is known for computing PUT-winners under
STV, RP, and other multi-stage voting rules. Given its importance as discussed above, the question we address in this
paper is:
How can we design efficient, practical algorithms for
computing PUT-winners under multi-stage voting rules?

STV and ranked pairs (RP) are two well-studied voting rules
for group decision-making. They proceed in multiple rounds,
and are affected by how ties are broken in each round. However, the literature is surprisingly vague about how ties should
be broken. We propose the first algorithms for computing
the set of alternatives that are winners under some tiebreaking mechanism under STV and RP, which is also known
as parallel-universes tiebreaking (PUT). Unfortunately, PUTwinners are NP-complete to compute under STV and RP, and
standard search algorithms from AI do not apply. We propose
multiple DFS-based algorithms along with pruning strategies, heuristics, sampling and machine learning to prioritize
search direction to significantly improve the performance. We
also propose novel ILP formulations for PUT-winners under
STV and RP, respectively. Experiments on synthetic and realworld data show that our algorithms are overall faster than
ILP.

1

Introduction

The Single Transferable Vote (STV) rule1 is among the most
popular voting rules used in real-world elections. According
to Wikipedia, STV is being used to elect senators in Australia, city councils in San Francisco (CA, USA) and Cambridge (MA, USA), and more (Wikipedia 2018). In each
round of STV, the lowest preferred alternative is eliminated,
in the end leaving only one alternative, the winner, remaining.
This raises the question: when two or more alternatives
are tied for last place, how should we break ties to eliminate an alternative? The literature provides no clear answer. For example, see (O’Neill 2011) for a list of different
STV tiebreaking variants. While the STV winner is unique
and easy to compute for a fixed tiebreaking mechanism, it
is NP-complete to compute all winners under all tiebreaking mechanisms. This way of defining winners is called
parallel-universes tiebreaking (PUT) (Conitzer, Rognlie, and
Xia 2009), and we will therefore call them PUT-winners in
this paper.

Our Contributions. Our main contributions are the first
practical algorithms to compute the PUT-winners for multistage voting rules: a depth-first-search (DFS) framework and
integer linear programming (ILP) formulations.
In our DFS framework, the nodes in the search tree rep-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
STV is also known as instant runoff voting, alternative vote,
or ranked choice voting.

2189

