The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Meta-Descent for Online, Continual Prediction
Andrew Jacobsen,1 Matthew Schlegel,1 Cameron Linke,1
Thomas Degris,2 Adam White,1,3 Martha White1
1

University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada,
2
Google DeepMind, London, UK
3
Google DeepMind, Edmonton, Canada
ajjacobs@ualberta.ca, mkschleg@ualberta.ca, clinke@ualberta.ca
thomas.degris@gmail.com, amw8@ualberta.ca, whitem@ualberta.ca
Abstract

to changes in the agent’s own behaviour, the targets may
change and the agent must refine its predictions. 1
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a natural choice for
our setting because gradient descent methods work well
when paired with abundant training data. The performance
of SGD is dependent on the step-size parameter (scalar, vector or matrix), which scales the gradient to mitigate sample
variance and improve data efficiency. Most modern largescale learning systems make use of optimization algorithms
that attempt to approximate stochastic second-order gradient descent to adjust both the direction and magnitude of
the descent direction, with early work indicating the benefits of such quasi-second order methods if used carefully
in the stochastic case (Schraudolph, Yu, and Günter 2007;
Bordes, Bottou, and Gallinari 2009). Many of these algorithms attempt to approximate the diagonal of the inverse
Hessian, which describes the curvature of the loss function,
and so maintain a vector of step-sizes—one for each parameter. Starting from AdaGrad (McMahan and Streeter 2010;
Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011), several diagonal approximations have been proposed, including RmsProp (Tieleman
and Hinton 2012), AdaDelta (Zeiler 2012), vSGD (Schaul,
Zhang, and LeCun 2013), Adam (Kingma and Ba 2015)
and AmsGrad (Reddi, Kale, and Kumar 2018). Stochastic
quasi-second order updates have been derived specifically
for temporal difference learning, with some empirical success (Meyer et al. 2014), particularly in terms of parameter sensitivity (Pan, White, and White 2017; Pan, Azer, and
White 2017). On the other hand, second order methods, by
design, assume the loss and thus Hessian are fixed, and so
non-stationary dynamics or drifting targets could be problematic.
A related family of optimization algorithms, called metadescent algorithms, were developed for continual, online prediction problems. These algorithms perform metagradient descent adapting a vector of step-size parameters
to minimize the error of the base learner, instead of approx-

This paper investigates different vector step-size adaptation
approaches for non-stationary online, continual prediction
problems. Vanilla stochastic gradient descent can be considerably improved by scaling the update with a vector of appropriately chosen step-sizes. Many methods, including AdaGrad, RMSProp, and AMSGrad, keep statistics about the
learning process to approximate a second order update—a
vector approximation of the inverse Hessian. Another family
of approaches use meta-gradient descent to adapt the stepsize parameters to minimize prediction error. These metadescent strategies are promising for non-stationary problems,
but have not been as extensively explored as quasi-second
order methods. We first derive a general, incremental metadescent algorithm, called AdaGain, designed to be applicable
to a much broader range of algorithms, including those with
semi-gradient updates or even those with accelerations, such
as RMSProp. We provide an empirical comparison of methods from both families. We conclude that methods from both
families can perform well, but in non-stationary prediction
problems the meta-descent methods exhibit advantages. Our
method is particularly robust across several prediction problems, and is competitive with the state-of-the-art method on a
large-scale, time-series prediction problem on real data from
a mobile robot.

Introduction
In this paper we consider continual, non-stationary prediction problems. Consider a learning system whose objective
is to learn a large collection of predictions about an agent’s
future interactions with the world. The predictions specify
the value of some signal many steps in the future, given that
the agent follows some specific course of action. There are
many examples of such prediction learning systems including Predictive State Representations (Littman, Sutton, and
Singh 2001), Observable Operator Models (Jaeger 2000),
Temporal-difference Networks (Sutton and Tanner 2004),
and General Value Functions (Sutton et al. 2011). In our
setting, the agent continually interacts with the world, making new predictions about the future, and revising its previous predictions as new outcomes are revealed. Occasionally, partially due to changes in the world and partially due

1

We exclude recent meta-learning frameworks (MAML (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017), LTLGDGD (Andrychowicz et al.
2016)) because they assume access to a collection of tasks that can
be sampled independently, enabling the agent to learn how to select meta-parameters for a new problem. In our setting, the agent
must solve a large collection of non-stationary prediction problems
in parallel using off-policy learning methods.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3943

