The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Residual Compensation Networks for Heterogeneous Face Recognition
Zhongying Deng,* Xiaojiang Peng,∗ Yu Qiao†
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China 518055
{zy.deng1, xj.peng, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract

2014b; 2014a; Wen et al. 2016). Compared to hand-crafted
features, CNN learned from large scale datasets extracts
more discriminative features which describe the highly nonlinear relationship of different modalities. Therefore, some
researchers introduce CNN to deal with the HFR problem and achieve impressive performance (Hu et al. 2017;
Wu et al. 2017; Sarfraz and Stiefelhagen 2015; He et al.
2017). Though CNN has shown superior performance compared to traditional features, it may easily over-fit on small
scale HFR datasets with naive training schemes. In addition,
extracting features with a generic face CNN model for both
NIR/Sketch and VIS images may still suffer modal discrepancy since all the parameters are shared while the inputs are
of different modalities.
To prevent the target CNN model from over-fitting, Hu
et al. (Hu et al. 2018) propose a synthetic data augmentation method to exponentially enlarge HFR datasets. Wu et
al. (Wu et al. 2017) propose a coupled deep learning (CDL)
approach which leverages a relevance constraint and a triplet
loss to alleviate over-fitting and reduce modal difference.
Several other methods utilize metric learning and generative
networks for the two issues of HFR (Saxena and Verbeek
2016; He et al. 2017). Overall, these methods use a generic
face CNN model to learn modality-invariant features which
can be seen as to project different modal images into a common subspace.
In this paper, instead of using a generic CNN model,
we propose a new two-branch network architecture, termed
as Residual Compensation Networks (RCN), to learn separated features for different modalities in HFR. In our RCN,
based on a well-trained backbone face CNN model from one
modality with rich training data, we add a Residual Compensation (RC) module for the other modality, and tune it
with an extra Modal Discrepancy loss (MD loss). The RCN
tackles over-fitting by fixing the backbone face CNN model
and tuning a light RC module for the other modality, and alleviates modal discrepancy by the RC module and the MD
loss. Take the NIR-VIS task for example, we first train a VIS
face CNN model on public available large VIS datasets, and
then fix it for the VIS branch while add a RC module after the feature layer for the NIR branch, and finally tune the
RC module with the MD loss and the cross-entropy loss on
paired NIR-VIS face images with the same identities.
With a two-branch architecture, our RCN owns several

Heterogeneous Face Recognition (HFR) is a challenging task
due to large modality discrepancy as well as insufficient training images in certain modalities. In this paper, we propose
a new two-branch network architecture, termed as Residual
Compensation Networks (RCN), to learn separated features
for different modalities in HFR. The RCN incorporates a
residual compensation (RC) module and a modality discrepancy loss (MD loss) into traditional convolutional neural networks. The RC module reduces modal discrepancy by adding
compensation to one of the modalities so that its representation can be close to the other modality. The MD loss alleviates modal discrepancy by minimizing the cosine distance
between different modalities. In addition, we explore different architectures and positions for the RC module, and evaluate different transfer learning strategies for HFR. Extensive
experiments on IIIT-D Viewed Sketch, Forensic Sketch, CASIA NIR-VIS 2.0 and CUHK NIR-VIS show that our RCN
outperforms other state-of-the-art methods significantly.

Introduction
Heterogeneous face recognition (HFR) mainly focuses on
identifying a person from face images with different modalities such as photos versus sketches or near-infrared (NIR)
versus visual (VIS) images. Owing to its promising applications in surveillance and law enforcement agencies, HFR
has attracted increasing attention recently (Wu et al. 2017;
Song et al. 2017; He et al. 2017). Though great progress has
been made, it is still a challenging problem due to insufficient training samples and the large modal discrepancy.
With limited training data, many early works (Liao et al.
2009; Klare, Li, and Jain 2011; Li et al. 2016) address heterogeneous face recognition based on hand-crafted features.
To reduce modal discrepancy, they mainly project face features of different modalities into latent common subspace.
Nonetheless, hand-crafted features based methods gradually
reach a bottleneck because hand-crafted features are with
limited representation capability.
Recently, new breakthrough marked by deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) has been made in various visual tasks including face recognition (Sun, Wang, and Tang
∗

Z. Deng and X. Peng contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8239

