The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Probabilistic Logic Programming with Beta-Distributed Random Variables∗
Federico Cerutti

Lance Kaplan

Angelika Kimmig

Murat Şensoy

Cardiff University
Cardiff
UK

Army Research Laboratory
Adelphi, MD
USA

Cardiff University
Cardiff
UK

Özyeǧin University
Istanbul
Turkey

Abstract

Faithfully capturing the distribution of the probabilities
of such queries is necessary for effective decision making
under uncertainty to compute an expected utility (Von Neumann and Morgenstern 2007). Often such distributions are
learned from prior experiences that can be provided either
by subject matter experts or by objective recordings.
Unfortunately, these probability distributions can be
highly uncertain and this significantly affects decision making (Anderson, Hare, and Maskell 2016; Antonucci, Karlsson, and Sundgren 2014). In fact, not all scenarios are
blessed with a substantial amount of data enabling reasonable characterisation of probability distributions. For instance, when dealing with adversarial behaviours such as
policing operations, training data is sparse or subject matter
experts have limited experience to elicit the probabilities.
To understand and accurately manipulate such probability distributions, we need a well-defined theoretical framework that is provided by the Beta distribution, which specifies a distribution of probabilities representing all the possible values of a probability when the exact value is unknown. This has been recently investigated in the context of
singly-connected Bayesian Network, in an approach named
Subjective Bayesian Network (SBN) (Ivanovska et al. 2015;
Kaplan and Ivanovska 2016; 2018), that shows higher performance against other traditional approaches dealing with
uncertain probabilities, such as Dempster-Shafer Theory of
Evidence (Dempster 1968; Smets 1993), and replacing single probability values with closed intervals representing the
possible range of probability values (Zaffalon and Fagiuoli
1998). SBN is based on Subjective Logic (Jøsang 2016)
(Section 2.2) that provides an alternative, more intuitive,
representation of Beta distributions as well as a calculus for
manipulating them. Subjective logic has been successfully
applied in a variety of domains, from trust and reputation
(Jøsang, Hayward, and Pope 2006), to urban water management (Moglia, Sharma, and Maheepala 2012), to assessing
the confidence of neural networks for image classification
(Sensoy, Kaplan, and Kandemir 2018).
In this paper, we enable aProbLog (Kimmig, Van den
Broeck, and De Raedt 2011) to reason in presence of uncertain probabilities represented as Beta distribution. Among
other features, aProbLog is freely available1 and it directly

We enable aProbLog—a probabilistic logical programming
approach—to reason in presence of uncertain probabilities represented as Beta-distributed random variables. We
achieve the same performance of state-of-the-art algorithms
for highly specified and engineered domains, while simultaneously we maintain the flexibility offered by aProbLog
in handling complex relational domains. Our motivation is
that faithfully capturing the distribution of probabilities is
necessary to compute an expected utility for effective decision making under uncertainty: unfortunately, these probability distributions can be highly uncertain due to sparse data. To
understand and accurately manipulate such probability distributions we need a well-defined theoretical framework that is
provided by the Beta distribution, which specifies a distribution of probabilities representing all the possible values of a
probability when the exact value is unknown.

1

Introduction

In the last years, several probabilistic variants of Prolog have
been developed, such as ICL (Poole 2000), Dyna (Eisner,
Goldlust, and Smith 2005), PRISM (Sato and Kameya 2001)
and ProbLog (De Raedt, Kimmig, and Toivonen 2007), with
its aProbLog extension (Kimmig, Van den Broeck, and De
Raedt 2011) to handle arbitrary labels from a semiring (Section 2.1). They all are based on definite clause logic (pure
Prolog) extended with facts labelled with probability values.
Their meaning is typically derived from Sato’s distribution
semantics (Sato 1995), which assigns a probability to every
literal. The probability of a Herbrand interpretation, or possible world, is the product of the probabilities of the literals
occurring in this world. The success probability is the probability that a query succeeds in a randomly selected world.
∗
This research was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory and the U.K. Ministry of Defence under Agreement Number W911NF-16-3-0001. The views and conclusions contained in
this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied,
of the U.S. Army Research Laboratory, the U.S. Government,
the U.K. Ministry of Defence or the U.K. Government. The U.S.
and U.K. Governments are authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright
notation hereon.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

7769

https://dtai.cs.kuleuven.be/problog/

