The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Oversampling for Imbalanced Data via Optimal Transport
Yuguang Yan,1,2∗† Mingkui Tan,1∗ Yanwu Xu,3∗
Jiezhang Cao,1 Michael Ng,4 Huaqing Min,1 Qingyao Wu1‡
1

School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
CVTE Research, Guangzhou Shiyuan Electronics Co., Ltd., China
3
Artificial Intelligence Innovation Business, Baidu Inc., China
4
Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
{yan.yuguang,secaojiezhang}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {mingkuitan,qyw,hqmin}@scut.edu.cn,
xuyanwu@baidu.com, mng@math.hkbu.edu.hk
Abstract

becomes even worse in medical diagnosis, since misclassifying an abnormal one is much severer than misclassifying
a normal one, which will delay the medical treatment.
To alleviate the imbalanced issue, several kinds of algorithms have been proposed in the last decades. Among these
methods, oversampling attracts much attention because of
its simplicity and efficacy (Fernández et al. 2018). Oversampling aims to synthesize minority class samples to balance
the numbers of different classes, so that standard machine
learning methods can be performed on the augmented data
set. Oversampling methods usually synthesize new samples
based on a minority class sample and its nearest neighbors.
However, they barely consider global geometric information
in the distribution of minority class samples, and thus may
incur distribution mismatching between real and synthetic
samples obtained by oversampling methods.
In this paper, we aim to exploit global geometric information of data to oversample minority class samples via optimal transport (Villani 2008). Motivated by this, we propose a novel oversampling method called Optimal Transport
for OverSampling (OTOS), which applies optimal transport
to synthesize samples that follow a similar distribution to
the one of minority class samples. Specifically, we move
random points from a prior distribution to that of minority
class samples, as shown in Figure 1, so that the transported
samples can be taken as synthetic minority class data for
training. In addition, we introduce a regularization based on
the transported samples for optimal transport, and leverage
loss information to concentrate more on those minority class
samples close to the decision boundary.
We apply a projected gradient method to optimize the resultant constrained problem, and conduct extensive experiments on both toy and real-world data sets, including benchmark data from LIBSVM1 and medical image data. Multiple metrics regarding imbalanced learning are adopted to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.
The principal contributions are summarized as follows:

The issue of data imbalance occurs in many real-world applications especially in medical diagnosis, where normal cases
are usually much more than the abnormal cases. To alleviate
this issue, one of the most important approaches is the oversampling method, which seeks to synthesize minority class
samples to balance the numbers of different classes. However, existing methods barely consider global geometric information involved in the distribution of minority class samples, and thus may incur distribution mismatching between
real and synthetic samples. In this paper, relying on optimal
transport (Villani 2008), we propose an oversampling method
by exploiting global geometric information of data to make
synthetic samples follow a similar distribution to that of minority class samples. Moreover, we introduce a novel regularization based on synthetic samples and shift the distribution of minority class samples according to loss information.
Experiments on toy and real-world data sets demonstrate the
efficacy of our proposed method in terms of multiple metrics.

Introduction
The imbalanced data issue occurs in many real-world applications, where the samples of one class are much more
than samples of other classes (He and Garcia 2008; Branco,
Torgo, and Ribeiro 2016; Lin et al. 2018; González et al.
2019). Especially in the area of medical diagnosis, the abnormal samples with a disease are expensive and difficult
to collect, while normal samples are much easier to obtain.
As a result, we usually face an imbalanced learning problem where normal samples are much more than the abnormal ones (Bhattacharya, Rajan, and Shrivastava 2017).
Standard machine learning methods usually focus on reducing loss over the whole training data set. These methods usually pay more attention to the training loss on majority class samples while omitting the minority class samples, thus fail to achieve promising performance. This issue
∗

The co-first author.
This work was done when Yuguang Yan was an intern at Medical Image and Signal Processing Group, CVTE Research.
‡
The corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We exploit global geometric information of data via optimal transport to guarantee distribution matching between
synthetic and real minority class samples.

†

1

5605

https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvmtools/datasets

