The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Neural Networks Constrained by Decision Rules
Yuzuru Okajima, Kunihiko Sadamasa
NEC Corporation
1753 Shimonumabe, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 211-8666, Japan
y-okajima@bu.jp.nec.com, k-sadamasa@az.jp.nec.com

Abstract

to interpret. This lack of interpretability could hinder practical use of neural networks in real-world applications; thus,
many techniques to give post-hoc explanations of the decisions of deep neural networks have been proposed (Montavon, Samek, and Müller 2018). As for these approaches, an
explanation of a decision made by a trained neural network
is generated by analyzing input features relevant to the decisions (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013; Bach et al.
2015) or approximating the behavior of the neural network
with simpler models (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016;
Zilke, Loza Mencı́a, and Janssen 2016).
On the other hand, the growing interest in interpretability has also brought renewed attention to rule-based models.
The high computational power of modern processors has
enabled non-greedy optimization of decision lists (Letham
et al. 2015; Wang and Rudin 2015; Angelino et al. 2017;
Yang, Rudin, and Seltzer 2017). Such optimized decision
lists are highly interpretable and achieve better accuracy
than traditional rule-based models for several datasets. Despite the recent improvement of rule-based models, however,
they are less accurate than uninterpretable models because
they cannot exploit the power of uninterpretable features.
In this study, which aims to balance the accuracy of neural
networks and the interpretability of decision rules, we propose a new model called a rule-constrained network (RCN).
RCNs are neural networks trained to make decisions by selecting decision rules. Given an observed instance, the RCNs
do not directly predict its class label; instead, they select a
decision rule from a given decision rule set so that the observation satisfies the antecedent of the rule and the consequent
gives a high probability to the correct class. An attention
mechanism using latent representations of rules is incorporated into the RCN to exploit similarity between rules and
to reduce the number of parameters. In addition, we propose
a method for optimizing the rule set from which the neural
networks select a rule. The optimization is achieved by combining a RCN with a rule-sampling model that models the
ruleset size and the probabilities of the rules being sampled.
An advantage of RCNs is that the decisions are confined
within the reach of the decision rules. For every decision, a
RCN is forced to select one rule that supports the decision.
Thus, any decisions that cannot be justified by decision rules
are never output. This guarantee of the existence of supporting rules is a feature of RCNs in contrast to post-hoc ex-

Deep neural networks achieve high predictive accuracy by
learning latent representations of complex data. However, the
reasoning behind their decisions is difficult for humans to understand. On the other hand, rule-based approaches are able
to justify the decisions by showing the decision rules leading to them, but they have relatively low accuracy. To improve the interpretability of neural networks, several techniques provide post-hoc explanations of decisions made by
neural networks, but they cannot guarantee that the decisions
are always explained in a simple form like decision rules because their explanations are generated after the decisions are
made by neural networks.
In this paper, to balance the accuracy of neural networks and
the interpretability of decision rules, we propose a hybrid
technique called rule-constrained networks, namely, neural
networks that make decisions by selecting decision rules from
a given ruleset. Because the networks are forced to make
decisions based on decision rules, it is guaranteed that every decision is supported by a decision rule. Furthermore,
we propose a technique to jointly optimize the neural network and the ruleset from which the network select rules.
The log likelihood of correct classifications is maximized
under a model with hyper parameters about the ruleset size
and the prior probabilities of rules being selected. This feature makes it possible to limit the ruleset size or prioritize
human-made rules over automatically acquired rules for promoting the interpretability of the output. Experiments on
datasets of time-series and sentiment classification showed
rule-constrained networks achieved accuracy as high as that
achieved by original neural networks and significantly higher
than that achieved by existing rule-based models, while presenting decision rules supporting the decisions.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved great success when applied to a wide variety of tasks. Their high predictive accuracy stems from their ability to learn latent representations
automatically from complex input data. However, the success of deep neural networks has renewed interest and discussion on their long-standing problem: “uninterpretability.”
While the decisions of neural networks are highly accurate,
the reasons behind their decisions are difficult for humans
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2496

