The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CAPNet: Continuous Approximation Projection for
3D Point Cloud Reconstruction Using 2D Supervision
K. L. Navaneet,* Priyanka Mandikal,* Mayank Agarwal, R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, CDS, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
navaneetl@iisc.ac.in, priyanka.mandikal@gmail.com, mayankgrwl97@gmail.com, venky@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

The information needed to perceive the 3D structure is provided by surface voxels, while the voxels within the volume
increase the representational and computational complexity
with minimal addition in information. 3D point clouds are a
more efficient alternative, since the points are sampled on
the surface of the object. However, lack of grid structure
and permutation invariance properties of point clouds pose
challenges in their processing. Recent works address these
issues using point cloud specific architectures and loss formulations (?; ?; ?; ?; ?).
In the case of 3D voxel-based approaches, the projection
is obtained via a transformation between two grid representations and hence can be performed by simple interpolation operations (?). Point clouds, however, pose two important challenges: (1) Firstly, projecting low density point
clouds using conventional interpolation techniques can result in projections with holes. Generating high density point
clouds requires higher memory and computational power.
(2) Secondly, the process of obtaining the projections by discretizing the point cloud is a non-differentiable operation. To
address both these issues, we propose a continuous approximation of points in the point cloud which produces smooth
projections in a differentiable manner.
However, a sparse projection map results in very low gradients in regions where no point is projected, which leads
to outlier points. We propose a novel loss function, termed
Affinity Loss, to enforce effective flow of gradients in such
situations, resulting in cleaner and better reconstructions.
Since 2D observations like foreground masks can be obtained from the input image, projection based approaches
provide a unique opportunity for optimization on the test
data. Given a test image, the point cloud obtained using
a pre-trained networked can be modified to exactly match
the corresponding mask. We introduce such a set-up and
obtain more accurate reconstructions with improved correspondence to the input image.
To summarize, we make the following key contributions:

Knowledge of 3D properties of objects is a necessity in order
to build effective computer vision systems. However, lack of
large scale 3D datasets can be a major constraint for datadriven approaches in learning such properties. We consider
the task of single image 3D point cloud reconstruction, and
aim to utilize multiple foreground masks as our supervisory
data to alleviate the need for large scale 3D datasets. A novel
differentiable projection module, called ‘CAPNet’, is introduced to obtain such 2D masks from a predicted 3D point
cloud. The key idea is to model the projections as a continuous approximation of the points in the point cloud. To overcome the challenges of sparse projection maps, we propose
a loss formulation termed ‘affinity loss’ to generate outlierfree reconstructions. We significantly outperform the existing projection based approaches on a large-scale synthetic
dataset. We show the utility and generalizability of such a
2D supervised approach through experiments on a real-world
dataset, where lack of 3D data can be a serious concern. To
further enhance the reconstructions, we also propose a test
stage optimization procedure to obtain reconstructions that
display high correspondence with the observed input image.

Introduction
3D Reconstruction from images is a key challenge in the
field of computer vision. While deep learning based approaches have achieved exceptional results in various computer vision tasks (?; ?; ?; ?), the capability of such approaches is limited by the amount of data available. Obtaining large scale 3D data of objects can be expensive
and time-consuming. In contrast, capturing 2D data (image,
foreground mask etc.) from multiple view points is relatively
easy. We consider the task of single image 3D point cloud
reconstruction and aim to utilize such 2D observations in
place of point clouds as our supervisory data. Towards this
end, we propose a novel differentiable projection module to
obtain the 2D observations from the predicted points.
The nature of the projection module is dependent on our
choice of the 3D representation. Unlike 2D images, where
all the pixels add rich spatial and structural information, volumetric representations suffer from sparsity of information.

• We propose CAPNet, a continuous approximation projection module for a differentiable and accurate rendering of
3D point clouds, to enable weakly supervised 3D object
reconstruction. The proposed rendering module generates
smooth, artifact-free projections, while also overcoming
the lack of gradients that can exist in a naive discretization based approach.

* equal contribution
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8819

