The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Neural Machine Translation with Adequacy-Oriented Learning
Xiang Kong

Zhaopeng Tu∗

Carnegie Mellon University
xiangk@andrew.cmu.edu

Tencent AI Lab
zptu@tencent.com

Shuming Shi

Eduard Hovy

Tong Zhang

Tencent AI Lab
shumingshi@tencent.com

Carnegie Mellon University
hovy@cs.cmu.edu

Tencent AI Lab
bradymzhang@tencent.com

Abstract

2. Word-level loss (Shen et al. 2016): Likelihood is defined
at word-level, which might hardly correlate well with
sequence-level evaluation metrics like BLEU.

Although Neural Machine Translation (NMT) models have
advanced state-of-the-art performance in machine translation,
they face problems like the inadequate translation. We attribute this to that the standard Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) cannot judge the real translation quality due to
its several limitations. In this work, we propose an adequacyoriented learning mechanism for NMT by casting translation as a stochastic policy in Reinforcement Learning (RL),
where the reward is estimated by explicitly measuring translation adequacy. Benefiting from the sequence-level training
of RL strategy and a more accurate reward designed specifically for translation, our model outperforms multiple strong
baselines, including (1) standard and coverage-augmented attention models with MLE-based training, and (2) advanced
reinforcement and adversarial training strategies with rewards
based on both word-level BLEU and character-level CHR F3.
Quantitative and qualitative analyses on different language
pairs and NMT architectures demonstrate the effectiveness
and universality of the proposed approach.

3. Focusing more on fluency than adequacy (Tu et al. 2017):
Likelihood does not measure how well the complete
source information is transformed to the target side, thus
does not correlate well with translation adequacy. Adequacy metric is regularly employed to assess the translation quality in practice.
Some recent work partially alleviates one or two of the
above problems with advanced training strategies. For example, the first two problems are tackled by sequence
level training using the REINFORCE algorithm (Ranzato
et al. 2016; Bahdanau et al. 2017), minimum risk training (Shen et al. 2016), beam search optimization (Wiseman
and Rush 2016) or adversarial learning (Wu et al. 2017;
Yang et al. 2018). The last problem can be alleviated by introducing an auxiliary reconstruction-based training objective to measure translation adequacy (Tu et al. 2017).
In this work, we aim to fully solve all the three problems
in a unified framework. Specifically, we model the translation as a stochastic policy in Reinforcement Learning (RL)
and directly perform gradient policy update. The RL reward is estimated on a complete sequence produced by the
NMT model, which is able to correlate well with a sequencelevel task-specific metric. To explicitly measure translation
adequacy, we propose a novel metric called Coverage Difference Ratio (C DR) which is calculated by counting how
many source words are under-translated via directly comparing generated translation with human translation. Benefiting from the sequence-level training of RL strategy and a
more accurate reward designed specifically for translation,
the proposed approach is able to alleviate all the aforementioned limitations of MLE-based training.
We conduct experiments on Chinese⇒English and
German⇔English translation tasks, using both the RNNbased NMT model (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015)
and the recently proposed T RANSFORMER (Vaswani et
al. 2017). The consistent improvements across language
pairs and NMT architectures demonstrate the effectiveness and universality of the proposed approach. The proposed adequacy-oriented learning improves translation performance not only over a standard attention model, but

Introduction
During the past several years, rapid progress has been made
in the field of Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom 2013; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le
2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Gehring et al.
2017; Wu et al. 2016; Vaswani et al. 2017).
Although NMT models have advanced the community,
they still face inadequate translation problems: one or multiple parts of the input sentence are not translated (Tu et al.
2016). We attribute this problem to the lack of the mechanism to guarantee the generated translation being as sufficient as human translation. NMT models are generally
trained in an end-to-end manner to maximize the likelihood
of the output sentence. Maximum Likelihood Estimation
(MLE), however, could not judge the real quality of generated translation due to its several limitations
1. Exposure bias (Ranzato et al. 2016): The models are
trained on the groundtruth data distribution, but at test
time are used to generate target words based on previous
model predictions, which can be erroneous;
∗
Zhaopeng Tu is the corresponding author. Work was mainly
done when Xiang Kong was interning at Tencent AI Lab.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6618

