The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Analyzing Compositionality-Sensitivity of NLI Models
Yixin Nie,* Yicheng Wang,* Mohit Bansal
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{yixin1, yicheng, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

al. (2017); Gong, Luo, and Zhang (2017); Ghaeini et al.
(2018); Parikh et al. (2016); Wang, Hamza, and Florian
(2017), all achieving near human-level performance on standard datasets.
Despite their high performance, it is unclear if these models employ semantic understanding of natural language to
classify these pairs, or are simply performing word/phraselevel pattern matching. We first conduct investigative experiments with rule-based adversaries and show empirically
that seven state-of-the-art NLI models, spanning a variety
of architectures, are all unable to recognize simple semantic differences when the word-level information remains unchanged (e.g., the swapping of the subject and object or the
addition of the same modifier to different governors).1 Their
failure on these examples contrasts sharply with their high
performance on the standard evaluation set, indicating that
standard evaluation does not sufficiently assess sentencelevel understanding.
Next, to further show the insufficiency of standard evaluation for testing compositional understanding, we conduct
two additional experiments in which the compositional information is removed or diluted. Firstly, we train and evaluate the state-of-the-art models with their RNNs replaced
by fully-connected layers. Secondly, we train these models
with input words shuffled and evaluate them on the original evaluation datasets. In both of the experiments, models
are still able to achieve high performance on the standard
evaluation datasets, demonstrating that standard evaluation
is unable to sufficiently separate models with compositionality understanding capabilities from those without.
We also show the limitation of adversarial evaluation setups by demonstrating their narrow scope: each type of adversary is only capable of testing a model’s ability to process
one specific type of compositional semantics. We show via
adversarial training that success on one type of adversary
does not generalize to other types of adversaries, but instead
induces errors caused by over-fitting the training data. Thus,
while adversarial evaluation is useful for exposing the issue
of lexical over-stability, it is not a robust measure of models’
ability to understand semantic compositional information.

Abstract
Success in natural language inference (NLI) should require a
model to understand both lexical and compositional semantics. However, through adversarial evaluation, we find that
several state-of-the-art models with diverse architectures are
over-relying on the former and fail to use the latter. Further,
this compositionality unawareness is not reflected via standard evaluation on current datasets. We show that removing RNNs in existing models or shuffling input words during training does not induce large performance loss despite
the explicit removal of compositional information. Therefore,
we propose a compositionality-sensitivity testing setup that
analyzes models on natural examples from existing datasets
that cannot be solved via lexical features alone (i.e., on
which a bag-of-words model gives a high probability to
one wrong label), hence revealing the models’ actual compositionality awareness. We show that this setup not only
highlights the limited compositional ability of current NLI
models, but also differentiates model performance based on
design, e.g., separating shallow bag-of-words models from
deeper, linguistically-grounded tree-based models. Our evaluation setup is an important analysis tool: complementing
currently existing adversarial and linguistically driven diagnostic evaluations, and exposing opportunities for future
work on evaluating models’ compositional understanding.

1

Introduction

Natural Language Inference (NLI) is a task in which a system is asked to classify the relationship between a pair of
premise and hypothesis as one of either entailment, contradiction, or neutral. This task is considered to be the basis
of many downstream, higher-level NLP tasks that require
complex natural language understanding such as questionanswering and summarization. Large annotated datasets
such as the Stanford Natural Language Inference Bowman
et al. (2015) (SNLI) and the Multi-Genre Natural Language
Inference Williams, Nangia, and Bowman (2018) (MNLI)
have promoted the development of many different neural NLI models, including encoding and co-attention models using both sequential and recursive representations Nie
and Bansal (2017); Choi, Yoo, and Lee (2017); Chen et

1
We release our adversaries and compositionalitysensitivity testing setups in the supplementary. The
code will be released at https://github.com/easonnie/
analyze-compositionality-sensitivity-NLI.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
indicates equal contribution.

6867

