The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Operator Mutexes and Symmetries for Simplifying Planning Tasks
Daniel Fišer

Álvaro Torralba

Alexander Shleyfman

Czech Technical University in Prague,
Faculty of Electrical Engineering,
Prague, Czech Republic
danfis@danfis.cz

Saarland University,
Saarland Informatics Campus,
Saarbrücken, Germany
torralba@cs.uni-saarland.de

Technion
Haifa, Israel
shleyfman.alexander@gmail.com

Abstract

be removed from the planning task. We show that at least one
optimal plan is preserved when removing some operators if
they are all op-mutex with other symmetric operators. In order to find out whether more operators can be removed, we
then analyze which symmetries are preserved after removing a set of operators in this way. This leads to a fixpoint
computation method that can remove a sizable number of
operators in some domains.

Simplifying classical planning tasks by removing operators
while preserving at least one optimal solution can significantly enhance the performance of planners. In this paper,
we introduce the notion of operator mutex, which is a set
of operators that cannot all be part of the same (strongly)
optimal plan. We propose four different methods for inference of operator mutexes and experimentally verify that they
can be found in a sizable number of planning tasks. We show
how operator mutexes can be used in combination with structural symmetries to safely remove operators from the planning task.

Background
A STRIPS planning task Π is specified by a tuple Π =
hF, O, I, Gi, where F = {f1 , . . . , fn } is a set of facts,
and O = {o1 , . . . , om } is a set of grounded operators. A
state s ⊆ F is a set of facts, I ⊆ F is an initial state
and G ⊆ F is a goal specification. An operator o is a tuple o = hpre(o), add(o), del(o), c(o)i, where pre(o) ⊆ F is
a set of preconditions of the operator o, and add(o) ⊆ F
and del(o) ⊆ F are sets of add and delete effects, respectively, and c(o) ∈ R+
0 is a cost of the operator. All
operators are well-formed, i.e., add(o) ∩ del(o) = ∅ and
pre(o) ∩ add(o) = ∅. An operator o is applicable in a state s
if pre(o) ⊆ s. The resulting state of applying an applicable
operator o in a state s is the state o[s] = (s\del(o))∪add(o).
A state s is a goal state iff G ⊆ s.
A sequence of operators π = ho1 , . . . , on i is applicable
in a state s0 if there are states s1 , . . . , sn such that oi is
applicable in si−1 and si = oi [si−1 ] for i ∈ {1, . . . , n}.
The resulting
state of this application is π[s0 ] = sn and
P
c(π) = o∈π c(o) denotes the cost of this sequence of operators. By |π| we denote the length of the sequence. π is
called a plan iff π[I] ⊇ G, π is called an optimal plan if its
cost is minimal among all plans, and π is called a strongly
optimal plan if it is an optimal plan and it contains the minimum number of operators among optimal plans. We denote
the set of strongly optimal plans by PΠ .
A state s is reachable if there exists an applicable operator sequence π such that π[I] = s. The set of all reachable
states is denoted by RΠ . An operator o is reachable iff it is
applicable in some reachable state. A state s is a dead-end
state iff G 6⊆ s and there is no applicable operator sequence
π such that G ⊆ π[s]. A mutex M ⊆ F is a set of facts such
that for every reachable state s ∈ RΠ it holds that M 6⊆ s. A
mutex group M ⊆ F is a set of facts such that |M ∩ s| ≤ 1
for every reachable state s ∈ RΠ .

Introduction
The solution to a classical planning problem is a sequence
of operators leading from the initial state to one of the goal
states. Since classical planning problems are described in a
domain-independent manner, automatic extraction of structural information can provide useful guidance for planners.
In this paper, we focus on identifying mutually exclusive
operators, in the sense that applying one forbids to apply
the others in the shortest optimal plan. For example, in a
task with non-replenishable resources, at most one operator
depleting a resource can be applied in any optimal plan. In
general, we say that a set of operators is a strong operator
mutex (op-mutex) if no strongly optimal plan contains all
of them. We introduce several methods to infer op-mutexes
automatically from the description of the task, and show that
they can be found in a sizable number of domains.
We combine op-mutexes with structural symmetries in order to identify operators that can be safely removed from
the planning tasks. The notion of symmetries is not new to
classical planning (Fox and Long 1999). They can be used
to reduce the size of the search space in heuristic search
planners (Pochter, Zohar, and Rosenschein 2011; Domshlak, Katz, and Shleyfman 2012), obtain more compact encodings in SAT-based planners (Rintanen 2003), compute
better heuristics (Domshlak, Katz, and Shleyfman 2013;
Sievers et al. 2015; 2017), transform the task (Riddle et al.
2015), or ground the task (Röger, Sievers, and Katz 2018).
Here, we use symmetries to prove that certain operators can
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7586

