The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Comparative Analysis of Expected and Distributional Reinforcement Learning
Clare Lyle,1 Marc G. Bellemare,2 Pablo Samuel Castro2
1

University of Oxford (work done while at Google Brain)
2
Google Brain
clare.lyle@cs.ox.ac.uk, bellemare@google.com, psc@google.com

Abstract

(e.g. the softmax distribution used in the C51 algorithm)
have a regularizing effect in optimization for neural networks.

Since their introduction a year ago, distributional approaches
to reinforcement learning (distributional RL) have produced
strong results relative to the standard approach which models
expected values (expected RL). However, aside from convergence guarantees, there have been few theoretical results
investigating the reasons behind the improvements distributional RL provides. In this paper we begin the investigation
into this fundamental question by analyzing the differences
in the tabular, linear approximation, and non-linear approximation settings. We prove that in many realizations of the
tabular and linear approximation settings, distributional RL
behaves exactly the same as expected RL. In cases where the
two methods behave differently, distributional RL can in fact
hurt performance when it does not induce identical behaviour.
We then continue with an empirical analysis comparing distributional and expected RL methods in control settings with
non-linear approximators to tease apart where the improvements from distributional RL methods are coming from.

1

3. Auxiliary tasks: the distribution offers a richer set of
predictions for learning, serving as a set of auxiliary tasks
which is tightly coupled to the reward.
Initial efforts to provide a theoretical framework for the analysis of distributional algorithms demonstrated their convergence properties (Rowland et al. 2018), and did not directly
compare their expected performance to expected algorithms.
Indeed, even experimental results supporting the distributional perspective have largely been restricted to the deep
reinforcement learning setting, and it is not clear whether the
benefits of the distributional perspective also hold in simpler
tasks. In this paper we continue lifting the veil on this mystery
by investigating the behavioural differences between distributional and expected RL, and whether these behavioural
differences necessarily result in an advantage for distributional methods.

Introduction

The distributional perspective, in which one models the distribution of returns from a state instead of only its expected
value, was recently introduced by (Bellemare, Dabney, and
Munos 2017). The first distributional reinforcement learning
algorithm, C51, saw dramatic improvements in performance
in many Atari 2600 games when compared to an algorithm
that only modelled expected values (Bellemare, Dabney, and
Munos 2017). Since then, additional distributional algorithms
have been proposed, such as quantile regression (Dabney et
al. 2017) and implicit quantile networks (Dabney et al. 2018),
with many of these improving on the results of C51. The
abundance of empirical results make it hard to dispute that
taking the distributional perspective is helpful in deep reinforcement learning problems, but theoretical motivation for
this perspective is comparatively scarce. Possible reasons for
this include the following, proposed by (Bellemare, Dabney,
and Munos 2017) .
1. Reduced chattering: modeling a distribution may reduce
prediction variance, which may help in policy iteration.
2. Improved optimization behaviour: distributions may
present a more stable learning target, or in some cases

2

Background

We model the reinforcement learning problem as an agent
interacting with an environment so as to maximize cumulative discounted reward. We formalize the notion of an
environment with a Markov Decision Process (MDP) defined as the tuple (X , A, R, P, γ), where X denotes the
state space, A the set of possible actions, R : X × A →
Dist([−RM AX , RM AX ]) is a stochastic reward function
mapping state-action pairs to a distribution over a set of
bounded rewards, P the transition probability kernel, and
γ ∈ [0, 1) the discount factor.
We denote by π : X → Dist(A) a stochastic policy
mapping states to a distribution over actions (i.e. π(a|x) is
the agent’s probability of choosing action a in state x). We
will use the notation Q to refer to state-action value function,
which has the type Q : X × A → R. The value of a specific
policy π is given by the value function Qπ , defined as the
discounted sum of expected future rewards after choosing
action a from state s and then following π
X

∞
Qπ (x, a) := Eπ,P
γ t R(xt , at ) x0 = x, a0 = a .

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

t=0

4504

