The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

STA: Spatial-Temporal Attention for
Large-Scale Video-Based Person Re-Identification
Yang Fu,1,2 Xiaoyang Wang,2 Yunchao Wei,1 Thomas Huang1
1

IFP, Beckman, UIUC, IL, 2 Nokia Bell Labs, Murray Hill, NJ
{yangfu2, yunchao, t-huang1}@illinois.edu
xiaoyang.wang@nokia-bell-labs.com

Abstract

Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims at matching images of
a person in one camera with the images of this person from
another different camera. In recent years, person Re-ID under the image sequence (video) setting has drawn significant
attention in literature since it is critical for applications like
intelligent video surveillance and multimedia. (McLaughlin,
Martinez del Rincon, and Miller 2016; Wang et al. 2016;
Zhou et al. 2017; Liu, Yan, and Ouyang 2017; Jimin Xiao
2019).
Most of the existing video-based person Re-ID work (Liu,
Yan, and Ouyang 2017; Song et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018)
focuses on very small datasets, e.g. PRID-2010 (Hirzer et
al. 2011) and iLIDS-VID (Wang et al. 2014) that only
contains about 300 person identities with 600 tracklets
in total. Although the existing approaches achieve good
performances on PRID-2010 and iLIDS-VID, their accuracies in the state-of-the-art large-scale datasets such as

the MARS dataset (Zheng et al. 2016) and DukeMTMCVideoReID dataset (Wu et al. 2018; Ristani et al. 2016) are
far from satisfying. Their performances are largely limited
by the tremendous variations in camera viewpoints, human
poses, illumination, occlusions, and background clutter in
the large-scale video-based Re-ID dataset.
For the video-based Re-ID task, the key is to learn a mapping function that converts videos into a low-dimensional
feature space in which each video can be represented by a
single vector. Most existing methods represent a frame of
the video as a feature vector, and then employ average or
maximum pooling across the frames to obtain the representation of the input video (Hirzer et al. 2011; You et al. 2016).
However, this approach usually fails when occlusions appear frequently in the video. In addition, basic operations
like maximum or average pooling across video frames cannot handle the spatial misalignment caused by the variation
of human poses among frames. In order to distill the relevant
information from a video and weaken the influence of noisy
samples (e.g. occlusion), recent studies (Zhou et al. 2017;
Xu et al. 2017) introduce the attention mechanism and
achieve improved results. However, these existing attentionbased methods only assign an attention weight to each
frame, thus lack the capabilities of discovering either the discriminative frames in a video sequence or the discriminative
body parts in each frame. Also, the attention mechanisms
in most existing attention-based approaches are parametric,
e.g. fully connected layers, which require the input video sequence to be in fixed length.
In order to address the issues mentioned above, we propose an effective yet easy-to-implement Spatial-Temporal
Attention (STA) framework to address the large-scale
video-based person re-identification problem, as shown in
Fig. 1. Instead of simply encoding a sequence of images by
pooling or assigning weights to each frame by the parametric model, our STA framework jointly incorporates multiple
novel components including frame selection, discriminative
parts mining, and feature aggregation without using any additional parameters. In all, our major contributions in this
paper can be summarized as follows:

Yang Fu did this work during the intern at Nokia Bell Labs.
Xiaoyang Wang and Yunchao Wei are joint corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a simple yet effective STA model that assigns
attention score for each spatial region to achieve discriminative parts mining and frame selection without using any
additional parameters.

In this work, we propose a novel Spatial-Temporal Attention (STA) approach to tackle the large-scale person reidentification task in videos. Different from the most existing methods, which simply compute representations of video
clips using frame-level aggregation (e.g. average pooling),
the proposed STA adopts a more effective way for producing robust clip-level feature representation. Concretely, our
STA fully exploits those discriminative parts of one target
person in both spatial and temporal dimensions, which results
in a 2-D attention score matrix via inter-frame regularization to measure the importances of spatial parts across different frames. Thus, a more robust clip-level feature representation can be generated according to a weighted sum operation
guided by the mined 2-D attention score matrix. In this way,
the challenging cases for video-based person re-identification
such as pose variation and partial occlusion can be well
tackled by the STA. We conduct extensive experiments on
two large-scale benchmarks, i.e. MARS and DukeMTMCVideoReID. In particular, the mAP reaches 87.7% on MARS,
which significantly outperforms the state-of-the-arts with a
large margin of more than 11.6%.

Introduction

8287

