The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Near-Neighbor Methods in Random Preference Completion
Ao Liu

Qiong Wu, Zhenming Liu

Lirong Xia

Department of Computer Science
Department of Computer Science
Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
College of William and Mary
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180, USA
Williamsburg, VA 23187, USA
Troy, NY 12180, USA
xial@cs.rpi.edu
qwu05@email.wm.edu and zliu@cs.wm.edu
liua6@rpi.edu

Abstract

scales for ratings; and (ii) numeric values are often less robust than ranking-based approaches. In fact, rating data can
always be converted to ranking data (e.g., y1 is ranked higher
than y2 if y1 has a higher rating) and thus ranking-based
models and algorithms are more general. We focus on ranking data.
A common approach to infer an agent’s preference is to
first identify near neighbors of the agent in terms of the
Kendall-Tau (KT) distance, then aggregate their rankings to
produce a prediction. The KT distance is a metric that counts
the number of pairwise disagreements between two ranking
lists. This approach was proposed by ? (?), and their algorithm will be referred to as KT-kNN in this paper. Many subsequent work are based on the following assumption (?; ?;
?; ?; ?).
Assumption 1. KT distance is a good measure of similarity between agents.
No theoretical justification for this assumption was known
until recently. ? (?) proposed a latent utility model to justify the assumption. In their model, each agent or alternative
is associated with a latent feature. Alternative j’s utility to
agent i is controlled by a deterministic function of the similarity in their latent features. Under this model, consistency
result is established for the KT-kNN algorithms.
However, this model assumes that agents’ preferences are
deterministic, which is unrealistic in many settings. For example, an agent can exhibit irrational behavior, or provide
only a noisy version of her preferences. In fact, human preferences are often highly non-deterministic. Various statistical models have been built to model such randomness, pioneered by the Nobel Laureate McFadden (?) among many
other researchers. Therefore, the following question remains
open.
How can we learn an agent’s random preferences from
other agents’ random preferences?
This question can be answered by designing algorithms
for two closely-related problems: (i) preference completion
(PC): given each agent’s preferences over a subset of alternatives, the goal is to estimate its preference over all the alternatives. (ii) near neighbors (NN): given an agent xi , the
goal is to find agents xi0 close to xi in the latent space.
Standard techniques exist to use algorithms for the NN
problem to solve a PC problem ( (?; ?); see also Appendix
D). Therefore, we focus on the NN problem in this paper.

This paper studies a stylized, yet natural, learning-to-rank
problem and points out the critical incorrectness of a widely
used nearest neighbor algorithm. We consider a model
with n agents (users) {xi }i∈[n] and m alternatives (items)
{yl }l∈[m] , each of which is associated with a latent feature
vector. Agents rank items nondeterministically according to
the Plackett-Luce model, where the higher the utility of an
item to the agent, the more likely this item will be ranked
high by the agent. Our goal is to identify near neighbors of an
arbitrary agent in the latent space for prediction.
We first show that the Kendall-tau distance based kNN produces incorrect results in our model. Next, we propose a
new anchor-based algorithm to find neighbors of an agent.
A salient feature of our algorithm is that it leverages the rankings of many other agents (the so-called “anchors”) to determine the closeness/similarities of two agents. We provide a
rigorous analysis for one-dimensional latent space, and complement the theoretical results with experiments on synthetic
and real datasets. The experiments confirm that the new algorithm is robust and practical.

1

Introduction

In a learning-to-rank problem, there is a set of agents
(users) X = {x1 , . . . xn } and a set of alternatives (items)
Y = {y1 , . . . ym }. Each agent reveals her preferences over
a subset of alternatives. The goal is to infer agents’ preferences over all alternatives, including those that are not
rated or ranked. This fundamental machine learning problem has many practical applications. For example, recommender systems use an agent’ revealed preferences to discover other alternatives she might be interested in; product
designers learn from consumers’ past choices to estimate the
demand curve of a new product; defenders can predict terrorists’ preferences based on their past behavior; and political parties can evaluate campaign options based on voters’
preferences. See (?) for a recent survey.
Rating vs. ranking. Agents’ preferences can be represented
by either a rating for each alternative (e.g., an integer rating in Netflix), or a ranking over the alternatives (i.e., complete ordering). Rating-based approaches have many known
drawbacks (?; ?), including (i) agents often have different
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4336

