The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Axiomatic Characterization of Data-Driven Influence Measures for Classification
Jakub Sliwinski

Martin Strobel

Yair Zick

ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
jsliwinski@ethz.ch

National University of Singapore
Singapore
mstrobel@comp.nus.edu.sg

National University of Singapore
Singapore
zick@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

feature in a dataset. However, these works, by and large, do
not justify why their particular methodology is sound. Our
work takes an axiomatic approach to influence measurement
in data-driven domains. Starting from a set of desiderata (or
axioms), we uniquely derive a class of measures satisfying
these axioms. Thus, our work provides a ...formal axiomatic
analysis of automatically generated numerical explanations
for black-box classifiers.

We study the following problem: given a labeled dataset and
a specific datapoint ⃗
x, how did the i-th feature influence the
classification for ⃗x? We identify a family of numerical influence measures — functions that, given a datapoint ⃗
x, assign a
numeric value φi (⃗
x) to every feature i, corresponding to how
altering i’s value would influence the outcome for ⃗
x. This
family, which we term monotone influence measures (MIM),
is uniquely derived from a set of desirable properties, or axioms. The MIM family constitutes a provably sound methodology for measuring feature influence in classification domains; the values generated by MIM are based on the dataset
alone, and do not make any queries to the classifier. While
this requirement naturally limits the scope of our framework,
we demonstrate its effectiveness on data.

1

1.1

Our Contribution

Numerical influence measures are functions that assign a
value φi to every feature i; φi corresponds to the predicted effect of this feature on the outcome. We identify
specific properties (axioms) that any reasonable influence
measure should satisfy (Section 3), and derive a class of
influence measures, dubbed monotone influence measures
(MIM), uniquely satisfying these axioms (Section 4). Next,
we show that MIM can be interpreted as the solution to a natural optimization problem, further grounding our methodology (Section 5). Unlike most existing influence measures
in the literature, we assume neither knowledge of the underlying decision making algorithm, nor of its behavior on
points outside the dataset. Indeed, some methodologies (see
Section 6 in the supplementary material) are heavily reliant
on having access to counterfactual information: what would
the classifier have done if some features were changed? This
may be a strong assumption: it requires not only access to the
classifier, but also the potential ability to use it on nonsensical data points1 . By making no such assumptions, we provide a general methodology for measuring influence; indeed,
many of the methods described in Section 1.2 are unusable
in the absence of classifier access, or when the underlying
classification algorithm is not known. We show that despite
our rather limiting conceptual framework, MIM does surprisingly well on a sparse image dataset, and provides an
interesting analysis of a recidivism dataset (see results in
the full version of this paper (Sliwinski, Strobel, and Zick
2018)). We compare the outputs of MIM to other measures,
and provide interpretable results. Additional results in the
full version of this work (Sliwinski, Strobel, and Zick 2018)

Introduction

Recent years have seen the widespread implementation
of data-driven decision making algorithms in increasingly
high-stakes domains, such as finance, healthcare, transportation and public safety. Using novel ML techniques, these algorithms are able to process massive amounts of data and
make highly accurate predictions; however, their inherent
complexity makes it increasingly difficult for humans to understand why certain decisions were made. Indeed, these algorithms are black-box decision makers: their inner workings are either hidden from human scrutiny by proprietary
law, or (as is often the case) are so complicated that even
their own designers are hard-pressed to explain their behavior. By obfuscating their reasoning, data-driven classifiers
expose human stakeholders to risks. These may include incorrect decisions (e.g. a loan application that was wrongly
rejected due to system error), information leaks (e.g. an algorithm inadvertently uses information it should not have
used), or discrimination (e.g. biased decisions against certain ethnic or gender groups). Government bodies and regulatory authorities have recently begun calling for algorithmic transparency: providing human-interpretable explanations of the underlying reasoning behind large-scale decision
making algorithms. Several recent works propose making
algorithms more transparent by using numerical influence
measures: methods for measuring the importance of every

1

For example, if the dataset consists of medical records of men
and women, the classifier might need to answer how it would handle pregnant men.

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

718

