The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Preference-Aware Task Assignment in Spatial Crowdsourcing
Yan Zhao,1 Jinfu Xia,1 Guanfeng Liu,2 Han Su,3 Defu Lian,3 Shuo Shang,4 Kai Zheng3,5

∗

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
2
Macquarie University, Australia
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
4
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia
5
Youedata Research, Beijing, China
zhaoyan@suda.edu.cn, viing937@gmail.com, guanfeng.liu@mq.edu.au
hansu@uestc.edu.cn, {dove.ustc, jedi.shang}@gmail.com, zhengkai@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract

2013), or the diversity score of assignments (Cheng et al.
2015b). An implicit assumption shared by these work is
that the workers are willing to perform the tasks assigned
to them. In practice, however, different task-performing intentions and preferences can lead to different types of behaviors. For example, two workers with different preferences for
the same category of tasks may exhibit different behaviors:
one is willing to report a hot spot for its popularity, while
the other may not due to its complexity. Actually, a worker
is unlikely to honestly and promptly complete the assigned
tasks when she is not interested in them, which cannot guarantee the quality of task results. Therefore the key to control quality for task accomplishment is how to accurately
capture worker preferences in her task-performing context.
Among these existing contextual dimensions, time information, especially temporal dynamics, is of great importance
since the characteristics of worker preferences with respect
to the task types may change over the time of day. For instance, a worker is happy to report promotion activities of
a shopping center during her lunch break but will definitely
refuse to do it in her working hours. Therefore, incorporating temporal dynamics in worker preferences can improve
the accuracy of spatial task assignment.

With the ubiquity of smart devices, Spatial Crowdsourcing (SC) has emerged as a new transformative platform
that engages mobile users to perform spatio-temporal tasks
by physically traveling to specified locations. Thus, various
SC techniques have been studied for performance optimization, among which one of the major challenges is how to
assign workers the tasks that they are really interested in
and willing to perform. In this paper, we propose a novel
preference-aware spatial task assignment system based on
workers’ temporal preferences, which consists of two components: History-based Context-aware Tensor Decomposition (HCTD) for workers’ temporal preferences modeling and
preference-aware task assignment. We model worker preferences with a three-dimension tensor (worker-task-time). Supplementing the missing entries of the tensor through HCTD
with the assistant of historical data and other two context matrices, we recover worker preferences for different categories
of tasks in different time slots. Several preference-aware task
assignment algorithms are then devised, aiming to maximize
the total number of task assignments at every time instance, in
which we give higher priorities to the workers who are more
interested in the tasks. We conduct extensive experiments using a real dataset, verifying the practicability of our proposed
methods.

Several previous approaches infer worker preferences
from past task-performing patterns or explicit feedbacks (Ambati, Vogel, and Carbonell 2011; Buchholz and
Latorre 2011; Yuen, King, and Leung 2012). However, they
fail to effectively incorporate temporal dynamics and workers’ historical task-performing records. The overall taskperforming behavior of a worker may be determined by her
long-term interest. But at any given time, a worker is also
affected by her instant preference due to transient events,
such as the tasks’ publishing and performing condition in
the current time. In addition, the above methods are not able
to make suitable task assignment since the task-performing
data is extremely sparse and there exists cold start problem
(no historical task-performing records for new workers or
new tasks). Lastly, we are not aware of any existing task assignment techniques that consider the temporal dynamics in
workers’ preferences, which can be a key factor for improving the quality of task assignment in spatial crowdsourcing.

Introduction
Spatial Crowdsourcing (SC) is a recently proposed concept,
which employs smart device carriers as workers to physically move to some specified locations and accomplish spatial tasks, such as taking photos, monitoring traffic condition
and reporting local hot spot.
Most existing research focuses on the task assignment (Deng, Shahabi, and Zhu 2015; Cheng et al. 2015a;
Alt et al. 2010; Tong et al. 2016a; 2016b; Song et al. 2017;
Li, Yiu, and Xu 2015; Cheng et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2017;
Tong et al. 2018a; 2017; 2016b; 2018b), which aims to maximize the total number of completed tasks (Kazemi and Shahabi 2012), the number of performed tasks for a worker
with an optimal schedule (Deng, Shahabi, and Demiryurek
∗

Corresponding author: Kai Zheng.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To address these challenges, we propose a Preference2629

