The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Address Health Inequality in the United States with a Bayesian
Decision Network
Tavpritesh Sethi,1,2 Anant Mittal,2 Shubham Maheshwari,2 Samarth Chugh3
2

1
Stanford University, USA
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi, India
3
Netaji Subhas University of Technology, Delhi, India
tavsethi@stanford.edu, tavpriteshsethi@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract

blind-spots resulting from human-biases (Cabitza, Rasoini,
and Gensini 2017; AS and Smith 2018; Keane and Topol
2018). In this study we demonstrate the use of expressive, interpretable and explainable AI for understanding healthcare
inequities themselves and for learning actions that may help
mitigate these in the United States. We learn the complex interplay of factors that influence life-expectancy and quantify
the impact of social, demographic and healthcare variables
through a data-driven Bayesian Decision Network. We do
this by learning a joint probabilistic graphical model (PGM)
upon a county-level dataset and extending it to a decision
framework for revealing policy actions. The key motivation
for this study was to create a unified model that integrates
geographical, socio-economic, behavioral, demographic and
healthcare indices at county-level resolution in order to discover the skeleton and key drivers of the longevity-gap.
Since graphical models are intuitive and interpretable, we
enhance the utility of our model with an interactive webapplication available to users for exploring and discovering
further insights from our model.

Life-expectancy is a complex outcome driven by genetic,
socio-demographic, environmental and geographic factors.
Increasing socio-economic and health disparities in the
United States are propagating the longevity-gap, making it
a cause for concern. Earlier studies have probed individual
factors but an integrated picture to reveal quantifiable actions
has been missing. There is a growing concern about a further
widening of healthcare inequality caused by Artificial Intelligence (AI) due to differential access to AI-driven services.
Hence, it is imperative to explore and exploit the potential of
AI for illuminating biases and enabling transparent policy decisions for positive social and health impact. In this work, we
reveal actionable interventions for decreasing the longevitygap in the United States by analyzing a County-level data
resource containing healthcare, socio-economic, behavioral,
education and demographic features. We learn an ensembleaveraged structure, draw inferences using the joint probability distribution and extend it to a Bayesian Decision Network
for identifying policy actions. We draw quantitative estimates
for the impact of diversity, preventive-care quality and stablefamilies within the unified framework of our decision network. Finally, we make this analysis and dashboard available as an interactive web-application for enabling users and
policy-makers to validate our reported findings and to explore
the impact of ones beyond reported in this work.

Determinants of the Longevity-gap
While access to medical care is the most tangible factor for
improving longevity, the latter is determined by a more nuanced interplay of social, behavioral, and economic factors.
Unavailability of fine-grained, integrated datasets has been
a major factor responsible for the lack of models for measuring the joint impact of these factors on health-inequality.
Hence, various theories and models have assessed these factors in isolation. The Health Inequity Project, (Chetty et al.
2016) compiled and released granular data at the County,
Commute Zone, Core Based Statistical Area and State levels, and demonstrated the longevity gap attributable to income disparity in the United States. Income data from 1.4
billion Tax Records were combined with County-level Mortality (Census), Healthcare (Dartmouth Atlas, Small Area
Insurance Estimates) Health-behaviors (CDC Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System, BRFSS), and Education
(National Center for Education Statistics Common Core of
Data & Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System)
for the period covering 1999-2014, thus generating the most
fine-grained data resource on socio-demographic determinants of longevity so far. Standard statistical analysis revealed significant correlations with longevity, however a

Introduction
Inequities in healthcare impose an estimated burden of $300
billion per year in the United States (LaVeist, Gaskin, and
Richard 2011). Longevity-gap is a collective effect of inequities such as economic, racial, ethnic, gender and environmental that lead to a decrease in life-expectancy. While
the effects of inequities on longevity have been a subject of
study for social scientists for decades, the society is now presented with an opportunity (or a threat) for the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in addressing (or propagating) healthcare inequities. Most of the AI research in healthcare has
focused on developing discriminative models for automated
diagnosis and predictions. Despite many promising applications, and the raised bar for demonstrating value in Clinical
Trials (Abràmoff et al. 2018), the opaque nature of many
of these models has raised concerns about propagation of
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

710

