The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Clipped Matrix Completion: A Remedy for Ceiling Effects
Takeshi Teshima,1,2 Miao Xu,2 Issei Sato,1,2 Masashi Sugiyama1,2
1

The University of Tokyo
2
RIKEN
teshima@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, miao.xu@riken.jp, {sato, sugi}@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

Movielens 100K

1

0. 0

1 2 3 4 5

Rating

0. 2
0. 1
0. 0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Rating

Figure 1: Ceiling effects may also exist in standard benchmark data sets of recommendation systems (details of the
data are described in Section 6). Histograms of the rated values are plotted. The right-truncated look of the histogram is
typical for a variable under ceiling effects (Greene 2012).

The ceiling effect is also conceivable in the context of machine learning, e.g., in recommendation systems with a fivestar rating. After rating an item with a five-star, a user may
find another item much better later. In this case, the true rating for the latter item should be above five, but the recorded
value is still a five-star. As a matter of fact, we can observe
right-truncated shapes indicating ceiling effects in the histograms of well-known benchmark data sets for recommendation systems, as shown in Figure 1.

Introduction

Ceiling effect is a measurement limitation that occurs when
the highest possible score on a measurement instrument
is reached, thereby decreasing the likelihood that the instrument has accurately measured in the intended domain
(Salkind 2010). In this paper1 , we investigate methods for
restoring a matrix data from ceiling effects.

1.1

0. 2

Probability

Probability

We consider the problem of recovering a low-rank matrix
from its clipped observations. Clipping is conceivable in
many scientific areas that obstructs statistical analyses. On
the other hand, matrix completion (MC) methods can recover
a low-rank matrix from various information deficits by using the principle of low-rank completion. However, the current theoretical guarantees for low-rank MC do not apply to
clipped matrices, as the deficit depends on the underlying values. Therefore, the feasibility of clipped matrix completion
(CMC) is not trivial. In this paper, we first provide a theoretical guarantee for the exact recovery of CMC by using
a trace-norm minimization algorithm. Furthermore, we propose practical CMC algorithms by extending ordinary MC
methods. Our extension is to use the squared hinge loss in
place of the squared loss for reducing the penalty of overestimation on clipped entries. We also propose a novel regularization term tailored for CMC. It is a combination of two
trace-norm terms, and we theoretically bound the recovery
error under the regularization. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods through experiments using both
synthetic and benchmark data for recommendation systems.

FilmTrust

Restoring data from ceiling effects can lead to benefits
in many fields. For example, in biological experiments to
measure the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) level, it is known
that the current measurement method has a technical upper
bound (Yaginuma et al. 2014). In such a case, by measuring
multiple cells in multiple environments, we may recover the
true ATP levels which can provide us with further findings.
In the case of recommendation systems, we may be able to
find latent superiority or inferiority between items with the
highest ranking and recommend unobserved entries better.

Ceiling effect

Ceiling effect has long been discussed across a wide range
of scientific fields such as sociology (DeMaris 2004), educational science (Kaplan 1992; Benjamin 2005), biomedical research (Austin and Brunner 2003; Cox and Oakes
1984), and health science (Austin, Escobar, and Kopec 2000;
Catherine et al. 2004; Voutilainen et al. 2016; Rodrigues et
al. 2013), because it is a crucial information deficit known
to inhibit effective statistical analyses (Austin and Brunner
2003).

In this paper, we investigate methods for restoring a matrix data from ceiling effects. In particular, we consider the
recovery of a clipped matrix, i.e., elements of the matrix are
clipped at a predefined threshold in advance of observation,
because ceiling effects are often modeled as a clipping phenomenon (Austin and Brunner 2003).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A longer version of this paper including Appendix is available
at https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.04997.

5151

