The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deictic Image Mapping: An Abstraction
for Learning Pose Invariant Manipulation Policies
Robert Platt, Colin Kohler, Marcus Gualtieri
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University
360 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA
{rplatt,ckohler,mgualti}@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
In applications of deep reinforcement learning to robotics, it
is often the case that we want to learn pose invariant policies:
policies that are invariant to changes in the position and orientation of objects in the world. For example, consider a pegin-hole insertion task. If the agent learns to insert a peg into
one hole, we would like that policy to generalize to holes presented in different poses. Unfortunately, this is a challenge using conventional methods. This paper proposes a novel state
and action abstraction that is invariant to pose shifts called
deictic image maps that can be used with deep reinforcement
learning. We provide broad conditions under which optimal
abstract policies are optimal for the underlying system. Finally, we show that the method can help solve challenging
robotic manipulation problems.

Figure 1: A policy for inserting a peg into Hole A learned
using deictic image mapping generalizes to Hole B without
any additional training.

eralizes over the pose of the robot and other objects in
the world. We focus on the end-to-end learning setting in
robotics where state is typically encoded in terms of images and the action set corresponds to possible motions of
the robot. Our key idea is to encode action as an image of
the world that is centered, aligned, and focused on the target
pose of the motion. Since this representation encodes motion
actions in terms of the configuration of the world relative to
the endpoint of the motion, it generalizes well over changes
in object pose and camera viewpoint. We call this a “deictic”
representation because motion actions are encoded relative
to the environment rather than an absolute reference frame.

Introduction
Policies learned by deep reinforcement learning agents are
generally not invariant to changes in the position and orientation of the camera or objects in the environment. For
example, consider the peg-in-hole insertion task shown in
Figure 1. A policy that can insert the peg into Hole A does
not necessarily generalize to Hole B. In order to learn a policy that can perform both insertions, the agent must be presented with examples of the hole in both configurations during training. This is a significant problem in robotics because
we often want to learn policies most easily expressed relative
to an object (i.e. relative to the hole) rather than relative to an
image. Without the ability to generalize over pose, deep reinforcement learning must be trained with experiences that
span the space of all possible pose variation. For example,
in order to learn an insertion policy for any hole configuration, the agent must be trained with task instances for hole
configurations spanning SE(2), a three dimensional space.
The problem is even worse in SE(3) which spans six dimensions. The need for all this training data slows down learning
and hampers the agent’s ability to generalize over other dimensions of variation such as task and shape. While pose
invariance is not always desirable, the inability to generalize
over pose can be a major problem.
This paper introduces deictic image mapping, an approach to encoding robotic manipulation actions that gen-

One of the interesting aspects of this work is that we
show that for a large class of problems, the proposed deictic state and action abstraction induces an MDP homomorphism (Ravindran 2004; Ravindran and Barto 2003). In consequence, we are assured that optimal policies found in using the deictic representation induce optimal policies for the
original problem. An important limitation of our approach is
the large action set that is often required: we have as many
of 26.9k actions in our experiments. This paper introduces a
number of techniques for handling this large branching factor in a Deep Q-learning (DQN) framework. Finally, we report on a series of experiments that evaluates the approach
both in simulation and in hardware. The results show that
the method can solve a variety of challenging manipulation
problems with training times less than two hours on a standard desktop GPU system.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8042

