The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Temporal Video Analyzer (TVAN): Efficient Temporal
Video Analysis for Robust Video Description and Search
Daniel Rotman, Dror Porat, Yevgeny Burshtein, Udi Barzelay
IBM Research AI
Haifa, Israel

Abstract
With the increasing popularity of video content, automatic
video understanding is becoming more and more important
for streamlining video content consumption and reuse. In this
work, we present TVAN—temporal video analyzer—a system for temporal video analysis aimed at enabling efficient
and robust video description and search. Its main components
include: temporal video segmentation, compact scene representation for efficient visual recognition, and concise scene
description generation. We provide a technical overview of
the system, as well as demonstrate its usefulness for the task
of video search and navigation.

Figure 1: Temporal and visual analysis for videos.
TVAN is composed of three components (see Figure 1):
1. Temporal Video Analysis: We analyze videos and segment them temporally into scenes—a semantic level of
division above shots. For videos of heterogeneous nature,
this is a critical step to allow understanding of the video
with regard to both local and global temporal changes.

Introduction

2. Efficient Visual Recognition: Prior to performing framebased visual recognition using state-of-the-art neural networks, we create a compact representation of the scene
to eliminate temporal redundancy and minimize computational cost and time.

Automated video understanding is one of the biggest challenges in AI today. With the rise in volume of video content, it is important for companies with large-scale video
corpuses to automatically extract insights from their video
content, thus enabling effective content-based indexing for
consumption and reuse. To make the information in videos
accessible, it is necessary to create AI technologies which
can temporally segment, analyze, index and retrieve desired
elements in videos.
To address this need, in recent years video comprehension
and navigation tasks have risen in interest in both academic
and industrial settings. Tasks such as image-based visual
recognition (Russakovsky et al. 2015) and video retrieval
systems (Song et al. 2018) aim to aid in the task of video
information extraction and browsing. A number of public
APIs (Li 2017) can perform a static (image-based) visual
analysis of a video, and provide a layer of meta-data which
can then be used for video indexing.
In this work we present TVAN, a novel temporal video
analysis framework which specifically focuses on the temporal analysis of video. TVAN given an input video of heterogeneous nature, can generate meta-data over multiple
levels of temporal granularity—shots and scenes. This metadata can be used by a video navigation interface for browsing the video for audio and visual concepts. Such a system
can be leveraged and applied to large video corpuses to extract the information of interest, allowing effective indexing,
navigation and retrieval.

3. Robust Scene Description: Utilizing the visual tags for
the frames constituting the compact representation of the
scene, we create a concise and representative description
of each scene, resulting in an automatically constructed
table-of-contents for the video.

Temporal Video Analysis
The very first phase when analyzing a video is to identify
the temporal structure and nature of the video and segment it
temporally into homogeneous chapters. This stage is crucial
when dealing with heterogeneous videos, as content analysis
of a video with multiple semantic chapters will likely result
in inaccurate results. We perform this task using our unsupervised learning mutlimodal video scene detection technology (Rotman, Porat, and Ashour 2017).
Video scene detection is the task of temporally dividing a heterogeneous video into its semantic sections, called
scenes. Scenes typically relay a specific concept or theme
which acts as a component of the story delivered by the
video. Formally, scenes are defined as a sequence of semantically related and temporally adjacent shots depicting
a high-level concept or story (Rui, Huang, and Mehrotra
1999).
We use our optimal sequential grouping formulation (Rotman et al. 2018) to partition the video using a multimodal

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9871

