The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Faster Gradient-Free Proximal Stochastic
Methods for Nonconvex Nonsmooth Optimization
Feihu Huang,1,2 Bin Gu,3 Zhouyuan Huo,2 Songcan Chen,1∗ Heng Huang2,3
1

College of Computer Science & Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, 211106, China
2
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA 3 JDDGlobal.com
huangfeihu@nuaa.edu.cn, gubin3@jd.com, zhouyuan.huo@pitt.edu, s.chen@nuaa.edu.cn, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract

the Nesterov’s accelerated technique. After that, Li and Lin
(2015) presented a class of accelerated PG methods for nonconvex optimization. More recently, Gu, Huo, and Huang
(2018) introduced inexact PG methods for nonconvex nonsmooth optimization. To solve the big data problems, the incremental or stochastic PG methods (Bertsekas, 2011; Xiao
and Zhang, 2014) were developed for large-scale convex
optimization. Correspondingly, Ghadimi, Lan, and Zhang
(2016); Reddi et al. (2016) proposed the stochastic PG methods for large-scale nonconvex optimization.
However, in many machine learning problems, the explicit expressions of gradients are difficult or infeasible to
obtain. For example, in some complex graphical model inference (Wainwright, Jordan, and others, 2008) and structure prediction problems (Sokolov, Hitschler, and Riezler,
2018), it is difficult to compute the explicit gradients of
the objective functions. Even worse, in bandit (Shamir,
2017) and black-box learning (Chen et al., 2017) problems, only the objective function values are available (the
explicit gradients cannot be calculated). Clearly, the above
PG methods will fail in dealing with these scenarios. The
gradient-free (zeroth-order) optimization method (Nesterov
and Spokoiny, 2017) is a promising choice to address these
problems because it only uses the function values in optimization process. Thus, the gradient-free optimization methods have been increasingly embraced for solving many machine learning problems (Conn, Scheinberg, and Vicente,
2009).
Although many gradient-free methods have recently been
developed and studied (Agarwal, Dekel, and Xiao, 2010;
Nesterov and Spokoiny, 2017; Liu et al., 2018b), they often
suffer from the high variances of zeroth-order gradient estimates. In addition, these algorithms are mainly designed for
smooth or convex settings, which will be discussed in the below related works, thus limiting their applicability in a wide
range of nonconvex nonsmooth machine learning problems
such as involving the nonconvex loss functions and nonsmooth regularization.
In this paper, thus, we propose a class of faster gradientfree proximal stochastic methods for solving the nonconvex
nonsmooth problem as follows:

Proximal gradient method has been playing an important role
to solve many machine learning tasks, especially for the nonsmooth problems. However, in some machine learning problems such as the bandit model and the black-box learning
problem, proximal gradient method could fail because the explicit gradients of these problems are difficult or infeasible to
obtain. The gradient-free (zeroth-order) method can address
these problems because only the objective function values are
required in the optimization. Recently, the first zeroth-order
proximal stochastic algorithm was proposed to solve the nonconvex nonsmooth problems. However, its convergence rate
is O( √1T ) for the nonconvex problems, which is significantly
slower than the best convergence rate O( T1 ) of the zerothorder stochastic algorithm, where T is the iteration number.
To fill this gap, in the paper, we propose a class of faster
zeroth-order proximal stochastic methods with the variance
reduction techniques of SVRG and SAGA, which are denoted
as ZO-ProxSVRG and ZO-ProxSAGA, respectively. In theoretical analysis, we address the main challenge that an unbiased estimate of the true gradient does not hold in the zerothorder case, which was required in previous theoretical analysis of both SVRG and SAGA. Moreover, we prove that both
ZO-ProxSVRG and ZO-ProxSAGA algorithms have O( T1 )
convergence rates. Finally, the experimental results verify
that our algorithms have a faster convergence rate than the
existing zeroth-order proximal stochastic algorithm.

Introduction
Proximal gradient (PG) methods (Mine and Fukushima,
1981; Nesterov, 2004; Parikh, Boyd, and others, 2014) are a
class of powerful optimization tools in artificial intelligence
and machine learning. In general, it considers the following
nonsmooth optimization problem:
min f (x) + ψ(x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f (x) usually is the loss function such as hinge loss
and logistic loss, and ψ(x) is the nonsmooth structure regularizer such as `1 -norm regularization. In recent research,
Beck and Teboulle (2009); Nesterov (2013) proposed the
accelerate PG methods to solve convex problems by using

n

∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

min F (x) =: f (x) + ψ(x), f (x) =:

x∈Rd

1503

1X
fi (x)
n i=1

(2)

