The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

From Horn-SRIQ to Datalog:
A Data-Independent Transformation That Preserves Assertion Entailment
David Carral,1 Larry González,1 Patrick Koopmann2
1

Center for Advancing Electronics Dresden (cfaed), Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
2
Institute for Theoretical Computer Science, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
firstname.lastname@tu-dresden.de
Example 1. Let Tex be the TBox with the following axioms
modelling conflicts of interests between researchers.

Abstract
Ontology-based access to large data-sets has recently gained
a lot of attention. To access data efficiently, one approach is to
rewrite the ontology into Datalog, and then use powerful Datalog engines to compute implicit entailments. Existing rewriting techniques support Description Logics (DLs) from ELH
to Horn-SHIQ. We go one step further and present one such
data-independent rewriting technique for Horn-SRIQu , the
extension of Horn-SHIQ that supports role chain axioms,
an expressive feature prominently used in many real-world
ontologies. We evaluated our rewriting technique on a large
known corpus of ontologies. Our experiments show that the
resulting rewritings are of moderate size, and that our approach is more efficient than state-of-the-art DL reasoners
when reasoning with data-intensive ontologies.

ResearchGroup v ∀hasMember.Researcher
Researcher v ∃hasMember− .ResearchGroup
collaborated ◦ hasMember− ◦ hasMember v hasConflict
hasMember ◦ supervises v hasMember
Here, the third axiom uses a role chain to express that,
if a researcher collaborated with someone who is a member of a research group, then he has a conflict of interest with everyone from that group. Using Tex , we can infer from the ABox Aex = {collaborated(gottlob, alonzo),
supervises(alonzo, alan), Researcher(alonzo)} the two assertions Researcher(alan) and hasConflict(gottlob, alan).
Both entailments depend on the existence of a research
group which has both alan and alonzo as members, the
existence of which is implied but not explicit. Specifically,
gottlob has a conflict of interest with alan because there is a
path via alonzo and this research group connecting gottlob
with alan, which corresponds to the role chain in the third
axiom.

Introduction
Assertion retrieval (AR)—i.e., the task of inferring implicit assertions from a Description Logics (DL) knowledge
base (KB)—is an important reasoning task with many applications in knowledge representation and data management. For instance, the computation of AR can be used
to solve SPARQL query answering, and to compute statistics on the implicit inferences of data-intensive ontologies
such as in (Callahan, Cruz-Toledo, and Dumontier 2013;
Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014). For these tasks, both the concepts an object satisfies and the relations between objects are
relevant. Typical DL ontologies focus on providing axioms
about concepts, but expressive ontologies also allow to make
inferences about roles, e.g., through the use of logical constructors such as inverse roles and role chains.
Efficient AR on large datasets requires the use of “onepass” algorithms that compute the full set of entailed assertions as part of a saturation procedure. Although many customised algorithms and implementations of this type have
been developed in the past, to the best of our knowledge,
either these procedures do not support role chains, or they
are not complete for deriving role assertions. Indeed, the retrieval of roles in the presence of role chains is a rather challenging task, as it may require reasoning about paths involving objects not explicit in the data.

We propose a technique for AR from KBs formulated
in Horn-SRIQu —a DL fragment that supports complex
roles and role conjunctions (Krötzsch, Rudolph, and Hitzler
2013)—based on data-independent rewritings into Datalog
rule sets. Specifically, given a TBox T , we describe how
to construct a Datalog rule set RT s.t., for every ABox A
and assertion α only using symbols occurring in T , we have
hT , Ai |= α iff hRT , Ai |= α.
To show practical feasibility, we implemented and evaluated our transformation, showing that Datalog rewritings
for many real-world Horn-SRIQu TBoxes are of moderate size. Moreover, we computed our Datalog rewritings for
two real-world ontologies, and performed AR over the resulting Datalog KBs. Our results show that our approach
can outperform Konclude (Steigmiller, Liebig, and Glimm
2014)—considered as one of the leading DL reasoners (Parsia et al. 2017)—when solving AR over data-intensive ontologies. This is rather noteworthy, since (unlike Konclude)
our rewritings are complete for role retrieval.
In summary, our contributions are as follows.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We present a worst-case optimal transformation of Horn2736

