The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Turbo Learning Framework for Human-Object Interactions
Recognition and Human Pose Estimation
Wei Feng,1 Wentao Liu,2,1 Tong Li,1 Jing Peng,1 Chen Qian,1 Xiaolin Hu2
1

SenseTime Group Ltd.
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
{fengwei, litong, pengjing1, qianchen}@sensetime.com, liuwtwinter@gmail.com, xlhu@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

two kinds of information are labeled at the same time. However, most existing methods treat HOI recognition and pose
estimation as separate tasks, which ignore the information
reciprocity between two tasks.
Constructing a closed loop between HOI recognition and
pose estimation may bring improvement to each task as
shown in Fig 1. On one hand, human pose can improve
the robustness of HOI recognition. As for action recognition, human pose offers accurate analysis of human structure
rather than coarse information of human body appearance,
thus reducing the impact of changes in human appearance.
As for target localization, the locations of some keypoints
can reveal the location and direction of the interacted objects. For example, the keypoint of the wrist is very close
to the object in the action hold. Therefore, human pose is a
powerful cue for recognizing actions and localizing the interacted objects. On the other hand, human action can guide
the distribution of keypoints vice versa. As a result, the relative position between the keypoints is clearer. Meanwhile,
their interacted objects’ localization can help localize specific keypoints. So human action and their interacted objects’ localization provide guidance for pose estimation.
In this paper, we propose a turbo learning method to simultaneously perform HOI recognition and pose estimation.
Specifically, a pose aware HOI recognition module is used
to perform HOI recognition based on both image and pose
features, which can reduce the influence of changes in human appearance. Meanwhile, a HOI guided pose estimation
module is used to perform pose estimation with clear relative distribution between keypoints, in which HOI features
are encoded into space location information. Then these two
modules form a closed loop in the similar way as an engine
turbo-charger, which feeds the output back to the input to
reuse the exhaust gas for better engine efficiency. The feedback process can gradually improve the results of both tasks.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first unified end-toend trainable network for simultaneous HOI recognition and
pose estimation.
Our contributions are in three folds: (1) A pose aware
HOI recognition module is proposed, in which the human
pose can help to extract more accurate human structure information than the source appearance features. (2) A HOI
guided pose estimation module is introduced, where HOI
recognition features and image features form an attention

Human-object interactions (HOI) recognition and pose estimation are two closely related tasks. Human pose is an essential cue for recognizing actions and localizing the interacted objects. Meanwhile, human action and their interacted
objects’ localizations provide guidance for pose estimation.
In this paper, we propose a turbo learning framework to perform HOI recognition and pose estimation simultaneously.
First, two modules are designed to enforce message passing
between the tasks, i.e. pose aware HOI recognition module
and HOI guided pose estimation module. Then, these two
modules form a closed loop to utilize the complementary information iteratively, which can be trained in an end-to-end
manner. The proposed method achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on two public benchmarks including Verbs in
COCO (V-COCO) and HICO-DET datasets.

Introduction
Human-object interactions (HOI) recognition (Gkioxari et
al. 2017; Gupta, Kembhavi, and Davis 2009; Yao and FeiFei 2010; Chen and Grauman 2014) aims to detect and recognize triplets in the form < human, action, object >
from a single image. It has attracted increasing attention, due
to its wide applications in image understanding and humancomputer interfaces. Although previous methods have made
significant progress, it is still a challenging task due to the
diversity of human activities and the complexity of backgrounds.
Most existing methods perform HOI recognition in two
steps. First, a detector is employed to detect all objects in the
image. Then the action and interacted objects’ locations are
obtained mainly based on the human appearance. However,
these methods are easily influenced by the change of human
appearance. In contrast to source human appearance, human
pose contains structure information, which is a more robust
reference for both action recognition and object localization.
Though pose information also comes from appearance features, from the viewpoint of HOI recognition task, it provides an indirect way to encode appearance features. Therefore, considering pose estimation in HOI recognition is thus
a natural and intuitive idea. Gupta and Malik (2015) propose a dataset named Verbs in COCO (V-COCO), in which
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

898

