The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Reliable Learning for High Stakes Applications
Jinyang Gao,1 Junjie Yao,2 Yingxia Shao3∗
1

Alibaba Group, 2 ECNU, 3 BUPT,
jinyang.gjy@alibaba-inc.com, junjie.yao@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, shaoyx@bupt.edu.cn.

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on delivering reliable learning results
for high stakes applications such as self-driving, financial investment and clinical diagnosis, where the accuracy of predictions is considered as a more crucial requirement than giving predictions for all query samples. We adopt the learning with reject option framework where the learning model
only predict those samples which they convince to give the
correct answer. However, for most prevailing deep learning
predictors, the confidence estimated by the model themselves
are far from reflecting the real generalization performance.
To model the reliability of prediction concisely, we propose
an exploratory solution called GALVE (Generative Adversarial Learning with Variance Expansion) which adopts generative adversarial learning to implicitly measure the region
where the model achieve good generalization performance.
By applying GALVE to measure the reliability of predictions,
we achieved an error rate less than half of which straightforwardly measured by confidence in CIFAR10 and SVHN
computer vision tasks.

Figure 1: Prediction with high confidence could be nonreliable, especially when the query sample is far from the
training distribution.
with high confidence without even knowing that themselves
are actually doing random guesses. For high stakes applications, every decision matters and such irresponsible actions
are definitely prohibited. Unfortunately, most deep learning models act like a black-box without much explanation,
and are hard to understand even for domain experts (Zeiler
and Fergus 2014) It is not practical to prevent such failures
by manually examining the inside logic. Consequently, developing a learning solution with reliable behaviour has attracted a great deal of interest.

Introduction
Nowadays, state-of-the-art AI solutions have achieved many
successes across a wide range of real world applications.
For most of the complex data analytics and decision making problems such as financial investment (Ding et al. 2015),
medical treatment (Zheng and Gao 2017; Cai and Gao 2018)
and self-driving system (Chen et al. 2015), learning algorithms, while in progressive development, are widely believed to be able to surpass human performance in the near
future. Such emerging “high stakes” applications of AI raise
high criteria on the reliability of deployed solutions. However, most of these applications rely on prevailing deep neural network models. While these models can provide high
prediction accuracy in general cases, they may be vulnerable to unexpected egregious errors (Nguyen, Yosinski, and
Clune 2015; Moosavi et al. 2016; Fawzi et al. 2016), particularly when being applied to data points that are not
well-represented in the training set (e.g., Figure 1). In some
above cases, the deep learning models act like doing random guesses on regions lack of training points, and predict

Learning with Reject Option (LRO)
To achieve reliable learning results, one possible solution
specifically studied in this paper is to construct a learning
model with reject option (Bartlett and Wegkamp 2008). Instead of optimizing the overall accuracy on the test samples,
it aims at selecting the largest distribution (i.e. subset) from
the test set, in which the averaged accuracy should be higher
than a given threshold p. Learning with reject option can be
applied to a wide range of high stakes applications, which
have the following two properties: 1) be backed up by human
or other default methods so that the applied model is not the
only problem solving solution; 2) must perform better than
a given requirement (e.g. better than human for financial investment etc.). Such reliable learning solutions are useful

∗

corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3614

