The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Automatic Generation of Leveled Visual Assessments for Young Learners
Anjali Singh, Ruhi Sharma Mittal, Shubham Atreja
{ansingh8, ruhi.sharma, satreja1}@in.ibm.com
IBM Research AI

Mourvi Sharma∗

Seema Nagar, Prasenjit Dey, Mohit Jain

mourvi.sharma@byjus.com
Think & Learn Pvt. Ltd.

{senagar3, prasenjit.dey, mohitjain}@in.ibm.com
IBM Research AI

Abstract
Images are an essential tool for communicating with children,
particularly at younger ages when they are still developing
their emergent literacy skills. Hence, assessments that use images to assess their conceptual knowledge and visual literacy,
are an important component of their learning process. Creating assessments at scale is a challenging task, which has led to
several techniques being proposed for automatic generation
of textual assessments. However, none of them focuses on
generating image-based assessments. To understand the manual process of creating visual assessments, we interviewed
primary school teachers. Based on the findings from the preliminary study, we present a novel approach which uses image semantics to generate visual multiple choice questions
(VMCQs) for young learners, wherein options are presented
in the form of images. We propose a metric to measure the semantic similarity between two images, which we use to identify the four options – one answer and three distractor images
– for a given question. We also use this metric for generating VMCQs at two difficulty levels – easy and hard. Through
a quantitative evaluation, we show that the system-generated
VMCQs are comparable to VMCQs created by experts, hence
establishing the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Figure 1: Example VMCQ at two different difficulty levels –
easy and hard with correct answer A: Duck

The use of distractors that appear as plausible answers to
a student who does not know the correct answer, helps in
making an MCQ difficult. Hence, the level of similarity between answer and distractor options allows test-makers to
control the difficulty level of MCQs to a great extent (Alsubait, Parsia, and Sattler 2013). For VMCQs, there are several factors that determine the level of similarity between the
different options. Consider the example shown in Figure 1.
The question is assessing a child’s conceptual knowledge of
animals and their habitat. Two variants of the question have
been shown - easy and hard. In the easy variant, the correct
option (A: Duck) shows a duck in a lake, while none of the
animals in the distractor images are near a water body. In
contrast, in the hard variant, all options show animals near
a water body, making it difficult for a child to select the correct answer solely on the basis of the details in the images.
It further requires the child to know unique features of the
answer object (ducks in this case).
To further understand the process of creating VMCQs and
the associated challenges, we conducted semi-structured interviews with five primary school teachers. From this study,
we found that the difficulty level of VMCQs is highly dependent on the choice of option images, and also how the answer
and distractor images compare to each other semantically.
Furthermore, manually creating VMCQs requires considerable effort in selecting images, considering factors such as
the images’ clarity, quality and appropriateness for children.
While several methods have been proposed for automatically generating textual MCQs, none of them focuses on

Introduction

One of the very first ways children engage with the world
is through images and visual cues (Ausburn and Ausburn
1978)). Developmentally, a young child’s visual literacy, i.e.,
the ability to make meaning from and communicate using
images, forms the foundation of their later manipulations
with language. It is imperative to consider this factor while
designing assessments for children, so that they are engaging and can be used to appropriately assess their learning
abilities. Visual Multiple Choice Questions (VMCQs) that
ask children to choose the correct answer from a given set of
images, are an ideal way of assessing children, and have indeed become common practice amongst assessments in the
early childhood age group (Dunn et al. 2015). While designing such assessments, it is important to include questions
at different difficulty levels, in order to measure children’s
learning progress as well as to cater to children with different
learning proficiencies (Alsubait, Parsia, and Sattler 2013).
∗

Work done while at IBM Research
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9713

