The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Building Human-Machine Trust via Interpretability
Umang Bhatt

Pradeep Ravikumar

José M. F. Moura

Carnegie Mellon University
umang@cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
moura@cmu.edu

Aggregate Valuation of Antecedents

Abstract

To maintain human-machine trust, we develop a new class of
explanations that aggregates feature attributions of the most
influential points to a given test point, exposing local explanations and global patterns simultaneously. Our proposed
method, AVA: Aggregate Valuation of Antecedents, combines the idea of approximating a black-box model of interest to develop a feature attribution for a test point via (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017) with a
local neighborhood influence measure proposed in (Koh and
Liang 2017). To first introduce notation, let x ∈ Rd be a datapoint’s feature vector where the xi ∈ R is a specific feature
of that datapoint. Let D = {x(j) }N
j=1 represent the training
d×N
datapoints, where D ∈ R
. Let fb be the learned predictor we wish to explain. Using the approximation in (Koh and
Liang 2017), we define the influence weight, ρj ∈ R≥0 , of
training point, x(j) , on a test point, xtest , as follows.

Developing human-machine trust is a prerequisite for adoption of machine learning systems in decision critical settings
(e.g healthcare and governance). Users develop appropriate
trust in these systems when they understand how the systems
make their decisions. Interpretability not only helps users understand what a system learns but also helps users contest
that system to align with their intuition. We propose an algorithm, AVA: Aggregate Valuation of Antecedents, that generates a consensus feature attribution, retrieving local explanations and capturing global patterns learned by a model. Our
empirical results show that AVA rivals current benchmarks.

Introduction
As machine learning systems become pervasive, humanmachine trust ought to become a potentially necessary objective. Currently, black-box systems beget powerful predictive power to the end user but come with a burden of opacity,
creating space for distrust. Training interpretable models or
coupling explainable models with black-box models demystifies the reasoning in these systems whilst maintaining respectable levels of accuracy (Lipton 2018). Such transparent
machine learning systems that deliver post-hoc explanations
with predictions have been extensively studied in the current
machine learning literature.
We can explain a model’s output by looking at the training
examples most influential to model prediction for an unseen
test point (Koh and Liang 2017). We also can provide associations between input features and the target prediction,
resulting in a feature attribution: a ranking of which features mattered most to the model. Feature attributions can
be found via gradient-based methods, which find the partial
derivative of the target with respect to every input feature
(Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017), or perturbation-based
methods, which use parametric models to approximate the
decision boundary in a region of interest (Lundberg and Lee
2017). Current feature attribution approaches are impoverished, resulting in inconsistent attributions due to noisy gradients estimates or unrepresentative regions of perturbation:
both of which decrease user trust.

d
L(fb,x(j) , xtest ) =0
d
We then select the local neighborhood, Nk , of the k most
influential training points on xtest .
X
ρj
Nk (xtest , D) = arg max
ρj = Iup,loss (x(j) , xtest ) =

N ⊂D,|N |=k

x(j) ∈N

Using an attribution technique g, like (Lundberg and Lee
2017) or (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017), we obtain a
value attribution for each of the k points. Finally, once we
have the set of value attributions {g(x(j) )}x(j) ∈Nk ∈ G ∗ ,
where g(x(j) ) ∈ G, we can apply an aggregation scheme
A : G ∗ 7→ G to obtain a consensus feature attribution. The
procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1.

Traditional Rank Aggregation
We leverage traditional aggregation techniques (i.e., Borda
Count and Markov Chains) to combine the top k attributions
into a consensus attribution. A natural class of such aggregation mechanisms are based on centroids with respect to
some distance d : G × G 7→ R, so that:
A ({g(x)}x∈Nk ) ∈ arg min

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

g∈G

9919

k
X
j=1

d(g, g j )

