The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Knowledge-Graph Augmented Word
Representations for Named Entity Recognition
Qizhen He,* Liang Wu,* Yida Yin, Heming Cai
Bilibili, Shanghai, China
{heqizhen, wuliang, yinyida, caiheming}@bilibili.com

Abstract

knowledge base can provide strong signals to recognize the
named entities. In a typical classifier for Named Entity
Recognition (NER), such signals can be captured by manmade features. To relieve the pressure on feature engineering and to provide a uniform word representation that is
both context-aware and knowledge-aware, we present a
knowledge-graph
augmented
word
representation
(KAWR). Specifically, the primary contribution of this
paper is that 1) we introduce a new kind of word embed௘௡௧௜௧௬
ding ‫ݓ‬௜
based on the related entities in the knowledge
graph through a novel Gated Entity-based Recurrent Unit
௘௡௧௜௧௬
or GERU, 2) based on ‫ݓ‬௜
, we design a new attention
function that is aware of entity relations, to provide
‫ݓ‬௜௥௘௟௔௧௜௢௡ which models the relation context of the entities
௘௡௧௜௧௬
in the sequence, 3) ‫ݓ‬௜
and ‫ݓ‬௜௥௘௟௔௧௜௢௡ then concatenated
௟௔௡௚௨௔௚௘
with the embedding vector ‫ݓ‬௜
from a standard language model to provide more powerful features for classification. As will be demonstrated in the experiment section, the KAWR can work with the existing context-aware
word representations, and provide better results than BERT
on five datasets by +0.46~+2.07 increase on F1 score. Noticeably, greater increases can be observed on small training-sets (which is often the case for domain-specific tasks)
suggesting less dependency on the training set and better
generalization for KAWR.
Although we are not the first to introduce the knowledge
information into NLP models (Annervaz et al., 2018; Xin
et al., 2018), this is the first time, to our best knowledge,
that knowledge information is encoded into word representation and the text context is modeled based on the entityrelations defined in the knowledge base.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We first
present related work in section 1.1. We then describe the
proposed methods and formulations in details in section 2,
followed by experiments and results in section 3. We conclude our paper with discussion on future work in section
4.

By modeling the context information, ELMo and BERT
have successfully improved the state-of-the-art of word representation, and demonstrated their effectiveness on the
Named Entity Recognition task. In this paper, in addition to
such context modeling, we propose to encode the prior
knowledge of entities from an external knowledge base into
the representation, and introduce a Knowledge-Graph Augmented Word Representation or KAWR for named entity
recognition. Basically, KAWR provides a kind of
knowledge-aware representation for words by 1) encoding
entity information from a pre-trained KG embedding model
with a new recurrent unit (GERU), and 2) strengthening
context modeling from knowledge wise by providing a relation attention scheme based on the entity relations defined
in KG. We demonstrate that KAWR, as an augmented version of the existing linguistic word representations, promotes F1 scores on 5 datasets in various domains by
+0.46~+2.07. Better generalization is also observed for
KAWR on new entities that cannot be found in the training
sets.

1. Introduction
Named entity recognition plays an important role in various applications such as search engines and questionanswering systems, and has always been studied as a sequence-tagging problem in Nature Language Processing.
Recent progress is reported either by constructing more
sophisticated classifiers like Bi-LSTM-CRF (Huang et al.,
2015) and Bi-LSTM-CNN (Chiu and Nichols, 2016) or by
more powerful word representations like ELMo (Peters et
al., 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2018). In this paper, we
focus on the representation part and propose a more descriptive representation by introducing the information of
entities and their relations which are defined in a
knowledge base.
The motivation for this paper comes from an intuitive
idea: the entities and their relations provided by the
*They contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7919

