The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Modeling Probabilistic Commitments for
Maintenance Is Inherently Harder than for Achievement
Qi Zhang, Edmund H. Durfee, Satinder Singh
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan
{qizhg, durfee, baveja}@umich.edu

Prior work has focused on semantics and mechanisms for
the provider to follow to faithfully pursue its commitments
despite uncertainty (Jennings 1993; Xing and Singh 2001;
Winikoff 2006; Durfee and Singh 2016). The previous work
held that a probabilistic commitment should be considered
fulﬁlled if the provider’s actions would have brought about
the desired outcome by the promised time with at least the
promised probability, even if in a particular instance the
desired outcome was not realized. In this vein, the focus
was largely on the provider’s pursuit of achievement commitments (Xuan and Lesser 1999; Maheswaran et al. 2008;
Witwicki and Durfee 2009; Zhang et al. 2016), where the
provider commits to changing some features of the state
in a way desired by the recipient with some probability by
some time. For example, the recipient plans to take an action
(e.g., move from one room to another) with a precondition
(e.g., the door separating rooms is open) that the provider
has promised to likely enable by some deadline.

Abstract
Most research on probabilistic commitments focuses on commitments to achieve enabling preconditions for other agents.
Our work reveals that probabilistic commitments to instead
maintain preconditions for others are surprisingly harder to
use well than their achievement counterparts, despite strong
semantic similarities. We isolate the key difference as being
not in how the commitment provider is constrained, but rather
in how the commitment recipient can locally use the commitment speciﬁcation to approximately model the provider’s effects on the preconditions of interest. Our theoretic analyses
show that we can more tightly bound the potential suboptimality due to approximate modeling for achievement than for
maintenance commitments. We empirically evaluate alternative approximate modeling strategies, conﬁrming that probabilistic maintenance commitments are qualitatively more
challenging for the recipient to model well, and indicating the
need for more detailed speciﬁcations that can sacriﬁce some
of the agents’ autonomy.

This paper also considers another form of commitment, a
maintenance commitment, where the provider instead commits to courses of action that, up until a promised time, are
sufﬁciently unlikely to change features that are already the
way the recipient wants them maintained. After that time,
the provider can freely change the features. For example, a
door the recipient wants open might initially be so, but the
provider wants to close it to clean behind it during housekeeping tasks. The provider could postpone closing it (clean
elsewhere ﬁrst), but by changing other doors while cleaning
elsewhere it might accidentally introduce a draft that could
prematurely close the door the recipient wants left open.

Introduction
In multiagent systems, agents are often interdependent in
that what one agent does can help or hinder another. In a cooperative system, agents can mutually beneﬁt from helping
each other. Speciﬁcally, we focus on interdependency where
an agent (the commitment provider) makes a social commitment (Singh 1999; Kalia, Zhang, and Singh 2014) to another (the commitment recipient). In essence, a commitment
abstracts the effect that the provider’s behavior has on the
recipient’s local environment, simplifying the coordination
between the agents. When stochasticity is inherent in the environment, the provider cannot guarantee to bring about the
outcomes the recipient wants, and in fact could discover after committing that its plan to pursue the outcomes is more
costly or risky than it had previously realized. Under such
circumstances, commitments are conditional (Singh 2008).
And when the conditions are expensive for the provider to
enumerate and/or the recipient to observe, the likelihood of
their holding can be summarized numerically, leading to a
probabilistic commitment.

Even though decision-theoretic formulations of, and reasoning methods for, achievement and maintenance commitments are nearly identical, prior work has found it
much harder to successfully coordinate for maintenance than
achievement (Clement and Schaffer 2008; Goldman et al.
2008; Hiatt 2009). In the past, it has been assumed that the
difﬁculty lies on the provider’s side—that it might be inherently harder for a provider to ﬁnd good policies that maintain a feature than to change it. However, in this paper we
claim (and justify) that instead the challenge actually lies on
the recipient’s side: that a maintenance commitment is fundamentally harder for the recipient to model safely than an

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10326

