The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FAN-Face: a Simple Orthogonal Improvement to Deep Face Recognition
Jing Yang,1,* Adrian Bulat,2 Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,2
1
University of Nottingham, 2 Samsung AI Center, Cambridge
{jing.yang2, yorgos.tzimiropoulos}@nottingham.ac.uk, adrian@adrianbulat.com

considered a difﬁcult problem due to large facial appearance
variations mostly caused by pose, facial expression, occlusion, illumination and age. When matching, for example, a
proﬁle Ap to a frontal Af face of the same identity A, this
distance must be smaller than the distance between Af with
another frontal face Bf of identity B. Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been shown that they
can learn to some extent such an embedding from large annotated face recognition datasets. Speciﬁcally, a few recent
works (Wen et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018;
Deng et al. 2019) have proposed more effective loss functions so that the learned feature embeddings for each face
are both separable and discriminative.
Our work has a similar objective but departs from all the
aforementioned works in that it does not propose a new loss
function. In contrast, for any given loss function, in this
work, we propose to learn a better feature representation for
face matching and recognition by integrating, during training, features from a pre-trained network for localizing facial landmarks. A network for detecting facial landmarks is
trained to learn by construction to establish correspondences
between faces in any pose and facial expression independently of nuisance factors like illumination, blur, poor resolution, occlusion etc. Although it seems natural to incorporate such features in a face recognition pipeline in order to
facilitate matching, to our knowledge, there is no prior work
which proposes to do so.
In summary, our contributions are:

Abstract
It is known that facial landmarks provide pose, expression
and shape information. In addition, when matching, for example, a proﬁle and/or expressive face to a frontal one, knowledge of these landmarks is useful for establishing correspondence which can help improve recognition. However, in prior
work on face recognition, facial landmarks are only used for
face cropping in order to remove scale, rotation and translation variations. This paper proposes a simple approach to face
recognition which gradually integrates features from different
layers of a facial landmark localization network into different
layers of the recognition network. To this end, we propose
an appropriate feature integration layer which makes the features compatible before integration. We show that such a simple approach systematically improves recognition on the most
difﬁcult face recognition datasets, setting a new state-of-theart on IJB-B, IJB-C and MegaFace datasets.

1

Introduction

Face recognition is the process of recognizing or verifying a person’s identity from a given facial image or video.
It is an important problem in computer vision research with
many applications like access control, identity recognition in
social media, and surveillance systems. With the advent of
Deep Learning there has been a tremendous progress in designing effective face recognition systems, yet, many applications (e.g. border control) require super-human accuracy
and, as such, improving existing systems is still an active research topic. Our main contribution is a simple approach to
improving deep face recognition accuracy via incorporating
face-related information (e.g. pose, expression and landmark
correspondence) provided by a network for facial landmark
localization in order to facilitate face matching. Besides improving accuracy, our approach can be readily incorporated
to all existing state-of-the-art face recognition methods.
The ultimate goal of face recognition is to learn a feature embedding for each face with small within-class and
large between-class distances. Traditionally, this has been

• We are the ﬁrst to explore how features from a pretrained facial landmark localization network can be used
to enhance face recognition accuracy. Contrary to prior
pipelines for face recognition, facial landmarks are not
just used for face cropping and normalization. Instead,
both landmark heatmaps and features from the facial
landmark network are integrated into the face recognition feature extraction process to (a) provide facial pose-,
expression-, and shape-related information, and (b) help
establish correspondence for improving face matching.
• We explore various architectural design choices at a network level to identify the best strategy for integration.
Importantly, we propose a novel feature integration layer
which is able to effectively integrate the features from the

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Work done as an intern at Samsung AI Center, Cambridge
12621

