The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Object Co-Segmentation via Spatial-Semantic Network Modulation
Kaihua Zhang,1 Jin Chen,1 Bo Liu,2∗ Qingshan Liu1
1

B-DAT and CICAEET, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
JD Finance America Corporation
{zhkhua, kﬂiubo}@gmail.com

Abstract
Object co-segmentation is to segment the shared objects in
multiple relevant images, which has numerous applications
in computer vision. This paper presents a spatial and semantic modulated deep network framework for object cosegmentation. A backbone network is adopted to extract
multi-resolution image features. With the multi-resolution
features of the relevant images as input, we design a spatial modulator to learn a mask for each image. The spatial
modulator captures the correlations of image feature descriptors via unsupervised learning. The learned mask can roughly
localize the shared foreground object while suppressing the
background. For the semantic modulator, we model it as a
supervised image classiﬁcation task. We propose a hierarchical second-order pooling module to transform the image
features for classiﬁcation use. The outputs of the two modulators manipulate the multi-resolution features by a shiftand-scale operation so that the features focus on segmenting
co-object regions. The proposed model is trained end-to-end
without any intricate post-processing. Extensive experiments
on four image co-segmentation benchmark datasets demonstrate the superior accuracy of the proposed method compared to state-of-the-art methods. The codes are available at
http://kaihuazhang.net/.

1

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Object co-segmentation examples by our approach. (a) Horse group; (b) Horse group co-segmentation
maps.
features cannot well handle the challenging cases in cosegmentation such as background clutter and large-scale
appearance variations of the co-objects in images. In recent years, deep-learning-based co-segmentation methods
have attracted much attention. For example, (Li et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2018) leverage a Siamese network architecture
for object co-segmentation and an attention mechanism is
used to enhance the co-object feature representations. These
methods have shown superior performance compared to
the traditional methods (Yuan, Lu, and Shivakumara 2014;
Dai et al. 2013; Lee et al. 2015), which inspire us to explore
a deep-learning-based solution to object co-segmentation.
One critical property of object co-segmentation is that the
co-objects in images belong to the same semantic category.
Those co-objects usually occupy part of each image. One illustrative example is shown in Figure 1. It is desirable that
the deep convolutional network layers, being used as a feature extractor, are targeted on modelling the co-objects. To
this end, we propose a spatial-semantic modulated network
structure to model this property. The two modulators are
achieved by the designed group-wise mask learning branch
and co-category classiﬁcation branch, respectively. We summarize the technical contributions of this work as follows:

Introduction

As a special case of image object segmentation, object cosegmentation refers to the task of jointly discovering and
segmenting the objects shared in a group of images. It has
been widely used to support various computer vision applications, such as interactive image segmentation (Kamranian
et al. 2018), 3D reconstruction (Mustafa and Hilton 2017)
and object co-localization (Wei et al. 2019; Han et al. 2018),
to name a few.
Image features that characterize the co-objects in the image group are vital for a co-segmentation task. Conventional approaches use the hand-crafted cues such as color
histograms, Gabor ﬁlter outputs and SIFT descriptors as
feature representations (Yuan, Lu, and Shivakumara 2014;
Dai et al. 2013; Lee et al. 2015). Those hand-crafted

• We propose a spatial-semantic modulated deep network
for object co-segmentation. Image features extracted by a
backbone network are used to learn a spatial modulator
and a semantic modulator. The outputs of the modulators

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12813

