The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AutoDAL: Distributed Active Learning with Automatic Hyperparameter Selection
Xu Chen,1 Brett Wujek1
1
SAS Inc
steven.xu.chen@gmail.com, Brett.Wujek@sas.com

is used to generate and optimize machine learning pipelines
that can transform data, select features, select the best model
type, and optimize hyperparameter settings to discover the
”best” model. While automated machine learning for supervised learning has been extensively studied, in many applications such as medical image analysis, fraud detection, and
mechanical system monitoring and maintenance, the available dataset contains a limited number of observations with
labels assigned (e.g. malignant, fraudulent, abnormal, failed,
etc.). In these situations, active learning (AL) (Wang and
Ye 2015)(Maystre and Grossglause 2017), which incorporates dynamic interactive querying for labels, is preferred
due to the power of combining the limited labeled data and
large amount of unlabeled data, accounting for the selection of the most informative data. Like supervised learning,
good hyperparameter tuning schemes also play a crucial role
in active learning. For instance, some theoretical analysis
(C.S.Ong, Smola, and Willamson 2003) have identiﬁed that
the machine learning performance is sensitive to the kernel
width selection in similarity measurement. There has also
been research (Beatty, Kochis, and Bloodgood 2018) studying the behavior of batch size in query selection for active
learning. Therefore, given a limited number of labeled samples, it is critical to automatically determine a good set of
hyperparameters for active learning in order to efﬁciently
maximize the classiﬁcation performance.

Abstract
Automated machine learning (AutoML) strives to establish
an appropriate machine learning model for any dataset automatically with minimal human intervention. Although extensive research has been conducted on AutoML, most of it has
focused on supervised learning. Research of automated semisupervised learning and active learning algorithms is still limited. Implementation becomes more challenging when the algorithm is designed for a distributed computing environment.
With this as motivation, we propose a novel automated learning system for distributed active learning (AutoDAL) to address these challenges. First, automated graph-based semisupervised learning is conducted by aggregating the proposed
cost functions from different compute nodes in a distributed
manner. Subsequently, automated active learning is addressed
by jointly optimizing hyperparameters in both the classiﬁcation and query selection stages leveraging the graph loss
minimization and entropy regularization. Moreover, we propose an efﬁcient distributed active learning algorithm which
is scalable for big data by ﬁrst partitioning the unlabeled data
and replicating the labeled data to different worker nodes in
the classiﬁcation stage, and then aggregating the data in the
controller in the query selection stage. The proposed AutoDAL algorithm is applied to multiple benchmark datasets and
a real-world electrocardiogram (ECG) dataset for classiﬁcation. We demonstrate that the proposed AutoDAL algorithm
is capable of achieving signiﬁcantly better performance compared to several state-of-the-art AutoML approaches and active learning algorithms.

However, research on automated active learning remains
limited. Traditional automated supervised learning techniques cannot be directly applied to automated active learning for two main reasons. First, whereas supervised learning
relies on more labeled examples for model selection and performance improvement, automated active learning has limited labeled data and therefore must resort to exploitation of
unlabeled observations for performance improvement in the
process of automatic hyperparameter selection. The techniques provided in automated supervised learning such as
cross-validation (Koch et al. 2018) are not directly applicable for automated active learning. Second, in order to capture the synergy between the classiﬁcation and the query
selection in active learning (Sener and Savarese 2018) and
determine the hyperparameters in an automated fashion, it is
very desirable to formulate a joint optimization problem to

Introduction
The development of automated machine learning (AutoML)
(Thornton et al. 2013)(Guyon et al. 2016) has become popular in data science discussions, publications, applications,
and systems, as an important tool to build better machine
learning models. Typically, existing methods rely on manually ﬁne-tuned machine learning models requiring a significant amount of human resources, time and effort. To address this, AutoML (Guyon et al. 2016) techniques have
been widely investigated and applied in applications such
as autonomous vehicles, sales forecasting, lead prioritization systems, and many other systems. In general, AutoML
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3537

