The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Zero-Shot Learning from Adversarial
Feature Residual to Compact Visual Feature
Bo Liu,1,2 Qiulei Dong,1,2,3∗ Zhanyi Hu1,2,3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{bo.liu, qldong, huzy}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, many zero-shot learning (ZSL) methods focused on
learning discriminative object features in an embedding feature space, however, the distributions of the unseen-class features learned by these methods are prone to be partly overlapped, resulting in inaccurate object recognition. Addressing this problem, we propose a novel adversarial network to
synthesize compact semantic visual features for ZSL, consisting of a residual generator, a prototype predictor, and a
discriminator. The residual generator is to generate the visual
feature residual, which is integrated with a visual prototype
predicted via the prototype predictor for synthesizing the visual feature. The discriminator is to distinguish the synthetic
visual features from the real ones extracted from an existing
categorization CNN. Since the generated residuals are generally numerically much smaller than the distances among all
the prototypes, the distributions of the unseen-class features
synthesized by the proposed network are less overlapped. In
addition, considering that the visual features from categorization CNNs are generally inconsistent with their semantic
features, a simple feature selection strategy is introduced for
extracting more compact semantic visual features. Extensive
experimental results on six benchmark datasets demonstrate
that our method could achieve a signiﬁcantly better performance than existing state-of-the-art methods by ∼1.2-13.2%
in most cases.

Figure 1: Comparison of our method with existing GANbased ZSL methods. A: Existing GAN-based methods generate visual features conditioned on their semantic feature.
B: Our method generates visual feature residuals conditioned on their semantic feature, and then synthesizes visual
features by combining the residuals and a visual prototype
predicted from its semantic feature.

tion function from visual features to semantic features. The
visual features are generally extracted from the input images
by CNNs (Convolutional Neural Networks), while the semantic features describe semantic attributes of object class,
e.g. class-level attribute and text description. The projection
function is trained on seen-class data by making the projected visual features closer to the semantic feature of their
correct class. However, the distributions of the projected visual features of unseen classes by these methods are prone
to be partly overlapped, leading to inaccurate object recognition.
In comparison to these visual-to-semantic methods, the
semantic-to-visual methods (Zhu et al. 2018; Xian et al.
2018b; Li et al. 2019) have signiﬁcantly improved the ZSL
performance recently. Most of semantic-to-visual methods
aim to generate visual features of unseen classes conditioned
on their semantic features via generative adversarial network
(GAN) as illustrated in Figure 1 A, and then train a classiﬁer
with the synthetic visual features and their corresponding labels for classifying real visual features of unseen classes.

Introduction
In recent years, zero-shot learning (ZSL) has attracted more
and more attention in pattern recognition and machine learning. Given a set of labeled seen-class data as well as the semantic relationship between seen and unseen classes, ZSL
aims to recognize unseen-class instances. Most existing ZSL
methods focused on learning discriminative object features
in an embedding feature space where the semantic relationship between seen and unseen classes is preserved, and
they could be roughly divided into two categories: visual-tosemantic methods and semantic-to-visual methods.
The visual-to-semantic methods (Frome et al. 2013;
Akata et al. 2015a; Xian et al. 2016) aim to build a projec∗

Corresponding author: Qiulei Dong
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11547

