The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Regression Under Human Assistance
Abir De

Paramita Koley

MPI-SWS
ade@mpi-sws.org

IIT Kharagpur
paramita.koley@iitkgp.ac.in

Niloy Ganguly

Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez

IIT Kharagpur
niloy@cse.iitkgp.ac.in

MPI-SWS
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org
or even surpassed, the average performance of human experts (Topol 2019; Cheng, Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and
Leskovec 2015; Pradel and Sen 2018). Currently, these models are mostly trained for full automation—they assume
they will take all the decisions. However, their decisions are
still worse than those by human experts on some instances,
where they make far more errors than average (Raghu et al.
2019a). Motivated by this observation, our goal is to develop
machine learning models that are optimized to operate under
different automation levels. In other words, these models are
optimized to take decisions for a given fraction of the instances and leave the remaining ones to humans.
More speciﬁcally, we focus on ridge regression and introduce a novel problem formulation that allows for different
automation levels. Based on this formulation, we make the
following contributions:

Abstract
Decisions are increasingly taken by both humans and machine learning models. However, machine learning models
are currently trained for full automation—they are not aware
that some of the decisions may still be taken by humans. In
this paper, we take a ﬁrst step towards the development of
machine learning models that are optimized to operate under
different automation levels. More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst introduce the problem of ridge regression under human assistance
and show that it is NP-hard. Then, we derive an alternative
representation of the corresponding objective function as a
difference of nondecreasing submodular functions. Building
on this representation, we further show that the objective is
nondecreasing and satisﬁes α-submodularity, a recently introduced notion of approximate submodularity. These properties allow a simple and efﬁcient greedy algorithm to enjoy approximation guarantees at solving the problem. Experiments on synthetic and real-world data from two important
applications—medical diagnosis and content moderation—
demonstrate that the greedy algorithm beats several competitive baselines.

1

I. We show that the problem is NP-hard. This is due to its
combinatorial nature—for each potential meta-decision
about which instances the machine will decide upon, there
is an optimal set of parameters for the regression model,
however, the meta-decision is also something we seek to
optimize.

Introduction

II. We derive an alternative representation of the objective function as a difference of nondecreasing submodular
functions. This representation enables us to use a recent
iterative algorithm (Iyer and Bilmes 2012) to solve the
problem, however, this algorithm does not enjoy approximation guarantees.

In a wide range of critical applications, societies rely on
the judgement of human experts to take consequential
decisions—decisions which have signiﬁcant consequences.
Unfortunately, the timeliness and quality of the decisions are
often compromised due to the large number of decisions to
be taken and a shortage of human experts. For example, in
certain medical specialties, patients in most countries need
to wait for months to be diagnosed by a specialist. In content moderation, online publishers often stop hosting comments sections because their staff is unable to moderate the
myriad of comments they receive. In software development,
bugs may be sometimes overlooked by software developers
who spend long hours on code reviews for large software
projects.
In this context, there is a widespread discussion on the
possibility of letting machine learning models take decisions in these high-stake tasks, where they have matched,

III. Building on the above representation, we further show
that the objective function is nondecreasing and satisﬁes
α-submodularity, a notion of approximate submodularity (Gatmiry and Gomez-Rodriguez 2019). These properties allow a simple and efﬁcient greedy algorithm (refer
to Algorithm 1) to enjoy approximation guarantees.
Here, we would like to acknowledge that our contributions
are just a ﬁrst step towards designing machine learning models that are optimized to operate under different automation
levels. It would be very interesting to extend our work to
more sophisticated machine learning models and other machine learning tasks (e.g., classiﬁcation).
Finally, we experiment with synthetic and real-world data

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2611

