The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Crowd-Assisted Disaster Scene Assessment with Human-AI Interactive Attention
Daniel (Yue) Zhang, Yifeng Huang, Yang Zhang, Dong Wang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
Email: {yzhang40, yhuang24, yzhang42, dwang5}@nd.edu

are done either manually (e.g., call centers) or through
the analysis of remote sensing data (e.g., satellite images).
These methods are both expensive and time-consuming. Recently, a new application called Disaster Scene Assessment
(DSA) has emerged where deep neural networks (Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) in particular) are applied
to recognize the severely damaged areas from self-reported
social media images of disaster scenes (Li et al. 2018;
Nguyen et al. 2017). The automatic tools like CNN allow
the DSA algorithms to be much more responsive than manual efforts. The social media images of DSA also provide
more detailed on-site information of the disaster from the
perspective of the eyewitnesses than the remote sensing data.
Despite the advantages of DSA applications, they suffer
from several failure scenarios. For example, they can treat
a small ﬁssure on a road in an image as severe damage or
take a large collapsed building as moderate damage (Zhang
et al. 2019). Such mistakes can mislead the response teams
to insigniﬁcant events and fail to respond to events where
people’s lives are at stake. We found one key element that
directly contributes to the failure of DSA algorithms is the
inaccurate “visual attention” in these algorithms. The visual attention refers to the region of an image that the AI
algorithm focuses on to identify the damage level of the
scene. We show examples of visual attention (illustrated as
heatmap) of three representative DSA algorithms in Figure 1. We also plot the ground truth annotation of human
attention (marked in red region) in the ﬁgure. Ideally, the
visual attention of a DSA scheme should focus on the damaged regions that are the same/similar as those captured by
human perception. However, all three DSA schemes in Figure 1 fail to perform such tasks to different extents.

Abstract
The recent advances of mobile sensing and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) have brought new revolutions in disaster response applications. One example is disaster scene assessment (DSA) which leverages computer vision techniques to
assess the level of damage severity of the disaster events from
images provided by eyewitnesses on social media. The assessment results are critical in prioritizing the rescue operations of the response teams. While AI algorithms can signiﬁcantly reduce the detection time and manual labeling cost
in such applications, their performance often falls short of
the desired accuracy. Our work is motivated by the emergence of crowdsourcing platforms (e.g., Amazon Mechanic
Turk, Waze) that provide unprecedented opportunities for acquiring human intelligence for AI applications. In this paper,
we develop an interactive Disaster Scene Assessment (iDSA)
scheme that allows AI algorithms to directly interact with humans to identify the salient regions of the disaster images in
DSA applications. We also develop new incentive designs and
active learning techniques to ensure reliable, timely, and costefﬁcient responses from the crowdsourcing platforms. Our
evaluation results on real-world case studies during Nepal and
Ecuador earthquake events demonstrate that iDSA can signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art baselines in accurately
assessing the damage of disaster scenes.

Introduction
Extreme disaster events such as hurricanes and earthquakes
can strike a community with little or no warning and leave
it with a high level of damages (e.g., casualties, injuries, and
infrastructure damages). In such events, the emergency response providers often run out of resources (e.g., rescuers,
ambulance, ﬁre trucks) due to the lack of preparation or the
sheer volume of the emergency events (Rawls and Turnquist 2010; Zhang et al. 2018a; Wang et al. 2013; 2019;
2012). For example, during the 2017 Hurricane Harvey crisis, 911 emergency lines were overwhelmed with more than
56,000 calls in 15 hours in Houston alone (Gomez 2017).
To effectively prioritize the rescue operations, it is critical to accurately assess the damage severity level of the
impact areas. Traditionally, such damage assessment tasks
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1: Visual Attention of Various DSA Schemes
2717

