The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dual Relation Semi-Supervised Multi-Label Learning
Lichen Wang, Yunyu Liu, Can Qin, Gan Sun, Yun Fu
Northeastern University, Boston, USA
{wang.lich, liu.yuny, qin.ca, g.sun}@husky.neu.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Label space

Wet

Rainy

…

…

Multi-label learning (MLL) solves the problem that one single sample corresponds to multiple labels. It is a challenging
task due to the long-tail label distribution and the sophisticated label relations. Semi-supervised MLL methods utilize
a small-scale labeled samples and large-scale unlabeled samples to enhance the performance. However, these approaches
mainly focus on exploring the data distribution in feature
space while ignoring mining the label relation inside of each
instance. To this end, we proposed a Dual Relation Semisupervised Multi-label Learning (DRML) approach which
jointly explores the feature distribution and the label relation
simultaneously. A dual-classiﬁer domain adaptation strategy
is proposed to align features while generating pseudo labels
to improve learning performance. A relation network is proposed to explore the relation knowledge. As a result, DRML
effectively explores the feature-label and label-label relations
in both labeled and unlabeled samples. It is an end-to-end
model without any extra knowledge. Extensive experiments
illustrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of our method1 .

Label Vector

…

Feature space

…

Abstract

…

…

Unlabeled sample

Inter-instance Instance Relation

Sunny
Intra-instance Label Relation

Figure 1: Two major challenges of semi-supervised MLL.
1) The labeled and unlabeled data have a distribution gap in
feature space due to long-tail label distribution. 2) The label
relations are complicated. (e.g., Sunny and Rainy have negative relation, Rainy and Wet have positive relation, while
Wet and Sunny have weak relation).

The scale of the available well-labeled datasets (Duygulu et
al. 2002; Wah et al. 2011; Patterson and Hays 2012) is relatively small compared with single-label datasets. Second,
the label relations are crucial to improve the MLL performance (Wu et al. 2018b). As illustrated in Figure 1. Some
labels have negative relations (e.g., Sunny and Rainy) which
are rare to show up together. While some labels have positive relations (e.g., Rainy and Wet) which usually appear together, and some labels have weak or no distinctive relations
(e.g., Wet and Sunny). Unfortunately, few datasets have the
relation information as prior knowledge. Besides, the relation map is manually deﬁned and task-speciﬁc. It is difﬁcult
to extend to other MLL tasks, which limits the potential applications of these approaches.
Although there are not enough labeled samples, the related unlabeled samples are easy to get. Consequently,
semi-supervised learning (Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty
2003) came up and has achieved great progress in MLL
tasks (Dong, Li, and Zhou 2018; Zhaomin et al. 2019). Conventional semi-supervised approaches mainly analyze the
data in feature space. However, the distribution of the label
and unlabeled features could be different which would affect
the ﬁnal performance. Moreover, most methods are inspired
by the single-label classiﬁcation approaches while ignoring

Introduction
Real-world objects could have multiple labels (e.g., colors, shapes, textures, and categories). Multi-label learning
(MLL) was proposed to predict tens or hundreds of different
labels for a single instance. MLL has become an attractive
and emerging ﬁeld (Boutell et al. 2004) as it can be applied
in a lot of practical applications (e.g., data mining (Cong et
al. 2018), image retrieval (Verma and Jawahar 2017) and image annotation (Verma and Jawahar 2017)).
There are two major challenges. First, the multi-label usually follows the long-tail distribution, which means that different labels appear in different frequencies. Some labels
rarely show up (e.g., Fight and Fall down) while some labels are common (e.g., Daytime and Natural light). Technologically, deploying more samples in the training stage could
solve this problem. However, it is not practical as the longtail label distribution characteristic, which means it is hard
to collect a dataset with enough and balanced information.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code is available in: https://github.com/wanglichenxj/
Dual-Relation-Semi-supervised-Multi-label-Learning
6227

