The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reinforcement-Learning Based Portfolio
Management with Augmented Asset Movement Prediction States
Yunan Ye,1 Hengzhi Pei,2 Boxin Wang,3 Pin-Yu Chen,4 Yada Zhu,4 Jun Xiao,1 Bo Li3
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Fudan University, 3 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 4 IBM Research
{chryleo, junx}@zju.edu.cn, hzpei16@fudan.edu.cn, {boxinw2, lbo}@illinois.edu,
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com, yzhu@us.ibm.com

(Tsay 2010). Essentially, PM involves sequential decision
making of continuously reallocating a number of funds into
assets based on the latest information to achieve the investment goal. It is natural to leverage reinforcement learning
(RL) to model the decision making process for asset reallocation (Almahdi and Yang 2017; Jiang, Xu, and Liang 2017;
Liang et al. 2018). Although some attempts have made to
apply RL for ﬁnancial PM, there are still several challenges
remain unsolved: 1) data heterogeneity: the collected information for each product may be sparse, noisy, imbalanced,
and diverse (e.g., ﬁnancial time series vs unstructured data,
news articles), and therefore it is difﬁcult to incorporate different information within the single model. 2) Environment
uncertainty: the non-stationary nature of ﬁnancial markets
induces uncertainty and often causes a distribution shift between training and testing data.

Abstract
Portfolio management (PM) is a fundamental ﬁnancial planning task that aims to achieve investment goals such as maximal proﬁts or minimal risks. Its decision process involves
continuous derivation of valuable information from various
data sources and sequential decision optimization, which
is a prospective research direction for reinforcement learning (RL). In this paper, we propose SARL, a novel StateAugmented RL framework for PM. Our framework aims to
address two unique challenges in ﬁnancial PM: (1) data heterogeneity – the collected information for each asset is usually diverse, noisy and imbalanced (e.g., news articles); and
(2) environment uncertainty – the ﬁnancial market is versatile and non-stationary. To incorporate heterogeneous data
and enhance robustness against environment uncertainty, our
SARL augments the asset information with their price movement prediction as additional states, where the prediction can
be solely based on ﬁnancial data (e.g., asset prices) or derived from alternative sources such as news. Experiments on
two real-world datasets, (i) Bitcoin market and (ii) HighTech
stock market with 7-year Reuters news articles, validate the
effectiveness of SARL over existing PM approaches, both in
terms of accumulated proﬁts and risk-adjusted proﬁts. Moreover, extensive simulations are conducted to demonstrate the
importance of our proposed state augmentation, providing
new insights and boosting performance signiﬁcantly over
standard RL-based PM method and other baselines.

To address the aforementioned challenges, in this paper,
we propose a novel State Augmented RL (SARL) framework for PM. The proposed SARL aims to leverage additional diverse information from alternative sources other
than classical structured ﬁnancial data, such as asset prices,
to make market trend prediction. Such prediction will then
be incorporated into our RL framework for state augmentation. SARL is a general framework in the sense that it can
incorporate different sources of information into the augmented states. It is also not restricted to any particular market. Throughout this paper, the information sources mainly
include the asset price, the exemplary ﬁnancial data, and
news articles of different products (companies), the exemplary alternative data.

Introduction
An investment portfolio is a basket of assets that can
hold stocks, bonds, cash and more. In today’s market, an
investor’s success heavily relies on maintaining a wellbalanced portfolio. Despite the recent trend of big data and
machine intelligence have triggered resolution to the investment industry, portfolio management is still largely based
on linear models and the Markowitz framework (Papenbrock 2016), known as Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT).
MPT relies on accurate prediction of market prices and restricted assumptions such as past probability distribution of
assets’ returns fully representing the future. Accurate market price forecast is extremely challenging, if not impossible, due to its highly noisy, stochastic and chaotic nature

To evaluate the performance of SARL, we test it on
two real-world datasets: the Bitcoin cryptocurrency dataset
(Jiang, Xu, and Liang 2017) and the HighTech stock
dataset (Ding et al. 2014). As an example, SARL is able
to achieve 140.9% improvement over the state-of-the-art
method (Jiang, Xu, and Liang 2017) in terms of accumulative return on the Bitcoin dataset. SARL also outperforms all
PM baselines including CRP, OLMAR, WMAMR in terms
of portfolio value and the Sharpe ratio (Sharpe and Pnces
1964). In addition, we show that due to market uncertainty,
the standard RL based PM approaches are difﬁcult to generalize while SARL is much more generalizable and eas-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1112

