The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Joint Super-Resolution and Alignment of Tiny Faces
Yu Yin,1 Joseph P. Robinson,1 Yulun Zhang,1 Yun Fu1,2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA
{yin.yu1, robinson.jo}@husky.neu.edu, yulun100@gmail.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

FSRNet

Abstract

Ours

SuperFAN

Super-resolution (SR) and landmark localization of tiny faces
are highly correlated tasks. On the one hand, landmark localization could obtain higher accuracy with faces of highresolution (HR). On the other hand, face SR would beneﬁt
from prior knowledge of facial attributes such as landmarks.
Thus, we propose a joint alignment and SR network to simultaneously detect facial landmarks and super-resolve tiny
faces. More speciﬁcally, a shared deep encoder is applied to
extract features for both tasks by leveraging complementary
information. To exploit representative power of the hierarchical encoder, intermediate layers of a shared feature extraction
module are fused to form efﬁcient feature representations.
The fused features are then fed to task-speciﬁc modules to detect landmarks and super-resolve face images in parallel. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art in both landmark
localization and SR of faces. We show a large improvement
for landmark localization of tiny faces (i.e., 16 × 16). Furthermore, the proposed framework yields comparable results
for landmark localization on low-resolution (LR) faces (i.e.,
64 × 64) to existing methods on HR (i.e., 256 × 256). As for
SR, the proposed method recovers sharper edges and more
details from LR face images than other state-of-the-art methods, which we demonstrate qualitatively and quantitatively.

(a) SR results

(b) SR + Landmark results

Figure 1: Comparison with SuperFAN (Bulat et al. 2018)
and FSRNet (Chen et al. 2018). The proposed recovers
sharper edges and ﬁner details HR space (a). Also, (b) shows
estimated landmarks superimposed on SR face, where Red
marks true landmarks and green marks predicted landmarks.
SR, also known as face hallucination, aims to generate highresolution (HR) faces from LR imagery (Liu, Shum, and
Freeman 2007). The recovered faces then provide more detailed information (e.g., sharper edges, clearer shapes, and
ﬁner skin details), and are often used for improved analysis
and perception. However, most existing methods (e.g., Superfan (Bulat and Tzimiropoulos 2018)) rely heavily on the
quality of recovered images. Since SR methods usually suffer from blurriness, using SR images for face-related tasks
can hinder the ﬁnal prediction or conclusion.
On the other hand, facial prior knowledge can be used to
recover SR faces of higher quality (Baker and Kanade 2000;
Liu, Shum, and Freeman 2007). In problems of single image super-resolution (SISR), face SR utilizes prior knowledge to improve the accuracy of the inferred images and,
thus, to yield results of higher quality. For example, one can
leverage low-level information (i.e., smoothness in color),
facial heatmaps, and face parsing maps to provide additional
mid-level information (i.e., face structure) to recover sharper
edges and shapes (Chen et al. 2018). Also, high-level information can be extracted with identity labels and other face

Introduction
Automatic face understanding is critical for problems in human perception (e.g., super-resolution (SR) (Yu and Porikli
2016), visual understanding (Güçlütürk et al. 2017), and
style transfer (Liu, Breuel, and Kautz 2017)) and applied
machine vision (e.g., landmark localization (Robinson et al.
2019), identity recognition (Wu et al. 2016), and face detection (Zhang et al. 2016)). Modern-day models for facebased tasks tend to breakdown when applied to images of
low-resolution (LR). In practice, face-based systems are frequently confronted with such scenarios (e.g., LR cameras
used for surveillance (Yu and Porikli 2017)). Recent studies
revealed that a decrease in resolution (i.e., < 30 × 30) yields
an increase in error for models used for facial landmark localization (Bulat et al. 2018). To address this problem, face
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12693

