The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Knowledge Graph Grounded Goal
Planning for Open-Domain Conversation Generation
Jun Xu,1 Haifeng Wang,2 Zhengyu Niu,2 Hua Wu,2 Wanxiang Che1∗
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{jxu, car}@ir.hit.edu.cn, {wanghaifeng, niuzhengyu, wu hua}@baidu.com

be explained by that they have no modules or effective mechanisms to manage chatting topics to ensure dialog coherence. Previous study (Hirano and Matsuo 2016) indicates
that dialog management strategies are quite universal in
human-human dialogs, e.g., topic changing or topic elaboration. Therefore, chatting topic management is crucial to generating coherent dialogs. Moreover, it is quite challenging
to learn the decision-making process for topic management
merely from dialog data without the help of background
knowledge.
To address these issues, there are two key challenges.
The ﬁrst one is how to conduct high-level goal1 sequence
planning. This is difﬁcult in that the chatbot should maintain inter-topic coherence2 , and at the same time it should
also take consideration of user interests for goal decision
to avoid “one-sided” conversation. The second one is how
to generate an in-depth multi-turn conversation about a single topic for goal completion, which corresponds to intratopic coherence2 . The capability of goal-sequence planning
enables chatbots to conduct proactive open-domain conversations towards recommended topics (Moon et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2018; Tang et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2019).
To this end, we present a three-layer Knowledge graph
grounded Hierarchical RL model (KnowHRL) for goalsequence planning and goal completion by topic elaboration. The upper-layer policy corresponds to the ﬁrst challenge, and the other two policies correspond to the second
challenge. The upper-layer policy is a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) based model, which learns natural paths over
a knowledge graph (KG) in order to plan a coherent, diverse and long-lasting goal sequence. At the same time, we

Abstract
Previous neural models on open-domain conversation generation have no effective mechanisms to manage chatting topics, and tend to produce less coherent dialogs. Inspired by
the strategies in human-human dialogs, we divide the task
of multi-turn open-domain conversation generation into two
sub-tasks: explicit goal (chatting about a topic) sequence
planning and goal completion by topic elaboration. To this
end, we propose a three-layer Knowledge aware Hierarchical
Reinforcement Learning based Model (KnowHRL). Specifically, for the ﬁrst sub-task, the upper-layer policy learns to
traverse a knowledge graph (KG) in order to plan a high-level
goal sequence towards a good balance between dialog coherence and topic consistency with user interests. For the second sub-task, the middle-layer policy and the lower-layer one
work together to produce an in-depth multi-turn conversation
about a single topic with a goal-driven generation mechanism. The capability of goal-sequence planning enables chatbots to conduct proactive open-domain conversations towards
recommended topics, which has many practical applications.
Experiments demonstrate that our model outperforms state of
the art baselines in terms of user-interest consistency, dialog
coherence, and knowledge accuracy.

Introduction
As letting machines talk with humans is one of the goals
of AI, lots of research efforts have been devoted to opendomain conversation generation (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015).
However, these Seq2Seq based models tend to produce
generic or less coherent responses. To address this issue, previous studies introduce external knowledge (Liu et al. 2018;
Zhou et al. 2018) or topic information (Wang et al. 2018;
Xing et al. 2017) to improve dialog informativeness. Moreover, there are other studies to employ reinforcement learning (RL) with the aim of generating coherent and longlasting multi-turn dialogs (Li et al. 2016b; Yao et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018; Zhao, Xie, and Eskenazi 2019).
Although these models have achieved promising results,
they still tend to produce less coherent dialogs with looselyconnected topics especially for a long conversation. It may

1

In this paper, goal refers to in-depth conversation about a given
topic, which is an entity in a knowledge graph. It should be noted
that the propose framework can be extended to cover more kinds
of goals, e.g., recommending items by conversation, or booking
a ticket, and so on, if we augment the KG to incorporate related
resource for these types of goals.
2
In this work, inter-topic coherence indicates that the whole
conversation is composed of well-connected topics as a sequence,
and intra-topic coherence indicates that each topic is elaborated by
well-connected consecutive utterances.

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9338

