The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Task-Oriented Dialog Systems That Consider
Multiple Appropriate Responses under the Same Context
Yichi Zhang∗

Zhijian Ou

Zhou Yu

Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
zhangyic17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
ozj@tsinghua.edu.cn

University of California, Davis
Davis, California, USA
joyu@ucdavis.edu

Abstract

restaurant
center

Conversations have an intrinsic one-to-many property, which
means that multiple responses can be appropriate for the same
dialog context. In task-oriented dialogs, this property leads
to different valid dialog policies towards task completion.
However, none of the existing task-oriented dialog generation approaches takes this property into account. We propose
a Multi-Action Data Augmentation (MADA) framework to
utilize the one-to-many property to generate diverse appropriate dialog responses. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst use dialog states to
summarize the dialog history, and then discover all possible
mappings from every dialog state to its different valid system
actions. During dialog system training, we enable the current
dialog state to map to all valid system actions discovered in
the previous process to create additional state-action pairs. By
incorporating these additional pairs, the dialog policy learns
a balanced action distribution, which further guides the dialog model to generate diverse responses. Experimental results
show that the proposed framework consistently improves dialog policy diversity, and results in improved response diversity and appropriateness. Our model obtains state-of-the-art
results on MultiWOZ.

request
food

I am so hungry - can you find me
a place to eat in the city center?

Sure. Which kind
of food do you like?

I have French and Italian
food, any preference?

I can do that. Which price
range do you prefer?
Bot 1

select
food

request
price
Bot 3

Bot 2

Figure 1: Multiple responses produced by different dialog
policies (shown in clouds) are proper for the same context.

Zhou et al. 2017; 2018). None of previous task-oriented systems consider such one-to-many property, since they focus
on task completion policies instead of language variations.
However, the one-to-many phenomenon is also prevalent
in task-oriented dialogs, in the form of different responding policies for the same dialog context (Fig.1). Since in
collected dialog datasets each dialog context has only one
reference response, the distribution of valid system actions
for each dialog state rely on their occurring frequencies in
the datasets which are usually highly unbalanced. Models
trained on these unbalanced datasets tend to capture the most
common dialog policy but ignore rarely occurred yet feasible user behaviors, which results in learning skewed and
low-coverage policies.
Our goal is to address such data bias and model this oneto-many property in task-oriented dialogs to enrich dialog
policy diversity, therefore building dialog systems that can
generate more diverse system responses. Instead of simply
learning how to map one user response to many system responses (Rajendran et al. 2018) , we propose to discover the
mapping from one dialog state (condensed dialog history) to
multiple system actions and then generate system responses
conditioned on learned actions. Since the number of unique
dialog states and system actions are much smaller than the
number of unique user and system responses, the mapping
is more structured and easier to incorporate in learning.
Speciﬁcally, we propose a general Multi-Action Data

Introduction
One big challenge in dialog system generation is that multiple responses can be appropriate under the same conversation context. This challenge originated from the intrinsic diversity of human conversations. Although recent progress in sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) learning
(Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) improves dialog systems
performance (Serban et al. 2017; Wen et al. 2017; Lei et al.
2018). These systems still ignore this one-to-many property
in conversation. Therefore, they are not able to handle diverse user behaviors in real-world settings (Li et al. 2016;
Rajendran et al. 2018).
Previous studies model this one-to-many conversation
property to improve utterance-level diversity in opendomain dialog generation (Zhao, Zhao, and Eskenazi 2017;
∗
This work was done during Yichi Zhang’s summer internship
at University of California, Davis.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9604

