The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Linguistic Fingerprints of Internet Censorship: the Case of Sina Weibo
Kei Yin Ng, Anna Feldman, Jing Peng
Montclair State University
Montclair, New Jersey, USA

In this paper, we deal with a particular type of censorship
– when a post gets removed from a social media platform
semi-automatically based on its content. We are interested in
exploring whether there are systematic linguistic differences
between posts that get removed by censors from Sina Weibo,
a Chinese microblogging platform, and the posts that remain
on the website. Sina Weibo was launched in 2009 and became the most popular social media platform in China. Sina
Weibo has over 431 million monthly active users3 .
In cooperation with the ruling regime, Weibo sets strict
control over the content published under its service (Tager,
Bass, and Lopez 2018). According to Zhu et al. (2013),
Weibo uses a variety of strategies to target censorable posts,
ranging from keyword list ﬁltering to individual user monitoring. Among all posts that are eventually censored, nearly
30% of them are censored within 5–30 minutes, and nearly
90% within 24 hours (Zhu et al. 2013). We hypothesize that
the former are done automatically, while the latter are removed by human censors.
Research shows that some of the censorship decisions are
not necessarily driven by the criticism of the state (King,
Pan, and Roberts 2013), the presence of controversial topics (Ng, Feldman, and Leberknight 2018; Ng et al. 2018), or
posts that describe negative events (Ng et al. 2019). Rather,
censorship is triggered by other factors, such as for example, the collective action potential (King, Pan, and Roberts
2013), i.e., censors target posts that stimulate collective action, such as riots and protests.
The goal of this paper is to compare censored and uncensored posts that contain the same sensitive keywords and
topics. Using the linguistic features extracted, a neural network model is built to explore whether censorship decision
can be deduced from the linguistic characteristics of the
posts.
The contributions of this paper are: 1. We decipher a
way to determine whether a blogpost on Weibo has been
deleted by the author or censored by Weibo. 2. We develop
a corpus of censored and uncensored Weibo blogposts that
contain sensitive keyword(s). 3. We build a neural network
classiﬁer that predicts censorship signiﬁcantly better than
non-expert humans. 4. We ﬁnd a set of linguistics features

Abstract
This paper studies how the linguistic components of blogposts collected from Sina Weibo, a Chinese microblogging
platform, might affect the blogposts’ likelihood of being censored. Our results go along with King et al. (2013)’s Collective Action Potential (CAP) theory, which states that a blogpost’s potential of causing riot or assembly in real life is the
key determinant of it getting censored. Although there is not
a deﬁnitive measure of this construct, the linguistic features
that we identify as discriminatory go along with the CAP
theory. We build a classiﬁer that signiﬁcantly outperforms
non-expert humans in predicting whether a blogpost will be
censored. The crowdsourcing results suggest that while humans tend to see censored blogposts as more controversial
and more likely to trigger action in real life than the uncensored counterparts, they in general cannot make a better guess
than our model when it comes to ‘reading the mind’ of the
censors in deciding whether a blogpost should be censored.
We do not claim that censorship is only determined by the
linguistic features. There are many other factors contributing
to censorship decisions. The focus of the present paper is on
the linguistic form of blogposts. Our work suggests that it is
possible to use linguistic properties of social media posts to
automatically predict if they are going to be censored.

Introduction
In 2019, Freedom in the World1 , a yearly survey produced
by Freedom House2 that measures the degree of civil liberties and political rights in every nation, recorded the 13th
consecutive year of decline in global freedom. This decline spans across long-standing democracies such as USA
as well as authoritarian regimes such as China and Russia.
“Democracy is in retreat. The offensive against freedom of
expression is being supercharged by a new and more effective form of digital authoritarianism.” According to the report, China is now exporting its model of comprehensive internet censorship and surveillance around the world, offering
trainings, seminars, and even study trips as well as advanced
equipment.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/
freedom-world-2019/democracy-in-retreat
2
https://freedomhouse.org/

3
https://www.investors.com/news/technology/
weibo-reports-ﬁrst-quarter-earnings/

446

