The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph-Based Transformer with
Cross-Candidate Veriﬁcation for Semantic Parsing
Bo Shao,∗1,2 Yeyun Gong,2 Weizhen Qi,2,3 Guihong Cao,4 Jianshu Ji,4 Xiaola Lin1
1

Sun Yat-sen University
Microsoft Research Asia
3
University of Science and Technology of China
4
Microsoft AI and Research, Redmond WA, USA
shaobo2@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {yegong, gucao, jianshuj}@microsoft.com,
weizhen@mail.ustc.edu.cn, linxl@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

To select the correct target from these candidates, it is
necessary to use a ranking model to rerank these candidates. There exist many applications that use sequenceto-sequence with reranking methods (Wen et al. 2015;
Einolghozati et al. 2019). (Wen et al. 2015) uses recurrent generation model with a convolutional ranker for a dialogue system. In (Einolghozati et al. 2019), they propose
a SVM+language model to rerank the candidates generated
by generation model. These methods achieve good performance, since the ranking model can capture the global information in questions and decoding candidates simultaneously. However, the general ranking model can not capture
the strong hierarchical structures in the logical forms. For
example, Figure 1 shows an example of the TOP dataset.
The logical form in this dataset is a task oriented representation of a dialog system. It contains a tree structure, which
also can be considered as a special graph.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a graph-based Transformer for semantic parsing. We separate the semantic parsing task into
two steps: 1) Use a sequence-to-sequence model to generate
the logical form candidates. 2) Design a graph-based Transformer to rerank the candidates. To handle the structure of
logical forms, we incorporate graph information to Transformer, and design a cross-candidate veriﬁcation mechanism
to consider all the candidates in the ranking process. Furthermore, we integrate BERT into our model and jointly train
the graph-based Transformer and BERT. We conduct experiments on 3 semantic parsing benchmarks, ATIS, JOBS and
Task Oriented semantic Parsing dataset (TOP). Experiments
show that our graph-based reranking model achieves results
comparable to state-of-the-art models on the ATIS and JOBS
datasets. And on the TOP dataset, our model achieves a new
state-of-the-art result.

Introduction

IN:GET_INSTANCE

SL:DESTINATION

How far is

Semantic parsing is a classic NLP task that has attracted a
huge amount of attention recently. It aims at mapping a natural language sentence into a logical form. With the rapid
development of natural language processing, semantic parsing has been used in various applications, such as question
answering (Kwiatkowski et al. 2011), task-oriented dialog
systems (Yih et al. 2015) and interpreting instructions (Artzi
and Zettlemoyer 2013).
Recently, many approaches based on the sequence-tosequence(S2S) model have been successfully used for semantic parsing (Dong and Lapata 2016; Yin and Neubig
2017; Dong and Lapata 2018). In the analysis of (Gupta
et al. 2018), the accuracy of exact match on TOP dataset
for RNN based sequence-to-sequence model is 75.3%, but
beam search with the size of 5 can cover 88.76% golden
target sequences. Since the exact match result is computed
by the top1 prediction from beam search, it means that the
candidates from the beam search have a greater chance of
containing the golden target.

I:GE_EAA_LTCAIT
the

IN:GET_INSTANCE

shop

coffee
Question: How far is the coffee shop
Logical Form: [IN:GET_DISTANCE How far is [SL:DESTINATION [IN:GET_LOCATION
[SL:CATEGORY_LOCATION the coffee shop ] ] ] ]

Figure 1: An example of Task Oriented Parsing (TOP)
dataset.
In this paper, we propose a ranking model for logical
form reranking based on Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017),
compared with other methods based on tree-structure, our
graph-based transformer is more scalable, which can handle different semantic graphs in an efﬁcient way. To capture
the tree structure information of logical forms, we extend
transformer with a Graph-based attention strategy. We incorporate the structure information of the logical forms to
multi-head attention in the transformer and generate graphaware interaction features. This method makes each token

∗

Work done while this author was visiting Microsoft Research.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8807

