The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

STEP: Spatial Temporal Graph
Convolutional Networks for Emotion Perception from Gaits
Uttaran Bhattacharya,1 Trisha Mittal,1 Rohan Chandra,1 Tanmay Randhavane,2
Aniket Bera,1 Dinesh Manocha1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, USA
{uttaranb, trisha, rohan, ab, dm}@cs.umd.edu, tanmay@cs.unc.edu
Project URL: http://www.gamma.umd.edu/step
Abstract

We present a novel classiﬁer network called STEP, to classify perceived human emotion from gaits, based on a Spatial Temporal Graph Convolutional Network (ST-GCN) architecture. Given an RGB video of an individual walking, our
formulation implicitly exploits the gait features to classify
the perceived emotion of the human into one of four emotions: happy, sad, angry, or neutral. We train STEP on annotated real-world gait videos, augmented with annotated synthetic gaits generated using a novel generative network called
STEP-Gen, built on an ST-GCN based Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE). We incorporate a novel pushpull regularization loss in the CVAE formulation of STEPGen to generate realistic gaits and improve the classiﬁcation
accuracy of STEP. We also release a novel dataset (E-Gait),
which consists of 4,227 human gaits annotated with perceived
emotions along with thousands of synthetic gaits. In practice,
STEP can learn the affective features and exhibits classiﬁcation accuracy of 88% on E-Gait, which is 14–30% more
accurate over prior methods.

1

Figure 1: STEP and STEP-Gen: We present a novel classiﬁer
network (STEP) to predict perceived emotions from gaits
extracted from walking videos. We also present a generator
network (STEP-Gen) to generate annotated synthetic gaits
to improve the accuracy of STEP.

and Barrett 2014). Most prior work has focused on facial
expressions, due to the availability of large datasets (Fabian
Benitez-Quiroz, Srinivasan, and Martinez 2016). However,
facial emotions can be unreliable in contexts such as referential expressions (Ekman 1993) or the presence or absence of
an audience (Fernández-Dols and Ruiz-Belda 1995). Thus,
we need techniques that can utilize other non-verbal cues.
In this paper, we focus on using movement features corresponding to gaits in a walking video for emotion perception.
A gait as an ordered temporal sequence of body joint transformations (predominantly translations and rotations) during the course of a single walk cycle. Simply stated, a person’s gait is the way the person walks. Prior works in psychology literature have reported that participants were able
to identify sadness, anger, happiness, and pride by observing affective features corresponding to arm swinging, long
strides, erect posture, collapsed upper body, etc. (Michalak
et al. 2009; Kleinsmith and Bianchi-Berthouze 2013).
There is considerable recent work on pose or gait extraction from a walking video using deep convolutional network
architectures and intricately designed loss functions (Dabral
et al. 2018; Girdhar et al. 2017). Gaits have also been
used for a variety of applications including action recognition (Wang et al. 2003; Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018) and person identiﬁcation (Zhang and Troje 2005). However, the use
of gaits for automatic emotion perceptions has been fairly
limited, primarily due to a lack of gait data or videos anno-

Introduction

Human emotion recognition using intelligent systems is an
important socio-behavioral task that arises in various applications, including behavior prediction (Denham et al. 2000),
surveillance (Arunnehru and Geetha 2017), robotics (Bauer
and others 2009), affective computing (Yates et al. 2017;
Atcheson, Sethu, and Epps 2017), etc. Current research
in perceiving human emotion predominantly uses facial
cues (Fan et al. 2016), speech (Jacob and Mythili 2015),
or physiological signals such as heartbeats and respiration
rates (Zhao, Adib, and Katabi 2016). These techniques have
been used to identify and classify broad emotions including
happiness, sadness, anger, disgust, fear and other combinations (Ekman and Friesen 1967).
Understanding the perceived emotions of individuals using non-verbal cues, such as face expressions or body movement, is regarded as an important and challenging problem
in both AI and psychology, especially when self-reported
emotions are unreliable or misleading (Quigley, Lindquist,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1342

