The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hierarchical Modes Exploring in Generative Adversarial Networks
Mengxiao Hu, Jinlong Li, Maolin Hu, Tao Hu
University of Science and Technology of China
m x hu@126.com, jlli@ustc.edu.cn, {humaolin, Skyful}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

be very important to quantify the diversity of output images
for addressing the mode collapse problem. The Learned Perceptual Image Path Similarity (LPIPS) (Zhang et al. 2018)
and the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al.
2017) are often used to measure the diversity and the quality
of output images, respectively. The Number of StatisticallyDifferent Bins (NDB) (Richardson and Weiss 2018) is also
used for estimation of mode missing in the generated distribution (Mao et al. 2019). Unlike previous works only use
the diversity metrics for evaluation, in this work, we proposed hierarchical Modes Exploring Generative Adversarial
Networks to alleviate the mode collapse problem in cGANs
by introducing a diversity measurement into the objective
function as a regularization term.
The regularization term was employed to expand the difference of an output image pair which is obtained by feeding
an input pair from the same batch to the generator (Mao et al.
2019; Yang et al. 2019). Here, we ﬁrstly compute the ratio
of the distance between an input pair to the distance between
an output feature pair and use it as a coefﬁcient of the expansion at each convolutional layer of the generator. Then, we
calculate the absolute difference between the computed ratio
and a predeﬁned ratio which is used to control the generated
images with different features. At last, we sum the absolute
differences across all layers as the regularization term of the
objective function. Since our regularization method requires
no modiﬁcation to the structure of original networks, it can
be used in cGANs for various tasks.
In this work, our primary contributions are:

Abstract
In conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (cGANs),
when two different initial noises are concatenated with the
same conditional information, the distance between their outputs is relatively smaller, which makes minor modes likely
to collapse into large modes. To prevent this happen, we
proposed a hierarchical mode exploring method to alleviate
mode collapse in cGANs by introducing a diversity measurement into the objective function as the regularization term.
We also introduced the Expected Ratios of Expansion (ERE)
into the regularization term, by minimizing the sum of differences between the real change of distance and ERE, we can
control the diversity of generated images w.r.t speciﬁc-level
features. We validated the proposed algorithm on four conditional image synthesis tasks including categorical generation,
paired and un-paired image translation and text-to-image generation. Both qualitative and quantitative results show that the
proposed method is effective in alleviating the mode collapse
problem in cGANs, and can control the diversity of output
images w.r.t speciﬁc-level features.

Introduction
With the potentiality of capturing high dimensional probability distributions, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow 2016) are broadly used in synthesizing text (Yu et al. 2017a), videos (Zhang and Peng 2018)
and images (Ge et al. 2018). Conditional GANs (cGANS)
(Mirza and Osindero 2014) are one of the early variants of
GANs and have been applied in many tasks of image synthesis (Doan et al. 2019) because of the ability to synthesizing
images with given information (e.g, generating images of
bird with given description of colors).
Many generation tasks adopt GANs for its simple setting
and impressive result, but we often suffer from the problem that the generator can only synthesize samples from few
modes of the real data distribution, which is called ”mode
collapse”. The formal deﬁnition of mode collapse (Lin et al.
2018) provides a theoretical measure of mode collapse.
In image synthesis, mode collapse means the output images are less diverse than the real ones. Therefore, it might

• We proposeed a hierarchical mode exploring method
to alleviate mode collapse in cGANs by introducing
a diversity measurement into the objective function
as the regularization term.
• We introduced the Expected Ratio of Expansion
(ERE) into the regularization term. With different
ERE, we can control the diversity of generated images w.r.t speciﬁc-level features.
• We demonstrated the proposed regularization
method on different datasets in three image synthesis tasks, and experimental results show that our
method can generate images with higher diversity,
compared with the baseline models.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10981

