The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Multi-Modal Biomarker
Representations via Globally Aligned Longitudinal Enrichments
Lyujian Lu, Saad Elbeleidy, Lauren Zoe Baker, Hua Wang,∗
for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative†
Department of Computer Science, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401
{lyujianlu, selbeleidy, laurenzoebaker}@mymail.mines.edu
huawangcs@gmail.com

Abstract

Introduction

Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative
disease that severely impacts patients’ thinking, memory and
behavior. To aid automatic AD diagnoses, many longitudinal
learning models have been proposed to predict clinical outcomes and/or disease status, which, though, often fail to consider missing temporal phenotypic records of the patients that
can convey valuable information of AD progressions. Another challenge in AD studies is how to integrate heterogeneous genotypic and phenotypic biomarkers to improve diagnosis prediction. To cope with these challenges, in this paper
we propose a longitudinal multi-modal method to learn enriched genotypic and phenotypic biomarker representations
in the format of ﬁxed-length vectors that can simultaneously
capture the baseline neuroimaging measurements of the entire dataset and progressive variations of the varied counts of
follow-up measurements over time of every participant from
different biomarker sources. The learned global and local projections are aligned by a soft constraint and the structuredsparsity norm is used to uncover the multi-modal structure
of heterogeneous biomarker measurements. While the proposed objective is clearly motivated to characterize the progressive information of AD developments, it is a nonsmooth
objective that is difﬁcult to efﬁciently optimize in general.
Thus, we derive an efﬁcient iterative algorithm, whose convergence is rigorously guaranteed in mathematics. We have
conducted extensive experiments on the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) data using one genotypic and two phenotypic biomarkers. Empirical results have
demonstrated that the learned enriched biomarker representations are more effective in predicting the outcomes of various
cognitive assessments. Moreover, our model has successfully
identiﬁed disease-relevant biomarkers supported by existing
medical ﬁndings that additionally warrant the correctness of
our method from the clinical perspective.

As the most prevalent and severe neurodegenerative disorder, Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) results in progressive impairment of memory and other cognitive abilities, triggered by
the damage of neurons in the brain. AD usually progresses
along a temporal continuum, initially from a pre-clinical
stage, subsequently to mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
and ultimately deteriorating to AD (Wenk and others 2003;
Brand et al. 2018). It is estimated that 5.7 million individuals are living with AD and this number is projected to grow
to 13.8 million by mid-century, fueled in large part by the
aging Baby Boom Generation. The number of AD sufferers worldwide is estimated to be 44 million now and 1 in
85 people will be affected by AD by 2050 (Association and
others 2018).
With all these facts, neuroimaging measurements have
been widely studied to predict disease status and/or cognitive performance (Stonnington et al. 2010; Zhang et al.
2012; Wang et al. 2012b; Yan et al. 2015; Brand et al.
2018). However, there are a few limitations to these predictive models. These approaches routinely conduct standard regression and/or classiﬁcation at each individual time
point separately, failing to take advantage of the longitudinal structure among temporal brain phenotypes. First,
since AD is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, multiple records can be obtained to monitor the disease’s progression. Thus it is beneﬁcial to uncover the temporal relation among these longitudinal biomarkers (Wang et al.
2012c; Wang, Shen, and Huang 2016; Wang et al. 2017;
Brand et al. 2018). Second, while heterogeneous biomarker
measurements, such as voxel-based morphometry (VBM),
FreeSurfer, and single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), are
available for predicting disease status and/or cognitive performance, current longitudinal methods (Wang et al. 2012a;
Wang, Nie, and Huang 2013; Wang, Shen, and Huang 2016)
often do not explore this multi-modal structure to boost prediction capabilities. Third, most importantly, the longitudinal biomarkers are often missing at some time points for
participants, since it is difﬁcult to conduct medical scans
consistently across a large group of subjects. Mortality risk
and cognitive impairment hinder older adults from staying
in studies requiring multiple visits and thus result in incom-

∗

Corresponding author.
Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from
the ADNI database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of
ADNI investigators can be found at: https://adni.loni.usc.edu/wpcontent/uploads/how to apply/ADNI Acknowledgement List.pdf.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

817

