The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On Swap Convexity of Voting Rules
Svetlana Obraztsova

Edith Elkind

Piotr Faliszewski

Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
svetlana.obraztsova@gmail.com

University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk

AGH University of Science and Technology
Krakow, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

making is a dynamic process, and aim to capture how voting rules should behave when voters’ preferences evolve.
Speciﬁcally, consider a society that moves between two
states A and B such that candidate a is considered to be the
best choice in both states. We assume that the voters’ preferences change gradually, that is, at each step some voter
reports a small change in her beliefs. One can then expect
that it should be possible to transition from A to B so that
a remains the collective choice along the way; more ambitiously, we may require that this remains the case when we
pick the shortest route from A to B.
Formally, Obraztsova et al. (2013) construct a graph
whose vertices are all n-voter m-candidate elections, and
there is an edge between two elections if one can be obtained from the other by swapping two adjacent candidates
in some voter’s ranking. The shortest path distance in this
graph is the well-known swap distance (Deza and Deza
2009). Obraztsova et al. (2013) are interested in ‘shapes’ of
sets of vertices of this graph that have a common deﬁning
property: for instance, these can be elections where a given
candidate is ranked ﬁrst by all voters or by a strict majority
of voters (such elections are known, respectively, as unanimity consensus elections and majority consensus elections),
elections that are single-peaked with respect to a ﬁxed axis,
or elections where a given candidate is a winner under a speciﬁc voting rule.
Yet, the results of Obraztsova et al. (2013) turn out to be
rather discouraging. While they do show that for most natural voting rules the sets of elections with a given winner
are connected in Gn,m , i.e., it is possible to get from one
election with winner a to another such election so that a
stays an election winner along the way, it may be impossible to do so if one insists on staying on the shortest path
between the two elections. That is, such sets are not convex,
even in the sense of the somewhat non-orthodox deﬁnition
that they use1 (we elaborate on the differences between their

Abstract
Obraztsova et al. (2013) have recently proposed an intriguing
convexity axiom for voting rules. This axiom imposes conditions on the shape of the sets of elections with a given candidate as a winner. However, this new axiom is both too weak
and too strong: it is too weak because it deﬁnes a set to be
convex if for any two elements of the set some shortest path
between them lies within the set, whereas the standard definition of convexity requires all shortest paths between two
elements to lie within the set, and it is too strong because
common voting rules do not satisfy this axiom. In this paper,
we (1) propose several families of voting rules that are convex in the sense of Obraztsova et al.; (2) put forward a weaker
notion of convexity that is satisﬁed by most common voting
rules; (3) prove impossibility results for a variant of this deﬁnition that considers all, rather than some shortest paths.

1

Introduction

Voting and elections are traditional ways in which societies
of agents make decisions (Moulin 1991; Arrow, Sen, and
Suzumura 2002). Since these decisions often carry signiﬁcant weight, it is important to identify suitable voting rules
for each application scenario. The requirements that a voting rule should satisfy, also called axioms, are applicationdependent: e.g., in some settings in may be desirable to treat
all opinions in the same way (voting rules with this property are called anonymous), while in other settings it may be
more important to avoid rules that suffer from the so-called
no-show paradox, where voters have an incentive to withdraw from the election. The axioms themselves can be classiﬁed in several ways. For instance, some axioms constrain
the behavior of a voting rule in individual elections: this is
the case, e.g., for the unanimity axiom, which requires that
if all voters rank some candidate ﬁrst, the rule outputs this
candidate. Other axioms relate the behavior of the rule in
elections obtained from each other by some transformation:
e.g., the anonymity axiom describes the behavior of the rule
on proﬁles obtained from each other by permuting votes.
Recently, Obraztsova et al. (2013) proposed two new
axioms, which recognize the fact that collective decision-

1
We remark that this is not the ﬁrst attempt to deﬁne a notion of convexity for voting rules: in particular, Saari (1990;
2003) proposed another notion of convexity, but his deﬁnition is
very different in spirit, and, in particular, imposes constraints on
the behavior of voting rules on elections with a different number of
voters.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1910

