The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SiamFC++: Towards Robust and Accurate
Visual Tracking with Target Estimation Guidelines
Yinda Xu,1∗† Zeyu Wang,2∗† Zuoxin Li,2 Ye Yuan,2 Gang Yu2‡
1

College of Electrical Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
Megvii Inc.
yinda xu@zju.edu.cn, wangzeyu0408@outlook.com, {lizuoxin, yuanye, yugang}@megvii.com

Abstract
Visual tracking problem demands to efﬁciently perform robust classiﬁcation and accurate target state estimation over
a given target at the same time. Former methods have proposed various ways of target state estimation, yet few of
them took the particularity of the visual tracking problem
itself into consideration. Based on a careful analysis, we
propose a set of practical guidelines of target state estimation for high-performance generic object tracker design. Following these guidelines, we design our Fully Convolutional
Siamese tracker++ (SiamFC++) by introducing both classiﬁcation and target state estimation branch (G1), classiﬁcation score without ambiguity (G2), tracking without prior
knowledge (G3), and estimation quality score (G4). Extensive analysis and ablation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed guidelines. Without bells and whistles,
our SiamFC++ tracker achieves state-of-the-art performance
on ﬁve challenging benchmarks(OTB2015, VOT2018, LaSOT, GOT-10k, TrackingNet), which proves both the tracking
and generalization ability of the tracker. Particularly, on the
large-scale TrackingNet dataset, SiamFC++ achieves a previously unseen AUC score of 75.4 while running at over 90
FPS, which is far above the real-time requirement.

1

Figure 1: A comparison of our approach (following the
guidelines) with state-of-the-art SiamRPN++ tracker (which
violates some of the guidelines). Score maps are visualized
by red color (i.e. red parts represent regions with high scores
and vice versa). In the case of a signiﬁcant change of target appearance, SiamRPN++ fails due to anchor-object mismatch while our SiamFC++ successes by directly matching
between objects. See Section 4 for analysis in detail.

Introduction

Generic Visual Tracking aims at locating a moving object
sequentially in a video, given very limited information, often only the annotation of the ﬁrst frame. Being a fundamental build block in various areas of computer vision, the
task comes with a variety of applications such as UAV-based
monitoring (Mueller, Smith, and Ghanem 2016) and surveillance system (Kokkeby et al. 2015). One unique characteristic of generic object tracking is that no prior knowledge (e.g.,
the object class) about the object, as well as its surrounding
environment, is allowed (Huang, Zhao, and Huang 2018).
Tracking problem can be treated as the combination of a
classiﬁcation task and an estimation task (Danelljan et al.

2019). The ﬁrst task aims at providing a robust coarse location of the target via classiﬁcation. The second task is
then to estimate an accurate target state, often represented
by a bounding box. While modern trackers have achieved
signiﬁcant progress, surprisingly their methods for the second task (i.e. target state estimation) largely differ. Based
on this aspect, previous methods can be roughly divided
into three categories. The ﬁrst category, including Discriminative Correlation Filter (DCF) (Henriques et al. 2014;
Bolme et al. 2010) and SiamFC (Bertinetto et al. 2016),
employs brutal multi-scale test which is inaccurate (Danelljan et al. 2019) and inefﬁciency (Li et al. 2018a). Also, the
prior assumption that target scale/ratio changes in a ﬁxed
rate in adjacent frames often does not hold in reality. For
the second category, ATOM (Danelljan et al. 2019) iteratively reﬁnes multiple initial bounding boxes via gradient
ascending to estimate the target bounding box (Jiang et al.
2018), which yields a signiﬁcant improvement on accuracy.

∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
This work has been done when these authors were doing an
intership at Megvii Inc.
‡
Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12549

