The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Restricted Black-Box Adversarial
Framework Towards Attacking Graph Embedding Models
Heng Chang,∗1 Yu Rong,2 Tingyang Xu,2 Wenbing Huang,2 Honglei Zhang,2
Peng Cui,3 Wenwu Zhu,†1,3 Junzhou Huang2
1

Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
changh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yu.rong@hotmail.com, Tingyangxu@tencent.com, hwenbing@126.com,
zhanghonglei@gatech.edu, {cuip, wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn, jzhuang@uta.edu
recent works have posed the risk of graph embedding models against adversarial attacks, just like what the researchers
are anxious for convolutional neural networks (Akhtar and
Mian 2018). A strand of research works (Dai et al. 2018;
Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018; Bojchevski and
Günnemann 2019) have already shown that various kinds of
graph embedding methods, including Graph Convolutional
Networks, DeepWalk, etc., are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Undoubtedly, the potential attacking risk is rising for
modern graph learning systems. For instance, by sophisticated constructed social bots and following connections, it’s
possible to fool the recommendation system equipped with
graph embedding models to give wrong recommendations.
Regarding the amount of information from both target
model and data required for the generation of adversarial
examples, all graph adversarial attackers fall into three categories (arranged in an ascending order of difﬁculties):

Abstract
With the great success of graph embedding model on both
academic and industry area, the robustness of graph embedding against adversarial attack inevitably becomes a central
problem in graph learning domain. Regardless of the fruitful
progress, most of the current works perform the attack in a
white-box fashion: they need to access the model predictions
and labels to construct their adversarial loss. However, the
inaccessibility of model predictions in real systems makes the
white-box attack impractical to real graph learning system.
This paper promotes current frameworks in a more general
and ﬂexible sense – we demand to attack various kinds of
graph embedding model with black-box driven. To this end,
we begin by investigating the theoretical connections between
graph signal processing and graph embedding models in a
principled way and formulate the graph embedding model
as a general graph signal process with corresponding graph
ﬁlter. As such, a generalized adversarial attacker: GF-Attack
is constructed by the graph ﬁlter and feature matrix. Instead of
accessing any knowledge of the target classiﬁers used in graph
embedding, GF-Attack performs the attack only on the graph
ﬁlter in a black-box attack fashion. To validate the generalization of GF-Attack, we construct the attacker on four popular
graph embedding models. Extensive experimental results validate the effectiveness of our attacker on several benchmark
datasets. Particularly by using our attack, even small graph
perturbations like one-edge ﬂip is able to consistently make
a strong attack in performance to different graph embedding
models.

• White-box Attack (WBA): the attacker can access any
information, namely, the training input (e.g., adjacency
matrix and feature matrix), the label, the model parameters,
the predictions, etc.
• Practical White-box Attack (PWA): the attacker can any
information except the model parameters.
• Restrict Black-box Attack (RBA): the attacker can only
access the training input and limited knowledge of the
model. The access of parameters, labels and predictions is
prohibited.

Introduction

Despite the fruitful results (Sun et al. 2018; Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018; Zügner and Günnemann
2019) which absorb ingredients from exiting adversarial
methods on convolutional neural networks, obtained in attacking graph embeddings under both WBA and PWA setting,
however, the target model parameter as well as the labels and
predictions are seldom accessible in real-life applications.
In the other words, the WBA and PWA attackers are almost
impossible to perform a threatening attack to real systems.
Meanwhile, current RBA attackers are either reinforcement
learning based (Dai et al. 2018), which has low computational efﬁciency and is limited to edge deletion, or derived
merely only from the structure information without considering the feature information (Bojchevski and Günnemann

Graph embedding models (Scarselli et al. 2009; Cui et
al. 2018), which elaborate the expressive power of deep
learning on graph-structure data, have achieved promising success in various domains, such as predicting properties over molecules (Duvenaud et al. 2015), biology analysis (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017), ﬁnancial surveillance (Paranjape, Benson, and Leskovec 2017) and structural role classiﬁcation (Tu et al. 2018). Given the increasing popularity and success of these methods, a bunch of
∗

Work done while interning at Tencent AI Lab.
Wenwu Zhu is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3389

