The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

QASC: A Dataset for Question Answering via Sentence Composition
Tushar Khot, Peter Clark, Michal Guerquin, Peter Jansen,+ Ashish Sabharwal
Allen Institute for AI, Seattle, WA, U.S.A.
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, U.S.A.
{tushark, peterc, michalg, ashishs}@allenai.org, pajansen@email.arizona.edu
+

Abstract

Question: Differential heating of air can be harnessed for
what?
(A) electricity production
(D) reduce acidity of food
(B) erosion prevention
...
(C) transfer of electrons
...

Composing knowledge from multiple pieces of texts is a
key challenge in multi-hop question answering. We present
a multi-hop reasoning dataset, Question Answering via
Sentence Composition (QASC), that requires retrieving facts
from a large corpus and composing them to answer a
multiple-choice question. QASC is the ﬁrst dataset to offer
two desirable properties: (a) the facts to be composed are annotated in a large corpus, and (b) the decomposition into these
facts is not evident from the question itself. The latter makes
retrieval challenging as the system must introduce new concepts or relations in order to discover potential decompositions. Further, the reasoning model must then learn to identify
valid compositions of these retrieved facts using commonsense reasoning. To help address these challenges, we provide
annotation for supporting facts as well as their composition.
Guided by these annotations, we present a two-step approach
to mitigate the retrieval challenges. We use other multiplechoice datasets as additional training data to strengthen the
reasoning model. Our proposed approach improves over current state-of-the-art language models by 11% (absolute). The
reasoning and retrieval problems, however, remain unsolved
as this model still lags by 20% behind human performance.

1

Annotated facts:
fS : Differential heating of air produces wind .
fL : Wind is used for producing electricity .
Composed fact fC : Differential heating of air can be harnessed
for electricity production .

Figure 1: A sample 8-way multiple choice QASC question.
Training data includes the associated facts fS and fL shown
above, as well as their composition fC . The term wind connects fS and fL , but appears neither in fC nor in the question. Further, decomposing the question relation “harnessed
for” into fS and fL requires introducing the new relation
“produces” in fS . The question can be answered by using
broad knowledge to compose these facts together and infer
fC .

Introduction

multi-hop multiple-choice questions (MCQs) where simple
syntactic cues are insufﬁcient to determine how to decompose the question into simpler queries. Fig. 1 gives an example, where the question is answered by decomposing its
main relation “harnessed for” (in fC ) into a similar relation “used for” (in fL ) and a newly introduced relation “produces” (in fS ), and then composing these back to infer fC .
While the question in Figure 1 can be answered by composing the two facts fS and fL , that this is the case is unclear based solely on the question. This property of relation
decomposition not being evident from reading the question
pushes reasoning models towards focusing on learning to
compose new pieces of knowledge, a key challenge in language understanding. Further, fL has no overlap with the
question, making it difﬁcult to retrieve it in the ﬁrst place.
Let’s contrast this with an alternative question formulation: “What can something produced by differential heating
of air be used for?” Although awkwardly phrased, this variation is easy to syntactically decompose into two simpler

Several multi-hop question-answering (QA) datasets have
been proposed to promote research on multi-sentence
machine comprehension. On one hand, many of these
datasets (Mihaylov et al. 2018; Clark et al. 2018; Welbl,
Stenetorp, and Riedel 2018; Talmor and Berant 2018) do
not come annotated with sentences or documents that can
be combined to produce an answer. Models must thus learn
to reason without direct supervision. On the other hand,
datasets that come with such annotations involve either
single-document questions (Khashabi et al. 2018a) leading
to a strong focus on coreference resolution and entity tracking, or multi-document questions (Yang et al. 2018) whose
decomposition into simpler single-hop queries is often evident from the question itself.
We propose a novel dataset, Question Answering via
Sentence Composition (QASC; pronounced kask) of 9,980
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8082

