The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Transfer: Unsupervised Domain Translation via Meta-Learning
Jianxin Lin,1 Yijun Wang,2 Zhibo Chen,1∗ Tianyu He3
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-spatial Information Processing and Application System,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
University of Science and Technology of China, 3 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{linjx, wyjun}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn, timhe.hty@alibaba-inc.com

In this paper, we take a step towards unsupervised domain
translation (UDT) problems from a meta-learning perspective, aiming to effectively leverage learning experiences from
previous domain translation tasks. Brieﬂy, the problem is
that we have several domain translation tasks where each
tasks only consists of limited samples. We have to learn a
meta-model from these tasks, that can be quickly adapted to
unseen domain translation tasks. To tackle this problem, we
propose a method called Meta-Translation Generative Adversarial Network (MT-GAN) that are robust to different task
contexts. The proposed model contains two meta-learners: a
meta-generator G which keeps the memory of prior translation experiences and a meta-discriminator D which teaches G
how to quickly generalize to a new task. Our approach leverages both model-agnostic meta-learning algorithm (MAML)
(Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017) and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) to iteratively
update G and D. To achieve that, within a meta-training iteration, for a speciﬁc translation task, we synthesize its dual
translation task with current states of MT-GAN and train
these two tasks in a dual learning form (Zhu et al. 2017;
He et al. 2016a). Then we design a meta-optimization objective to evaluate the performance of ﬁne-tuned MT-GAN, and
minimize the expected losses on the meta-testing samples
with respect to parameters of MT-GAN, which ensures that
the direction taken to ﬁne-tuning leads to a good generalization performance.

Abstract
Unsupervised domain translation has recently achieved impressive performance with Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) and sufﬁcient (unpaired) training data. However, existing domain translation frameworks form in a disposable way
where the learning experiences are ignored and the obtained
model cannot be adapted to a new coming domain. In this
work, we take on unsupervised domain translation problems
from a meta-learning perspective. We propose a model called
Meta-Translation GAN (MT-GAN) to ﬁnd good initialization
of translation models. In the meta-training procedure, MTGAN is explicitly trained with a primary translation task and
a synthesized dual translation task. A cycle-consistency metaoptimization objective is designed to ensure the generalization
ability. We demonstrate effectiveness of our model on ten diverse two-domain translation tasks and multiple face identity
translation tasks. We show that our proposed approach signiﬁcantly outperforms the existing domain translation methods
when each domain contains no more than ten training samples.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised domain translation tasks (Zhu et al. 2017;
Choi et al. 2018), which aim at learning a mapping that
can transfer images from a source domain to a target domain
using unpaired training data only, have been widely investigated in recent years. However, current literature focuses
on learning a model for a speciﬁc translation task without
considering the generalization ability to other tasks. In comparison, human intelligence has the ability to quickly learn
new concepts with the prior experiences. Taking painting
as an example, after being taught how to paint in Monet’s
style, people have learned the basic skills of painting with
usage of painting brush, palette, etc. When being required
to learn painting in Van Gogh’s style, we do not need to
learn from scratch for all these skills. Instead, we can quickly
adapt to this new task by viewing only a few Van Gogh’s
paintings, extracting his painting style, combining the basic
painting knowledge we learned before with the new style and
eventually know how to draw in Van Gogh’s way.

We extensively evaluate the effectiveness and generalizing ability of the proposed MT-GAN algorithm on two
kinds of translation task distributions. The ﬁrst one contains 10 diverse two-domain translation tasks covering a wide
range of scenarios, including labels↔photos, horses↔zebras,
summer↔winter, etc. The second one is established by repeatedly sampling two arbitrary identities, which forms a
two-domain translation task, from a multiple identity dataset
(Ng and Winkler 2014). For a translation task T , we take
the other 9 different tasks as the training dataset and test the
meta-learned parameter initialization on task T . Our experiments only use 10 samples at most in an image domain of
a translation task and show that the proposed meta-learning
approach outperforms ordinary domain translation models,
such as CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017) and StarGAN (Choi et

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11507

