The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Label Patent Categorization with
Non-Local Attention-Based Graph Convolutional Network
Pingjie Tang,1∗ Meng Jiang,1 Bryan (Ning) Xia,1 Jed W. Pitera,2 Jeffrey Welser,2 Nitesh V. Chawla1†
2

1
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA
IBM Research - Almaden, 650 Harry Road, San Jose, California 95120, USA
{ptang, mjiang2, nxia, nchawla}@nd.edu, {pitera, welser}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Patent categorization, which is to assign multiple International Patent Classiﬁcation (IPC) codes to a patent document,
relies heavily on expert efforts, as it requires substantial domain knowledge. When formulated as a multi-label text classiﬁcation (MTC) problem, it draws two challenges to existing models: one is to learn effective document representations
from text content; the other is to model the cross-section behavior of label set. In this work, we propose a label attention model based on graph convolutional network. It jointly
learns the document-word associations and word-word cooccurrences to generate rich semantic embeddings of documents. It employs a non-local attention mechanism to learn
label representations in the same space of document representations for multi-label classiﬁcation. On a large CIRCA patent
database, we evaluate the performance of our model and as
many as seven competitive baselines. We ﬁnd that our model
outperforms all those prior state of the art by a large margin
and achieves high performance on P @k and nDCG@k.

Figure 1: An example of patent claim citation
a concrete example whose concept can be interpreted hierarchically. “F” stands for general concepts “mechanical engineering, lighting, heating, weapons and blasting”, “F01”
represents sub-concepts “machines or engines in general”,
and “F01P” indicates ﬁne-grained concepts “cooling of machines or engines”. Eventually, “F01P” will be assigned to
relevant patents.
Most patents consist of multiple related aspects. Such
characteristic makes patents associated with multiple IPC
codes (labels). Also, labels are not exclusive, actually, the
number of related categories can range from a few to even
hundreds depending on the application concepts a patent
contains. This presents the compelling challenge for categorization of patents. There are many possible set of labels
that can be assigned to each patent, and thus the the task of
automated patent categorization becomes a multi-label text
classiﬁcation (MTC) problem.
Unique characteristics of patent’s document and IPC
codes bring unique challenges to the patent MTC task. First,
from the perspective of a patent expert, words play the key
role in the patent categorization, so a model should learn predictive word representations from the word co-occurrence
and document-word associations. Second, patent document
is often consisted of multiple “claim” sections and there
are long-range dependencies between claims. For example,
Fig. 1 shows that claim 11 cites claim 1 across a number of
claims2 . It requires a careful mechanism to model such long
dependencies. Third, the IPC code covers a vast and sometimes disparate areas, creating thereby ambiguous semantic
interpretations. For example, instead of deﬁning one clear
and consistent concept, IPC codes preﬁxed by “G09” refers
to “Educating, Cryptography, Display, Advertising, Seals.”
The label representation is a mixture of topics that can only
be learned from document-label associations.
To address the above challenges, we propose a novel

Introduction
Patent databases are valuable information sources reﬂecting
universal inventive trends and evolution of real-world technologies. A large number of new patent applications arrive
at patent ofﬁces around the world every day. Professional
patent examiners are trained to assign proper category codes
to patents so as to facilitate patent search and management
(Gomez and Moens 2014). However, manually categorizing
large volume of patents requires expensive human labor and
examiners’ broad domain knowledge. Furthermore, complex and hierarchical concepts of the patent category codes
impose signiﬁcant challenges on the categorization task.
IPC code1 is the most commonly used taxonomy system
for categorizing patents. It includes thousands of categories
and is deﬁned in a hierarchical way. IPC code is preﬁxed by a
capital letter from “A” to “H”, followed by a two-digit number and ends with a letter in uppercase. Take code “F01P” as
∗
This work was partially done when the ﬁrst author was interning with IBM Research - Almaden.
†
Nitesh V. Chawla is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.wipo.int/classiﬁcations/ipc/en/

2

9024

https://patents.google.com/patent/US9381707

