The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Annotated Corpus of Reference
Resolution for Interpreting Common Grounding
Takuma Udagawa

Akiko Aizawa

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
takuma udagawa@nii.ac.jp

National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
aizawa@nii.ac.jp

for some of the important details in common grounding,
constructing such precise semantic representation is a difﬁcult and costly process, especially under continuous and
partially-observable context with high ambiguity and uncertainty. Interpretation becomes even more challenging when
we deal with dialogue systems represented by end-to-end
neural models (Vinyals and Le 2015; Bordes and Weston
2016), which can converse ﬂuently but still lack true competency of natural language understanding and generation.
In this work, we approach this problem by decomposing
the common grounding task based on its intermediate subtasks. Speciﬁcally, we consider reference resolution as the
central subtask of common grounding (in the sense that mutual understanding can only be created through successful
references to the entities in the task domain), deﬁne this
subtask formally based on a simple and general annotation
schema, and create a large-scale resource to study this subtask along with the original task of common grounding.
Our annotated corpus consists of a total of 40,172 referring expressions in 5,191 dialogues curated from the existing
corpus (Udagawa and Aizawa 2019), along with multiple (a
minimum of 3) judgements for referent interpretations. A
visualization of our annotation is shown in Figure 1.
Through our corpus analysis, we show that our annotation has high agreement in general but also includes a natural degree of reasonable disagreements, which veriﬁed that
our annotation can be conducted reliably while capturing the
ambiguity and uncertainty under continuous and partiallyobservable context. In addition, we give a more quantitative
analysis of pragmatic expressions as an illustrative example
of analyses that can be conducted based on our annotation.
Finally, through our experiments we show that our annotation is critical for interpreting and analyzing common
grounding in baseline dialogue systems, as well as improving their performance on difﬁcult end tasks.
Overall, we propose a fundamental method and resource
for interpreting the process of common grounding through
its subtask of reference resolution. All materials related to
this work will be publicly available at https://github.com/
Alab-NII/onecommon.

Abstract
Common grounding is the process of creating, repairing and
updating mutual understandings, which is a fundamental aspect of natural language conversation. However, interpreting
the process of common grounding is a challenging task, especially under continuous and partially-observable context
where complex ambiguity, uncertainty, partial understandings and misunderstandings are introduced. Interpretation becomes even more challenging when we deal with dialogue
systems which still have limited capability of natural language understanding and generation. To address this problem, we consider reference resolution as the central subtask
of common grounding and propose a new resource to study
its intermediate process. Based on a simple and general annotation schema, we collected a total of 40,172 referring expressions in 5,191 dialogues curated from an existing corpus,
along with multiple judgements of referent interpretations.
We show that our annotation is highly reliable, captures the
complexity of common grounding through a natural degree
of reasonable disagreements, and allows for more detailed
and quantitative analyses of common grounding strategies.
Finally, we demonstrate the advantages of our annotation for
interpreting, analyzing and improving common grounding in
baseline dialogue systems.

1

Introduction

Common grounding is the process of creating, repairing and
updating mutual understandings, which is a critical aspect
of sophisticated human communication (Clark 1996) as well
as a longstanding goal in dialogue modeling (Traum 1994).
Recently, there have been several new proposals of dialogue
tasks which require advanced skills of common grounding
under continuous and partially-observable context (Udagawa and Aizawa 2019; Haber et al. 2019). Their main contributions include proposal of clear evaluation metrics based
on task success rate, collection of large-scale datasets (thousands of dialogues) and introduction of complex ambiguity, uncertainty, partial understandings and misunderstandings which are minimally observed under traditional settings
based on either categorical or fully-observable context.
However, interpretation of the process of common
grounding remains largely an open problem. Although a formal theory such as Poesio and Rieser (2010) can account

2

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Work

One of the most inﬂuential models of common grounding to
date is the contribution model (Clark 1996), which distin9081

