The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Partial Label Learning with Batch Label Correction
Yan Yan,1,2 Yuhong Guo2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Canada
yanyan.nwpu@gmail.com, yuhong.guo@carleton.ca

candidate label in an equal manner for model induction, and
make the ﬁnal prediction by averaging the modeling outputs
over all candidate labels (Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006;
Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011; Zhang, Zhou, and Liu 2016).
The identiﬁcation-based disambiguation approaches take the
ground-truth labels as latent variables and try to identify
the ground-truth labels by employing an iterative procedure
to gradually update the conﬁdence value over each candidate label (Jin and Ghahramani 2003; Zhang and Yu 2015;
Tang and Zhang 2017).

Abstract
Partial label (PL) learning tackles the problem where each
training instance is associated with a set of candidate labels,
among which only one is the true label. In this paper, we propose a simple but effective batch-based partial label learning algorithm named PL-BLC, which tackles the partial label learning problem with batch-wise label correction (BLC).
PL-BLC dynamically corrects the label conﬁdence matrix of
each training batch based on the current prediction network,
and adopts a MixUp data augmentation scheme to enhance
the underlying true labels against the redundant noisy labels.
In addition, it introduces a teacher model through a consistency cost to ensure the stability of the batch-based prediction
network update. Extensive experiments are conducted on synthesized and real-world partial label learning datasets, while
the proposed approach demonstrates the state-of-the-art performance for partial label learning.

As it is more suitable to consider the different relevance
degrees of each candidate label, the identiﬁcation-based approaches have recently started gaining more attention from
the research community. One recent work (Xu, Lv, and Geng
2019) attempts to recover the generalized label distribution
by exploiting the topological information extracted based on
a widely-used smooth assumption, and then learn a prediction model by ﬁtting the recovered generalized label distribution. This phrase-wise learning methodology however is
prone to the false positives in the labels identiﬁed via the
generalized label distribution. Another recent work in (Lei
and An 2019) learns the label conﬁdence values of candidate
labels by exploiting a self-training strategy by minimizing
the widely used squared loss between the model predictions
and the learned label conﬁdence matrix. Although this work
achieves some reasonable results, its label conﬁdence score
estimation is error-prone, which can have a profound negative impact on the model prediction, especially when the
candidate label set is large.

Introduction
In partial label (PL) learning, each training instance is assigned a set of candidate labels, only one of which is
valid. In some literatures, this learning paradigm is also
termed as superset label learning (Liu and Dietterich 2012;
Hüllermeier and Cheng 2015) or ambiguous label learning
(Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006; Zeng et al. 2013). Since
precisely annotating the ground-truth label of each instance
is typically difﬁcult and costly, the task of partial label learning naturally arises in various application domains, such
as automatic face naming (Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006;
Zeng et al. 2013), web mining (Luo and Orabona 2010), and
ecoinformatics (Liu and Dietterich 2014).
As the ground-truth label for each instance in the PL training set is hidden among the ambiguous labels in the candidate annotation set, one intuitive strategy of partial label
learning is performing disambiguation, i.e., trying to identify the ground-truth label from the candidate label set. Existing disambiguation-based PL approaches can be roughly
grouped into two categories, the average-based disambiguation approaches and the identiﬁcation-based approaches.
The average-based disambiguation approaches treat each

In this paper, we propose a novel Partial Label Learning with Batch Label Correction (PL-BLC) method, which
dynamically corrects the label conﬁdence values of candidate labels and exploits a mixup data enhancement scheme
to boost the prediction model through training batches. For
each training batch, PL-BLC ﬁrst dynamically corrects the
conﬁdence values of the candidate labels on being true labels based on the outputs of the current prediction network.
Then PL-BLC mixes the partial label training instances with
the corrected label conﬁdence matrix by adopting a MixUp
procedure, which serves as a data enhancement method to
improve the prediction model’s robustness against the noisy
labels. In addition, PL-BLC further adopts a self-ensembling

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6575

