The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Just Add Functions: A Neural-Symbolic Language Model
David Demeter

Doug Downey

Northwestern University
Evanston, IL, USA
ddemeter@u.northwestern.edu

Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Seattle, WA, USA
dougd@allenai.org

tain spatial, temporal, or quantitative relationships, that are
commonplace in text and are second-nature for human readers. Consider the following examples in which a language
model is asked to predict the ﬁnal word shown in square
brackets:

Abstract
Neural network language models (NNLMs) have achieved
ever-improving accuracy due to more sophisticated architectures and increasing amounts of training data. However,
the inductive bias of these models (formed by the distributional hypothesis of language), while ideally suited to modeling most running text, results in key limitations for today’s
models. In particular, the models often struggle to learn certain spatial, temporal, or quantitative relationships, which are
commonplace in text and are second-nature for human readers. Yet, in many cases, these relationships can be encoded
with simple mathematical or logical expressions. How can
we augment today’s neural models with such encodings?
In this paper, we propose a general methodology to enhance the inductive bias of NNLMs by incorporating simple functions into a neural architecture to form a hierarchical neural-symbolic language model (NSLM). These functions explicitly encode symbolic deterministic relationships
to form probability distributions over words. We explore the
effectiveness of this approach on numbers and geographic locations, and show that NSLMs signiﬁcantly reduce perplexity
in small-corpus language modeling, and that the performance
improvement persists for rare tokens even on much larger corpora. The approach is simple and general, and we discuss how
it can be applied to other word classes beyond numbers and
geography.

William the Conqueror won the Battle of Hastings in
1066, and died in [1087]
Exciting European cities are Paris, Rome and [London]
Based on the context, a human reader can predict that the
target word in the ﬁrst case will likely be a four-digit number
that is at least as large as (but not much larger than) 1066.
Likewise, the target word in the second case will be a city
that is geographically close to the other locations (i.e., a city
in Europe). While these expectations can be encoded with
simple mathematical or logical expressions, as we show in
our experiments they are nontrivial for NNLMs to learn.
How can we augment today’s neural models with such encodings? In this paper we propose a general methodology to
enhance the inductive bias of NNLMs by incorporating simple functions into a neural architecture to form a hierarchical
Neural-Symbolic Language Model (NSLM). To formulate
a NSLM, words associated with a particular language phenomena are aggregated into a small number of classes with
their own class-speciﬁc vocabularies (e.g., four-digit years).
The NSLM takes the form of a hierarchical NNLM (Bengio et al. 2006) that jointly generates a probability distribution over the classes and the non-class vocabulary. Simple
functions are then used to allocate probability assigned to
a particular class to the words in the class-speciﬁc vocabulary (see Figure 1). These simple functions explicitly encode
symbolic deterministic relationships to form probability distributions over a class-speciﬁc vocabulary, and are called
micro-models (MMs). For example, an MM for four-digit
years could capture how the numeric difference between two
consecutive years in text often follows a predictable distribution (see Figure 2).
We implement our approach within Recurrent NNLMs,
and demonstrate the effectiveness of NSLMs in the number and geographic domains. Micro-models are formulated
using a small set of general-purpose building blocks and
parameters of these functions are learned on the training

Introduction
Neural network language models (NNLMs) have achieved
ever-improving accuracy due to more sophisticated architectures and increasing amounts of training data (Radford
et al. 2019; Krause et al. 2019; Merity, Keskar, and Socher
2017). These models are formulated on the inductive bias of
the distributional hypothesis of language, which states that
words appearing in similar contexts are likely to have similar meanings (Firth 1957). This is realized in NNLMs by
embedding words with similar meanings close to each other
in a high-dimensional space.
The NNLM inductive bias, while well-suited to modeling
most running text, can result in key limitations for the models. In particular, today’s NNLMs often struggle to learn cerc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7634

