The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cross-Lingual Pre-Training Based
Transfer for Zero-Shot Neural Machine Translation
Baijun Ji,‡ Zhirui Zhang,§ Xiangyu Duan,†‡∗ Min Zhang,†‡ Boxing Chen,§ Weihua Luo§
‡

†
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
§
Alibaba DAMO Academy, Hangzhou, China
†
bjji@stu.suda.edu.cn, ‡ {xiangyuduan, minzhang}@suda.edu.cn
§
{zhirui.zzr, boxing.cbx, weihua.luowh}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Transfer learning between different language pairs has shown
its effectiveness for Neural Machine Translation (NMT) in
low-resource scenario. However, existing transfer methods
involving a common target language are far from success in
the extreme scenario of zero-shot translation, due to the language space mismatch problem between transferor (the parent model) and transferee (the child model) on the source
side. To address this challenge, we propose an effective transfer learning approach based on cross-lingual pre-training. Our
key idea is to make all source languages share the same feature space and thus enable a smooth transition for zero-shot
translation. To this end, we introduce one monolingual pretraining method and two bilingual pre-training methods to
obtain a universal encoder for different languages. Once the
universal encoder is constructed, the parent model built on
such encoder is trained with large-scale annotated data and
then directly applied in zero-shot translation scenario. Experiments on two public datasets show that our approach significantly outperforms strong pivot-based baseline and various
multilingual NMT approaches.

Figure 1: The circle and triangle dots represent source sentences in different language l1 and l2 , and the square dots
means target sentences in language l3 . A sample of translation pairs is connected by the dashed line. We would like to
force each of the translation pairs has the same latent representation as the right part of the ﬁgure so as to transfer
l1 → l3 model directly to l2 → l3 model.

tialize a low-resource source→target model (child) that is
further optimized with a small amount of available parallel data. Although this approach has achieved success in
some low-resource language pairs, it still performs very
poorly in extremely low-resource or zero-resource translation scenario. Speciﬁcally, Kocmi and Bojar (2018) reports
that without any child model training data, the performance
of the parent model on the child test set is miserable.
In this work, we argue that the language space mismatch problem, also named domain shift problem (Fu et al.
2015), brings about the zero-shot translation failure in transfer learning. It is because transfer learning has no explicit
training process to guarantee that the source and pivot languages share the same feature distributions, causing that the
child model inherited from the parent model fails in such
a situation. For instance, as illustrated in the left of Figure 1, the points of the sentence pair with the same semantics are not overlapping in source space, resulting in that
the shared decoder will generate different translations denoted by different points in target space. Actually, transfer
learning for NMT can be viewed as a multi-domain problem
where each source language forms a new domain. Minimizing the discrepancy between the feature distributions of different source languages, i.e., different domains, will ensure
the smooth transition between the parent and child models,

Introduction
Although Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has dominated recent research on translation tasks (Wu et al. 2016;
Vaswani et al. 2017; Hassan et al. 2018), NMT heavily relies
on large-scale parallel data, resulting in poor performance
on low-resource or zero-resource language pairs (Koehn
and Knowles 2017). Translation between these low-resource
languages (e.g., Arabic→Spanish) is usually accomplished
with pivoting through a rich-resource language (such as English), i.e., Arabic (source) sentence is translated to English (pivot) ﬁrst which is later translated to Spanish (target) (Kauers et al. 2002; de Gispert and Mariño 2006).
However, the pivot-based method requires doubled decoding
time and suffers from the propagation of translation errors.
One common alternative to avoid pivoting in NMT is
transfer learning (Zoph et al. 2016; Nguyen and Chiang
2017; Kocmi and Bojar 2018; Kim et al. 2019) which leverages a high-resource pivot→target model (parent) to ini∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
115

