The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On Succinct Groundings of HTN Planning Problems
Gregor Behnke, Daniel Höller, Alexander Schmid, Pascal Bercher,∗ Susanne Biundo
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ulm University, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
{gregor.behnke, daniel.hoeller, alexander-1.schmid, susanne.biundo}@uni-ulm.de, pascal.bercher@alumni.uni-ulm.de

grounding procedure aims to remove as many unnecessary instantiations as possible. Unnecessary here means that
grounding of e.g. actions can be removed if they cannot be
part of a solution to the planning problem. Smaller groundings are generally advantageous to planners, as their persearch-node effort or the size of any translation decreases.
Further, even the quality of computed heuristics can improve
if “distractor actions” are removed. Even a small decrease in
the size of the grounding can signiﬁcantly impact the efﬁciency of the planner. As such, grounding is a critical step in
the process of planning.
For Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning (Erol,
Hendler, and Nau 1996), there is – as far as we know –
only a single paper concerned with grounding HTN planning domains (Ramoul et al. 2017), which is used in the
planner GTOHP. However, several other HTN planners plan
using a grounded model (e.g. FAPE (Dvorak et al. 2014)
and PANDA (Bercher, Keen, and Biundo 2014; Bercher et
al. 2017)), but there are no publications on their grounding
procedures. Lastly, Tree-Rex (Schreiber et al. 2019) uses a
yet unpublished improvement of GTOHP’s grounder.
In this paper we describe the grounding procedure that as
so-far been used by the HTN planner PANDA and a recently
developed improved version of the grounder called pandaPI.
We start by describing the lifted HTN planning formalism,
then give an overview of grounding in planning in general
and in HTN planning in particular. We describe the grounding procedure used by PANDA. Thereafter we present the
new and more systematic view on the HTN grounding process, which allowed us to create the new and highly efﬁcient
grounder pandaPI. Lastly, we compare the performance of
pandaPI with that of PANDA, GTOHP, and Tree-Rex.

Abstract
Both search-based and translation-based planning systems
usually operate on grounded representations of the problem.
Planning models, however, are commonly deﬁned using lifted
description languages. Thus, planning systems usually generate a grounded representation of the lifted model as a preprocessing step. For HTN planning models, only one method
to ground lifted models has been published so far. In this
paper we present a new approach for grounding HTN planning problems that produces smaller groundings in a shorter
timespan than the previously published method.

Introduction
Most modelling languages for planning problems (such as
PDDL (McDermott 2000) and HDDL (Höller et al. 2020))
allow for specifying planning problems in a lifted fashion,
e.g. by allowing the modeller to specify the model using a
ﬁrst-order logical language. Actions are speciﬁed with parameters and the action’s preconditions and effects are speciﬁed using literals referring to these parameters. Using such
a lifted representation, a modeller can easily write models
with a large number of action instantiations without the need
to enumerate them explicitly. More importantly, a lifted representation enables the modeller to specify a single planning
domain that can be used in multiple planning problems without any change to the domain.
Unfortunately, to plan directly using only the lifted
model is quite difﬁcult. Most planners transform the lifted
input-model into a grounded model before planning. Planning is then performed on the grounded representation, either via search (Höller et al. 2018b; Bercher et al. 2017;
Helmert 2006) or via a translation into other problems, e.g.
SAT (Behnke, Höller, and Biundo 2019b; 2019a; 2018b;
Behnke and Biundo 2018; Behnke, Höller, and Biundo
2018a; Rintanen 2014; Rintanen, Heljanko, and Niemelä
2006). Naively grounding the lifted representation by simply instantiating all its elements is seldom feasible due to
the huge size of the naively grounded model. Instead, the

Lifted HTN Planning Formalism
Before explaining the HTN grounding procedure, we start
by brieﬂy describing the formalism of lifted HTN planning.
We have based our formalism on the lifted one by Alford,
Bercher, and Aha (2015), which in turn is based on the formalism by Geier and Bercher (2011).
Assume that L = (P, T, V, C) is a quantiﬁer- and
function-free ﬁrst-order predicate logic with the following
elements. P is a ﬁnite set of predicate symbols. A predi-

∗
Pascal Bercher is now at the College of Engineering and Computer Science, the Australian National University
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9775

