The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generate (Non-Software) Bugs to Fool Classiﬁers
Hiromu Yakura,1,2∗ Youhei Akimoto,1,2 Jun Sakuma1,2
1

University of Tsukuba, Japan
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
hiromu@mdl.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp, {akimoto, jun}@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp
2

Abstract
In adversarial attacks intended to confound deep learning
models, most studies have focused on limiting the magnitude
of the modiﬁcation so that humans do not notice the attack.
On the other hand, during an attack against autonomous cars,
for example, most drivers would not ﬁnd it strange if a small
insect image were placed on a stop sign, or they may overlook
it. In this paper, we present a systematic approach to generate natural adversarial examples against classiﬁcation models
by employing such natural-appearing perturbations that imitate a certain object or signal. We ﬁrst show the feasibility of
this approach in an attack against an image classiﬁer by employing generative adversarial networks that produce image
patches that have the appearance of a natural object to fool
the target model. We also introduce an algorithm to optimize
placement of the perturbation in accordance with the input
image, which makes the generation of adversarial examples
fast and likely to succeed. Moreover, we experimentally show
that the proposed approach can be extended to the audio domain, for example, to generate perturbations that sound like
the chirping of birds to fool a speech classiﬁer.

1

Figure 1: Because road signs are commonly located outside,
adding a bug image to such a sign is more natural than perturbing with an arbitrary pattern and is more difﬁcult to notice.
These adversarial examples are most commonly generated by perturbing the input data, in a way that limits the
magnitude of the perturbation so that humans do not notice the difference between a legitimate input sample and an
adversarial example. When image classiﬁcation models are
attacked, regularization by L2 - or L∞ -norm is often used
to make the generated adversarial examples unnoticeable
to humans. In another approach, some studies (Xiao et al.
2018; Zhao, Dua, and Singh 2018) introduced generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) to prepare adversarial examples that are likely to appear as natural
images. In these methods, GAN is used to generate adversarial examples that are close to the distribution of pre-given
natural images.
One drawback of the GAN-based approach is that natural adversarial examples do not always necessarily resemble
the input or natural images in some attack scenarios. For example, to attack autonomous cars, placing small bugs on a
stop sign would be more natural than modifying the entire
sign, as shown in Figure 1. More generally, by overlaying a
perturbation that imitates a natural object consistent with the
attack scenario on part of the input image, we can create adversarial examples less likely to be noticed. Such a strategy
can be extended to domains other than images, for example, to attack speech classiﬁcation models by generating a
perturbation that sounds like environmental noise.
Given the widespread use of image classiﬁcation and

Introduction

Despite the great success of deep learning in various ﬁelds
(LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015), recent studies have
shown that deep learning methods are vulnerable to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015). In other words, an attacker can make
deep learning models misclassify examples by intentionally adding small perturbations to the examples, which are
referred to as adversarial examples. Following a study by
Szegedy et al. (2014) on image classiﬁcation, adversarial examples have been demonstrated in many other domains, including natural language processing (Jia and Liang 2017),
speech recognition (Carlini and Wagner 2018), and malware detection (Grosse et al. 2017). Moreover, some studies
(Eykholt et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018) have demonstrated
a practical attack scenario based on adversarial examples to
make autonomous driving systems misclassify stop signs by
placing stickers on them.
∗

Also with Teambox Inc., Japan.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1070

