The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Self-Attention Enhanced Selective Gate with
Entity-Aware Embedding for Distantly Supervised Relation Extraction
Yang Li,1 Guodong Long,∗1 Tao Shen,1 Tianyi Zhou,2 Lina Yao,3 Huan Huo,1 Jing Jiang1
1

2

Centre of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales
{yang.li-17, tao.shen}@student.uts.edu.au
tianyizh@uw.edu, lina.yao@unsw.edu.au
{guodong.long, huan.huo, jing.jiang}@uts.edu.au
Abstract

Bag consisting of one sentence

Label

Correct

Distantly supervised relation extraction intrinsically suffers
from noisy labels due to the strong assumption of distant supervision. Most prior works adopt a selective attention mechanism over sentences in a bag to denoise from wrongly labeled data, which however could be incompetent when there
is only one sentence in a bag. In this paper, we propose a
brand-new light-weight neural framework to address the distantly supervised relation extraction problem and alleviate
the defects in previous selective attention framework. Specifically, in the proposed framework, 1) we use an entity-aware
word embedding method to integrate both relative position
information and head/tail entity embeddings, aiming to highlight the essence of entities for this task; 2) we develop a
self-attention mechanism to capture the rich contextual dependencies as a complement for local dependencies captured
by piecewise CNN; and 3) instead of using selective attention,
we design a pooling-equipped gate, which is based on rich
contextual representations, as an aggregator to generate baglevel representation for ﬁnal relation classiﬁcation. Compared
to selective attention, one major advantage of the proposed
gating mechanism is that, it performs stably and promisingly
even if only one sentence appears in a bag and thus keeps the
consistency across all training examples. The experiments on
NYT dataset demonstrate that our approach achieves a new
state-of-the-art performance in terms of both AUC and top-n
precision metrics.

After moving back to New York,
Miriam was the victim of a
seemingly racially motivated attack ...

place lived

True

... he faced, walking Bill
Mueller and giving up singles
to Mark Bellhorn and Johnny
Damon.

place lived

False

1

Table 1: Two examples of one-sentence bag, which are correctly and wrongly labeled by distant supervision respectively.

ing entity mentions in natural language sentences. This approach is based on a strong assumption that, any sentence
containing two entities should be labeled according to the relationship of the two entities on the given knowledge graph.
However, this assumption does not always hold. Sometimes
the same two entities in different sentences with various contexts cannot express a consistent relationship as described in
the knowledge graph, which certainly results in wrongly labeled problem.
To alleviate the aformentioned problem, Riedel, Yao, and
McCallum (2010) proposes a multi-instance learning framework, which relaxes the strong assumption to expressed-atleast-one assumption. In plainer terms, this means any possible relation between two entities hold true in at least one
distantly-labeled sentence rather than all of the them that
contains those two entities. In particular, instead of generating a sentence-level label, this framework assigns a label
to a bag of sentences containing a common entity pair, and
the label is a relationship of the entity pair on knowledge
graph. Recently, based on the labeled data at bag level, a line
of works (Zeng et al. 2015; Du et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2016;
Han et al. 2018; Ye and Ling 2019) under selective attention
framework (Lin et al. 2016) let model implicitly focus on the
correctly labeled sentence(s) by an attention mechanism and
thus learn a stable and robust model from the noisy data.
However, such selective attention framework is vulnerable to situations where a bag is merely comprised of one

Introduction

Relation extraction (RE) is one of the most fundamental
tasks in natural language processing, and its goal is to identify the relationship between a given pair of entities in a sentence. Typically, a large-scale training dataset with clean labels is required to train a reliable relation extraction model.
However, it is time-consuming and labor-intensive to annotate such data by crowdsourcing. To overcome the lack of
labeled training data, Mintz et al. (2009) presents a distant
supervision approach that automatically generates a largescale, labeled training set by aligning entities in knowledge
graph (e.g. Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008)) to correspond∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8269

