The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fragmentation Coagulation Based Mixed Membership Stochastic Blockmodel
Zheng Yu,1 Xuhui Fan,2 Marcin Pietrasik,1 Marek Reformat1,3
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta
2
School of Mathematics & Statistics, University of New South Wales
3
Information Technology Institute, University of Social Sciences, Poland
{zy3, pietrasi, reformat}@ualberta.ca, xuhui.fan@unsw.edu.au

Analysis of complex networks is an important research topic
leading to a variety of useful applications. To this end, many
interesting and promising approaches have been proposed
to address various challenges in investigating these complex networks. The Mixed-Membership Stochastic Blockmodel (MMSB) (Airoldi et al. 2008) is one such state-ofthe-art model in using Bayesian methods to discover meaningful underlying hidden structure. In general, MMSB assumes each entity in the network has a mixed-membership
distribution over the groups. To generate the link between
two entities, each entity would sample a belonging group
from its mixed-membership distribution. The compatibility
value between these two sampled groups would then determine the probability of generating this link.
MMSB has garnered considerable interest in recent years,
however, it is not good at embedding certain prior infor-

mation such as, for instance, the entities’ community structure. When the entities in the network are assumed to have
a mixed-membership distribution over the groups, the entity itself would belong to only one community. That is to
say, we should consider two types of clustering in MMSB:
entity-based clustering (i.e. communities for entities) and
linkage-based clustering (i.e. groups for links.)
For example, each footballer can play multiple positions
(groups) in one match while only belonging to one team
(community). This situation is quite common in the real
world. Besides, consider the more general example in Figure
1 where there are three communities {Ci |i ∈ 1, 2, 3} in the
network, each composed of two groups (G1i , G2i ). If we use
a 6 × 6 compatibility matrix, this will hinder interpretability because entities that should belong to groups in the same
community may belong to groups in different communities.
Under this setting, the MMSB can’t not infer any community
information about entities. Moreover, the size of the compatibility matrix is bigger than the true one (or the proposed one
in Figure 1.) which may lead to an overﬁtting problem.
Furthermore, another issue will also be prominent under
the dynamic setting. Recall that with respect to temporal dynamics, most of MMSB-based temporal models focus on
correlation among groups in the adjacent time slice. However, the size of their compatibility matrices is same across
time which leads to another shortcoming. Consider, for instance, a simple case where there is a complex network with
just 2 time slices. At time slice 1, there is one community
that consists of 4 groups. It is reasonable to use MMSB with
a 4 × 4 compatibility matrix to represent it. However, at time
slice 2, the community splits into two communities. Each
community still consists of 4 groups but the entities originally in the same group may have different relations based
on the community they belong to. Thus a compatibility matrix of size 8 × 8 is more suitable at time slice 2. This causes
a problem when selecting the compatibility matrix size in
the MMSB. Choosing the 4 × 4 matrix will lead to an underﬁtting problem while choosing the 8 × 8 one will lead to an
overﬁtting problem.
In this work, we focus on the following problems:

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• In a complex network, we should consider two types of
clustering: entity-based clustering (communities for en-

Abstract
The Mixed-Membership Stochastic Blockmodel (MMSB) is
proposed as one of the state-of-the-art Bayesian relational
methods suitable for learning the complex hidden structure
underlying the network data. However, the current formulation of MMSB suffers from the following two issues: (1), the
prior information (e.g. entities’ community structural information) can not be well embedded in the modelling; (2), community evolution can not be well described in the literature.
Therefore, we propose a non-parametric fragmentation coagulation based Mixed Membership Stochastic Blockmodel
(fcMMSB). Our model performs entity-based clustering to
capture the community information for entities and linkagebased clustering to derive the group information for links
simultaneously. Besides, the proposed model infers the network structure and models community evolution, manifested
by appearances and disappearances of communities, using the
discrete fragmentation coagulation process (DFCP). By integrating the community structure with the group compatibility
matrix we derive a generalized version of MMSB. An efﬁcient Gibbs sampling scheme with Polya Gamma (PG) approach is implemented for posterior inference. We validate
our model on synthetic and real world data.

Introduction

6704

