The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SMIX(λ): Enhancing Centralized Value Functions
for Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Chao Wen,∗ Xinghu Yao,∗ Yuhui Wang, Xiaoyang Tan
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Nanjing 211106, China
{chaowen, xinghuyao, y.wang, x.tan}@nuaa.edu.cn
for both fully centralized methods which consider all agents
as a single meta agent and fully decentralized methods
which individually train each agent by treating other agents
as part of the environment (Tan 1993; Foerster et al. 2017;
2018; Rashid et al. 2018).
Recently the paradigm of centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) has become popular for multiagent learning (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis 2008; Kraemer and Banerjee 2016; Foerster et al. 2018; Rashid et al.
2018) due to its conceptual simplicity and practical effectiveness. Its key idea is to learn a centralized value function
(CVF) shared by all the agents during training, while each
agent acts in a decentralized manner during the execution
phase. The CVF works as a proxy to the environment for
each agent, through which individual value/advantage functions for each agent can be conveniently learnt by incorporating appropriate credit assignment mechanism.
Unfortunately, the central role played by the CVF in the
CTDE approach seems to receive inadequate attention in
current practice - it is commonly treated in the same way as
in single-agent settings (Lowe et al. 2017; Rashid et al. 2018;
Foerster et al. 2018; Sunehag et al. 2018), leading to larger
estimation error in multi-agent environments. Furthermore,
to reduce the difﬁculty of decomposing the centralized value
function to individual value functions, many algorithms impose extra structural assumptions onto the hypothesis space
of the CVF during training. For example, VDN (Sunehag et
al. 2018), QMIX (Rashid et al. 2018), and QTRAN (Son et
al. 2019) assume that the optimal joint action is equivalent
to the collection of each agent’s optimal action.
On the other hand, performing an accurate estimation
of CVF in multi-agent environments is inherently difﬁcult
due to the following reasons: 1) the “curse of dimensionality” (Bellman 1957) of the joint action space results in the
sparsity of experiences; 2) the challenges of non-Markovian
property (Laurent et al. 2011) and partial observability in
multi-agent environments become even more severe than in
single-agent settings; 3) the dynamics of multi-agent environments are complex and hard to model, partially due to
the complicated interactions among agents. In practice, these
factors usually contribute to an unreliable and unstable CVF
with high bias and variance.
To tackle these difﬁculties, this work proposes a new
sample efﬁcient multi-agent reinforcement learning method,

Abstract
This work presents a sample efﬁcient and effective valuebased method, named SMIX(λ), for reinforcement learning
in multi-agent environments (MARL) within the paradigm of
centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE), in
which learning a stable and generalizable centralized value
function (CVF) is crucial. To achieve this, our method carefully combines different elements, including 1) removing the
unrealistic centralized greedy assumption during the learning
phase, 2) using the λ-return to balance the trade-off between
bias and variance and to deal with the environment’s nonMarkovian property, and 3) adopting an experience-replay
style off-policy training. Interestingly, it is revealed that
there exists inherent connection between SMIX(λ) and previous off-policy Q(λ) approach for single-agent learning. Experiments on the StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC)
benchmark show that the proposed SMIX(λ) algorithm outperforms several state-of-the-art MARL methods by a large
margin, and that it can be used as a general tool to improve
the overall performance of a CTDE-type method by enhancing the evaluation quality of its CVF. We open-source our
code at: https://github.com/chaovven/SMIX.

1

Introduction

Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) has made great success in a variety of domains, from game playing (Mnih et al.
2015; Silver et al. 2017) to complex continuous control tasks
(Schulman et al. 2017). However, many real-world problems
are inherently multi-agent in nature, such as network packet
routing (Ye, Zhang, and Yang 2015), trafﬁc light control
(Van der Pol and Oliehoek 2016), and multi-player games
(Jaderberg et al. 2019), which raises great challenges that
are never encountered in single-agent settings.
In particular, the main challenges in multi-agent environments include the dimension of joint action space that
grows exponentially with the number of agents (Foerster et
al. 2018; Rashid et al. 2018), unstable environments caused
by the interaction of individual agents (Laurent et al. 2011;
Lowe et al. 2017), and multi-agent credit assignment in cooperative scenarios with global rewards (Foerster et al. 2018;
Rashid et al. 2018). These challenges make it troublesome
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7301

