The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adaptive Trust Region Policy Optimization:
Global Convergence and Faster Rates for Regularized MDPs
Lior Shani,† Yonathan Efroni,† Shie Mannor
†
equal contribution
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

and they are considered heuristics (Schulman et al. 2015;
Papini, Pirotta, and Restelli 2019) (see Figure 1).
TRPO and Regularized MDPs: Trust region methods
are often used in conjunction with regularization. This is
commonly done by adding the negative entropy to the instantaneous cost (Nachum et al. 2017; Schulman et al.
2017). The intuitive justiﬁcation for using entropy regularization is that it induces inherent exploration (Fox, Pakman, and Tishby 2016), and the advantage of ‘softening’ the
Bellman equation (Chow, Nachum, and Ghavamzadeh 2018;
Dai et al. 2018). Recently, Ahmed et al. (2019) empirically observed that adding entropy regularization results in a
smoother objective which in turn leads to faster convergence
when the learning rate is chosen more aggressively. Yet, to
the best of our knowledge, there is no ﬁnite-sample analysis that demonstrates faster convergence rates for regularization in MDPs. This comes in stark contrast to well established faster rates for strongly convex objectives w.r.t. convex ones (Nesterov 1998). In this work we refer to regularized MDPs as describing a more general case in which a
strongly convex function is added to the immediate cost.
The goal of this work is to bridge the gap between the
practicality of trust region methods in RL and the scarce theoretical guarantees for standard (unregularized) and regularized MDPs. To this end, we revise a fundamental question
in this context:

Abstract
Trust region policy optimization (TRPO) is a popular and empirically successful policy search algorithm in Reinforcement
Learning (RL) in which a surrogate problem, that restricts
consecutive policies to be ‘close’ to one another, is iteratively
solved. Nevertheless, TRPO has been considered a heuristic
algorithm inspired by Conservative Policy Iteration (CPI). We
show that the adaptive scaling mechanism used in TRPO is in
fact the natural “RL version” of traditional trust-region methods from convex analysis. We ﬁrst analyze TRPO in the planning setting, in which we have access to the model and the entire state space.√Then, we consider sample-based TRPO and
establish Õ(1/ N ) convergence rate to the global optimum.
Importantly, the adaptive scaling mechanism allows us to analyze TRPO in regularized MDPs for which we prove fast
rates of Õ(1/N ), much like results in convex optimization.
This is the ﬁrst result in RL of better rates when regularizing
the instantaneous cost or reward.

1

Introduction

The ﬁeld of Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto
2018) tackles the problem of learning how to act optimally
in an unknown dynamic environment. The agent is allowed
to apply actions on the environment, and by doing so, to manipulate its state. Then, based on the rewards or costs it accumulates, the agent learns how to act optimally. The foundations of RL lie in the theory of Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs), where an agent has an access to the model of the
environment and can plan to act optimally.
Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO): Trust region methods are a popular class of techniques to solve an
RL problem and span a wide variety of algorithms including
Non-Euclidean TRPO (NE-TRPO) (Schulman et al. 2015)
and Proximal Policy Optimization (Schulman et al. 2017).
In these methods a sum of two terms is iteratively being
minimized: a linearization of the objective function and a
proximity term which restricts two consecutive updates to
be ‘close’ to each other, as in Mirror Descent (MD) (Beck
and Teboulle 2003). In spite of their popularity, much less
is understood in terms of their convergence guarantees

What is the proper form of the proximity term in trust
region methods for RL?
In Schulman et al. (2015), two proximity terms are suggested which result in two possible versions of trust region methods for RL. The ﬁrst (Schulman et al. 2015, Algorithm 1) is motivated by Conservative Policy Iteration
(CPI) (Kakade and others 2003) and results in an improving and thus converging algorithm in its exact error-free version. Yet, it seems computationally infeasible to produce a
sample-based version of this algorithm. The second algorithm, with an adaptive proximity term which depends on
the current policy (Schulman et al. 2015, Equation 12), is
described as a heuristic approximation of the ﬁrst, with no
convergence guarantees, but leads to NE-TRPO, currently
among the most popular algorithms in RL (see Figure 1).
In this work, we focus on tabular discounted MDPs and

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5668

