The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Copy or Rewrite: Hybrid Summarization
with Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
1

Liqiang Xiao,1 Lu Wang,2 Hao He,1,3 Yaohui Jin1,3

MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115
3
State Key Lab of Advanced Optical Communication System and Network, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{xiaoliqiang, hehao, jinyh}@sjtu.edu.cn, luwang@ccs.neu.edu
2

Article:

Abstract

For U.S. moms, the typical time between pregnancies is about 2
1/2 years but nearly a third of women space their children too
close, a government study shows.

Copy

The study released on Thursday by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention found that about 30 percent of women
who 'd had a child became pregnant again within 18 months.
…
Human Summary:
 For U.S. moms, the typical time between pregnancies is
about 2 1/2 years.
 Experts say mothers should wait at least 18 months to give
their body time to recover and increase the chances the next
child is full-term and healthy.
 The study found that about 30 percent of women who 'd had
a child became pregnant again within 18 months.

Rewrite

1

Experts say mothers should wait at least 18 months to give their
body time to recover and increase the chances the next child is
full-term and healthy.

Rewrite

Jointly using the extractive and abstractive summarization
methods can combine their complementary advantages, generating both informative and concise summary. Existing
methods that adopt an extract-then-abstract strategy have
achieved impressive results, yet they suffer from the information loss in the abstraction step because they compress all
the selected sentences without distinguish. Especially when
the whole sentence is summary-worthy, salient content would
be lost by compression. To address this problem, we propose H Y S UM, a hybrid framework for summarization that
can ﬂexibly switch between copying sentence and rewriting sentence according to the degree of redundancy. In this
way, our approach can effectively combine the advantages of
two branches of summarization, juggling informativity and
conciseness. Moreover, we based on Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning, propose an end-to-end reinforcing method to
bridge together the extraction module and rewriting module,
which can enhance the cooperation between them. Automatic
evaluation shows that our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms
the state-of-the-arts on the CNN/DailyMail corpus. Human
evaluation also demonstrates that our generated summaries
are more informative and concise than popular models.

Figure 1: Sample summary of an article from the test set of
CNN/DailyMail corpus (Hermann et al., 2015). The words
used in summary are colored. In this sample, one sentence
(green) is directly copied from article and two are rewritten
to be concise.

Introduction

The target of summarization is to rewrite a long article
into a short and ﬂuent version while maintaining the most
salient content. With the successful application of neural
network on natural language processing (NLP) tasks, two
data-driven branches, extractive and abstractive summarization (See, Liu, and Manning, 2017; Vinyals, Fortunato, and
Jaitly, 2015; Nallapati, Zhai, and Zhou, 2017), stand out
from the various approaches (Jing and McKeown, 2000;
Knight and Marcu, 2000). Extractive methods (Dong et al.,
2018; Nallapati, Zhai, and Zhou, 2017) generally select the
most salient sentences from the source article as the summary, which are precise at content selection making the
result informative but suffer from high redundancy since
it does not edit the sentences. In the opposite, abstractive
methods (Paulus, Xiong, and Socher, 2017; Çelikyilmaz et

al., 2018) can generate more concise summary via compressing and paraphrasing, while current models are weak
at content selection and easy to lose crucial information. We
can see that these two branches are complementary to each
other, which motivates us to combine their advantages, generating both informative and concise summary.
Some effort has been made to combine these two
branches. Most existing works use the extract-then-abstract
framework that ﬁrst extracts the summary-worthy sentences
and then abstracts each of them (Dong et al., 2018; Mendes
et al., 2019; Chen and Bansal, 2018). However, they suffer from an information loss in abstract stage, since all the
sentence is compressed and pruned without a distinguish.
When the whole sentence is crucial, some important content would be mistakenly deleted, causing a severe information loss. In addition, their training method is not end-to-end

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9306

