The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Symbolic Top-k Planning
David Speck, Robert Mattmüller, Bernhard Nebel
University of Freiburg, Germany
{speckd, mattmuel, nebel}@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

(Bock, Kanter, and Haynes 1957), the problem of determining k cheapest plans for a given planning task has more recently been raised (Riabov, Sohrabi, and Udrea 2014). There
are several approaches to the k shortest paths problem, such
as a generalization of A (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968),
called K (Aljazzar and Leue 2011), which partially generates and processes parts of the input graph. For top-k planning, there are currently two different approaches: K and
FORBID - K (Katz et al. 2018). While K  can be applied to
top-k planning without major changes, FORBID - K is a novel
iterative approach based on a replanning loop that forbids
already found plans and preserves all other plans. It turns
out that FORBID - K dominates K if only a small number of
plans are desired. However, the replanning is too expensive
if a larger number of plans is desired, which leads to a large
decrease in performance. This raises the question whether
there are approaches that are efﬁcient for small k and also
scale well to larger k.
Over the past decade, symbolic search has proven to be a
competitive approach to cost-optimal planning (Edelkamp,
Kissmann, and Torralba 2015). In contrast to explicit search,
in which individual states are generated and expanded, symbolic search operates on whole state sets. Interestingly, symbolic planning often ﬁnds not only one (optimal) plan, but
several at once. However, only one of these plans is reported and all other plans are ignored (Torralba 2015). To the
best of the authors’ knowledge, symbolic planning has never
before been used for top-k planning. However, Günther,
Schuster, and Siegle (2010) proposed a symbolic search
based on Binary Decision Diagrams (Bryant 1986) to determine the most probable paths of a given graph with transition probabilities. The approach of Günther, Schuster, and
Siegle (2010) explores the entire state space to determine
these paths and is closely related to the k shortest path problem of graphs.
This paper has a theoretical and a practical contribution to
top-k planning. On the theoretical side, we answer the question whether top-k planning is computationally harder than
ordinary planning. On the practical side, we introduce a new
symbolic approach to top-k planning and prove soundness
and completeness. An empirical study on various planning
domains shows that the algorithm presented is a top-k planner that exceeds the current state of the art for both small
and large values of k.

Abstract
The objective of top-k planning is to determine a set of k
different plans with lowest cost for a given planning task. In
practice, such a set of best plans can be preferred to a single
best plan generated by ordinary optimal planners, as it allows
the user to choose between different alternatives and thus take
into account preferences that may be difﬁcult to model. In
this paper we show that, in general, the decision problem version of top-k planning is PSPACE-complete, as is the decision problem version of ordinary classical planning. This
does not hold for polynomially bounded plans for which the
decision problem turns out to be PP-hard, while the ordinary
case is NP-hard. We present a novel approach to top-k planning, called SYM - K, which is based on symbolic search, and
prove that SYM - K is sound and complete. Our empirical analysis shows that SYM - K exceeds the current state of the art for
both small and large k.

Introduction
The objective of cost-optimal planning is to ﬁnd a single
plan, which is a sequence of actions that leads to a goal state
with minimal cumulative costs. The problem of determining not only a single best plan, but a set of the k best plans
is called top-k planning (Katz et al. 2018). While an optimal plan may be sufﬁcient in some cases, in practice it is
often better to have many good alternative plans. A variety
of good alternative plans makes it possible to take into account user preferences and environmental inﬂuences that are
difﬁcult to model or may have changed at the time the plan
is executed. A top-k planner also allows to “generate and
test” high quality plans, which is relevant for various areas,
such as goal recognition (Sohrabi, Riabov, and Udrea 2016),
diverse planning (Katz and Sohrabi 2019), morally permissible planning (Lindner, Mattmüller, and Nebel 2019), or explanation generation (Eiﬂer et al. 2019). In addition, collections of plans for planning tasks can serve as practical training sets for machine learning algorithms (Toyer et al. 2018;
Gnad et al. 2019) and enable empirical studies on properties
of different planning tasks (Corraya et al. 2019).
Although the problem of determining k shortest paths for
a given graph is a well studied topic going back to 1957
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9967

