The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Using Approximation within Constraint Programming to Solve the
Parallel Machine Scheduling Problem with Additional Unit Resources
Arthur Godet,1 Xavier Lorca,2 Emmanuel Hebrard,3 Gilles Simonin1
1

IMT Atlantique, LS2N - UMR CNRS 6004, 44307, Nantes, France
2
Centre Génie Industriel, IMT Mines Albi, France
3
CNRS, LAAS-CNRS, Université de Toulouse
{arthur.godet, gilles.simonin}@imt-atlantique.fr, xavier.lorca@mines-albi.fr, hebrard@laas.fr

tion satellites (Pralet et al. 2014; Hebrard et al. 2016). These
satellites rotate around the Earth and make acquisitions of
data that are saved in memory banks inside the satellites. A
memory bank can be seen as a hard drive, and so only one
picture can be read at a time from a memory bank. When
making an acquisition, the satellite uses r different optic frequencies, and so generates r different ﬁles. There are exactly
r memory banks, storing the different ﬁles. The pictures
can be transmitted to ground stations only at certain periods
of time, called download windows, because of the rotation
around the Earth. Moreover, when the satellite is well positioned and so can transfer data to ground stations, m communication channels are open, but only ﬁles from distinct
memory banks can be transferred in parallel. The objective
is to minimise the total completion time, called makespan.
Indeed, the objective is to know whether it is possible to
download all the ﬁles during a given download window or
not. This problem is generally part of a bigger one, as described by Pralet et al. (2014).

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the Parallel Machine Scheduling
Problem with Additional Unit Resources, which consists in
scheduling a set of n jobs on m parallel unrelated machines
and subject to exactly one of r unit resources. This problem
arises from the download of acquisitions from satellites to
ground stations. We ﬁrst introduce two baseline constraint
models for this problem. Then, we build on an approximation algorithm for this problem, and we discuss about the
efﬁciency of designing an improved constraint model based
on these approximation results. In particular, we introduce
new constraints that restrict search to executions of the approximation algorithm. Finally, we report experimental data
demonstrating that this model signiﬁcantly outperforms the
two reference models.

Introduction
Scheduling problems have long been studied for their importance and relevance to real-life applications, especially
in but not limited to manufacturing. In the Parallel Machines Scheduling problem, as many jobs as machines can
be processed simultaneously. There are several variants of
this problem (Allahverdi 2015). Among them, those involving additional resources are of particular interest and their
complexity and approximability was the focus of signiﬁcant
research (Blazewicz, Lenstra, and Kan 1983).
The Parallel Machine Scheduling Problem with Additional Unit Resources (PMSPAUR) is a scheduling problem with n jobs to be processed on m parallel machines
and each job is subject to exactly one of r disjunctive resources. This problem is a generalisation of P ||Cmax which
is strongly NP-hard (Blazewicz, Lenstra, and Kan 1983;
Garey and Johnson 1978). A survey by Edis, Oguz, and
Ozkarahan reports known approximation bounds for several
variants of parallel machines scheduling problem, including
a generalization of PMSPAUR (2013). However, the best approximation algorithm for this problem was proposed more
recently in (Hebrard et al. 2016). This problem has several
real-life applications. One of them is the problem of planning the download of acquisitions made by agile observa-

The main contribution of this paper is to show how insights from approximation algorithms for PMSPAUR (Hebrard et al. 2016) can be leveraged to design an exact constraint programming (CP) model for this problem. In particular, decision variables stand for potential executions of
a greedy approximation algorithm, which are in turn channeled to a more conventional constraint model for scheduling problems. Moreover, although the goal is to emulate the
approximation algorithm, this is achieved declaratively, by
adding dedicated constraints and dominance relations to the
model. Experimental results clearly show that our method
outperforms other state-of-the-art CP approaches.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. The next section precisely describes the studied problem and recalls the
necessary background. The following section gives a baseline CP model of PMSPAUR. Then, we show how to use approximation results into the CP model, and we demonstrate
that ﬁnding an optimal schedule can be achieved by ﬁnding the right sequence in which processing the jobs through
a speciﬁc algorithm. The following section details the CP
model built on these results. And ﬁnally, the last section, we
discuss the results of the three models on our instances.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1512

