The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Semi-Supervised Learning under Class Distribution Mismatch
Yanbei Chen,1 Xiatian Zhu,2 Wei Li,1 Shaogang Gong1
1
Queen Mary University of London, 2 Vision Semantics Ltd.
{yanbei.chen, w.li, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk, eddy.zhuxt@gmail.com

bird

Abstract

cat

deer

dog

frog

horse

…

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims to avoid the need for collecting prohibitively expensive labelled training data. Whilst
demonstrating impressive performance boost, existing SSL
methods artiﬁcially assume that small labelled data and large
unlabelled data are drawn from the same class distribution. In
a more realistic scenario with class distribution mismatch between the two sets, they often suffer severe performance degradation due to error propagation introduced by irrelevant unlabelled samples. Our work addresses this under-studied and realistic SSL problem by a novel algorithm named UncertaintyAware Self-Distillation (UASD). Speciﬁcally, UASD produces
soft targets that avoid catastrophic error propagation, and empower learning effectively from unconstrained unlabelled data
with out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. This is based on joint
Self-Distillation and OOD ﬁltering in a uniﬁed formulation.
Without bells and whistles, UASD signiﬁcantly outperforms
six state-of-the-art methods in more realistic SSL under class
distribution mismatch on three popular image classiﬁcation
datasets: CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and TinyImageNet.

labelled, unlabelled training data: same class space

(a) conventional semi-supervised learning

bird

cat

deer

dog

match classes

mismatch classes

frog

ship

horse

…
labelled class space

truck

…

unlabelled class space

(b) realistic semi-supervised learning

Figure 1: (a) In conventional semi-supervised learning, both
labelled and unlabelled training data come from an identical
class distribution. (b) In real-world scenario, however, class
distribution mismatch often exits between the labelled and
unlabelled data.

alisable DNNs. With a substantial fraction of labels discarded, recent advanced methods (Laine and Aila 2017;
Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Athiwaratkun et al. 2019) can
even approach the performance of fully supervised learning.
Built upon a de facto artiﬁcial assumption that labelled and
unlabelled training data are drawn from an identical class
space (i.e. every unlabelled sample must belong to one of
the known classes), existing SSL methods are not practically
deployable and scalable. This is because, unlabelled data are
unlikely to be manually puriﬁed beforehand in many realworld applications for meeting the de facto assumption. More
probably, unlabelled data are sampled from a class distribution with an unknown class mismatch rate against the labelled
class distribution. Lacking algorithmic consideration to deal
with the class distribution mismatch between labelled and
unlabelled data, state-of-the-art SSL algorithms generally suffer severe performance degradation when deployed to such
realistic settings, as identiﬁed by (Oliver et al. 2018).
In this work, we investigate the more realistic and understudied semi-supervised learning scenario with class distribution mismatch between limited labelled and abundant unlabelled data sets. In particular, unlike the conventional SSL
setting, we consider the unlabelled data is drawn from a mix-

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) often require supervised learning on large-scale labelled training data (LeCun, Bengio,
and Hinton 2015). This greatly restricts their generalisability
in the limited supervision regime – where labelled data is
scare due to high annotation cost and/or prohibitive collecting process. As a remedy to mitigate the labelling overload,
semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims for model optimisation with limited labelled and abundant unlabelled training
data (Chapelle, Scholkopf, and Zien 2009). This learning
paradigm hence brings enormous potential value to a variety
of real-world applications, such as medical data analysis (Papernot et al. 2017), image search (Fergus, Weiss, and Torralba
2009), genetics and genomics (Libbrecht and Noble 2015).
Recent developments (Kingma et al. 2014; Rasmus et al.
2015; Miyato et al. 2016; Sajjadi, Javanmardi, and Tasdizen
2016; Laine and Aila 2017; Tarvainen and Valpola 2017;
Athiwaratkun et al. 2019; Berthelot et al. 2019) have pushed
the limit of SSL drastically, leading to increasingly generc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3569

