The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Robust Self-Weighted Multi-View Projection Clustering
Beilei Wang,1 Yun Xiao,1∗ Zhihui Li,2,3† Xuanhong Wang,4 Xiaojiang Chen,1 Dingyi Fang1
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Northwest University, Xi’an 710127, P.R. China
School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250358, P.R. China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
4
School of Communications and Information Engineering,
Xi’an University of Posts & Telecommunications, Xi’an 710121, P.R. China
wangbeilei@stumail.nwu.edu.cn, {yxiao, xjchen, dyf}@nwu.edu.cn, zhihuilics@gmail.com, wxh@xupt.edu.cn
2

multi-modal spectral clustering methods, which can not distinguish the importance of different views and were vulnerable to poor quality views. In order to distinguish the importance of different views for clustering results, (Nie et al.
2016; Nie, Cai, and Li 2017) proposed to automatically assign an ideal weight to each view without introducing redundant hyperparameters. (Nie, Tian, and Li 2018) considered the clustering ability difference of different views and
proposed multiview clustering via adaptively weighted procrustes. The above clustering methods successfully solved
the clustering problem in low-dimensional data. However,
there are still signiﬁcant challenges to high-dimensional data
clustering problems with noise.
In order to process high-dimensional data, (Chen et al.
2018; Xiao et al. 2019) proposed to project the original
matrix from the high-dimensional subspace to the lowdimensional subspace by learning the projection matrix, and
obtained better clustering results on the single view. For
multi-view high-dimensional data processing, (Gao et al.
2015) proposed multi-view subspace clustering (MVSC),
which performs clustering on the subspace representation
of each view, using a common indicator to ensure consistency between different views. (Wang et al. 2019) proposed
two parameter-free weighted projected clustering methods,
which can simultaneously perform structural graph learning and dimensionality reduction. However, for multi-view
high-dimensional data with noise, these existing algorithms
adopt dimensionality reduction method to project data from
high-dimensional subspace to low-dimensional subspace,
without considering the effect of noise in the datasets.
Since 2,1 -norm has advantages in noise processing and
feature selection (Yang et al. 2011), in this paper, we combine it with dimensionality reduction method to solve the
clustering problem on high dimensional and noisy multiview datasets. We propose a Robust Self-weighted Multiview Projection Clustering (RSwMPC) based on 2,1 -norm,
which project the original dataset into the low-dimensional
subspace through the projection matrix, and suppress the
noise points and outliers through increase the 2,1 -norm
penalty of the projection matrix. At the same time, in our
proposed RSwMPC, the weight of each view depends on
the projection matrix and the similarity matrix, and no redundant parameters are introduced. Different from the conventional post-processing methods (Tang, Lu, and Dhillon

Abstract
Many real-world applications involve data collected from different views and with high data dimensionality. Furthermore,
multi-view data always has unavoidable noise. Clustering on
this kind of high-dimensional and noisy multi-view data remains a challenge due to the curse of dimensionality and ineffective de-noising and integration of multiple views. Aiming at this problem, in this paper, we propose a Robust Selfweighted Multi-view Projection Clustering (RSwMPC) based
on 2,1 -norm, which can simultaneously reduce dimensionality, suppress noise and learn local structure graph. Then
the obtained optimal graph can be directly used for clustering while no further processing is required. In addition, a
new method is introduced to automatically learn the optimal
weight of each view with no need to generate additional parameters to adjust the weight. Extensive experimental results
on different synthetic datasets and real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outperforms other state-ofthe-art methods on clustering performance and robustness.

Introduction
In many real-world applications, instances can be described
in many different ways or angles, which produce abundant multi-views data, such as web page classiﬁcation problems, image processing problems, and the like. Clustering
on multi-view data is a fundamental and important topic in
data mining, machine learning, pattern recognition and so
on. In this era of information explosion, the dimensionality
of data is getting higher and higher. Meanwhile, multi-view
data always has unavoidable noise. These directly lead to the
increase of data storage cost, the further improvement of the
complexity of learning algorithm and the decrease of algorithm generalization ability. Clustering on this kind of highdimensional and noisy multi-view data remains a challenge
due to the curse of dimensionality and ineffective de-noising
and integration of multiple views.
In the past decades, a number of multi-view clustering approaches have been proposed. In order to maintain the same
clustering consistency among all graphs, (Kumar, Rai, and
Daume 2011; Cai et al. 2011) proposed co-regularized and
∗

Corresponding author
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6110

