The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Acquiring Knowledge from Pre-Trained Model to Neural Machine Translation
Rongxiang Weng,1,2∗ Heng Yu,2 Shujian Huang,1
Shanbo Cheng,2 Weihua Luo2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{wengrx, yuheng.yh, weihua.luowh}@alibaba-inc.com, huangsj@nju.edu.cn,

eral successful attempts have been made to improve NMT
by incorporating monolingual data (Gulcehre et al. 2015;
Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016; Zhang and Zong 2016;
Poncelas et al. 2018). However, these studies only focus on
the usage of word-level information, e.g. extracting information from word embedding. The rich contextual information
from large scale monolingual data does not be fully utilized.
Meanwhile, ﬁne-tuning the parameters from unsupervised
pre-trained models, like GPT (Radford et al. 2018) or BERT
(Devlin et al. 2018), in which downstream tasks could exploit the contextual knowledge from large scale monolingual data, has gained tremendous success in a variety of natural language process tasks. Thus, the upcoming question is
whether the contextual knowledge from pre-trained models
are useful in NMT.

Abstract
Pre-training and ﬁne-tuning have achieved great success in
natural language process ﬁeld. The standard paradigm of exploiting them includes two steps: ﬁrst, pre-training a model,
e.g. BERT, with a large scale unlabeled monolingual data.
Then, ﬁne-tuning the pre-trained model with labeled data
from downstream tasks. However, in neural machine translation (NMT), we address the problem that the training objective of the bilingual task is far different from the monolingual pre-trained model. This gap leads that only using ﬁnetuning in NMT can not fully utilize prior language knowledge. In this paper, we propose an A PT framework for acquiring knowledge from pre-trained model to NMT. The proposed approach includes two modules: 1). a dynamic fusion
mechanism to fuse task-speciﬁc features adapted from general knowledge into NMT network, 2). a knowledge distillation paradigm to learn language knowledge continuously
during the NMT training process. The proposed approach
could integrate suitable knowledge from pre-trained models to improve the NMT. Experimental results on WMT English to German, German to English and Chinese to English
machine translation tasks show that our model outperforms
strong baselines and the ﬁne-tuning counterparts.

1

Due to the limited amount of high-quality parallel data,
NMT as a complex text generation task, can not generate
appropriate representation. The contextual knowledge from
pre-trained models could naturally be a good complement
for NMT. Nevertheless, how to integrate the knowledge
from pre-trained models into NMT is another challenge: the
improvement in NMT with the standard ﬁne-tuning operation is relatively less (Sun et al. 2019). The main reason is
that the training objective of the bilingual task is far different from the monolingual task. For example, even with a
multi-lingual setting, the objective of BERT or GPT is also
predicting the words from the same language, while translation requires the conversion of one language to another.
Especially in languages having large differences in morphology and syntax, this gap will lead to that general knowledge
from pre-trained models will be erased in the training process of NMT (Yang et al. 2019a). When using the ﬁne-tuning
method directly can not work well, how to explore the potential abilities of pre-trained models in NMT is an urgent
problem to be solved.

Introduction

Neural machine translation (NMT) based on the encoderdecoder framework (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Cho
et al. 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Luong, Pham,
and Manning 2015) has obtained state-of-the-art performance on many language pairs (Deng et al. 2018). Various advanced neural architectures have been explored for
NMT under this framework, such as recurrent neural network (RNN) (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Luong,
Pham, and Manning 2015, RNNSearch), convolutional neural network (CNN) (Gehring et al. 2016, Conv-S2S) and
self-attention network (Vaswani et al. 2017, Transformer).
Currently, most NMT systems only utilize the sentencealigned parallel corpus for model training. Monolingual
data, which is larger and easier to collect, is not fully utilized limiting the capacity of NMT models. Previously, sev-

In this paper, to address this appealing challenge, we design an A PT framework for acquiring the knowledge from
pre-trained models to NMT. Speciﬁcally, our A PT framework has two modules. First, we propose a dynamic fusion
mechanism which can learn a task-speciﬁc representation by
adapting the general representation from pre-trained models,
and adopt two controlling methods based on different granu-

∗

Code is available at: https://github.com/wengrx/APT-NMT
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9266

