The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Scalable Decision-Theoretic Planning in Open and Typed Multiagent Systems
Adam Eck,1 Maulik Shah,2 Prashant Doshi,2 Leen-Kiat Soh3
1
Oberlin College, 2 University of Georgia, 3 University of Nebraska
aeck@oberlin.edu, {mns28652, pdoshi}@uga.edu, lksoh@cse.unl.edu

recharge their limited suppressants that were spent during
ﬁreﬁghting. Likewise, competitive autonomous ride-sharing
cars can no longer compete for new passengers while transporting a full ride. Consequently, openness requires that an
agent not only predict what actions their neighbors will take,
but also whether they are even present to take actions. Inaccurately predicting the presence or absence of others may
cause agents to choose actions that miss their intended beneﬁts or other utility maximizing opportunities.

Abstract
In open agent systems, the set of agents that are cooperating
or competing changes over time and in ways that are nontrivial to predict. For example, if collaborative robots were
tasked with ﬁghting wildﬁres, they may run out of suppressants and be temporarily unavailable to assist their peers. We
consider the problem of planning in these contexts with the
additional challenges that the agents are unable to communicate with each other and that there are many of them. Because an agent’s optimal action depends on the actions of others, each agent must not only predict the actions of its peers,
but, before that, reason whether they are even present to perform an action. Addressing openness thus requires agents to
model each other’s presence, which becomes computationally intractable with high numbers of agents. We present a
novel, principled, and scalable method in this context that enables an agent to reason about others’ presence in its shared
environment and their actions. Our method extrapolates models of a few peers to the overall behavior of the many-agent
system, and combines it with a generalization of Monte Carlo
tree search to perform individual agent reasoning in manyagent open environments. Theoretical analyses establish the
number of agents to model in order to achieve acceptable
worst case bounds on extrapolation error, as well as regret
bounds on the agent’s utility from modeling only some neighbors. Simulations of multiagent wildﬁre suppression problems demonstrate our approach’s efﬁcacy compared with alternative baselines.

Furthermore, real-world environments such as wildﬁre
suppression often involve many agents of various types
working together to put out the wildﬁres. Thus, the modeling and reasoning must additionally scale with the number of
agents. As scalability is a general and ever-present challenge
for multiagent planning, investigations have ﬁrst focused on
multiagent planning for smaller groups of agents, e.g., (Amato and Oliehoek 2015; Claes et al. 2017; Hoang and Low
2013; Nair et al. 2005; Oliehoek et al. 2008). Subsequently,
there has been some focus on scalable planning in large
groups of agents (Oliehoek, Whiteson, and Spaan 2013;
Nguyen, Kumar, and Lau 2017; Sonu, Chen, and Doshi
2017; Velagapudi et al. 2011) albeit, in the absence of openness. Indeed, state-of-the-art multiagent planning in open
environments has demonstrated successful planning with up
to 5 agents (Chandrasekaran et al. 2016; Cohen, Dibangoye,
and Mouaddib 2017). Of course, openness compounds the
challenges of scalable reasoning since not only should the
agent model how its many peers decide their actions, but
also how they dynamically join and leave the environment.

Introduction
In both cooperative and competitive multiagent systems
(MAS), a participating agent beneﬁts from reasoning about
how other agents will behave while choosing optimal actions
that maximize its chances of accomplishing shared or selfinterested goals. However, nuances in real-world environments often challenge straightforward peer modeling. One
of these is agent openness occurring whenever individual
agents join or leave the system (temporarily or permanently)
over time. For example, cooperative robots tasked with suppressing wildﬁres alongside or in place of human ﬁre ﬁghters would need to periodically leave the environment to

In this paper, we focus on achieving scalable multiagent
reasoning in open environments. We improve on a previous
approach to individual agent planning in the context of agent
openness (Chandrasekaran et al. 2016) to consider manyagent settings. To promote ﬂexible scalability, our method
enables a subject agent to intelligently select a small subset
of neighbors to explicitly model. Then, it extrapolates their
expected behaviors to the larger set of all agents. This approach has its roots in surveying and polling theory where
surveyors rarely poll all individuals in their target class. As
such, this approach represents a novel integration of survey
theory in multiagent planning. However, selective modeling
may not be enough for many-agent systems. We observe that

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7127

