The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning General Latent-Variable
Graphical Models with Predictive Belief Propagation
Borui Wang

Geoffrey Gordon

Computer Science Department
Stanford University
wbr@cs.stanford.edu

Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
ggordon@cs.cmu.edu

Our method: message encodes predictions about the future

Abstract
Learning general latent-variable probabilistic graphical models is a key theoretical challenge in machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence. All previous methods, including the EM
algorithm and the spectral algorithms, face severe limitations
that largely restrict their applicability and affect their performance. In order to overcome these limitations, in this paper we introduce a novel formulation of message-passing inference over junction trees named predictive belief propagation, and propose a new learning and inference algorithm for
general latent-variable graphical models based on this formulation. Our proposed algorithm reduces the hard parameter learning problem into a sequence of supervised learning
problems, and uniﬁes the learning of different kinds of latent
graphical models into a single learning framework, which is
local-optima-free and statistically consistent. We then give a
proof of the correctness of our algorithm and show in experiments on both synthetic and real datasets that our algorithm signiﬁcantly outperforms both the EM algorithm and
the spectral algorithm while also being orders of magnitude
faster to compute.

1

Predictive Belief
Propagation
pa
Past part of the
latent junction tree

Separator
Set

Future part of the
latent junction tree

Conventional Belief Propagation

Previous Methods: message encodes summaries of the past

Figure 1: Comparison between predictive belief propagation
and conventional methods for belief propagation during inference over latent-variable junction trees.

of EM, recently a second type of methods called spectral
learning has been proposed (Hsu, Kakade, and Zhang 2009;
Anandkumar et al. 2014; Parikh, Song, and Xing 2011).
Spectral learning algorithms are based on the idea of method
of moments and reparametrize the latent graphical models
such that the learning procedure can be performed through
tensor algebra using only observed quantities. Although
spectral algorithms enjoy the beneﬁts of being provably consistent, computationally efﬁcient and local-optima-free, they
have three key limitations. First, most spectral learning algorithms only apply to restricted types of latent structures
(mostly trees), and are hard to generalize to more complicated latent structures beyond trees (e.g. loopy graphs). Second, most spectral learning algorithms can only deal with
discrete random variables and cannot be easily extended to
handle continuous random variables. Third, the current spectral algorithms are generally idiosyncratic to the speciﬁc
model structures that they are targeted to learn, and thus cannot provide a ﬂexible learning framework to incorporate different prior knowledge and probabilistic assumptions when
facing different learning scenarios.
In order to overcome these limitations of previous methods, in this paper we propose a new algorithm for learning general latent-variable graphical models that applies to
all different types of latent structures, can handle both dis-

Introduction

Probabilistic graphical models with latent variables are powerful in modeling many important problems in machine
learning and artiﬁcial intelligence (Koller and Friedman
2009; Bishop 2006). The existence of latent variables in such
models provides us with the ability to capture richer statistical dependencies among observed variables. However,
learning latent-variable graphical models is often difﬁcult,
due to the non-convex nature of their parameter learning
problem and the intractability in the corresponding inference
procedure.
Currently, there are two main types of learning algorithms
for latent-variable graphical models. The ﬁrst one is the
Expectation-Maximization algorithm (Dempster, Laird, and
Rubin 1977), which transforms the parameter learning problem into an iterative procedure that maximizes a non-convex
objective function. However, the EM algorithm only provides weak theoretical guarantees, can lead to bad local optima and has slow convergence. To address these problems
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6118

