The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Rethinking the Image Fusion: A Fast Uniﬁed Image Fusion
Network based on Proportional Maintenance of Gradient and Intensity
Hao Zhang,1 Han Xu,1 Yang Xiao,2 Xiaojie Guo,3 Jiayi Ma1,∗
1
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
School of Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China
{zhpersonalbox, xj.max.guo, jyma2010}@gmail.com, xu han@whu.edu.cn, Yang Xiao@hust.edu.cn
2

Sevcenco, and Agathoklis 2016) propose a general algorithm for multi-focus and multi-exposure image fusion,
which is based on blending the gradients of the luminance
components of source images using the maximum gradient magnitude at each pixel location and then obtaining the
fused luminance using a Haar wavelet-based image reconstruction technique. The pyramid methods achieve medical
image fusion by the diverse resolutions in the level and the
iteration of the images (Patil and Mudengudi 2011). Rahmani et al. (Rahmani et al. 2010) come up with an adaptive
IHS pan-sharpening Method, which produces images with
higher spectral resolution while maintaining the high-quality
spatial resolution of the original IHS. ii) Deep learningbased methods. Due to the strong ﬁtting ability of neural
networks, these methods can usually achieve better fused
results by designing objective functions. In multi-focus image fusion, Liu et al. (Liu et al. 2017) used the convolutional neural network to jointly generate activity level measurement and fusion rules. Ma et al. (Ma et al. 2019a) proposed an unsupervised network to generate the decision map
for fusion. In multi-exposure image fusion, Prabhakar et
al. (Ram Prabhakar, Sai Srikar, and Venkatesh Babu 2017)
proposed an unsupervised deep learning framework that utilizes a no-reference quality metric MEF-SSIM (Ma, Zeng,
and Wang 2015) as the loss function and can produce satisfactory fused results. In medical image fusion, PA-PCNN
proposed by Yin et al. (Yin et al. 2018) can realize the fusion of different types of medical images, which is a novel
method in nonsubsampled shearlet transform (NSST) domain. Ma et al. (Ma et al. 2019b) proposed an end-to-end
model called FusionGAN, which generates a fused image
with dominant infrared intensities and additional visible gradients on the basis of GAN. Subsequently, they proposed
to use a dual-discriminator to avoid loss of information in
source images (Xu et al. 2019). In addition, they also introduced a detail loss and a target edge-enhancement loss based
on FusionGAN to further enhance the texture details in the
fused results (Ma et al. 2020).

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a fast uniﬁed image fusion network
based on proportional maintenance of gradient and intensity
(PMGI), which can end-to-end realize a variety of image fusion tasks, including infrared and visible image fusion, multiexposure image fusion, medical image fusion, multi-focus
image fusion and pan-sharpening. We unify the image fusion
problem into the texture and intensity proportional maintenance problem of the source images. On the one hand, the
network is divided into gradient path and intensity path for
information extraction. We perform feature reuse in the same
path to avoid loss of information due to convolution. At the
same time, we introduce the pathwise transfer block to exchange information between different paths, which can not
only pre-fuse the gradient information and intensity information, but also enhance the information to be processed later.
On the other hand, we deﬁne a uniform form of loss function
based on these two kinds of information, which can adapt
to different fusion tasks. Experiments on publicly available
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our PMGI over the
state-of-the-art in terms of both visual effect and quantitative
metric in a variety of fusion tasks. In addition, our method is
faster compared with the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Image fusion is to extract the most meaningful information from images acquired by different sensors, and combine the information to generate a single image, which contains more abundant information and is more conducive to
subsequent applications. Common image fusions include infrared and visible image fusion, multi-exposure image fusion, multi-focus image fusion, medical image fusion, and
remote sensing image fusion (also called pan-sharpening).
They are used in target detection, HDTV, medical diagnosis and other ﬁelds (Ma, Ma, and Li 2019; Ma et al. 2017;
Xing et al. 2018).
Existing fusion methods can be divided into two categories. i) Traditional methods. These methods usually use
the related mathematical transformation and manually designed fusion rules to get fused images. Paul et al. (Paul,

Although existing methods can achieve good results in
corresponding fusion tasks, there are still several aspects to
be improved. First, existing methods usually need to manually design the activity level measurement and fusion rules.

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12797

