The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Leveraging Title-Abstract Attentive Semantics for Paper Recommendation
Guibing Guo,1 Bowei Chen,1 Xiaoyan Zhang,2 Zhirong Liu,3 Zhenhua Dong,3 Xiuqiang He3
1
Northeastern University, China, 2 Shenzhen University, China, 3 Noah’s Ark Research Lab, Huawei, China
guogb@swc.neu.edu.cn, boweichen public@outlook.com, {liuzhirong, dongzhenhua, hexiuqiang1}@huawei.com

Abstract

TITLE

ABSTRACT

0.21

Paper recommendation is a research topic to provide users
with personalized papers of interest. However, most existing
approaches equally treat title and abstract as the input to learn
the representation of a paper, ignoring their semantic relationship. In this paper, we regard the abstract as a sequence of
sentences, and propose a two-level attentive neural network
to capture: (1) the ability of each word within a sentence to
reﬂect if it is semantically close to the words within the title.
(2) the extent of each sentence in the abstract relative to the
title, which is often a good summarization of the abstract document. Speciﬁcally, we propose a Long-Short Term Memory
(LSTM) network with attention to learn the representation of
sentences, and integrate a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) network with a memory network to learn the long-term sequential sentence patterns of interacted papers for both user and
item (paper) modeling. We conduct extensive experiments on
two real datasets, and show that our approach outperforms
other state-of-the-art approaches in terms of accuracy.

1. Adaptive web sites may oﬀer automated recommendations generated
through any number of well-studied techniques including collaborative,
content-based and knowledge-based recommendation.

0.02
2. Each of these techniques has its own strengths and weaknesses.

Hybrid Web
Recommender
Systems
(Burke 2007)

0.23

3. In search of better performance, researchers have combined
recommendation techniques to build hybrid recommender systems.

0.32

4. This chapter surveys the space of two-part hybrid recommender
systems, comparing four diﬀerent recommendation techniques and seven
diﬀerent hybridization strategies.

0.10
5. Implementations of 41 hybrids including some novel combinations

are examined and compared.
0.12

6. The study ﬁnds that cascade and augmented hybrids work well,
especially when combining two components of diﬀering strengths.

Figure 1: The semantic relationship between title and abstract taken from (Burke 2007). Words highlighted in red are
semantically close to those in title. The weight (importance)
of each sentence is shown above the arrow.

inﬂuence of one paper to another, but it ignores the real
content and semantics of the paper. (Hassan 2017) points
out another issue that some newly published papers may
not be cited and some researchers prefer to cite their own
less relevant papers. The latter type tries to make use of
title and abstract to better represent a paper, for example,
by extracting its topics (Wang, Wang, and Yeung 2015;
Kim et al. 2016). Some researchers also integrate keywords
and domain of a paper as well as user proﬁles to generate
better recommendation lists (Sun et al. 2013). Our paper
follows this research direction that uses textual information,
which refers to title and abstract of papers in our case, for
paper recommendation. We opt not to use full paper text for
recommendation since it contains a lot of noise and may deteriorate the overall performance. We leave it as a part of
future work for further exploration.
However, most existing text-based approaches suffer from
the limitation that they simply treat title and abstract of a
paper without any difference, failing to grasp the semantic relationship between them. In our viewpoint, we regard
the title as a conclusive and informative sentence relative to
the whole abstract document, and thus combining both of
them can better capture the semantics of a speciﬁc paper. To

Introduction
Ever-increasing number of research papers have been published over the last decades, resulting in a problem known
as ‘information overload’. Researchers have to spend more
time searching for articles articles they are interested in.
Therefore, paper recommendation is more important than
before. Collaborative ﬁltering (CF) has been widely adopted
in recommendation systems, which explores user-item historical interactions (e.g., purchase). However, CF often generates poor performance since the user-item interaction matrix is very sparse in many ﬁelds. Thus, auxiliary information is introduced to enhance recommendation performance.
In recent years, many approaches have been proposed
to exploit various auxiliary information. For paper recommendation, two types of auxiliary information are widely
adopted for better recommendations, including structural
and textual information. The former type refers to paper citation relationships, i.e., papers that a paper cites or those
cite it (Sugiyama and Kan 2010; 2013; Mohammadi et al.
2016). The structure of paper citations may indicate the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
67

