The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Using AI Techniques in a Serious Game for Socio-Moral Reasoning Development
Tato Ange,1,2,4 Nkambou Roger,1,2 Dufresne Aude3
1

Department of Computer Science, Université du Québec À Montréal, Canada
2
Centre de Recherche en Intelligence Artiﬁcielle, Montréal, Canada
3
Department of Communication, Université de Montréal, Canada
4
nyamen tato.ange adrienne@courrier.uqam.ca

So-Moral task. The user model is build using a novel hybrid neural network architecture and the adaptation rules
are provided by both human experts and machine learning
techniques (a decision tree and a neural network). We will
show that the game can signiﬁcantly improve the SMR of
teenagers.

Abstract
We present a serious game designed to help players/learners
develop socio-moral reasoning (SMR) maturity. It is based on
an existing computerized task that was converted into a game
to improve the motivation of learners. The learner model
is computed using a hybrid deep learning architecture, and
adaptation rules are provided by both human experts and machine learning techniques. We conducted some experiments
with two versions of the game (the initial version and the
adaptive version with AI-Based learner modeling). The results show that the adaptive version provides signiﬁcant better
results in terms of learning gain.

LesDilemmes : A serious game to learn SMR
Many studies have proven the pedagogical value of serious
games (Dondlinger 2007; Andrews 2011), which can help
build concrete spaces where abstract problems can be explained. For serious games to be efﬁcient it is important
that they rely on knowledge models and good learner models. Playing serious games can improve diverse cognitive
abilities (Granic, Lobel, and Engels 2014), and can provide
opportunities for superior learning experiences since the
learner is active and can experience different situations that
reﬂect behaviorally and decision making capacities (Ryan
and Deci 2008). Even though there exist several serious
game in different domain, there are none that target the SMR
skills.
LesDilemmes aims to assess and improve the socio-moral
reasoning skills. The game involves a series of dilemmas
that the player must solve. It has been implemented as a
3D environment to recreate as faithfully as possible, the real
situation in which the individual would normally have to
make decisions. For each dilemma, the player has to decide what action to take and give a verbal justiﬁcation of
his choice. The experts then use the reasons given by the
player to evaluate his level of maturity. This evaluation is
done automatically in the game thanks to our hybrid model
that we will present later in this paper. The level of maturity
(which varies between 1 and 5) is determined according to
the content of the individual’s verbatim and the information
extracted from a coding system (see table 1) (Chiasson et
al. 2017). The player is also surrounded by non-player characters (NPCs) who represent different SMR levels. He can
consult the NPCs and evaluate the justiﬁcations they suggest for each dilemma. The player’s emotions are captured
during the game, using the Facereader1 tool (using facial ex-

Socio-Moral Reasoning (SMR) is a socio-cognitive construct essential for decision-making, as well as social interaction adaptation. It is commonly deﬁned as ”how individuals think about moral emotions and conventions that govern social interactions in their everyday lives” (Beauchamp,
Dooley, and Anderson 2013). Being able to predict and diagnose one’s socio-moral reasoning skill level (or ability) is
a key step for quantifying peoples’ social functioning and
can be used to identify those at risk for mal-adaptive social behavior. This diagnosis could help orient people towards appropriate services or provide adequate support to
improve this skill’s development. The Socio-Moral Reasoning Aptitude Level (So-Moral)(Dooley, Beauchamp, and
Anderson 2010) task is a computer-measured walkthrough
in which children and adolescents are presented with visual
social dilemmas from everyday life. They are then asked to
verbalize how they would react in this situation, justifying
their answer. The participants’ answers are recorded verbatim in transcripts that are subsequently scored manually by
experts using a moral-maturity coding scheme inspired by
Kohlberg’s theory of moral development (Kohlberg 1984).
Verbatims are short or long text containing at least one
sentence. Each socio-moral reasoning level was well documented by experts.
In this paper, we present a novel emotionally adaptive serious game (LesDilemmes) designed to help develop SMR
maturity. The game is based on the existing, computerized
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13477

shorturl.at/hlCN4

