The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relation Inference among Sensor Time
Series in Smart Buildings with Metric Learning
Shuheng Li,1 Dezhi Hong,2 Hongning Wang3
1
Peking University, Beijing, China
University of California, San Diego, CA USA
3
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA USA
shuhengli@pku.edu.cn, dehong@ucsd.edu, hw5x@virginia.edu
2

Abstract
Smart Building Technologies hold promise for better livability for residents and lower energy footprints. Yet, the rollout
of these technologies, from demand response controls to fault
detection and diagnosis, signiﬁcantly lags behind and is impeded by the current practice of manual identiﬁcation of sensing point relationships, e.g., how equipment is connected or
which sensors are co-located in the same space. This manual
process is still error-prone, albeit costly and laborious.
We study relation inference among sensor time series. Our
key insight is that, as equipment is connected or sensors colocate in the same physical environment, they are affected by
the same real-world events, e.g., a fan turning on or a person entering the room, thus exhibiting correlated changes in
their time series data. To this end, we develop a deep metric
learning solution that ﬁrst converts the primitive sensor time
series to the frequency domain, and then optimizes a representation of sensors that encodes their relations. Built upon
the learned representation, our solution pinpoints the relationships among sensors via solving a combinatorial optimization problem. Extensive experiments on real-world buildings
demonstrate the effectiveness of our solution.

Figure 1: An example of building metadata and the corresponding encoded contextual information.
AHU

Power Meter

Return Fan

Supply Fan

VAV
Damper

Return Air

Supply Air

Room 101
Thermostat
Temperature
CO2 Sensor

Room 102

HVAC ZONE

Figure 2: A typical building contains multiple air handling
units (AHUs), each heating/cooling the air and circulating
it to dozens of variable air volume (VAV) boxes. Each VAV
ﬁne tunes the airﬂow for a single room, where multiple sensors are instrumented to monitor its temperature, humidity, CO2 level, etc. Building analytics require the relations
among the vast amounts of data streams (e.g., which VAV
connects to which AHU, and which sensors are in the same
space), which are currently acquired via a costly, laborious,
yet still error-prone manual process.

Introduction
Smart Building Technologies hold great potential for improving residents’ comfort while reducing energy footprints (Schumann, Ploennigs, and Gorman 2014). These
technologies, from demand response controls (Palensky and
Dietrich 2011) to fault detection and diagnosis (Katipamula
and Brambley 2005), require the knowledge about the sensing and control points in a building, including what they
measure, where they are located, how they are connected,
and more. However, this contextual information about each
point is represented as metadata (as shown in Fig. 1) following vendor-speciﬁc naming conventions, and therefore
varies signiﬁcantly in vocabulary and structure from one
building to another. Consequently, a necessary ﬁrst step in
deploying any smart building application would be to obtain
the contextual information about the points in the building.
However, currently, obtaining this information is a costly,
laborious process that often involves domain experts or

technicians visiting the site and manually inspecting the
points (Dong and Lam 2014). This process can take weeks
to complete, and the need for repeating is not necessarily
eliminated, as buildings are often retroﬁtted or renovated.
Because new equipment can be installed or new walls can be
set up, the context of points will change and thus the metadata requires updates. Simply investing more man-hours is
neither scalable nor economical; we need an automated solution to obtain the sensor context.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4683

