The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Knowledge and Cross-Pair Pattern
Guided Semantic Matching for Question Answering
Zihan Xu,1,2 Hai-Tao Zheng,1,2∗ Shaopeng Zhai,3 Dong Wang1,2
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{xu-zh17, wangd18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zheng.haitao@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn,
zsp1197@163.com
2

other patterns. For example, considering Q1 in Figure 1, it
is difﬁcult to pick out the true answer based on Q-A similarity, since the comparing framework is likely to be misled by
words with identical attributes (marked by color).
In fact, QA is different from PI because the question and
the answer are not synonymous sentences and not strictly
comparable. Instead of being semantically equivalent, Q-A
pairs usually form a continuity in meaning (and generally
fall into certain Q-to-A patterns). Therefore, the basic semantic matching strategy for answer selection has room for
improvement. In this work, we study the answer selection
problem based on fundamental characteristics of QA itself.
We observe that, a sentence will be considered as a proper
answer only if it meets two basic conditions. First, the information in the sentence must be relevant to that in the question (knowledge condition). Second, the structure of the sentence should correspond to the question structure (pattern
condition). Knowledge condition ensures that the sentence
is “telling the truth”, while pattern condition checks whether
the sentence is “responding to” the question.
There is growing interest in the study of the knowledge
condition. Some recent work leverages Wikipedia (Chen et
al. 2017), knowledge bases (Shen et al. 2018) or other external resources to provide background information for QA.
However, content correlation with the question is not sufﬁcient for an answer. As can be seen from Figure 1, the listed
candidate answers to Q1 are more reliable than others because they are all statements of fact, and are all about the
entity “8 track” in the question. However, among these candidates, A1−1 and A1−2 are giving irrelevant answers, but
are also likely to be assigned with high probability, unless
extra semantic parsing or information extraction methods
(entity linking and relation detection) are conducted as in
KBQA (Yao and Van Durme 2014).
However, if the pattern condition is followed when designing AS models, irrelevant answers will be avoided with
few auxiliary tasks. As in the example, Q1 and Q2 both contain what year was ... invented. Meanwhile, A1−3 shares
the same pattern ... was created in (year) ... with A2−1 .
These pairs are in a common Q-to-A pattern. If the pattern
is explicitly learned to guide the answer selection process of
Q1 , the correct answer will be picked out more easily.

Abstract
Semantic matching is a basic problem in natural language
processing, but it is far from solved because of the differences between the pairs for matching. In question answering
(QA), answer selection (AS) is a popular semantic matching task, usually reformulated as a paraphrase identiﬁcation
(PI) problem. However, QA is different from PI because the
question and the answer are not synonymous sentences and
not strictly comparable. In this work, a novel knowledge and
cross-pair pattern guided semantic matching system (KCG) is
proposed, which considers both knowledge and pattern conditions for QA. We apply explicit cross-pair matching based
on Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) to help KCG recognize general domain-independent Q-to-A patterns better.
And with the incorporation of domain-speciﬁc information
from knowledge bases (KB), KCG is able to capture and explore various relations within Q-A pairs. Experiments show
that KCG is robust against the diversity of Q-A pairs and outperforms the state-of-the-art systems on different answer selection tasks.

Introduction
Semantic matching is a basic problem in natural language
processing. Many tasks are essentially a semantic matching problem, such as information retrieval (IR), question answering (QA) and paraphrase identiﬁcation (PI) (Li, Xu, and
others 2014). In QA, the matching of the question with the
most proper answer from a set of candidates, which is known
as answer selection (AS), remains challenging due to the diversity of Q-A pairs.
Usually, AS is reformulated as a PI problem. Methods
can be divided into three categories based on the general
model structures: Siamese networks (Feng et al. 2015; Yang,
Yih, and Meek 2015), attentive networks (Santos et al. 2016;
Yin et al. 2016) and Compare-Aggregate networks (Wang
and Jiang 2017; Bian et al. 2017). However, these methods
are all based on the comparing framework. It appears that
by optimizing the likelihood of two text sequences being a
matched pair based on their similarity, neural models assign
high probability to those with the same words, phrases or
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9370

