The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Temporal Logics Over Finite Traces with Uncertainty
Fabrizio M. Maggi∗

Marco Montali†

Rafael Peñaloza

University of Tartu
f.m.maggi@ut.ee

Free University of Bozen-Bolzano
montali@inf.unibz.it

University of Milano-Bicocca
rafael.penaloza@unimib.it

Montali 2010), monitoring (Maggi et al. 2011; De Giacomo
et al. 2014), and mining (Maggi, Chandra Bose, and van der
Aalst 2012; De Giacomo et al. 2017), to planning (Gerevini
et al. 2009; De Giacomo and Rubin 2018) and decision making (Brafman, De Giacomo, and Patrizi 2018).
When considering real-world processes, uncertainty
(which is inexpressible in classical logics) is unavoidable.
For example, some pieces may be defective, external events
may delay a service, and the loan may lead to an outcome depending on various implicit factors. Handling these scenarios requires a logical formalism capable of expressing uncertainty. Surprisingly, to the best of our knowledge no probabilistic extension of LTLf has been considered so far. Although several probabilistic variants of inﬁnite-time temporal logics exist (Ognjanovic 2006; Morão 2011; Konur 2010;
Kovtunova and Peñaloza 2018; Woltzenlogel Paleo 2016),
the complex interaction of probabilities and time usually
requires syntactic or semantic restrictions in the logic, and
does not directly carry over the ﬁnite-trace setting.
To overcome both challenges at once, we propose a new
probabilistic extension of LTLf , called PLTLf , that essentially predicates over the possible evolutions of a trace. The
main novelty of PLTLf lies in its superposition semantics,
where every evolution is possible (with different probabilities) until it is observed. This semantics accommodates a
seamless interaction of probabilities and time that was not
possible in previous formalisms, and elegantly ﬁts over ﬁnite traces. PLTLf is a direct generalisation of LTLf : PLTLf
formulas without probabilistic constructors are in fact LTLf
formulas. PLTLf adequately describes probabilistic temporal or dynamic properties of process executions; e.g., it can
express that a shipped package will eventually reach its destination with probability 0.95, or that a machine will fail in
the next 100 timepoints with probability below 0.001.
Our second main contribution is an investigation of the
logical and computational properties of PLTLf , introducing automata-based algorithms for deciding satisﬁability of
PLTLf formulas and for computing the most likely executions of a system described in this logic. These core reasoning services provide the basis for sophisticated, domainspeciﬁc tasks such as a probabilistic version of conformance
checking (Carmona et al. 2018) and (preﬁx) monitoring

Abstract
Temporal logics over ﬁnite traces have recently seen wide application in a number of areas, from business process modelling, monitoring, and mining to planning and decision making. However, real-life dynamic systems contain a degree of
uncertainty which cannot be handled with classical logics.
We thus propose a new probabilistic temporal logic over ﬁnite traces using superposition semantics, where all possible
evolutions are possible, until observed. We study the properties of the logic and provide automata-based mechanisms for
deriving probabilistic inferences from its formulas. We then
study a fragment of the logic with better computational properties. Notably, formulas in this fragment can be discovered
from event log data using off-the-shelf existing declarative
process discovery techniques.

Introduction
Linear temporal logic (LTL) is one of the most important formalisms to declaratively specify and reason about
the evolution of systems and processes (Baier and Katoen
2008). Traditionally, LTL adopts a linear, inﬁnite model of
time where formulas are interpreted over inﬁnite traces. In
recent years, increasing attention has been given to a different version of the logic, LTL over ﬁnite traces or LTLf
(De Giacomo and Vardi 2013), which adopts instead a ﬁnitetrace semantics. From the modelling point of view, LTLf
matches settings where each execution of the system is eventually expected to end (even though there is no bound on
the number of steps required to reach the termination point).
From the reasoning point of view, the automata-theoretic
characterisation of LTLf relies on classical ﬁnite-state automata (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013; De Giacomo, De
Masellis, and Montali 2014), which are easier to manipulate and pave the way for the development of robust and efﬁcient reasoning techniques. In fact, LTLf and extensions
thereof have been widely employed in a number of application domains relevant for AI: from declarative business process modelling (Pesic, Schonenberg, and van der Aalst 2007;
∗

Supported by the Estonian Research Council Grant IUT20-55.
Partially supported by the UNIBZ CRC project REKAP.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10218

