The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Estimating Causal Effects Using Weighting-Based Estimators
Yonghan Jung

Jin Tian

Elias Bareinboim

Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
jung222@purdue.edu

Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University
jtian@iastate.edu

Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

drawn from P (V ). One setting where estimators for estimating Px (y) from ﬁnite samples have been systematically
developed is when the well-known back-door (BD) criterion
holds (Pearl 2000, Ch. 3.3.1). That is, if a set of variables Z
(called covariates) satisfy the BD criterion relative to (X, Y )
then the effect Px (y)
 can be identiﬁed by covariate adjustment as Px (y) = z P (y|x, z)P (z), and the corresponding mean as:

EPx (y) [Y ] =
E[Y |x, z]P (z).
(1)

Abstract
Causal effect identiﬁcation is one of the most prominent and
well-understood problems in causal inference. Despite the
generality and power of the results developed so far, there are
still challenges in their applicability to practical settings, arguably due to the ﬁnitude of the samples. Simply put, there is
a gap between causal effect identiﬁcation and estimation. One
popular setting in which sample-efﬁcient estimators from ﬁnite samples exist is when the celebrated back-door condition
holds. In this paper, we extend weighting-based methods developed for the back-door case to more general settings, and
develop novel machinery for estimating causal effects using
the weighting-based method as a building block. We derive
graphical criteria under which causal effects can be estimated
using this new machinery and demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method through simulation studies.

1

z

Computing Eq. (1) naively – i.e., estimating E[Y |x, z] and
summing over all values Z = z is computationally and
statistically challenging whenever the set Z is high dimensional. Regarding the former, summing over Z = z entails an exponential computational burden in |Z|, the cardinality of Z; regarding the latter, covering the support of
E[Y |x, z], P (z) with some statistical signiﬁcance is hardly
realizable.
A series of robust and efﬁcient estimators for estimating
the BD estimand (Eq. (1)) from ﬁnite samples have been developed to circumvent these challenges with great practical
success, including propensity score matching (Rosenbaum
and Rubin 1983), inverse-probability or stabilized weighting (IPW, SW) (Horvitz and Thompson 1952; Robins, Hernan, and Brumback 2000), doubly robust (Bang and Robins
2005), target maximum likelihood estimator (TMLE) (Van
Der Laan and Rubin 2006), and outcome-regression such as
BART (Hill 2011), just to cite a few. These techniques have
been extended to BD-like estimands for time-series and have
been called the g-formula by Robins (1986). This formula
holds whenever sequential exchangeability or the sequential
back-door (SBD) condition holds (Pearl and Robins 1995).
Despite all their power, these BD-like conditions only
cover a limited set of identiﬁable scenarios, while causal effects could be identiﬁable in many settings that are not in the
form of an adjustment, for which no general purpose estimators have been developed. For instance, we discuss below
two practical examples where the causal effects are identiﬁable but not by BD-like adjustment.
Example 1: Surrogate endpoints. The causal graph in
Fig. 1a illustrates a data-generating process of an experimental study that leverages a surrogate endpoint X, a variable

Introduction

Computing the effects of interventions is one of the central tasks in data-intensive sciences. This problem comes
in the literature under the rubric of causal effect identiﬁcation (Pearl 2000, Def. 3.2.4), which asks whether the
causal distribution P (Y = y|do(X = x)) (for short,
Px (y)) can be uniquely identiﬁed from a combination of
substantive knowledge about the phenomenon under investigation, usually in the form of a causal graph G, and
the observational distribution P (V ), where V is the set of
observed variables. Causal identiﬁcation has been extensively studied based on the do-calculus (Pearl 1995). Building on this logic, a number of solutions were developed
for variants of this problem, including complete graphical
and algorithmic conditions (Tian 2002; Huang and Valtorta
2006; Shpitser and Pearl 2006; Bareinboim and Pearl 2012;
2016; Jaber, Zhang, and Bareinboim 2018; Lee, Correa, and
Bareinboim 2019).
Even though causal identiﬁcation has been wellunderstood and solved in principle, there are still outstanding challenges to the application of these results in practice.
By and large, these results assume that the precise observational distribution, P (V ), is available for use, while in reality one has access to only a limited number of samples
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10186

