The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DMRM: A Dual-Channel Multi-Hop Reasoning Model for Visual Dialog
Feilong Chen,1,2,3,4∗ Fandong Meng,2 Jiaming Xu,1,3† Peng Li,2 Bo Xu,1,3,4,5 Jie Zhou2
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing, China.
2
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc., China
3
Research Center for Brain-inspired Intelligence, CASIA
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS. China
{chenfeilong2018, jiaming.xu, xubo}@ia.ac.cn
{fandongmeng, patrickpli, withtomzhou}@tencent.com
In Visual Dialog, an agent is required to answer a question given the dialog history and the visual context. In order to make an appropriate response, it is necessary for the
agent to gain a proper understanding of the question, which
requires it to exploit the textual dialog history and the visual context. To this end, some studies (Das et al. 2017;
Lu et al. 2017a) design models to obtain features from both
modalities. Das et al. (2017) propose Late Fusion (LF),
which directly concatenates individual representations of the
question, the dialog history, and the image, and then generates a new joint representation by a linear transformation
on them. Lu et al. (2017a) design a history-conditioned attention image encoder to generate the representation of the
question, the question-aware dialog history and the historyconditioned image features, and then concatenate them to be
joint representations.

Abstract
Visual Dialog is a vision-language task that requires an AI
agent to engage in a conversation with humans grounded
in an image. It remains a challenging task since it requires
the agent to fully understand a given question before making an appropriate response not only from the textual dialog history, but also from the visually-grounded information.
While previous models typically leverage single-hop reasoning or single-channel reasoning to deal with this complex
multimodal reasoning task, which is intuitively insufﬁcient.
In this paper, we thus propose a novel and more powerful
Dual-channel Multi-hop Reasoning Model for Visual Dialog,
named DMRM. DMRM synchronously captures information
from the dialog history and the image to enrich the semantic representation of the question by exploiting dual-channel
reasoning. Speciﬁcally, DMRM maintains a dual channel to
obtain the question- and history-aware image features and the
question- and image-aware dialog history features by a mulithop reasoning process in each channel. Additionally, we also
design an effective multimodal attention to further enhance
the decoder to generate more accurate responses. Experimental results on the VisDial v0.9 and v1.0 datasets demonstrate
that the proposed model is effective and outperforms compared models by a signiﬁcant margin.

Nevertheless, the approaches mentioned above are of
single-hop approaches, which show the limited ability of
reasoning and neglect latent information of the interactions
among the question, the dialog history and the image. For
better solutions, researchers (Das et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2018;
Niu et al. 2019; Kang, Lim, and Zhang 2019) investigate multi-hop reasoning approaches (Hudson and Manning
2018; Hu et al. 2018) to conduct interactions among modalities. For example, Wu et al. (2018) provide a sequential
co-attention encoder, which ﬁrstly obtains question-aware
image features, secondly extracts history features by coattention mechanism with the question features and the extracted image features, thirdly gets the attended question features by the extracted history features and image features,
and ﬁnally joints the three attended features and send them
to the decoder. Niu et al. (2019) propose a recursive visual attention model, which recursively reviews the dialog
history to ﬁnd the reference of the question, and then extracts the image features by the attention model with the extracted history context and the question. These approaches
are of single-channel approaches, which ﬁrstly use the question to ﬁnd reference from the dialog history and then extract the image context from both the question and the history context. However, humans usually deal with a visuallygrounded, multi-turn dialog by simultaneously comprehending the two aspects of information, namely both the textual

Introduction
With the rapid development of both computer vision and
natural language processing, visual-language tasks such as
image caption (Xu et al. 2015; Anderson et al. 2016; 2018)
and visual question answering (Ren, Kiros, and Zemel 2015;
Gao et al. 2015; Lu et al. 2016; Anderson et al. 2018) have
attracted increasing attention in recent years. Although these
tasks have inspired tremendous efforts on integrating vision
and language to develop smarter AI, they are mostly singleround while human conversations are generally multi-round.
Therefore, the Visual Dialog task is proposed to encourage
research on multi-round visually-grounded dialog by Das et
al. (2017).
∗
This work was done when Feilong Chen was interning at Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc., China
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7504

