The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DeepDualMapper: A Gated Fusion Network for
Automatic Map Extraction Using Aerial Images and Trajectories
∗

∗

Hao Wu,1,2,3,5 Hanyuan Zhang,1,2,3,5 Xinyu Zhang,1,2,3 Weiwei Sun,1,2,3
Baihua Zheng,4 Yuning Jiang5
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, Fudan University
3
Shanghai Institute of Intelligent Electronics & Systems
4
Singapore Management University, 5 Bytedance AI Lab
{wuhao5688, hanyuanzhang16, zhangxinyu, wwsun}@fudan.edu.cn,
bhzheng@smg.edu.sg, jiangyuning@bytedance.com
2

Abstract

2FFOXGHGE\
7UHHV

Automatic map extraction is of great importance to urban
computing and location-based services. Aerial image and GPS
trajectory data refer to two different data sources that could
be leveraged to generate the map, although they carry different types of information. Most previous works on data fusion
between aerial images and data from auxiliary sensors do not
fully utilize the information of both modalities and hence suffer from the issue of information loss. We propose a deep
convolutional neural network called DeepDualMapper which
fuses the aerial image and trajectory data in a more seamless
manner to extract the digital map. We design a gated fusion
module to explicitly control the information ﬂows from both
modalities in a complementary-aware manner. Moreover, we
propose a novel densely supervised reﬁnement decoder to
generate the prediction in a coarse-to-ﬁne way. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate that DeepDualMapper can
fuse the information of images and trajectories much more
effectively than existing approaches, and is able to generate
maps with higher accuracy.

6SDUVH
7UDMHFWRU\'DWD

D $HULDO,PDJH

E 7UDMHFWRU\

F 0DS

Figure 1: Examples showing some limitations in aerial images and trajectories (visualized by plotting the GPS points).
Eg., roads are covered by trees and trajectories are sparse on
minor roads. However, by leveraging both data sources, such
problems are expected to be eliminated.

Introduction

is also a hot research problem (Biagioni and Eriksson 2012;
Liu et al. 2012b; Chen et al. 2016; Shan et al. 2015).
However, neither data source is perfect for the task of
automatic map extraction because of the information loss
issue. There is inevitably missing information in the data
which makes it extremely challenging, if not impossible, to
infer the map accurately. Eg., as shown in Fig. 1, in aerial
image, some roads may be occluded by trees and buildings; in
trajectory data, some less popular roads may have very few, or
zero, historical trajectories passing by. Such information loss
introduces more complexity to the map extraction process.
As aerial images and trajectory data capture different types
of information, the information missed in one source might
be available in the other source. In other words, combining
two data sources that are complementary offers an effective
way to make full use of the information that can be well
captured by at least one data source. In the current literature,
a variety of researches have tried to fuse aerial images with
other auxiliary data sources, including earth observation data
including Radar (Fil et al. 2018), Lidar (Audebert, Saux,

Generating city maps is a fundamental building block
of many location-based applications like navigation, autonomous vehicle, and so on. Multiple data sources can be
leveraged to automatically generate the map. In this paper,
we focus on two data sources, namely aerial images and GPS
trajectories. The former is captured by the satellites. Such
images are publicly available in many places, eg., Google
Earth can stay up-to-date, and have been explored extensively
in the past decades for map extraction ( Bastani et al. 2018;
Zhou, Zhang, and Wu 2018; Sun et al. 2018; Demir et al.
2017, Mnih and Hinton 2010; Cheng et al. 2017). The latter
captures human movements in the urban area as most human
movements are constrained by the underlying road network.
Thanks to the fast development of mobile platforms and localization techniques, collecting these GPS trajectories is much
easier nowadays. How to extract the map from trajectory data
∗

indicates equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1037

