The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dynamic Network Pruning with Interpretable Layerwise Channel Selection
Yulong Wang,1 Xiaolu Zhang,2 Xiaolin Hu,1 Bo Zhang,1 Hang Su1∗
1

Tsinghua University, 2 Ant Financial
wang-yl15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yueyin.zxl@antﬁn.com
{xlhu, dcszb, suhangss}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
"#


  

Dynamic network pruning achieves runtime acceleration by
dynamically determining the inference paths based on different inputs. However, previous methods directly generate
continuous decision values for each weight channel, which
cannot reﬂect a clear and interpretable pruning process. In
this paper, we propose to explicitly model the discrete weight
channel selections, which encourages more diverse weights
utilization, and achieves more sparse runtime inference paths.
Meanwhile, with the help of interpretable layerwise channel
selections in the dynamic network, we can visualize the network decision paths explicitly for model interpretability. We
observe that there are clear differences in the layerwise decisions between normal and adversarial examples. Therefore,
we propose a novel adversarial example detection algorithm
by discriminating the runtime decision features. Experiments
show that our dynamic network achieves higher prediction
accuracy under the similar computing budgets on CIFAR10
and ImageNet datasets compared to traditional static pruning
methods and other dynamic pruning approaches. The proposed adversarial detection algorithm can signiﬁcantly improve the state-of-the-art detection rate across multiple attacks, which provides an opportunity to build an interpretable
and robust model.

xl−1

xl

 
!  θ l

$

 
  
 



 


 
%% &



 


G[i]

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed dynamic network pruning scheme. We associate each convolution layer with a decision unit, which is composed of action head and channel
selection masks. For the l-th convolution layer in the network, the input xl−1 ﬁrst passes through action head A to
generate the action probability corresponding to a group of
channel selection masks G. Then the chosen channel mask
G[i] is used to select convolution weights θ , which can
achieve runtime compression and acceleration. The channel mask values are also multiplied to convolution output
to perform channel scaling. We use continuous relaxation to
resolve non-differentiability in action head, and all the parameters of decision units are trained in an end-to-end manner, which allows channel masks to learn the ﬁlters selection
automatically.

Introduction
In recent years, as deep neural networks have achieved
signiﬁcant performance in many ﬁelds (He et al. 2016;
Silver et al. 2017), deep models have been deployed in many
practical applications. However, due to the huge consumption of computation resources by the original full model,
many model pruning and acceleration methods (Han, Mao,
and Dally 2016; He, Zhang, and Sun 2017; Liu et al. 2017)
have been proposed to meet the real-time computing requirements while ensuring prediction performance. Most of
the pruning methods utilize existing pre-trained models as
the basis and delete the redundant parameters and structures
to obtain the ﬁnal static compressed models. Pruned model
weights are often ﬁne-tuned based on the full model weights
to improve model prediction performance further.

Different from the above static pruning techniques, dynamic network pruning (Lin et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2018)
determines the inference paths to achieve runtime acceleration according to different inputs. Compared to the static
pruning, dynamic pruning methods preserve the full model
but add runtime decision units inside each computational
layer, which can complete the feedforward operations with
a portion of the network weights by generating different
weight masks. However, previous methods (Gao et al. 2018;
Luo and Wu 2018) generate continuous gate predictions by
directly outputting each channel’s decision gate value, which
cannot reﬂect a transparent and interpretable pruning pro-

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6299

