The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Draft and Edit: Automatic Storytelling Through
Multi-Pass Hierarchical Conditional Variational Autoencoder
Meng-Hsuan Yu,1∗ Juntao Li,1,3∗ Danyang Liu,1,2 Bo Tang,4 Haisong Zhang,5
Dongyan Zhao,1,3 Rui Yan1,2,3†
1

2

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
Key Laboratory of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240
3
Center for Data Science, AAIS, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
5
Tencent AI Lab
{yumenghsuan, lijuntao, zhaody, ruiyan}@pku.edu.cn,
danyliu@sjtu.edu.cn, tangb3@sustech.edu.cn, hansonzhang@tencent.com
Abstract

Christmas Shopping
Frankie had Christmas shopping to do.
She went to the store.
Inside, she walked around looking for gifts.
Soon her cart was full.
She paid and took her things home.

Automatic Storytelling has consistently been a challenging
area in the ﬁeld of natural language processing. Despite considerable achievements have been made, the gap between
automatically generated stories and human-written stories is
still signiﬁcant. Moreover, the limitations of existing automatic storytelling methods are obvious, e.g., the consistency
of content, wording diversity. In this paper, we proposed a
multi-pass hierarchical conditional variational autoencoder
model to overcome the challenges and limitations in existing
automatic storytelling models. While the conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) model has been employed to generate diversiﬁed content, the hierarchical structure and multipass editing scheme allow the story to create more consistent
content. We conduct extensive experiments on the ROCStories Dataset. The results veriﬁed the validity and effectiveness
of our proposed model and yields substantial improvement
over the existing state-of-the-art approaches.

Table 1: An example of the story in the ROCStories dataset.
Each story title is paired with ﬁve sentences.
have prominent performance, it is still insufﬁcient to yield
satisfactory results in general case as the intermediate representations are extracted independently, which did not consider the context. Speciﬁcally, these approaches may loss the
consistency in the whole story and enlarge the interrelation
gap between the story theme and the generated content when
the representation is presented improperly, or not closely related to the story title. Moreover, the generation process of
these approaches always requires multiple stages, in other
words, it is not trained in an end-to-end manner. As a result,
the model training is relatively complex.
On the other hand, to address the challenge of wording diversity, some related text generation works have proposed to use variational autoencoder(VAE) or conditional
variational autoencoder (CVAE) model(Shen et al. 2017;
Zhao, Zhao, and Eskenazi 2017; Serban et al. 2017) to generate diversiﬁed content. Even though both the VAE and
CVAE model have been proved to model wording diversity
successfully (Li, Luong, and Jurafsky 2015), as mentioned
in (Li et al. 2013), consistency and wording diversity are to
some extent, mutually exclusive. To be more speciﬁc, consistent stories may have restricted wording, while diversiﬁed wordings could lead to inconsistency. Apart from this,
the current approaches are mainly trained in a single-pass
manner, which makes the model fail to capture global information of the story.
In this paper, we proposed a multi-pass hierarchical
CVAE generation model, targeting to enhance the quality of

Introduction
Automatic storytelling is on the frontier of natural language
generation (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018). It generates a
sequence of sentences which logically links events sets and
shared characters throughout a passage. Due to the requirements of aesthetic and long-range dependency modelling,
automatic storytelling needs to not only consider the semantic consistency among sentences, but also ensure wording
diversity in the whole story. The above requirements are the
main challenges in the automatic storytelling task.
To tackle the consistency challenge, most of the stateof-the-art approaches (Martin et al. 2018; Fan, Lewis, and
Dauphin 2018; Xu et al. 2018; Yao et al. 2019; Li et al.
2019) exploit mid-level representations, such as keywords,
events and skeleton, to provide better guidance during the
story generation process. Even though these approaches
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@pku.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1741

