The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A New Burrows Wheeler Transform Markov Distance
Edward Raff,1,2,3 Charles Nicholas,3 Mark McLean1
1

Laboratory for Physical Sciences, 2 Booz Allen Hamilton, 3 University of Maryland, Baltimore County
raff edward@bah.com, nicholas@umbc.edu, mclean@lps.umd.edu

valid1 distance metric, and can scale to far larger problems
that EBWT cannot tackle due to computational limits. Compared to other compression-based distances, our BWMD is
the ﬁrst to work by embedding a sequence into a Euclidean
vector space. This gives a signiﬁcant advantage to our approach in terms of clustering and query speed. This advantage is achieved by using algorithms that are designed around
Euclidean distance, like k-means, that other methods cannot
leverage.
We will begin by reviewing related work in the compression distance space, and the needed details of the BWT, the
prior method EBWT, and a related method known as LZJD,
in Section 2. Next we will begin with a description of the new
BWMD in Section 3. In Section 4 we will develop a number
of new theoretical insights, proving 1) how EBWT has dramatic failure cases that violate our intuition of how a distance
measure should work, 2) that BWMD does not have these
failure cases, and 3) comparing how EBWT, BWMD, and
LZJD handle randomness, and 4) that BWMD has unique
properties in this regard. We will then move into empirical
results in Section 5 by comparing BWMD with EBWT on
DNA sequence clustering, where we show that BWMD is
able to cluster DNA sequences of varying lengths that EBWT
fails to cluster in a meaningful way. In Section 6 we will
show how BWMD is able to scale to malware classiﬁcation
and clustering tasks that are beyond EBWT’s computational
ability. Though LZJD provides better classiﬁcation accuracy
at this task, BWMD provides superior clustering results. Finally we will conclude in Section 7

Abstract
Prior work inspired by compression algorithms has described
how the Burrows Wheeler Transform can be used to create a
distance measure for bioinformatics problems. We describe
issues with this approach that were not widely known, and introduce our new Burrows Wheeler Markov Distance (BWMD)
as an alternative. The BWMD avoids the shortcomings of earlier efforts, and allows us to tackle problems in variable length
DNA sequence clustering. BWMD is also more adaptable to
other domains, which we demonstrate on malware classiﬁcation tasks. Unlike other compression-based distance metrics
known to us, BWMD works by embedding sequences into a
ﬁxed-length feature vector. This allows us to provide significantly improved clustering performance on larger malware
corpora, a weakness of prior methods.

1

Introduction

Compression algorithms can be used to measure the similarity between arbitrary sequences with little required domain
knowledge or expertise. They have been used in bioinformatics(Mantaci, Restivo, and Sciortino 2008), time series
classiﬁcation and clustering(Keogh, Lonardi, and Ratanamahatana 2004), and malware analysis (Borbely 2015). The
bioinformatics and malware analysis domains can be particularly attractive for compression-based similarity measures.
Both of these domains involve ”short” sequences of tens of
thousands of steps, and can often reach 108 steps in length.
Other machine learning techniques often fail to work when
dealing with sequences of such variety and length.
In this work, we note that the Extended Burrows Wheeler
Transform (EBWT) (Mantaci et al. 2005) is a compressionbased distance metric designed explicitly around the Burrows
Wheeler Transform (BWT) (Burrows and Wheeler 1994) algorithm for use in bioinformatics. While EBWT has been
useful in that domain, we have discovered a number of weaknesses in this method that reduce its effectiveness and prevent
it from being useful in other domains, such as malware detection.
To remedy these issues, we develop a new BWT-inspired
distance measure that we refer to as the Burrows Wheeler
Markov Distance (BWMD). Unlike EBWT, BWMD is a

Compression in general can be seen as one way of performing
many machine learning tasks, and has deep connections to
statistical methods. Following this intuition, Li et al. (2004)
introduced the Normalized Information Distance (NID) as
a method of measuring similarity using compression. Given
a function K(x) that computes the Kolmogorov complexity
(i.e., return the length of the shortest computer program that
produces x as output), and the associated conditional Kolmogorov complexity K(x|y) (i.e., the length of the shortest
computer program that produces x as output given y as in-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A distance metric is considered true, or valid, if it adheres to
the properties of reﬂexivity, symmetry, and triangularity.

2

5444

Compression Distances

