The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Understanding Chat Messages for Sticker Recommendation in Messaging Apps
Abhishek Laddha, Mohamed Hanoosh, Debdoot Mukherjee, Parth Patwa, Ankur Narang
Hike Messenger
{abhishekl, moh.hanoosh, debdoot, parthp, ankur}@hike.in

Abstract
Stickers are popularly used in messaging apps such as Hike to
visually express a nuanced range of thoughts and utterances
to convey exaggerated emotions. However, discovering the
right sticker from a large and ever expanding pool of stickers
while chatting can be cumbersome. In this paper, we describe
a system for recommending stickers in real time as the user
is typing based on the context of the conversation. We decompose the sticker recommendation (SR) problem into two
steps. First, we predict the message that the user is likely to
send in the chat. Second, we substitute the predicted message with an appropriate sticker. Majority of Hike’s messages
are in the form of text which is transliterated from users’ native language to the Roman script. This leads to numerous
orthographic variations of the same message and makes accurate message prediction challenging. To address this issue,
we learn dense representations of chat messages employing
character level convolution network in an unsupervised manner. We use them to cluster the messages that have the same
meaning. In the subsequent steps, we predict the message
cluster instead of the message. Our approach does not depend on human labelled data (except for validation), leading
to fully automatic updation and tuning pipeline for the underlying models. We also propose a novel hybrid message
prediction model, which can run with low latency on lowend phones that have severe computational limitations. Our
described system has been deployed for more than 6 months
and is being used by millions of users along with hundreds of
thousands of expressive stickers.

1

Fig. 1: Sticker Recommendation (SR) UI on Hike and a high
level ﬂow of our 2 step SR system.
able for free download or purchase on sticker stores of popular messaging apps. Once a user downloads a sticker pack,
it gets added to a palette, which can be accessed from the
chat input box. However, discovering the right sticker while
chatting can be cumbersome because it’s not easy to think
of the best sticker that can substitute your utterance. Apps
like Hike and Line offer type-ahead SR while typing (as
shown in Fig. 1) in order to alleviate this problem. In comparison to emoji prediction which predicts a few set of emotions, there are numerous possible utterances in text (in tens
of thousands) and their corresponding stickers which makes
SR problem more complex than emoji prediction (Barbieri,
Ballesteros, and Saggion 2017).
The latency of generating such SR should be in tens of
milliseconds in order to avoid any perceivable delay during
typing. This is possible only if the system runs end-to-end on
the mobile device without any network calls. Furthermore, a
large fraction of Hike users use low-end mobile phones, so
we need a solution which is efﬁcient both in terms of CPU
load and memory requirements.
Prior to this work, SR on Hike app was based on string
matching of the typed text to the tags that were manually
assigned to each sticker. Recall of string matching based
approach is limited by exhaustiveness of tagging. However,
there are many ways of expressing same message in a chat.

Introduction

In messaging apps such as Facebook Messenger, WhatsApp,
Line and Hike, new modalities are extensively used to visually express thoughts and emotions (e.g. emojis, gifs and
stickers). Emojis (e.g., , ) are used in conjunction with
text to convey emotions in a message (Donato and Paggio
2017). Unlike emojis, stickers provide a graphic alternative
for text messages. Hike stickers are composed of an artwork
(e.g., cartoonized characters and objects) and a stylized text
(See Fig. 1). They help to convey rich expressions along with
the message. Hundreds of thousands of stickers are availc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13156

