The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Ultrafast Photorealistic Style Transfer via Neural Architecture Search
Jie An,∗†1 Haoyi Xiong,†2 Jun Huan,3 Jiebo Luo1
1
University of Rochester, 2 Baidu Research, 3 StylingAI Inc.
{jan6, jluo}@cs.rochester.edu, xionghaoyi@baidu.com, lukehuan@shenshangtech.com

camera. For example, in Fig. 1, we transfer the night view
photo from a warm color to cold while in the other example, a day-time photo is changed to a night-time one.
In these examples, the scene of the input content keeps
intact in the produced result. Unfortunately, artistic style
transfer methods (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2015; 2016;
Johnson, Alahi, and Fei-Fei 2016; Ulyanov et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2017; Huang and Belongie 2017; Sheng et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2019) generally distort ﬁne details (lines, shapes,
borders) in images, which is necessary for producing art ﬂavors in artistic scenarios but is not favored in photorealistic
stylization. We illustrate the failure of artistic methods in
photorealistic stylization cases with the example of WCT in
Fig. 1 (b). More failure cases are available in supplementary
materials.

Abstract
The key challenge in photorealistic style transfer is that an
algorithm should faithfully transfer the style of a reference
photo to a content photo while the generated image should
look like one captured by a camera. Although several photorealistic style transfer algorithms have been proposed, they
need to rely on post- and/or pre-processing to make the generated images look photorealistic. If we disable the additional
processing, these algorithms would fail to produce plausible
photorealistic stylization in terms of detail preservation and
photorealism. In this work, we propose an effective solution
to these issues. Our method consists of a construction step
(C-step) to build a photorealistic stylization network and a
pruning step (P-step) for acceleration. In the C-step, we propose a dense auto-encoder named PhotoNet based on a carefully designed pre-analysis. PhotoNet integrates a feature aggregation module (BFA) and instance normalized skip links
(INSL). To generate faithful stylization, we introduce multiple style transfer modules in the decoder and INSLs. PhotoNet signiﬁcantly outperforms existing algorithms in terms
of both efﬁciency and effectiveness. In the P-step, we adopt a
neural architecture search method to accelerate PhotoNet. We
propose an automatic network pruning framework in the manner of teacher-student learning for photorealistic stylization.
The network architecture named PhotoNAS resulted from the
search achieves signiﬁcant acceleration over PhotoNet while
keeping the stylization effects almost intact. We conduct extensive experiments on both image and video transfer. The
results show that our method can produce favorable results
while achieving 20-30 times acceleration in comparison with
the existing state-of-the-art approaches. It is worth noting
that the proposed algorithm accomplishes better performance
without any pre- or post-processing.

Based on Gatys et al. (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016),
Luan et al. (Luan et al. 2017) introduce a photorealistic loss term and adopts an optimization method to make
style transfer. However, solving the optimization problem
is time/computation consuming. To address this issue, Li et
al. propose PhotoWCT (Li et al. 2018) which uses a feedforward network to make style transfer. Although PhotoWCT applied multi-level stylization and uses unpooling
operator as a replacement of upsampling to enhance the detail preservation of the network, the produced results still
suffer from distortions as demonstrated in Fig. 1 (c). To
overcome the remaining artifacts, they have to introduce
close-formed post-processing to regulate the spatial afﬁnity of the image. However, such post-processing is computationally expensive and causes the result over-smoothed. Recently, Yoo et al. (Yoo et al. 2019) proposed Wavelet Corrected Transfer (WCT2 ) aims at eliminating post-processing
steps while preserving ﬁne details in transferred photos. Although using wavelets can increase the ﬁdelity of signal recovery, WCT2 need to rely on region masks of content and
reference style photos to perform style transfer. If such region masks are disabled, as shown in Fig. 1 (d), the result
of WCT2 shows signiﬁcant distortions. Since such region
masks are hard to acquire for arbitrary photos (generally
have to train speciﬁc networks to segment input photos and
manually ﬁne-tune the segmented results), the practical usage of WCT2 is limited.

Introduction
Photorealistic style transfer is an image editing task aims at
changing the style of a photo to a given reference. To be
photorealistic, the produced image should preserve spatial
details of the input and looks like a photo captured by a
∗
This work was done when Jie An worked as an intern at Big
Data Lab of Baidu Research.
†
Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10443

