The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Characterizing Membership Privacy in Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics
Bingzhe Wu,1 Chaochao Chen,2 Shiwan Zhao,3 Cen Chen,2
Yuan Yao,4 Guangyu Sun,1 Li Wang,2 Xiaolu Zhang,2 Jun Zhou2
1

Peking University, 2 Ant Financial Service Group, 3 IBM Reseach, 4 HongKong University of Science and Technology
{wubingzhe, gsun}@pku.edu.cn
{chaochao.ccc, cecilia.cenchen, aymond.wangl, yueyin.zxl, jun.zhoujun}@antﬁn.com
zhaosw@cn.ibm.com, yuany@ust.hk

posterior can be decomposed into separable Gaussian distributions, which may lead to non-negligible approximation
error and underestimation of the weight uncertainty (Li et
al. 2016a). Such SVI based approaches can hardly scale to
large datasets and difﬁcult to handle complex model structures, thus limit their applicability for deep learning models.

Abstract
Bayesian deep learning is recently regarded as an intrinsic way to characterize the weight uncertainty of deep neural networks (DNNs). Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) is an effective method to enable Bayesian deep
learning on large-scale datasets. Previous theoretical studies
have shown various appealing properties of SGLD, ranging
from the convergence properties to the generalization bounds.
In this paper, we study the properties of SGLD from a novel
perspective of membership privacy protection (i.e., preventing the membership attack). The membership attack, which
aims to determine whether a speciﬁc sample is used for training a given DNN model, has emerged as a common threat
against deep learning algorithms. To this end, we build a theoretical framework to analyze the information leakage (w.r.t.
the training dataset) of a model trained using SGLD. Based on
this framework, we demonstrate that SGLD can prevent the
information leakage of the training dataset to a certain extent.
Moreover, our theoretical analysis can be naturally extended
to other types of Stochastic Gradient Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (SG-MCMC) methods. Empirical results on different
datasets and models verify our theoretical ﬁndings and suggest that the SGLD algorithm can not only reduce the information leakage but also improve the generalization ability of
the DNN models in real-world applications.

To enable Bayesian learning at scale, SG-MCMC is proposed as an alternative to SVI (Welling and Teh 2011; Chen,
Fox, and Guestrin 2014). Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) is one of the most popular SG-MCMC
methods. The key idea of SGLD is applying stochastic optimization (Robbins and Monro 1951) to Langevin Dynamics (Neal and others 2011), which is implemented by injecting proper Gaussian noise to the gradient estimation of
a mini-batch sampled from the training dataset (Welling
and Teh 2011). SGLD can also be regarded as an effective way to approximately sample from the Bayesian posterior distribution (Sato and Nakagawa 2014). It has been
successfully applied to a number of real-world applications,
such as language modeling (Gan et al. 2017) and shape
classiﬁcation (Li et al. 2016b). Among these practical applications, various theoretical studies have shown different
appealing properties of SGLD (Sato and Nakagawa 2014;
Mou et al. 2018). Most of these theoretical works focus on
analyzing the convergence properties of SGLD. Besides the
convergence properties, some recent works also attempted to
study the generalization bounds of SGLD (Mou et al. 2018;
Pensia, Jog, and Loh 2018).

Introduction
Bayesian deep learning has received increasing attention
from the research community over the past few years, due
to its effectiveness to capture weight uncertainty and alleviate overﬁtting in deep neural networks (DNNs) (Blundell et
al. 2015; Li et al. 2016a). The key ingredient of Bayesian
deep learning is sampling from the Bayesian posterior. To
enable the posterior sampling, there are typically two different types of approaches, namely, Stochastic Variational Inference (SVI) and Stochastic Gradient Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (SG-MCMC). One representative work of SVI is
Bayes-by-Backprop (Blundell et al. 2015) that enables the
variational inference of DNNs. These SVI based methods in
the realm of deep learning always assume that the Bayesian

In this paper, we speciﬁcally study the properties of
SGLD from the perspective of membership privacy. Some
recent studies showed that a well-trained DNN model may
unintentionally expose the private information of the training dataset (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015; Shokri et
al. 2017). The membership attack (Shokri et al. 2017) has
emerged as a common threat to detect the membership information of the training dataset armed with the learned model.
Given the trained model and a speciﬁc sample, the membership attack aims to infer whether this given sample is used
for training the given model. Our work is motivated by some
recent works that study the connection between the overﬁtting and the information leakage of DNNs, which shows that
the less overﬁtting a model is, the less information is dis-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6372

