The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Exchangeable Generative Models with Flow Scans
Christopher M. Bender,∗1 Kevin O’Connor,*2 Yang Li,1 Juan Jose Garcia,1
Junier Oliva,1 Manzil Zaheer3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, UNC Chapel Hill
Department of Statistics and Operations Research, UNC Chapel Hill
3
Google Research
{bender, yangli95, jjgarcia, joliva}@cs.unc.edu,
koconn@live.unc.edu, manzilz@google.com

Abstract
In this work, we develop a new approach to generative density
estimation for exchangeable, non-i.i.d. data. The proposed
framework, FlowScan, combines invertible ﬂow transformations with a sorted scan to ﬂexibly model the data while
preserving exchangeability. Unlike most existing methods,
FlowScan exploits the intradependencies within sets to learn
both global and local structure. FlowScan represents the ﬁrst
approach that is able to apply sequential methods to exchangeable density estimation without resorting to averaging over
all possible permutations. We achieve new state-of-the-art
performance on point cloud and image set modeling.

Figure 1: A training dataset of sets. Each instance Xi is a set
i
of points Xi = {xi,j ∈ Rd }nj=1
(d = 2 shown). We estimate
p(Xi ), from which we can sample distinct sets.

set share information with one another, providing structure.
Despite the abundance of such data, the bulk of existing
approaches either ignore the relation between points (i.i.d.
methods) or model dependencies in a manner that depends
on inherent orderings (sequential methods) (Rezatoﬁghi et
al. 2017; You et al. 2018). In order to accurately learn the
structure of a set whilst preserving the exchangeability of its
likelihood, one cannot rely solely on either approach.
In this work, we focus on the task of tractable, non-i.i.d.
density estimation for exchangeable sets. We explore both
low cardinality sets of high dimension (10-20 points with
many hundreds of dimensions each, e.g. collections of images) and high cardinality sets of low dimension (hundreds
of points with 2-7 dimensions each, e.g. point clouds). We
develop a generative model suitable for exchangeable sets
in either regime, called FlowScan, which does not rely on
i.i.d. assumptions and is provably exchangeable. Contrary
to intuition, we show that one can preserve exchangeability
while scanning over the data in a sorted manner. FlowScan is
the ﬁrst method to achieve a tractable, non-i.i.d., exchangeable likelihood by leveraging traditional (e.g. sequential),
non-exchangeable density estimators.
Main Contributions. 1) We show that transforming points
with an equivariant change of variables allows for modeling
sets in a different space. 2) We introduce a scanning-based
technique for modeling exchangeable data, relating the underlying exchangeable likelihood to that of the sorted covariates.
3) We demonstrate how traditional density estimators may
be used for the task of principled and feasible exchangeable
density estimation via a scanning-based approach. 4) We
show empirically that FlowScan achieves the state-of-the-art
for density estimation tasks in both synthetic and real-world
point cloud and image set datasets.

Introduction
Modeling unordered, non-i.i.d. data is an important problem
in machine learning and data science. Collections of data objects with complicated intrinsic relationships are ubiquitous.
These collections include sets of 3d points sampled from the
surface of complicated shapes like human organs, sets of images shared within the same web page, or point cloud LiDAR
data observed by driverless cars. In any of these cases, the collections of data objects do not possess any inherent ordering
of their elements. Thus, any generative model which takes
these data as input should not depend on the order in which
the elements are presented and must be ﬂexible enough to
capture the dependencies between co-occurring elements.
The unorderedness of these kinds of collections is captured
probabilistically by the notion of exchangeability. Formally,
a set of points {xj }nj=1 ⊂ Rd with cardinality n, dimension
d, and probability density p(·) is called exchangeable if
(1)
p(x1 , ..., xn ) = p(xπ1 , ..., xπn )
for every permutation π. In practice {xj }nj=1 often represent
2d or 3d spatial points (see Fig. 1) in which case we refer
to the set as a point cloud. In other settings, the points of
interest may be more complex like images represented as
very high-dimensional vectors.
As a simple example, one may trivially generate a set of
exchangeable points by drawing them i.i.d. from some distribution. More commonly, elements within an exchangeable
∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10053

