The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dynamic Instance Normalization for Arbitrary Style Transfer
Yongcheng Jing,1 Xiao Liu,2 Yukang Ding,2 Xinchao Wang,3 Errui Ding,2
Mingli Song,1∗ Shilei Wen2
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., 3 Stevens Institute of Technology
{ycjing, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, {liuxiao12, dingyukang, dingerrui, wenshilei}@baidu.com, xinchao.wang@stevens.edu

Abstract
Prior normalization methods rely on afﬁne transformations
to produce arbitrary image style transfers, of which the parameters are computed in a pre-deﬁned way. Such manuallydeﬁned nature eventually results in the high-cost and shared
encoders for both style and content encoding, making style
transfer systems cumbersome to be deployed in resourceconstrained environments like on the mobile-terminal side. In
this paper, we propose a new and generalized normalization
module, termed as Dynamic Instance Normalization (DIN),
that allows for ﬂexible and more efﬁcient arbitrary style transfers. Comprising an instance normalization and a dynamic
convolution, DIN encodes a style image into learnable convolution parameters, upon which the content image is stylized. Unlike conventional methods that use shared complex
encoders to encode content and style, the proposed DIN introduces a sophisticated style encoder, yet comes with a compact
and lightweight content encoder for fast inference. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach yields
very encouraging results on challenging style patterns and,
to our best knowledge, for the ﬁrst time enables an arbitrary
style transfer using MobileNet-based lightweight architecture, leading to a reduction factor of more than twenty in computational cost as compared to existing approaches. Furthermore, the proposed DIN provides ﬂexible support for stateof-the-art convolutional operations, and thus triggers novel
functionalities, such as uniform-stroke placement for nonnatural images and automatic spatial-stroke control.

(a) Content

(b) Chen et al.

(c) Huang et al.

(d) Ours (VGG)

(e) Style

(f) Li et al.

(g) Sheng et al.

(h) Ours (MobileNet)

Figure 1: Existing ASPM methods either barely transfer
style to the target (Chen et al., Huang et al.), or produce
distorted style patterns (Li et al., Sheng et al.) while relying on high-cost encoders. By contrast, the proposed DIN
achieves superior performance using the same architecture
(Ours (VGG)), and for the ﬁrst time endows a much smaller
lightweight network to transfer arbitrary styles (Ours (MobileNet)).

volutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to render a content image in different styles, pioneering a new ﬁeld called Neural
Style Transfer (NST) (Jing et al. 2019).
The inspiring work of Gatys et al. is, however, built upon
an iterative image optimization in the pixel space, which
turns out to be computationally expensive due to the online optimization. To address this efﬁciency issue, modeloptimization-based NST algorithms are proposed, which
optimize feed-forward models in an ofﬂine training manner. The earliest model-optimization-based NST algorithms,
namely Per-Style-Per-Model (PSPM), train separate stylespeciﬁc models for each particular style, and are therefore burdensome to be adopted for real-world applications.
(Johnson, Alahi, and Fei-Fei 2016; Ulyanov et al. 2016;
Li and Wand 2016). To address this issue, Multiple-StylePer-Model (MSPM) algorithms are proposed by incorporating multiple styles into one single model (Zhang and Dana
2017; Chen et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017b; Dumoulin, Shlens,
and Kudlur 2017). Unfortunately, MSPM also suffers from

Introduction
Image stylization has been a long-standing research topic.
It has been studied in the domain of computer graphics, or
more speciﬁcally, the area of Non-Photorealistic Rendering (NPR) (Gooch and Gooch 2001; Rosin and Collomosse
2012). In the ﬁeld of computer vision, image stylization is
studied as a generalized problem of texture synthesis (Efros
and Leung 1999). Built upon the recent progress in visual
texture modelling (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2015) and image reconstruction (Mahendran and Vedaldi 2015), Gatys et
al. (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016) propose to exploit Con∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4369

