The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Inﬁnity Learning: Learning Markov
Chains from Aggregate Steady-State Observations
Jianfei Gao,1 Mohamed A. Zahran,2 Amit Sheoran,3 Sonia Fahmy,4 Bruno Ribeiro5
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
305 N. University St, West Lafayette, IN 47907
{gao4621 , mzahran2 , asheoran3 }@purdue.edu, {fahmy4 , ribeiro5 }@cs.purdue.edu

collection (logs) due to the potential performance penalty of
logging (Newman 2017). Capacity planning requires knowing how the servers perform under medium to high load conditions, which requires extrapolated predictions of request
loss probability and server response times from the collected
light-load data.
Hence, in this work we consider the task of learning a
parametric Continuous Time Markov Chain (CTMC) sequence model —with transition rate matrix Q(x, θ) where
x are known parameters but parameters θ must be learned—
without examples of sequences, where the training data consists entirely of aggregate steady-state statistics. Making the
problem harder, we further assume that the states we wish
to predict are unobserved in the training data. More specifically, given an inductive bias over the transition rates of a
CTMC and some known transition rates, we wish to extrapolate its steady state distribution to states that are unobserved.
We focus on the application of predicting failures in queuing systems under heavy loads —e.g., predicting request
loss rates in overloaded cloud services— with training data
that contains only aggregate statistics of the system under
light loads, and no observed losses. Traditionally, CTMCs
are learned from observations of their transient (sequences
given by transitions between states) not from observations
of their steady state, even less so if only a subset of the state
space is observable.

Abstract
We consider the task of learning a parametric Continuous
Time Markov Chain (CTMC) sequence model without examples of sequences, where the training data consists entirely of
aggregate steady-state statistics. Making the problem harder,
we assume that the states we wish to predict are unobserved
in the training data. Speciﬁcally, given a parametric model
over the transition rates of a CTMC and some known transition rates, we wish to extrapolate its steady state distribution
to states that are unobserved. A technical roadblock to learn
a CTMC from its steady state has been that the chain rule to
compute gradients will not work over the arbitrarily long sequences necessary to reach steady state —from where the aggregate statistics are sampled. To overcome this optimization
challenge, we propose ∞-SGD, a principled stochastic gradient descent method that uses randomly-stopped estimators to
avoid inﬁnite sums required by the steady state computation,
while learning even when only a subset of the CTMC states
can be observed. We apply ∞-SGD to a real-world testbed
and synthetic experiments showcasing its accuracy, ability to
extrapolate the steady state distribution to unobserved states
under unobserved conditions (heavy loads, when training under light loads), and succeeding in difﬁcult scenarios where
even a tailor-made extension of existing methods fails.

Introduction
Can we learn a parametric sequence model given only
aggregate statistics as training data? As machine learning expands into new applications, new learning paradigms
emerge, such as learning a sequence model from a set of observations without any clear time order between them.
Traditional supervised and unsupervised learning methods are essentially tasked with problems that can be learned
from examples (interpolation). In a host of key applications
of parametric sequence models, we want to extrapolate, i.e.,
take these aggregate observations and extrapolate them to a
scenario not observed in the training data.
For instance, servers in the cloud collect system logs
—aggregate statistics such as response-time distribution,
queue length distribution— under light-load conditions. Under high-loads, however, these servers may disable statistics

Remark 1. Extrapolation v.s. generalization error: In our
task we must make a distinction between generalization error
—which is the error on unseen data that reduces with more
training examples even without inductive biases— and extrapolation error (Marcus 1998) —which is a type of generalization error over unseen states and domains that does not
reduce with more training data without the help of a modeling assumption. Our task is to learn a parametric model that
is capable of extrapolation.
Contributions. Our work introduces the general problem
of learning a parametric CTMC from aggregate steady-state
observations (frequencies) of part of the CTMC states, focusing on queueing systems as our application. We also
introduce a novel method (∞-SGD) to learn parametric
CTMCs from aggregate steady-state observations, which

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3922

