The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

LATTE: Latent Type Modeling for Biomedical Entity Linking
Ming Zhu,1∗ Busra Celikkaya,2 Parminder Bhatia,2 Chandan K. Reddy1
1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Arlington, VA 22203
2
AWS AI, Seattle, WA 98121
mingzhu@vt.edu, {busrac, parmib}@amazon.com, reddy@cs.vt.edu

though a signiﬁcant amount of work has been done in the
domain of entity linking for text found on the web, where
the objective is to link the mentions to standard knowledgebases such as Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), most of the
techniques cannot be directly transferred to biomedical domain, which poses a number of new challenges to the entity
linking problem.

Abstract
Entity linking is the task of linking mentions of named
entities in natural language text, to entities in a curated
knowledge-base. This is of signiﬁcant importance in the
biomedical domain, where it could be used to semantically
annotate a large volume of clinical records and biomedical
literature, to standardized concepts described in an ontology
such as Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS). We observe that with precise type information, entity disambiguation becomes a straightforward task. However, ﬁne-grained
type information is usually not available in biomedical domain. Thus, we propose LATTE, a LATent Type Entity
Linking model, that improves entity linking by modeling
the latent ﬁne-grained type information about mentions and
entities. Unlike previous methods that perform entity linking directly between the mentions and the entities, LATTE
jointly does entity disambiguation, and latent ﬁne-grained
type learning, without direct supervision. We evaluate our
model on two biomedical datasets: MedMentions, a large
scale public dataset annotated with UMLS concepts, and a
de-identiﬁed corpus of dictated doctor’s notes that has been
annotated with ICD concepts. Extensive experimental evaluation shows our model achieves signiﬁcant performance improvements over several state-of-the-art techniques.

1

Figure 1: An example of biomedical entity linking. Phrase
shown in red is the extracted mention, the orange boxes refer
to the top candidate entities retrieved from the biomedical
knowledge-base, and the green box is the ground truth entity
for this mention.

Introduction

With the advancements in the healthcare domain, we have
witnessed a considerable increase in the amount of biomedical text, including electronic health records, biomedical
literature and clinical trial reports (Reddy and Aggarwal
2015). To successfully utilize the wealth of knowledge contained in these records, it is critical to have automated semantic indexing techniques. Entity linking refers to the process of automatically linking mentions of entities in raw text,
to a standardized list of entities in a knowledge-base. This
process typically requires two steps. First, all the mentions
of entities in the raw text are annotated using a standard
Named Entity Recognition (NER) technique (Lample et al.
2016). Next, the extracted mentions are linked to the corresponding entities in the entity disambiguation stage. Al-

Biomedical entity linking is the task of linking mentions
in biomedical text, such as clinical notes, or biomedical literature, to medical entities in a standard ontology such as
Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS) (Bodenreider
2004). In the healthcare domain, accurate entity disambiguation is crucial to the understanding of biomedical context.
Many distinct biomedical concepts can have very similar
mentions, and failure in disambiguation will lead to incorrect interpretation of the entire context. This will introduce
huge risks in medical-related decision making. Moreover,
biomedical entity linking can be useful in many other applications, which require automatic indexing of the text. For
instance, it can be used by healthcare providers to automatically link the medical records of patients to different medical entities, which can then be used for downstream tasks
such as diagnosis/medication decision making, population
and health analytics, predictive modeling (Jin et al. 2018),

∗

Work done while MZ was an intern at AWS AI.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9757

