The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversary for Social Good: Protecting
Familial Privacy through Joint Adversarial Attacks∗
Chetan Kumar, Riazat Ryan, Ming Shao
Department of Computer & Information Science
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, Dartmouth, MA, USA
{ckumar, rryan2, mshao}@umassd.edu

Abstract
Social media has been widely used among billions of people
with dramatical participation of new users every day. Among
them, social networks maintain the basic social characters
and host huge amount of personal data. While protecting user
sensitive data is obvious and demanding, information leakage due to adversarial attacks is somehow unavoidable, yet
hard to detect. For example, implicit social relation such as
family information may be simply exposed by network structure and hosted face images through off-the-shelf graph neural networks (GNN), which will be empirically proved in this
paper. To address this issue, in this paper, we propose a novel
adversarial attack algorithm for social good. First, we start
from conventional visual family understanding problem, and
demonstrate that familial information can easily be exposed
to attackers by connecting sneak shots to social networks.
Second, to protect family privacy on social networks, we propose a novel adversarial attack algorithm that produces both
adversarial features and graph under a given budget. Specifically, both features on the node and edges between nodes
will be perturbed gradually such that the probe images and
its family information can not be identiﬁed correctly through
conventional GNN. Extensive experiments on a popular visual social dataset have demonstrated that our defense strategy can signiﬁcantly mitigate the impacts of family information leakage.

Photo Clicked by
any Person

Family Information
Searched over the Web

Family Data is Found
(Information Leakage)

Figure 1: A sneak shot by someone can be used to ﬁnd out
the family information of the target through social network.

tos (especially children) are exposed without their permission. On the other hand, with the rapid development in AI,
and especially the new wave caused by deep learning and
newly developed tools ready for various social data, we usually have limited knowledge about what additional information will be inferred from the social networks. For example,
people’s browsing and reading interests (Google Chrome),
shopping habits (Amazon), and movie preferences (Netﬂix)
have been analyzed by advanced algorithms, and it is our
feeling that these algorithms know us better than ourselves.
In fact, all these services and convenience are supposed to
serve for social good under the permission of the users, but
sometimes unintentional leakage could occur. This becomes
more likely for the user groups of limited knowledge or time
for inspection, and puts their privacy at risk.
Here we conceptually demonstrate with an unintentional
information leakage scenario on the social network. The
photo of a targeted person is ﬁrst captured by the attacker
without permission. Then by connecting this photo to existing social networks (e.g., Facebook), the attacker may not
only ﬁnd the identity of the target, but also his/her private
family information through dedicated algorithms, e.g., graph
neural networks (GNN) (Zhang, Cui, and Zhu 2018), which
will be experimentally demonstrated later. This idea is visualized in Figure 1. Generally, people have no willing to
disclose personal data in such a manner, but it has already
been out of our control, as long as people remain connected
by the society and the Internet.
In fact, such risk is NOT rare on the Internet, and could
be quickly transmitted and propagated through AI algorithms in an automatic manner. To parse the visual information of images on social media, off-the-shelf tools rooted in

Introduction
We are living in the era of modern technology and now our
lives are surrounded by social media networks. These networks allow us to connect and share our everyday activities with friends, family and others, but notably some of
them are user sensitive data. It is our attention to protect
those “explicit” sensitive data like credentials by all means,
nonetheless other information gets leaked through an “implicit” manner. And this social information is critical to certain group of people. For example, it can be imagined how
furious the celebrity will be when their family members pho∗

This work is supported in part by the UMass Dartmouth College of Engineering faculty start-up fund and NVIDIA Corporation
GPU donation.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11304

