The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning and Reasoning for Robot Sequential Decision Making under Uncertainty
Saeid Amiri,1 Mohammad Shokrolah Shirazi,2 Shiqi Zhang1
1

SUNY Binghamton, Binghamton, NY 13902 USA
University of Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN 44227 USA
samiri1@binghamton.edu; shirazim@uindy.edu; szhang@cs.binghamton.edu
2

be comprehensive in practice, and robots frequently ﬁnd it
difﬁcult to survive from inaccurate or outdated knowledge.
Third, probabilistic planning methods support active information collection for goal achievement, e.g., using decisiontheoretic frameworks such as Markov decision processes
(MDPs) (Puterman 2014) and partially observable MDPs
(POMDPs) (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998). However, the planning frameworks are ill-equipped for incorporating declarative contextual knowledge.
In this work, we develop a robot SDM framework that enables the simultaneous capabilities of learning from past experiences, reasoning with declarative contextual knowledge,
and planning toward achieving long-term goals. Speciﬁcally,
we use long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) to learn a classiﬁer for passive state
estimation using streaming sensor data, and use commonsense reasoning and probabilistic planning (CORPP) (Zhang
and Stone 2015) for active perception and task completions
using contextual knowledge and human-robot interaction.
Moreover, the dataset needed for supervised learning can
be augmented through the experience of active human-robot
communication, which identiﬁes the second contribution of
this work. The resulting algorithm is called learning-CORPP
(LCORPP), as overviewed in Figure 1.
We apply LCORPP to the problem of human intention estimation using a mobile robot. The robot can passively estimate human intentions based on their motion trajectories,
reason with contextual knowledge to improve the estimation, and actively conﬁrm the estimation through humanrobot interaction (dialog-based and motion-based). Results
suggest that, in comparison to competitive baselines from
the literature, LCORPP signiﬁcantly improves a robot’s performance in state estimation (in our case, human intention)
in both accuracy and efﬁciency. 1

Abstract
Robots frequently face complex tasks that require more than
one action, where sequential decision-making (SDM) capabilities become necessary. The key contribution of this work
is a robot SDM framework, called LCORPP, that supports
the simultaneous capabilities of supervised learning for passive state estimation, automated reasoning with declarative
human knowledge, and planning under uncertainty toward
achieving long-term goals. In particular, we use a hybrid reasoning paradigm to reﬁne the state estimator, and provide
informative priors for the probabilistic planner. In experiments, a mobile robot is tasked with estimating human intentions using their motion trajectories, declarative contextual knowledge, and human-robot interaction (dialog-based
and motion-based). Results suggest that, in efﬁciency and accuracy, our framework performs better than its no-learning
and no-reasoning counterparts in ofﬁce environment.

1

Introduction

Mobile robots have been able to operate in everyday environments over extended periods of time, and travel long
distances that have been impossible before, while providing
services, such as escorting, guidance, and delivery (Hawes et
al. 2017; Veloso 2018; Khandelwal et al. 2017). Sequential
decision-making (SDM) plays a key role toward robot longterm autonomy, because real-world domains are stochastic,
and a robot must repeatedly estimate the current world state
and decide what to do next.
There are at least three AI paradigms, namely supervised learning, automated reasoning, and probabilistic planning, that can be used for robot SDM. Each of the three
paradigms has a long history with rich literature. However,
none of the three completely meet the requirements in the
context of robot SDM. First, a robot can use supervised
learning to make decisions, e.g., to learn from the demonstrations of people or other agents (Argall et al. 2009).
However, the methods are not designed for reasoning with
declarative contextual knowledge that are widely available
in practice. Second, knowledge representation and reasoning (KRR) methods can be used for decision making (Gelfond and Kahl 2014). However, such knowledge can hardly

2

Related Work

KRR and SDM : SDM algorithms can be grouped into two
classes depending on the availability of the world model,
namely probabilistic planning, and reinforcement learning
(RL). Next, we select a sample of the SDM algorithms, and

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2726

A demo video is available: https://youtu.be/YgiB1fpJgmo

