The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Machine-Learning-Based Functional Microcirculation Analysis
Ossama Mahmoud1, GH Janssen2,3, Mahmoud R. El-Sakka1
1

Department of Computer Sciences, Western University, London (ON), Canada
Department of Medical Biophysics, Western University, London (ON), Canada
3
Centre for Critical Illness Research, Lawson Health Research Institute, London (ON), Canada
2

Abstract
Analysis of microcirculation is an important clinical and research task. Functional analysis of the microcirculation allows researchers to understand how blood flowing in a tissues’ smallest vessels affects disease progression, organ
function, and overall health. Current methods of manual
analysis of microcirculation are tedious and timeconsuming, limiting the quick turnover of results. There has
been limited research on automating functional analysis of
microcirculation. As such, in this paper, we propose a twostep machine-learning-based algorithm to functionally assess microcirculation videos. The first step uses a modified
vessel segmentation algorithm to extract the location of vessel-like structures. While the second step uses a 3D-CNN to
assess whether the vessel-like structures contained flowing
blood. To our knowledge, this is the first application of machine learning for functional analysis of microcirculation.
We use real-world labelled microcirculation videos to train
and test our algorithm and assess its performance. More
precisely, we demonstrate that our two-step algorithm can
efficiently analyze real data with high accuracy (90%).

Introduction
For many years, researchers have used the integrity of microcirculation to understand disease progression and overall health (Tafner et al. 2017). The microcirculation consists of the tissue’s smallest vessels, ranging from only 5 to
100 micrometers in diameter. These microvessels include
capillaries, arterioles, and venules (Tafner et al. 2017).
While larger microvessels can accommodate a robust flow
of blood, to maximize oxygen off-loading in the tissue,
capillary blood flow consists of a single file of red blood
cells, interspaced with plasma gaps.
To examine the microvasculature, both the structure of
the vascular network and the blood flow in functionally
perfused microvessels, need to be assessed via intravital
video microscopy (IVM).

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13326

The functionality of these microvessels, i.e., the ability to
carry blood flow, has significant implications for organ
function during disease progression and overall health. As
such, IVM is used in various medical domains to examine
the microcirculation and to understand disease processes
and their effects on the microcirculation (Ellis 2005;
Lawendy 2016; Yeh 2017).
The quality of a tissue’s microcirculation can be measured through its vascular density. Usually, vascular density
for a region of tissue is determined by taking the total
number of flowing microvessels across a cross-section
divided by the surface area of the region examined (Charlton 2017).
Calculating vascular density proves to be a timeconsuming and tedious task in practice, as it requires the
visual assessment of hundreds of vessels across many
frames in a microcirculation video.
Although the improvement in the speed of acquisition
and quality of microscopic videos, the analysis of the experimental video data is still made by visual inspection.
This time-consuming task prevents efficient use of microcirculation analysis in research. Moreover, to ensure the
quality of the analysis, visual analysis is often repeated by
two or more independent analyzers, compounding this
problem even further. The time-intensive nature of the
manual analysis is mainly due to the complexity of the
video images involved, often containing a large number of
similar stagnant or dynamically moving structures (i.e., red
blood cells), as well as sudden changes in contrast or
movement artifacts of the tissue.
Although many algorithms have been developed for
analyzing the structural component of microcirculation, the
functionality of microvascular blood flow is a critical parameter for assessing the development of microvascular
dysfunction. As of today, to the best of our knowledge, this
is the first application of machine learning for the simultaneously assessment of both vessel structure and vessel
blood flow functionality
In this paper, we present a two-step machine-learningbased algorithm for the functional and structural analysis

