The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Interactively Learn and Assist
Mark Woodward,∗ Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman
Google Brain, Mountain View
{markwoodward, chelseaf, karolhausman}@google.com
The effort required by the human user is affected by many
aspects of the learning problem, including restrictions on
when the agent is allowed to act and restrictions on the behavior space of either human or agent, such as limiting the
user feedback to rewards or demonstrations. We consider a
setting where both the user and the agent are allowed to act
throughout learning, which we refer to as interactive learning. Unlike collecting a set of demonstrations before training, interactive learning allows the user to selectively act
only when it deems the information is necessary and useful, reducing the user’s effort. Examples of such interactions
include allowing user interventions or agent requests, for
demonstrations (Kelly et al. 2018), rewards (Warnell et al.
2018; Arumugam et al. 2019), or preferences (Christiano et
al. 2017). While these methods allow the user to provide
feedback throughout learning, the communication interface
is restricted to structured forms of supervision, which may
be inefﬁcient for a given situation. For example, in a dishwasher unloading task, given the history of learning, it may
be sufﬁcient to point at the correct drawer rather than provide a full demonstration.
To this end, we propose to allow the agent and the user
to exchange information through an unstructured interface.
To do so, the agent and the user need a common prior understanding of the meaning of different unstructured interactions, along with the context of the space of tasks that the
user cares about. Indeed, when humans communicate tasks
to each other, they come in with rich prior knowledge and
common sense about what the other person may want and
how they may communicate that, enabling them to communicate concepts effectively and efﬁciently (Peloquin, Goodman, and Frank 2019).
In this paper, we propose to allow the agent to acquire
this prior knowledge through joint pre-training with another
agent who knows the task and serves as a human surrogate.
The agents are jointly trained on a variety of tasks, where
actions and observations are restricted to the physical environment. Since the ﬁrst agent is available to assist, but only
the second agent is aware of the task, interactive learning behaviors should emerge to accomplish the task efﬁciently. We
hypothesize that, by restricting the action and observation
spaces to the physical environment, the emerged behaviors
can transfer to learning from a human user. An added beneﬁt of our framework is that, by training on a variety of tasks
from the target task domain, much of the non-user speciﬁc
task prior knowledge is pre-trained into the agent, further
reducing the effort required by the user.
We evaluate various aspects of agents trained with our

Abstract
When deploying autonomous agents in the real world, we
need effective ways of communicating objectives to them.
Traditional skill learning has revolved around reinforcement
and imitation learning, each with rigid constraints on the format of information exchanged between the human and the
agent. While scalar rewards carry little information, demonstrations require signiﬁcant effort to provide and may carry
more information than is necessary. Furthermore, rewards
and demonstrations are often deﬁned and collected before
training begins, when the human is most uncertain about what
information would help the agent. In contrast, when humans
communicate objectives with each other, they make use of
a large vocabulary of informative behaviors, including nonverbal communication, and often communicate throughout
learning, responding to observed behavior. In this way, humans communicate intent with minimal effort. In this paper, we propose such interactive learning as an alternative
to reward or demonstration-driven learning. To accomplish
this, we introduce a multi-agent training framework that enables an agent to learn from another agent who knows the
current task. Through a series of experiments, we demonstrate the emergence of a variety of interactive learning behaviors, including information-sharing, information-seeking,
and question-answering. Most importantly, we ﬁnd that our
approach produces an agent that is capable of learning interactively from a human user, without a set of explicit demonstrations or a reward function, and achieving signiﬁcantly better performance cooperatively with a human than a human
performing the task alone.

1

Introduction

Many tasks that we would like our agents to perform, such as
unloading a dishwasher, straightening a room, or restocking
shelves are inherently user-speciﬁc, requiring information
from the user in order to fully learn all the intricacies of the
task. The traditional paradigm for agents to learn such tasks
is through rewards and demonstrations. However, iterative
reward engineering with untrained human users is impractical in real-world settings, while demonstrations are often
burdensome to provide. In contrast, humans learn from a variety of interactive communicative behaviors, including nonverbal gestures and partial demonstrations, each with their
own information capacity and effort. Can we enable agents
to learn tasks from humans through such unstructured interaction, requiring minimal effort from the human user?
∗

Work done as a part of the Goolge AI Residency
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2535

