The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Boundary Enhanced Neural Span
Classiﬁcation for Nested Named Entity Recognition
Chuanqi Tan,† Wei Qiu,† Mosha Chen,† Rui Wang,† Fei Huang†
†

†

Alibaba Group
{chuanqi.tcq, qiuwei.cw, chenmosha.cms, masi.wr, f.huang}@alibaba-inc.com



Abstract






Named entity recognition (NER) is a well-studied task in
natural language processing. However, the widely-used sequence labeling framework is usually difﬁcult to detect entities with nested structures. The span-based method that can
easily detect nested entities in different subsequences is naturally suitable for the nested NER problem. However, previous span-based methods have two main issues. First, classifying all subsequences is computationally expensive and
very inefﬁcient at inference. Second, the span-based methods mainly focus on learning span representations but lack
of explicit boundary supervision. To tackle the above two issues, we propose a boundary enhanced neural span classiﬁcation model. In addition to classifying the span, we propose
incorporating an additional boundary detection task to predict
those words that are boundaries of entities. The two tasks are
jointly trained under a multitask learning framework, which
enhances the span representation with additional boundary
supervision. In addition, the boundary detection model has
the ability to generate high-quality candidate spans, which
greatly reduces the time complexity during inference. Experiments show that our approach outperforms all existing methods and achieves 85.3, 83.9, and 78.3 scores in terms of F1 on
the ACE2004, ACE2005, and GENIA datasets, respectively.

       

  

Figure 1: An example in the ACE dataset.







$ %    $ 
 

  

! 
  

 $  "   !  #

Figure 2: An example in the GENIA dataset.
type of “GPE”. It is nested in “Britain’s ITN” with the type
of “ORG”. They are further nested in “Reporter Carl Dinnon
of Britain ’s ITN” with the type of “PER”. The above nested
structure cannot be handled by the predominant sequence
labeling models.
Various approaches for nested NER have been proposed
in recent years. One representative direction is based on
hypergraph-based methods (Lu and Roth 2015; Wang and
Lu 2018) that recognize nested entities by designing expressive tagging schemas. However, the hypergraph-based
method needs a lot of human efforts to carefully design
the unambiguous hypergraph. Another direction is based
on span-based methods that recognize nested entities by
classifying subsequences of the sentence (Xu, Jiang, and
Watcharawittayakul 2017; Sohrab and Miwa 2018; Xia et
al. 2019). The span-based method has its own advantages
that we can easily ﬁnd all candidate entities with different
subsequences, which is straightforward and does not need
human efforts. We therefore solve the nested NER task with
the span-based method in this work. However, the spanbased method still has two main issues. First, classifying all
subsequences in the sentence is computationally expensive.
Second, the span-based methods mainly focus on learning
span representations but lack of explicit boundary supervision. Compared with methods under the sequence labeling
framework and hypergraph methods, we observe that spanbased methods usually perform worse in detecting boundaries of entities. Span-based methods are usually confused

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) is a fundamental task in
the ﬁeld of natural language processing. It aims to identify text spans to speciﬁc entity types such as Person, Organization, and Location, which beneﬁts many downstream
NLP applications. Previous works usually treat NER as a sequence labeling task. For example, Lample et al. (2016) propose the LSTM-CRF model, which achieves promising results by combining deep recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
with conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs) (Lafferty, McCallum,
and Pereira 2001). However, Finkel and Manning (2009)
point out that named entities are often nested. For example,
43.27% and 37.35% entities are nested in the ACE2004 and
ACE2005 datasets, respectively. Figure 1 and Figure 2 show
two examples in the ACE2005 and GENIA datasets, respectively. In the ﬁrst example, “Britain” is an entity with the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9016

