The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Ranking and Rating Rankings and Ratings∗
Jingyan Wang, Nihar B. Shah
Carnegie Mellon University
{jingyanw, nihars}@cs.cmu.edu

evaluation, and this assignment is done uniformly at random. The two reviewers provide their evaluations (say, in
the range [0, 1]) for the respective item they evaluate, from
which the better item must be chosen. However, the reviewers’ rating scales may be miscalibrated. It might be the case
that the ﬁrst reviewer is lenient and always provides scores
in [0.6, 1] whereas the second reviewer is more stringent and
provides scores in the range [0, 0.4]. Or it might be the case
that one reviewer is moderate whereas the other is extreme –
the ﬁrst reviewer’s 0.2 is equivalent to the second reviewer’s
0.1 whereas the ﬁrst reviewer’s 0.3 is equivalent to the second reviewer’s 0.8. More generally, the miscalibration of the
reviewers may be arbitrary and unknown. Then is there any
hope of identifying the better of the two items with any nontrivial degree of certainty?
A variety of applications involve collection and aggregation of human preferences or judgments in terms of cardinal scores (numeric ratings). A perennial problem with
eliciting cardinal scores is that of miscalibration – the systematic errors introduced due to incomparability of cardinal scores provided by different people (see (Poston 2008;
Grifﬁn and Brenner 2008) and references therein).
This issue of miscalibration is sometimes addressed by
making simplifying assumptions about the form of miscalibration, such as linear bias models (Paul 1981; Roos,
Rothe, and Scheuermann 2011; Baba and Kashima 2013;
Ge, Welling, and Ghahramani 2013; MacKay et al. 2017).
However, the calibration issues with human-provided scores
are often signiﬁcantly more complex causing signiﬁcant violations to these simpliﬁed assumptions (see (Grifﬁn and
Brenner 2008) and references therein). Moreover, the algorithms for post-hoc correction often try to estimate the individual parameters which may not be feasible due to low
sample sizes. For instance, John Langford notes from his
experience as the program chair of the ICML 2012 conference:

Abstract
Cardinal scores collected from people are well known to suffer from miscalibrations. A popular approach to address this
issue is to assume simplistic models of miscalibration (such
as linear biases) to de-bias the scores. This approach, however, often fares poorly because people’s miscalibrations are
typically far more complex and not well understood. It is
widely believed that in the absence of simplifying assumptions on the miscalibration, the only useful information in
practice from the cardinal scores is the induced ranking. In
this paper we address the fundamental question of whether
this widespread folklore belief is actually true. We consider
cardinal scores with arbitrary (or even adversarially chosen)
miscalibrations that is only required to be consistent with
the induced ranking. We design rating-based estimators and
prove that despite making no assumptions on the ratings, they
strictly and uniformly outperform all possible estimators that
rely on only the ranking. These estimators can be used as a
plug-in to show the superiority of cardinal scores over ordinal
rankings for a variety of applications, including A/B testing
and ranking. This work thus provides novel fundamental insights in the eternal debate between cardinal and ordinal data:
It ranks the approach of using ratings higher than that of using
rankings, and rates both approaches in terms of their estimation errors.

Introduction
“A raw rating of 7 out of 10 in the absence of any other information is potentially useless.” (Mitliagkas et al. 2011)
“The rating scale as well as the individual ratings are
often arbitrary and may not be consistent from one user
to another.” (Ammar and Shah 2012)
Consider two items that need to be evaluated (for example, papers submitted to a conference) and two reviewers. Suppose each reviewer is assigned one distinct item for
∗

“We experimented with reviewer normalization and generally found it signiﬁcantly harmful.” (Langford 2012)

This work was originally published at the International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS
2019) (Wang and Shah 2019). The interested reader is referred to
the full version of this paper on arXiv (Wang and Shah 2018) for
proofs and additional material.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

It is commonly believed that when unable or unwilling
to make simplifying assumptions on the bias in cardinal scores, the only useful information is the ranking of
the scores (Rokeach 1968; Freund et al. 2003; Harzing et
13704

