The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On Performance Estimation in Automatic Algorithm Conﬁguration
Shengcai Liu,1 Ke Tang,2∗ Yunwen Lei,2 Xin Yao2
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
liuscyyf@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tangk3, leiyw, xiny}@sustech.edu.cn

Tang, and Yao 2019), the answer set programming (ASP)
(Hutter et al. 2014) and machine learning (Feurer et al. 2015;
Kotthoff et al. 2017).

Abstract
Over the last decade, research on automated parameter tuning, often referred to as automatic algorithm conﬁguration
(AAC), has made signiﬁcant progress. Although the usefulness of such tools has been widely recognized in real world
applications, the theoretical foundations of AAC are still very
weak. This paper addresses this gap by studying the performance estimation problem in AAC. More speciﬁcally, this paper ﬁrst proves the universal best performance estimator in a
practical setting, and then establishes theoretical bounds on
the estimation error, i.e., the difference between the training
performance and the true performance for a parameter conﬁguration, considering ﬁnite and inﬁnite conﬁguration spaces
respectively. These ﬁndings were veriﬁed in extensive experiments conducted on four algorithm conﬁguration scenarios
involving different problem domains. Moreover, insights for
enhancing existing AAC methods are also identiﬁed.

Despite the notable success achieved in application, the
theoretical aspects of AAC have been rarely investigated. To
our best knowledge, for AAC the ﬁrst theoretical analysis
was given by Birattari (2004), in which the author analyzed
expectations and variances of different performance estimators that estimate the true performance of a given parameter
conﬁguration on the basis of N runs of the conﬁguration.
It is concluded in (Birattari 2004) that performing one single run on N different problem instances guarantees that the
variance of the estimate is minimized, which has served as a
guidance in the design of the performance estimation mechanisms in later AAC methods including irace, ParamILS and
SMAC. It is noted that the analysis in (Birattari 2004) assumes that inﬁnite problem instances could be sampled for
conﬁguration evaluation. However, in practice we are often
only given a set of ﬁnite training instances (Hoos 2012).

Introduction
Many high-performance algorithms for solving computationally hard problems, ranging from exact methods such
as mixed integer programming solvers to heuristic methods
such as local search, involve a large number of free parameters that need to be carefully tuned to achieve their best performance. In many cases, ﬁnding performance-optimizing
parameter settings is performed manually in an ad-hoc way.
However, the manually-tuning approach is often intensive
in terms of human effort (López-Ibáñez et al. 2016) and
thus there are a lot of attempts on automating this process (see (Hutter et al. 2009) for a comprehensive review),
which is usually referred to as automatic algorithm conﬁguration (AAC) (Hoos 2012). Many AAC methods such
as ParamILS (Hutter et al. 2009), GGA/GGA+(Ansótegui,
Sellmann, and Tierney 2009; Ansótegui et al. 2015), irace
(López-Ibáñez et al. 2016) and SMAC (Hutter, Hoos, and
Leyton-Brown 2011) have been proposed in the last few
years. They have been used for boosting the algorithm’s performance in a wide range of domains such as the boolean
satisﬁability problem (SAT) (Hutter et al. 2009), the traveling salesman problem (TSP) (López-Ibáñez et al. 2016; Liu,

Recently, Kleinberg, Leyton-Brown, and Lucier (2017)
introduced a new algorithm conﬁguration framework named
Structured Procrastination (SP), which is guaranteed to ﬁnd
an approximately optimal parameter conﬁguration within a
logarithmic factor of the optimal runtime in a worst-case
sense. Furthermore, the authors showed that the gap between
worst-case runtimes of existing methods (ParamILS, GGA,
irace, SMAC) and SP could be arbitrarily large. These results were later extended in (Weisz, György, and Szepesvári
2018; 2019), in which the authors proposed new methods, called LEAPSANDBOUNDS (LB) and CapsAndRuns
(CR), with better runtime guarantees. However, there is a
discrepancy between the algorithm conﬁguration problem
addressed by these methods (SP, LB and CR) and the problem that is most frequently encountered in practice. More
speciﬁcally, these methods are designed to ﬁnd parameter
conﬁgurations with approximately optimal performances on
the input (training) instances; while in practice it is more
desirable to ﬁnd parameter conﬁgurations that will perform
well on new unseen instances rather than just the training
instances (Hoos 2012). Indeed, one of the most critical issues that needs to be addressed in AAC is the over-tuning
phenomenon (Birattari 2004), in which the found parame-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2384

