The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Corpus-Level End-to-End Exploration for Interactive Systems
Zhiwen Tang, Grace Hui Yang
InfoSense, Department of Computer Science
Georgetown University
zt79@georgetown.edu, huiyang@cs.georgetown.edu

tools. Such a pipeline is a convenient use of existing Information Retrieval (IR) techniques; however, it comes with a
few drawbacks.
First, most existing retrieval functions are optimized over
precision at top ranks, which is demanded by the limited
cognitive load a human user could afford when examining
the results. This bias is engraved in all ready-to-use retrieval
tools. The consequence is that results that are good but not
as optimal would have little chance to show up. It might
be ideal when there is only one run of retrieval, such as
in single-turn QA or ad-hoc document retrieval. In multiturn interactions, however, early triage of lower-ranked documents would lead to long-term loss that can not be easily recovered. Classic works on exploratory search (White
and Roth 2009) and information seeking (Marchionini 2006)
named this phenomenon “berry picking” – which depicts a
tortuous search trajectory where only very limited useful information can be obtained at each single step because the
search space is so restricted by the top results. This makes
the RL agent’s learning very challenging because the agent
is not able to “explicitly consider the whole problem of a
goal-oriented” process (Sutton and Barto 2018).
Second, widely-used retrieval functions, including TFIDF (Salton and Buckley 1988) and BM25 (Robertson, Zaragoza, and others 2009), are non-differentiable.
Common functions to reformulate queries (Huang and
Efthimiadis 2009) are non-differentiable, too. These nondifferentiable functions prevent a gradient-based RL method
from updating its gradient through; thus a user’s feedback
would not have real control over which documents to return. Consequently, the retrieval results could look random.
Nonetheless, these functions remain quite popular due to
their readiness.
In this paper, using dynamic search as an illustrating example, we propose a different solution to retrieval-based interactive agents. In our corpus-level end-to-end exploration
algorithm (CE3), at each time step, we compress a text corpus into a single global representation and used to support
the agent’s full exploration in the state and action spaces. In
addition, we propose a novel differentiable retrieval function
that allows an RL agent to directly manipulate documents.
Experiments on the Text REtrieval Conference (TREC) Dy-

Abstract
A core interest in building Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) agents
is to let them interact with and assist humans. One example is Dynamic Search (DS), which models the process that
a human works with a search engine agent to accomplish a
complex and goal-oriented task. Early DS agents using Reinforcement Learning (RL) have only achieved limited success
for (1) their lack of direct control over which documents to
return and (2) the difﬁculty to recover from wrong search trajectories. In this paper, we present a novel corpus-level endto-end exploration (CE3) method to address these issues. In
our method, an entire text corpus is compressed into a global
low-dimensional representation, which enables the agent to
gain access to the full state and action spaces, including the
under-explored areas. We also propose a new form of retrieval
function, whose linear approximation allows end-to-end manipulation of documents. Experiments on the Text REtrieval
Conference (TREC) Dynamic Domain (DD) Track show that
CE3 outperforms the state-of-the-art DS systems.

1

Introduction

Retrieval-based interactive systems, including multi-turn
Question Answering (QA) (Reddy, Chen, and Manning
2019), dialogue systems (Sankar et al. 2019), and dynamic
search systems (Yang, Sloan, and Wang 2016), study the
interaction between a human user and an intelligent agent
when they work together to accomplish a goal-oriented task.
Reinforcement Learning (RL) becomes a natural solution
to these interactive systems (Yang, Sloan, and Wang 2016;
Li, Resnick, and Mei 2016; Hu et al. 2018) for its emphasis on adaptation and exploration. Prior work on this topic
has investigated bandits-based (Li, Resnick, and Mei 2016),
value-based (Luo, Zhang, and Yang 2014), and policy-based
(Hu et al. 2018) RL methods. In these approaches, oftentimes, a repository of documents (or knowledge) and inputs from a human user, are treated as the learning environment for the AI agent; and the agent’s actions usually
take two steps – ﬁrst, reformulating queries (or questions)
based on user responses; second, retrieving relevant information to fulﬁll those queries via some off-the-shelf retrieval
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2527

