The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Representative Solutions for Bi-Objective Optimisation
Emir Demirović

Nicolas Schwind

School of Computing and Information Systems
University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
emir.demirovic@unimelb.edu.au

National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology
Tokyo, Japan
nicolas-schwind@aist.go.jp

y

Abstract
Bi-objective optimisation aims to optimise two generally
competing objective functions. Typically, it consists in computing the set of nondominated solutions, called the Pareto
front. This raises two issues: 1) time complexity, as the Pareto
front in general can be inﬁnite for continuous problems and
exponentially large for discrete problems, and 2) lack of decisiveness. This paper focusses on the computation of a small,
“relevant” subset of the Pareto front called the representative set, which provides meaningful trade-offs between the
two objectives. We introduce a procedure which, given a precomputed Pareto front, computes a representative set in polynomial time, and then we show how to adapt it to the case
where the Pareto front is not provided. This has three important consequences for computing the representative set: 1)
does not require the whole Pareto front to be provided explicitly, 2) can be done in polynomial time for bi-objective
mixed-integer linear programs, and 3) only requires a polynomial number of solver calls for bi-objective problems, as
opposed to the case where a higher number of objectives is
involved. We implement our algorithm and empirically illustrate the efﬁciency on two families of benchmarks.

y

x
(a) Diverse Solutions

x
(b) Representative Solutions.

Figure 1: Two notions of Pareto front ﬁltering when two solutions are to be selected in each case. The dashed lines illustrate the radius of the corresponding representative set
A reasonable alternative is then to consider a subset of
the Pareto front. Two main notions of such Pareto front ﬁltering have been introduced in the literature. Both notions
depend on a number k which is assumed to be “small”
and given in input of the problem. The ﬁrst one, called diversity (or uniformity) (Sayin 2000; Hebrard et al. 2005;
Petit and Trapp 2015; Vaz et al. 2015; Masin and Bukchin
2008), aims to select k solutions from the Pareto front that
are “spread out” as much as possible. The second one, called
representativity (or coverage) (Sayin 2000; Vaz et al. 2015;
Schwind et al. 2016), considers a set S of k solutions from
the Pareto front with minimum radius, where the radius of
S is the maximal distance between any solution p from the
Pareto front and the solution from S that is the closest to p;
such a set S is called a representative set (cf. Fig. 1).
In this paper, we focus on the computation of a representative set of solutions in the bi-objective case. In particular,
we pose the following research questions:

Introduction
Bi-objective optimisation aims to optimise two competing
objective functions. For instance, in supply-chain management, the goal is to simultaneously minimise delivery time
and delivery cost (Trisna et al. 2016). In the design of wireless sensor networks, both energy consumption and data collection time must be kept at a minimum (Caillouet, Li, and
Razaﬁndralambo 2011). An “ideal” option generally does
not exist and trade-offs must be made.
The set of nondominated solutions, called the Pareto
front, is exponentially large in the general case. This brings
forth two main issues. First, enumerating the Pareto front
can be computationally infeasible. Second, providing a large
number of options might hinder decision making, as providing an overwhelming number of choices can be counterproductive (Iyengar and Lepper 2000; Shaﬁr, Simonson, and
Tversky 1993; Dhar 1997).

1. Is it possible to efﬁciently compute a representative set
without computing the whole complete Pareto front?
2. Can a representative set be computed even if the Pareto
front is inﬁnite?
Our contribution provides a positive answer to both questions. This is done constructively: we provide a generic procedure for bi-objective optimisation that computes a rep-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1436

