The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Web-Supervised Network with Softly
Update-Drop Training for Fine-Grained Visual Classiﬁcation
Chuanyi Zhang,1 Yazhou Yao,1 * Huafeng Liu,1 Guo-Sen Xie,2 Xiangbo Shu,1
Tianfei Zhou,2 Zheng Zhang,3 Fumin Shen,4 Zhenmin Tang1
3

1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China, 2 Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UAE
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, 4 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract

Open-set
Irrelevant Noise

Labeling objects at the subordinate level typically requires expert knowledge, which is not always available from a random
annotator. Accordingly, learning directly from web images for
ﬁne-grained visual classiﬁcation (FGVC) has attracted broad
attention. However, the existence of noise in web images is
a huge obstacle for training robust deep neural networks. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach to remove irrelevant
samples from the real-world web images during training, and
only utilize useful images for updating the networks. Thus, our
network can alleviate the harmful effects caused by irrelevant
noisy web images to achieve better performance. Extensive
experiments on three commonly used ﬁne-grained datasets
demonstrate that our approach is much superior to state-ofthe-art webly supervised methods. The data and source code
of this work have been made anonymously available at:
https://github.com/z337-408/WSNFGVC.

Clean American Crow

Labeled as
American Crow
Labeled as
Fish Crow
Clean Fish Crow

Close-set
Label Noise

Figure 1: An illustration of the close-set and open-set noisy
web images on a bird dataset. Noisy images in the close-set
have their true labels in the dataset. Open-set contains irrelevant noisy images, whose labels are outside of the dataset.

Introduction
DNNs have achieved impressive results on many computer
vision tasks due to available large-scale image datasets (Deng
et al. 2009; Bai et al. 2018a; 2018b). However, ﬁne-grained
image classiﬁcation remains challenging. Subdividing a category into subcategories multiplies the number of labels
and thus is a labor-intensive and time-consuming problem.
What’s worse, ﬁne-grained annotation usually requires expert
knowledge, which exacerbates the labeling problem. To reduce the cost of manual labeling, some works focused on the
semi-supervised paradigm (Xu et al. 2015; Cui et al. 2016;
Niu, Veeraraghavan, and Sabharwal 2018). However, these
works inevitably involve various forms of human intervention
and remain labor-consuming.
Compared to manual-labeled image datasets, web images
are a rich and free resource. For arbitrary categories, the
potential training data can be easily obtained from the image
search engines like Google or Bing. Therefore, it is a natural
idea to directly leverage web images for training ﬁne-grained
classiﬁcation models. Unfortunately, due to the error-index
of image search engine, the precision of returned images

from image search engine is still unsatisfactory. As pointed
by (Schroff, Criminisi, and Zisserman 2011), the average
precision of the top 1000 images for 18 categories from
Google Image Search engine is only 32%.
As shown in Fig. 1, the noisy web images for ﬁne-grained
categories can be divided into two groups: Close-set noise
and Open-set noise. Speciﬁcally, noisy images in the close-set
have their true labels in the dataset (e.g., the images of ”Fish
Crow” are mistakenly labeled as “American Crow” in Fig. 1).
Open-set consists of irrelevant noisy images, whose labels
are outside of the dataset (e.g., the images pointed by the
black dotted arrow in Fig. 1). As deep neural networks have a
high capacity to ﬁt noisy data (Arpit et al. 2017; Zhang et al.
2016), training ﬁne-grained neural network models directly
with these noisy web images will result in poor performance.
To reduce the harmful inﬂuence of noise, some works
concentrate on estimating the noise transition probabilities
between different category labels. For example, (Reed et al.
2014) leveraged bootstrapping loss and assigned a weight to
the current prediction to compensate for the erroneous guiding of noisy samples. (Goldberger and Ben-Reuven 2016)
added an additional softmax layer to estimate the label noise

* Corresponding author: Yazhou Yao
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12781

