The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Abstraction and Reﬁnement in Games with Dynamic Weighted Terrain
Nathan R. Sturtevant

Devon Sigurdson, Bjorn Taylor, Tim Gibson

Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB, Canada
nathanst@ualberta.ca

Improbable Canada Inc.
Edmonton, AB, Canada
{devon, bjorntaylor, timgibson}@improbable.io

• Different terrain costs: While all terrain may be
traversable, different terrain types can have different
costs. It is preferred that characters follow roads, when
they exist, and use other terrain types when appropriate.
Thus, a pathﬁnding system should be able to reason about
terrain and return appropriate paths.

Abstract
This abstract looks at one version of the pathﬁnding problem
in games and discusses how it motived our recent work at the
AIIDE 2019 conference.

Pathﬁnding in Games

• Per-character terrain costs: While human characters
will prefer to travel on roads, other types of creatures
might prefer to stay off the roads to avoid being seen and
travel within forests.

In 2019 Improbable Inc’s Canada studio began to collaborate with the Moving AI Lab at the University of Alberta.
Our ﬁrst task was to look at the problem of pathﬁnding in
games to see if we could open up new design possibilities
for character pathﬁnding in Improbable’s games. The ﬁrst
result of this collaboration was published at AIIDE 2019
(Sturtevant et al. 2019); in this abstract we give a high-level
overview of the motivations for that work and the general
approach that was adopted for the initial technologies built
into the game.
We begin by looking at some of the properties of pathﬁnding in games that makes this problem unique from other applications, such as navigation for cars on roads. However,
the games industry itself is quite broad, so this cannot taken
to be representative of all games. Given this caveat, some
unique features of pathﬁnding in games include:

• Dynamic terrain costs: Terrain costs can change during gameplay either from casting a spell, or from other
dynamic events such as weather. While taking a boat
across a lake in normal weather may be ﬁne, characters
may dynamically avoid water during inclement weather
or when ﬁghting a creature with lightning abilities. Taken
together with per-character terrain costs, this suggests that
changes in terrain cost should not require signiﬁcant recomputation.
• Fast computation: Pathﬁnding requests typically need to
be satisﬁed in 1ms or less, meaning that optimality (in
terms of path length) is often sacriﬁced in return for faster
results.

• Free space traversal: Characters are able to move
through free space and are not restricted to a ﬁnite number
of traversable edges. For instance, the underlying terrain
in the Unreal game engine1 is represented by a NavMesh
(Tozour 2002), which uses the Recast toolset2 to build a
polygonal representation of free space in the world.

• No clear deﬁnition of optimality: Many pathﬁnding applications prefer optimal paths with respect to metrics
such as distance or time. In games there are often additional artistic constraints on movement that make it difﬁcult to even deﬁne an optimal path, so traditional optimality metrics are only an approximation of path quality.

• Dynamic terrain: Characters are free to modify the terrain. This could be by building buildings, bridges, or by
harvesting forests to turn them into grassland, but could
also be a result of destruction by enemies or environmental forces. The terrain representation must be able
to be changed at runtime to reﬂect these changes. Thus,
any techniques used to speed up pathﬁnding must be
amenable to re-computation at runtime.

Approach: Abstraction and Reﬁnement
The general approach that we took uses abstraction to build
a high-level representation of the world. Paths found in
the high-level representation can then be reﬁned to paths
in the real world. Even optimal approaches such as contraction hierarchies (Geisberger et al. 2008) use abstraction
and reﬁnement, but we use a class of approaches that have
been well-studied (Holte et al. 1996; Botea, Müller, and
Schaeffer 2004; Sturtevant and Buro 2005; Bulitko et al.
2007; Sturtevant and Jansen 2007; Harabor and Botea 2008;
Pelechano and Fuentes 2016) and that produce suboptimal

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.unrealengine.com
2
https://github.com/recastnavigation
13697

