The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Co-Occurrence Estimation from Aggregated Data with Auxiliary Information
Tomoharu Iwata, Naoki Marumo
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan
{tomoharu.iwata.gy, naoki.marumo.ec}@hco.ntt.co.jp

medical histories, because of their high cost or privacy protection. However, even within such applications, aggregated
data would be available, such as the number of purchasers
for each item and the number of patients for each disease,
since they do not contain any privacy information.
In this paper, we propose a method that estimates cooccurrence from aggregated data with auxiliary information.
For auxiliary information, we use item features. In the case
of purchase records, item features might include genres, release dates and descriptions. Since item features do not contain privacy information, they are often open to the public.
Although many methods have been proposed for estimating
co-occurrence counts given aggregated data (Deming and
Stephan 1940; Causey 1983; Sheldon and Dietterich 2011),
no existing method can use auxiliary information. We also
use the records of a few users that are sampled from total
users. The sampled records can be obtained by giving incentives to some users if they agree to share their records. We
assume that the number of sampled users with their records
is much smaller than the total number of users.
With the proposed method, we introduce latent cooccurrence variables, which represent the amount of cooccurrence for each pair of items, or the number of users
who purchased both items. The joint probability of the cooccurrence count of two items is assumed to follow a multinomial distribution with Dirichlet priors. The parameters of
the Dirichlet priors are modeled by non-linear functions that
take the auxiliary information as input. For non-linear functions, we use permutation invariant neural networks since
co-occurrence data are invariant to the permutation of two
items. The neural network parameters are shared across different pairs of items. Shared neural networks enable us to
learn unknown relationships between auxiliary information
and the co-occurrence using the data of multiple items.
The latent co-occurrence variables and the neural network parameters are estimated by maximizing the sum of
the likelihood of the latent co-occurrence variables and the
likelihood of the small sampled records. The parameters of
the multinomial distributions are analytically marginalized
since we use conjugate Dirichlet priors. By relaxing that the
latent co-occurrence variables are non-negative real values
instead of integers, we efﬁciently maximize the objective

Abstract
Complete co-occurrence data are unavailable in many applications, including purchase records and medical histories, because of their high cost or privacy protection. Even with such
applications, aggregated data would be available, such as the
number of purchasers for each item and the number of patients with each disease. We propose a method for estimating
the co-occurrence of items from aggregated data with auxiliary information. For auxiliary information, we use item features that describe the characteristics of each item. Although
many methods have been proposed for estimating the cooccurrence given aggregated data, no existing method can
use auxiliary information. We also use records of a small
number of users. With our proposed method, we introduce
latent co-occurrence variables that represent the amount of
co-occurrence for each pair of items. We model a probabilistic generative process of the latent co-occurrence variables
by a multinomial distribution with Dirichlet priors. The parameters of the Dirichlet priors are parameterized with neural
networks that take the auxiliary information as input, where
neural networks are shared across different item pairs. The
shared neural networks enable us to learn unknown relationships between auxiliary information and co-occurrence using
the data of multiple items. The latent co-occurrence variables
and the neural network parameters are estimated by maximizing the sum of the likelihood of the latent co-occurrence variables and the likelihood of the small records. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed method using user-item rating datasets.

1

Introduction

Co-occurrence is the basic and important statistics for analyzing categorical data. For example, recommender systems in e-commerce services suggest items that are likely
to be purchased by the same user (Sarwar et al. 2001). With
text analysis, words that appear in the same document are
clustered to discover topics (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003).
With social network analysis, communities are detected using information about common friends (Girvan and Newman 2002). Medical knowledge about complications is essential for treatment. Complete co-occurrence data are unavailable in many applications, such as purchase records and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4247

