The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Modelling Form-Meaning Systematicity with Linguistic and Visual Features
Arie Soeteman

Dario Gutierrez

Elia Bruni

Ekaterina Shutova

University of Amsterdam
awsoeteman@hotmail.com

IBM Research
elkin.gutierrez@ibm.com

University of Amsterdam
e.bruni@uva.nl

University of Amsterdam
e.shutova@uva.nl

leads to ambiguity. This ambiguity hinders language acquisition by obscuring form-meaning relations. Based on formal simulations Gasser therefore reached the same conclusion as Hockett: arbitrariness is a fundamental property of
extensive languages (Gasser 2004).
However, linguists have long noted exceptions to arbitrariness. For instance, vowels with high acoustic frequency
tend to be associated with smallness, while vowels with
low acoustic frequency tend to be associated with largeness
(Ohala 1984). Onomatopoeic words (e.g. ‘bark’, ‘cling’,
‘clang’, ‘slurp’) directly echo the sound of their referent.
Phonaesthemes are another counterexample to arbitrariness
in language. They represent phonetic clusters that occur in
words with related meanings. For instance, numerous English words that start with ‘sn-’ are related to the nose
and mouth (e.g. ‘snore’, ‘snorkel’, ‘sniff’, ‘snout’, ‘snot’).
Otis (2008) statistically conﬁrmed the existence of 27 of
such phonaesthemes in English, while research into the psychological reality of phonaesthemes found that native English speakers perceive as many as 46 (Hutchins 1999).
While these studies point towards localized clusters of nonarbitrariness, they do not address the role of arbitrariness in
a language as a whole. Richard Shillcock (2001) ﬁrst used
distributional semantics to analyze the signiﬁcance of arbitrariness in the English language, by correlating the distance between distributional semantic vectors with orthographic distance. This approach has been further developed
by Monaghan et al. (2014) and Gutierrez et al. (2016). All
three studies found a small but statistically signiﬁcant correlation between form and meaning. However, Monaghan
et al. (2014) found systematicity to be diffusely distributed
across language, while Gutierrez et al. (2016) found systematicity to be concentrated in localized phonological clusters.
The semantic vectors used to represent word meaning in
these three studies are based on word usage in textual corpora. However, research into grounded cognition suggests
that simulations of visual, auditory and other sensorimotor
stimuli play a substantial role in language comprehension
(Barsalou 2008).
For instance, Gernsbacher et. Al (1990) found that individuals abilities for comprehending events visually versus verbally were highly correlated. More recently, research
into our cognitive capacities for text representation (Zwaan
and Madden 2005; Fincher-Kiefer and D’Agostino 2004)

Abstract
Several studies in linguistics and natural language processing
(NLP) pointed out systematic correspondences between word
form and meaning in language. A prominent example of such
systematicity is iconicity, which occurs when the form of a
word is motivated by some perceptual (e.g. visual) aspect of
its referent. However, the existing data-driven approaches to
form-meaning systematicity modelled word meanings relying on information extracted from textual data alone. In this
paper, we investigate to what extent our visual experience explains some of the form-meaning systematicity found in language. We construct word meaning representations from linguistic as well as visual data and analyze the structure and
signiﬁcance of form-meaning systematicity found in English
using these models. Our ﬁndings corroborate the existence of
form-meaning systematicity and show that this systematicity
is concentrated in localized clusters. Furthermore, applying
a multimodal approach allows us to identify new patterns of
systematicity that have not been previously identiﬁed with the
text-based models.

1

Introduction

Linguistic arbitrariness refers to the notion that there are no
structural ties between words and their meanings. The concept of arbitrariness has been at the foundation of numerous
linguistic theories ever since its introduction in the ﬁeld of
linguistics by Ferdinand de Saussure in 1916 (De Saussure
and Baskin 1916). In The Origin of Speech, for example,
Charles Hockett (1960) argued that arbitrariness in “the ties
between meaningful message-elements and their meaning”
is a universal feature of human language, and a necessary
condition for extensive and ﬂexible communication (Hockett and Hockett 1960). Gasser (2004) introduced a formalized notion of arbitrariness as the absence of iconicity (i.e.
direct similarity relations between word form and meaning).
He argued that iconicity can facilitate early language acquisition since it reduces the information required to learn
form-meaning mappings. However, when a language becomes more extensive, iconicity limits the available space
for new words, i.e. the number of forms that can be related
to a meaning. This limitation of space causes overlap between the forms used for different meanings, and therefore
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8870

