The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bi-Directional Generation for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Guanglei Yang,† Haifeng Xia,‡ Mingli Ding,† Zhengming Ding∗
†

School of Instrument science and engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis

Department of Computer, Information and Technology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis
{yangguanglei, dingml}@hit.edu.cn, {haifxia, zd2}@iu.edu
‡

imizing domain shift through metrics such as correlation
distances (Yao et al. 2015; Sun, Feng, and Saenko 2016)
or maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Ding et al. 2018;
Ding and Fu 2018). Among the recent efforts on domain
adaption, several works (Pan et al. 2019; Pinheiro 2018;
Kang et al. 2019) aim to minimize the MMD-based distance of cross-domain in the deep neural network. For example, (Pan et al. 2019) applies the pairwise reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) between the prototypes of the
same class from different domains to reduce the discrepancy of cross-domain. (Kang et al. 2019) divides the domain discrepancy into two kinds of class-aware domain discrepancy. Another branch of domain adaptation is to exploit the domain adversarial training (Tzeng et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018; Saito et al. 2018). For example, (Saito
et al. 2018) maximizes the discrepancy between two classiﬁers’ outputs to determine target samples without the support of the source.

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation facilitates the unlabeled target domain relying on well-established source domain information. The conventional methods forcefully reducing the
domain discrepancy in the latent space will result in the destruction of intrinsic data structure. To balance the mitigation
of domain gap and the preservation of the inherent structure,
we propose a Bi-Directional Generation domain adaptation
model with consistent classiﬁers interpolating two intermediate domains to bridge source and target domains. Speciﬁcally,
two cross-domain generators are employed to synthesize one
domain conditioned on the other. The performance of our proposed method can be further enhanced by the consistent classiﬁers and the cross-domain alignment constraints. We also
design two classiﬁers which are jointly optimized to maximize the consistency on target sample prediction. Extensive
experiments verify that our proposed model outperforms the
state-of-the-art on standard cross domain visual benchmarks.

Introduction

Despite the success of previous methods, they suffer from
following limitations. First of all, almost methods apply
a shared generator, which means their domain adaption is
monodirectional. For example, DAN (Long et al. 2015)
aligns source domain to target domain. The features of the
target domain are merely simulated instead of positively taking part in domain adaption. Therefore, such methods cannot fully take advantage of the target data. Meanwhile, the
target data has many unknown factors because it may come
from complicated situations. The boundary among different
classes can be not clear, and thereby it hurts the knowledge
transfer. Secondly, most of the previous methods calculate
the domain discrepancy at the domain level, but they neglect the class level where the samples come. Class-agnostic
adaptation aligning source and target data at the domainlevel is possible to cause sub-optimal solutions. These solutions are likely to overﬁt in the source domain, causing
that performance in the target domain is not as expectancy.

Deep learning gains huge success in diverse applications
across many ﬁelds, such as computer vision, data mining,
and natural language processing. In practical application, it
is usually easy to acquire abundant target data. However,
the insufﬁciency and absence of labels is still a challenge
(Ding, Shao, and Fu 2018; Saito et al. 2018) leading to
exceedingly time-consuming and expensive manual annotation. To solve this problem, domain adaptation is introduced
and has shown excellent performance. It transfers knowledge from external well-labeled source domain to the target domain (Wei, Ke, and Goh 2016; Ding and Fu 2016;
Yan et al. 2017). The theory of domain adaptation is to discover the common latent factors across the source and target domains, and thereby reducing domain mismatch across
domains. Different domain adaptation methods have been
developed, such as feature alignment and domain confusion
adaptation (Pan et al. 2019).
A common practice in domain adaption is to align feature distribution between source and target domains by min-

To address these above issues, we propose a BiDirectional Generation (BDG) method for unsupervised domain adaptation with dual consistent classiﬁers. The dual
generators interpolate two intermediate domains and synthesize more effective data so that there are more samples
to train the classiﬁers. Meanwhile, the target samples are

∗
Corresponding author: Zhengming Ding (zd2@iu.edu). This
work is done under the supervision of Dr. Zhengming Ding.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6615

