The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CD-UAP: Class Discriminative Universal Adversarial Perturbation
Chaoning Zhang,* Philipp Benz,* Tooba Imtiaz, In-So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
*
Equal contribution
chaoningzhang1990@gmail.com, {pbenz, timtiaz, iskweon}@kaist.ac.kr

Images from
Images from
non-targeted classes targeted classes

Abstract
A single universal adversarial perturbation (UAP) can be
added to all natural images to change most of their predicted
class labels. It is of high practical relevance for an attacker to
have ﬂexible control over the targeted classes to be attacked,
however, the existing UAP method attacks samples from all
classes. In this work, we propose a new universal attack
method to generate a single perturbation that fools a target
network to misclassify only a chosen group of classes, while
having limited inﬂuence on the remaining classes. Since the
proposed attack generates a universal adversarial perturbation
that is discriminative to targeted and non-targeted classes, we
term it class discriminative universal adversarial perturbation
(CD-UAP). We propose one simple yet effective algorithm
framework, under which we design and compare various loss
function conﬁgurations tailored for the class discriminative
universal attack. The proposed approach has been evaluated
with extensive experiments on various benchmark datasets.
Additionally, our proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance for the original task of UAP attacking all classes,
which demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach.

Perturbation

Target Network

Class-wise accuracies

(fixed)

Figure 1: Class Discriminative Universal Adversarial Perturbation (CD-UAP). After adding the perturbation, the model
performance on a subset of classes (targeted classes) is signiﬁcantly reduced, while the inﬂuence on the non-targeted
classes is limited. We demonstrate this with the results
achieved on CIFAR10 dataset.
al. 2017). The universal nature has the practical beneﬁt that
the perturbations can be crafted in advance, which makes
them more convenient to use for an attacker. However, the
existing universal attacks (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2017;
Neekhara et al. 2019) fool the network for samples from every class, which can lead to obvious network misbehavior
and raise suspicion. Consequently, it can be of practical relevance for an attacker to have control over the classes to attack. A natural question arises whether it is possible to craft
a universal perturbation that fools the network only for certain classes while having minimal inﬂuence on other classes.
In this work, we propose the task of class discriminative
UAP (CD-UAP) as shown in Figure 1. To distinguish our
approach from the original UAP by Moosavi-Dezfooli et al.
we term their task of a UAP attacking all classes All-Classes
UAP (AC-UAP). AC-UAP can be seen as a special case of
CD-UAP when all classes are targeted. Nonetheless, in this
work by default, CD-UAP does not attack all classes. Ideally, the proposed CD-UAP negatively affects only the targeted classes. We argue that this property makes the CDUAP more covert than the AC-UAP. Strictly speaking, the
proposed attack falls no longer under the category of universal attacks, since it does not fool a network for samples
from every class. We still term it universal attack, since the
perturbation is still applied to all image samples (Moosavi-

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable
to malicious attacks of visually inconspicuous adversarial
examples (Szegedy et al. 2013; Qiu et al. 2019). The reason behind this intriguing DNN property is not fully understood (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Tanay and
Grifﬁn 2016), however, researchers have exploited this phenomenon to come up with various attack methods (Akhtar
and Mian 2018).
The existing adversarial attack methods can be categorized into image-dependent attacks and image-agnostic attacks (Akhtar and Mian 2018). Image-dependent attacks
craft perturbations that can fool the network for one speciﬁc input image. Due to the image-dependent nature, the
perturbations have to be crafted individually for each target image (Szegedy et al. 2013). On the other hand, imageagnostic attacks, also called universal attacks, craft one single perturbation for converting every image from a data distribution into an adversarial example (Moosavi-Dezfooli et
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6754

