The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁcient Inference of Optimal Decision Trees
Florent Avellaneda
Computer Research Institute of Montreal
ﬂorent.avellaneda@crim.ca

inferring models capable of explaining their own behaviour.
XAI has been the subject of several studies (Goebel et al.
2018; Li et al. 2018; Van Lent, Fisher, and Mancuso 2004;
Angelino et al. 2017), and several events (IJCAI XAI Workshop; NIPS IML Symposium; ACM FAT*). One approach
to obtain an explainable model is to use decision trees because the reasons for classiﬁcation are clearly deﬁned (Quinlan 1986).
To obtain accurate and explainable models, we are interested in the inference of optimal decision trees. The optimality of a decision tree is generally deﬁned by the simplicity
of the tree based on the principle of parsimony. The basic
simplicity criteria are the depth of the tree and the number of nodes. The problem of learning an optimal decision
tree is known to be NP-complete for these two basic criteria but also for several other deﬁnitions of optimality (Hyaﬁl
and Rivest 1976; Hancock et al. 1996) and it is also hard
to approximate up to any constant factor under the assumption P = N P (Sieling 2008; Alekhnovich et al. 2004). For
these reasons, the majority of known algorithms for inferring
decision trees are heuristics trying to minimize the number
of nodes without guaranteeing any optimality (Kass 1980;
Breiman et al. 1984; Quinlan 1986; 2014).
Despite the complexity of the problem and the efﬁciency
of the ﬁrst attempts to infer optimal decision trees, two studies have recently proposed approaches focused on improving the performance of algorithms inferring decision trees
with a minimum number of nodes (Bessiere, Hebrard, and
O’Sullivan 2009; Narodytska et al. 2018). Bessiere, Hebrard, and O’Sullivan propose a SAT formulation, but experiments show that the method only works for trees of up
to ﬁfteen nodes. Narodytska et al. propose a new SAT formulation that signiﬁcantly improves the performance of optimal decision tree inference. Thus, with their formulation,
Narodytska et al. were able to build a decision tree with a
minimum number of nodes in 13 seconds for the “Mouse”
dataset, while this required 9.6 minutes with the SAT formulation from Bessiere, Hebrard, and O’Sullivan. Narodytska
et al. note that their paper is the ﬁrst presentation of an optimal decision tree inference method working on well-known
datasets.
In this paper, we also use a SAT solver to infer optimal

Abstract
Inferring a decision tree from a given dataset is a classic problem in machine learning. This problem consists of building,
from a labelled dataset, a tree where each node corresponds
to a class and a path between the tree root and a leaf corresponds to a conjunction of features to be satisﬁed in this class.
Following the principle of parsimony, we want to infer a minimal tree consistent with the dataset. Unfortunately, inferring
an optimal decision tree is NP-complete for several deﬁnitions of optimality. For this reason, the majority of existing
approaches rely on heuristics, and the few existing exact approaches do not work on large datasets. In this paper, we propose a novel approach for inferring an optimal decision tree
with a minimum depth based on the incremental generation
of Boolean formulas. The experimental results indicate that
it scales sufﬁciently well and the time it takes to run grows
slowly with the size of datasets.

Introduction
In machine learning, the problem of classiﬁcation consists
of inferring a model of a given system from its observations (also called training examples) that make it possible
to identify which class of a set of classes a new observation belongs to. When the training examples used to infer a
model are assigned to the classes to which they belong, it
is called supervised learning. Many machine learning models exist to solve this problem, such as support vector machines (Cortes and Vapnik 1995), artiﬁcial neural networks
(McCulloch and Pitts 1943), decision trees (Breiman et al.
1984). Since inferring such models is complicated and training examples are generally numerous, most existing inference algorithms are heuristic in the sense that the algorithms
infer models without any guarantee of optimality.
Although heuristic-based techniques generally work well,
there are often cases where a new example is not correctly
recognized by the model. In the context of critical systems in
which errors are not allowed, such models are problematic.
This precision requirement is frequently associated with the
demand that models must also be understandable. This area,
known as eXplainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI), aims at
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3195

