The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reliability Does Matter: An
End-to-End Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation Approach
Bingfeng Zhang,1 Jimin Xiao,1∗ Yunchao Wei,2 Mingjie Sun,1 Kaizhu Huang1,3
1

Xi’an Jiaotong-liverpool University, Suzhou, China
2
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, Hangzhou, China
1
{Bingfeng.Zhang, jimin.xiao, mingjie.sun18, kaizhu huang}@xjtlu.edu.cn, 2 yunchao.wei@uts.edu.au

since there is no direct mapping between semantic labels and
pixels.

Abstract
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation is a challenging
task as it only takes image-level information as supervision
for training but produces pixel-level predictions for testing. To
address such a challenging task, most recent state-of-the-art
approaches propose to adopt two-step solutions, i.e. 1) learn
to generate pseudo pixel-level masks, and 2) engage FCNs
to train the semantic segmentation networks with the pseudo
masks. However, the two-step solutions usually employ many
bells and whistles in producing high-quality pseudo masks,
making this kind of methods complicated and inelegant. In
this work, we harness the image-level labels to produce reliable pixel-level annotations and design a fully end-to-end
network to learn to predict segmentation maps. Concretely, we
ﬁrstly leverage an image classiﬁcation branch to generate class
activation maps for the annotated categories, which are further pruned into conﬁdent yet tiny object/background regions.
Such reliable regions are then directly served as ground-truth
labels for the parallel segmentation branch, where a newly designed dense energy loss function is adopted for optimization.
Despite its apparent simplicity, our one-step solution achieves
competitive mIoU scores (val: 62.6, test: 62.9) on Pascal VOC
compared with those two-step state-of-the-arts. By extending
our one-step method to two-step, we get a new state-of-the-art
performance on the Pascal VOC (val: 66.3, test: 66.5).

To learn semantic segmentation models using image-level
labels as supervision, many existing approaches can be categorized as one-step approaches and two-step approaches.
One-step approaches (Papandreou et al. 2015) often establish
an end-to-end framework, which augments multi-instance
learning with other constrained strategies for optimization.
This family of methods is elegant and easy to implement.
However, one signiﬁcant drawback of these approaches is that
the segmentation accuracy is far behind their fully supervised
counterparts. To achieve better segmentation performance,
many researchers alternatively propose to leverage two-step
approaches (Wei et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2018). This family of approaches usually aim to take bottom-up (Hou et al.
2017) or top-down (Zhang et al. 2018a; Zhou et al. 2016)
strategies to ﬁrstly generate high-quality pseudo pixel-level
masks with image-level labels as supervision. These pseudo
masks then act as ground-truth and are fed into the off-theshelf fully convolutional networks such as FCN (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) and Deeplab (Chen et al. 2014;
2018a) to train the semantic segmentation models. Current
state-of-the-arts are mainly two-step approaches, with segmentation performance approaching that of their fully supervised counterparts. However, to produce high-quality
pseudo masks, these approaches often employ many bells and
whistles, such as introducing additional object/background
cues from object proposals (Pinheiro and Collobert 2015) or
saliency maps (Jiang et al. 2013) in an off-line manner. Therefore, the two-step approaches are usually very complicated
and hard to be re-implemented, limiting their application to
research areas such as object localization and video object
tracking.

Introduction
Recently, weakly supervised semantic segmentation receives
great interest and is being extensively studied. Requiring
merely low degree (cheaper or simpler) annotations including
scribbles (Lin et al. 2016; Vernaza and Chandraker 2017;
Tang et al. 2018b), bounding boxes (Dai, He, and Sun 2015;
Khoreva et al. 2017), points (Maninis et al. 2018; Bearman et
al. 2016) and image-level labels (Ahn and Kwak 2018; Hou
et al. 2018; Wei et al. 2018) for training, weakly supervised
semantic segmentation offers a much easy way than its fully
supervised counterpart adopting pixel-level masks (Chen et
al. 2018a; 2017; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015). Among
these weakly supervised labels, the image-level annotation is
the simplest one to collect yet also the most challenging case

In this paper, we present a simple yet effective one-step approach, which can be easily trained in an end-to-end manner.
It achieves competitive segmentation performance compared
with two-step approaches. Our approach named Reliable Region Mining (RRM) includes two branches: one to produce
pseudo pixel-level masks using image-level annotations, and
the other to produce the semantic segmentation results. In
contrast to the previous two-step state-of-the-arts (Ahn and
Kwak 2018; Lee et al. 2019) that prefer to mine dense and

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12765

