The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Leveraging Multi-View Image Sets for Unsupervised
Intrinsic Image Decomposition and Highlight Separation
Renjiao Yi,1 Ping Tan,1 Stephen Lin2
1

Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{renjiaoy, pingtan}@sfu.ca, stevelin@microsoft.com

Snavely 2018b; Ma et al. 2018). With images from such a
sequence, these methods guide network training by exploiting the albedo consistency that exists for each scene point
throughout the sequence.
A beneﬁt of using image sequences of ﬁxed scenes is that
the images are perfectly aligned, allowing scene point consistency to be easily utilized. However, there exists an untapped wealth of image data captured of objects from different viewpoints. A prominent example of such data is customer product photos uploaded by consumers to show items
they bought. Some example customer photos are shown in
Figure 1. This source of imagery is valuable not just because of its vast quantity online, but also because it provides
object-centric data (different from the scene data compiled
in (Li and Snavely 2018b) from webcams) and can promote
robustness of factorizations to different object orientations.
These images also exhibit a larger variation in illumination
conditions and camera settings, which can potentially beneﬁt the trained network. An issue with using such images
though is that they are difﬁcult to align accurately, as they
vary in viewpoint, lighting and imaging device. Misalignment among the images of an object would lead to violations
of scene point consistency on which the existing unsupervised methods are based.
In this paper, we present an unsupervised method for reﬂectance layer separation using multi-view image sets such
as customer product photos. To effectively learn from such
data, our system is designed so that its training is relatively insensitive to misalignments. After approximately
aligning images with state-of-the-art correspondence estimation techniques (Rocco, Arandjelovic, and Sivic 2018;
Ilg et al. 2017), the network transforms the images into a
proposed representation based on local color distributions.
An important property of this representation is its ability to
model detailed local content over an object in a manner that
discards ﬁne-scale positional information. With this color
distribution based descriptor, unsupervised training becomes
possible using consistency constraints between multi-view
images of an object.
An additional contribution of this work is a method for
further guiding the unsupervised training via a relationship
between highlight separation and intrinsic decomposition of

Abstract
We present an unsupervised approach for factorizing object
appearance into highlight, shading, and albedo layers, trained
by multi-view real images. To do so, we construct a multiview dataset by collecting numerous customer product photos
online, which exhibit large illumination variations that make
them suitable for training of reﬂectance separation and can
facilitate object-level decomposition. The main contribution
of our approach is a proposed image representation based
on local color distributions that allows training to be insensitive to the local misalignments of multi-view images. In addition, we present a new guidance cue for unsupervised training
that exploits synergy between highlight separation and intrinsic image decomposition. Over a broad range of objects, our
technique is shown to yield state-of-the-art results for both of
these tasks.

Introduction
Separating reﬂectance layers in an image is an essential step
for various image editing and scene understanding tasks.
One such layer is composed of highlights, which are mirrorlike reﬂections off the surface of objects. Extracting highlights from an image can be useful for problems such as
estimating scene illumination (Lombardi and Nishino 2016;
Yi et al. 2018) and reducing the oily appearance of faces (Li,
Zhou, and Lin 2015). The other two layers represent shading
and albedo. Their separation is commonly known as intrinsic image decomposition, which has been utilized in applications such as shading-based scene reconstruction (Yu et
al. 2013; Or-El et al. 2015) and texture replacement in images (Weiss 2001; Jeon et al. 2014).
Factorizing an image into the three reﬂectance layers is an
ill-posed problem that is best solved at present through machine learning. However, obtaining large-scale ground-truth
data for training deep neural networks remains a challenge,
and this has motivated recent work on developing unsupervised schemes for the reﬂectance separation problem. The
unsupervised techniques that have been presented thus far all
take the same approach of training a network on image sequences of a ﬁxed scene under changing illumination (Li and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12685

