The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Complexity and Expressive Power of Disjunction and Negation in Limit Datalog
Mark Kaminski, Bernardo Cuenca Grau, Egor V. Kostylev, Ian Horrocks
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
{mark.kaminski, bernardo.cuenca.grau, egor.kostylev, ian.horrocks}@cs.ox.ac.uk

functions over the integers that is expressive enough to capture the core features of existing declarative languages for
data analysis. In limit Datalog programs, all intensional
predicates with a numeric argument are limit predicates that
keep maximal (or minimal) bounds on numeric values. For
example, if we encode a directed graph with weighted edges
using a ternary predicate edge, then rules (1) and (2), with
dist a min limit predicate, compute the cost of a shortest
path from a source node as to each other node in the graph.

Abstract
Limit Datalog is a fragment of DatalogZ —the extension of
Datalog with arithmetic functions over the integers—which
has been proposed as a declarative language suitable for capturing data analysis tasks. In limit Datalog programs, all intensional predicates with a numeric argument are limit predicates that keep maximal (or minimal) bounds on numeric values. Furthermore, to ensure decidability of reasoning, limit
Datalog imposes a linearity condition restricting the use of
multiplication in rules. In this paper, we study the complexity and expressive power of limit Datalog programs extended
with disjunction in the heads of rules and non-monotonic
negation under the stable model semantics. We show that allowing for unrestricted use of negation leads to undecidability
of reasoning. Decidability can be restored by stratifying the
use of negation over predicates carrying numeric values. We
show that the resulting language is ΠEXP
2 -complete in combined complexity and that it captures ΠP2 over ordered structures in the sense of descriptive complexity. We also provide a
study of several fragments of this language: we show that the
complexity and expressive power of the full language are already reached for disjunction-free programs; furthermore, we
show that semi-positive disjunctive programs are coNEXPcomplete and that they capture coNP.

1

→ dist(as , 0)
dist(x, m) ∧ edge(x, y, n) → dist(y, m + n)

(1)
(2)

Intuitively, rule (2) says that, if x is reachable from as with
cost at most m and (x, y) is an edge of cost n, then y is
reachable from as with cost at most m + n. If the rules and
a dataset entail a fact dist(a, ), then the length of a shortest
path from as to a is at most ; so, dist(a, k) holds for each
k ≥  since the cost of a shortest path is also at most k.
To ensure decidability, limit Datalog imposes a linearity
condition restricting the use of multiplication. Under this restriction, fact entailment for semi-positive limit programs is
coNEXP-complete in combined and coNP-complete in data
complexity (Kaminski et al. 2017), whereas for programs
with stratiﬁed negation fact entailment is ΔEXP
2 -complete
and ΔP2 -complete, respectively (Kaminski et al. 2018).
In this paper, we study limit Datalog programs equipped
with disjunction in the head of rules and non-monotonic
negation in the body. We ﬁrst observe that allowing for unrestricted use of negation as failure leads to undecidability of
reasoning, which holds even for disjunction-free programs
satisfying the linearity condition. Thus, to obtain decidability we restrict the use of negation: while still allowing unrestricted application of negation to atoms without a numeric
argument, we require that negation over atoms with numeric arguments is stratiﬁed. We call the resulting programs
numerically stratiﬁed. The resulting language extends both
stratiﬁed limit-linear Datalog (Kaminski et al. 2018) and disjunctive Datalog with negation under the stable model certain semantics (Eiter, Gottlob, and Mannila 1997).
We show that fact entailment for numerically stratiﬁed
P
programs is ΠEXP
2 -complete in combined and Π2 -complete
in data complexity, where the lower bounds hold already

Introduction

Declarative languages underpinning existing rule-based reasoning engines for data analysis, such as BOOM (Alvaro et al. 2010), DeALS (Yang, Shkapsky, and Zaniolo
2017), Myria (Wang, Balazinska, and Halperin 2015), SociaLite (Seo, Guo, and Lam 2015), Overlog (Loo et al.
2009), Dyna (Eisner and Filardo 2011), and Yedalog (Chin
et al. 2015), can be seen as extensions of Datalog where
rules are equipped with arithmetic functions and aggregation
to capture quantitative aspects of the data. These languages
are, however, trivially undecidable due to the interaction between recursion and numeric computations in rules.
Kaminski et al. [2017; 2018] have recently proposed the
language of limit Datalog programs—a decidable variant
of Datalog equipped with stratiﬁed negation and arithmetic
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2862

