The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

COBRA: Context-Aware Bernoulli Neural Networks for Reputation Assessment
Leonit Zeynalvand,1 Tie Luo,2 Jie Zhang1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Department of Computer Science, Missouri University of Science and Technology, USA
leonit001@e.ntu.edu.sg, tluo@mst.edu, zhangj@ntu.edu.sg

IoT), ﬁrst-hand evidence becomes too sparse to support reliable trust evaluation. Hence, second-hand evidence was exploited by researchers to supplement ﬁrst-hand evidence. In
that case, Alice would assign a trust score to Bob based not
only on her own interactions with Bob but also on what other
agents advise about Bob.
However, what form the second-hand evidence should
take has been largely overlooked. This engenders an important issue which we refer to as the accuracy-privacy
dilemma. To illustrate this, suppose Alice consults another
agent Judy about how trustworthy Bob is. One way is to
let Judy give a trust score or rating about Bob (Yu et al.
2013), which is the approach commonly adopted in the trust
research community. This approach is simple but loses the
context information of the interactions between agents. For
example, the context could be the transaction time and location, and service provided by an agent during off-peak hours
could have higher quality (more SLA-conformant) than during peak hours. Without such context information, trust assessment based on just ratings or scores would have lower
accuracy. On the other hand, another method is to let Judy
reveal her entire interaction history with Bob (e.g., in the
form of a detailed review), which is the approach commonly
used in recommender systems. Although the information
disclosed as such is helpful for trust assessment of Bob, it
is likely to expose substantial privacy of Bob and Judy to
Alice and possibly the public.2
To address this accuracy-privacy dilemma, and in the
meantime avoid relying on a trusted third-party which is often not available in practice, we propose a framework called
Context-aware Bernoulli Neural Network based Reputation
Assessment (COBRA). It encapsulates the detailed secondhand evidence using machine learning models, and then aggregate these model using a Bernoulli neural network (BNN)
to predict the trustworthiness of an agent of interest (e.g., an
IoT service provider). The encapsulation protects agent privacy and retains the context information to enable more accurate trust assessment, and the BNN accepts the outputs of
those ML models and the information-seeking agent’s (Alice’ as in the above example) ﬁrst-hand evidence as input, to
make more accurate trustworthiness prediction (of Bob as in

Abstract
Trust and reputation management (TRM) plays an increasingly important role in large-scale online environments such
as multi-agent systems (MAS) and the Internet of Things
(IoT). One main objective of TRM is to achieve accurate trust
assessment of entities such as agents or IoT service providers.
However, this encounters an accuracy-privacy dilemma as we
identify in this paper, and we propose a framework called
Context-aware Bernoulli Neural Network based Reputation
Assessment (COBRA) to address this challenge. COBRA encapsulates agent interactions or transactions, which are prone
to privacy leak, in machine learning models, and aggregates
multiple such models using a Bernoulli neural network to predict a trust score for an agent. COBRA preserves agent privacy and retains interaction contexts via the machine learning models, and achieves more accurate trust prediction than
a fully-connected neural network alternative. COBRA is also
robust to security attacks by agents who inject fake machine
learning models; notably, it is resistant to the 51-percent attack. The performance of COBRA is validated by our experiments using a real dataset, and by our simulations, where
we also show that COBRA outperforms other state-of-the-art
TRM systems.

1

Introduction

Trust and reputation management (TRM) systems are critical to large-scale online environments such as multi-agent
systems (MAS) and the Internet of Things (IoT), where
agents1 are more autonomous and tend to have more interactions with each other. Without a reliable TRM system, such
interactions will be signiﬁcantly hindered due to lack of trust
in services or information provided by other agents. Formal
contracts such as Service Level Agreements (SLA) are hard
to enforce in such open environments because of high cost
and lack of central authorities.
Early TRM systems such as (Josang and Ismail 2002)
rely on ﬁrst-hand evidence to derive trust scores of agents.
For example, an agent Alice assigns a trust score to another
agent Bob based on the outcome of her previous interactions
with Bob. However, as the scale of the systems grows (e.g.,
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Throughout this paper, we use the term agents in a broader
sense which is not limited to agents in MAS, but also includes IoT
service providers and consumers as well as other similar cases.

2

Recommender systems can take this approach because they
are generally considered trusted intermediaries, and they focus on
preference modeling rather than trust and reputation modelling.
7317

