The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph Representation Learning via Ladder Gamma Variational Autoencoders
Arindam Sarkar,1∗ Nikhil Mehta,2∗ Piyush Rai3
1

2

Amazon India
Duke University
3
IIT Kanpur

latent variables that denote node membership to communities, the graph neural network based methods, such as graph
convolutional networks (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2016a)
and its variants (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017a) are
appealing since they enable learning multilayer representation for the nodes in the graph, which has been shown to
achieve impressive results on link-prediction and node classiﬁcation.
However, both stochastic blockmodels as well as graph
neural networks have their own shortcomings. In particular,
despite providing nice interpretability for the node embeddings, the powerful variants of stochastic blockmodels such
as mixed-membership blockmodels (Airoldi et al. 2008)
and overlapping stochastic blockmodels (Miller, Jordan, and
Grifﬁths 2009; Zhou 2015) are especially difﬁcult to do inference on (relying on expensive MCMC or variational inference), and are difﬁcult to scale. On the other hand, the
recently proposed graph neural networks lack a proper generative story, do not have a mechanism to do model selection
(e.g., inferring the size of node embeddings), and the learned
embeddings do not have a direct interpretability (required
for tasks such as community discovery).
In this work, we develop a deep generative framework for
graph-structured data that enjoys the natural advantages of
stochastic blockmodels and graph neural networks, while
also addressing their limitations/shortcomings in a principled manner. Our framework is based on a novel, gamma
ladder variational autoencoder (VAE) architecture, which allows each node in the graph to be modeled by multiple layers
of gamma-distributed latent variables (which represent multiple layers of embeddings for each node). The probability
of each link in the graph is a nonlinear function (modeled
by a deep neural network) of the node embeddings of the
associated nodes.
While existing ladder VAE architectures (Sønderby et al.
2016) typically assume dense, Gaussian distributed latent
variables in each layer, the gamma-distributed embeddings
in our ladder VAE architecture naturally provide sparsity and
interpretability as desired for the node embeddings. These
sparse, non-negative, and multilayed embeddings can be
readily used for discovering overlapping community structure that allows each node to belong to potentially more

Abstract
We present a probabilistic framework for community discovery and link prediction for graph-structured data, based on a
novel, gamma ladder variational autoencoder (VAE) architecture. We model each node in the graph via a deep hierarchy of
gamma-distributed embeddings, and deﬁne each link probability via a nonlinear function of the bottom-most layer’s embeddings of its associated nodes. In addition to leveraging the
representational power of multiple layers of stochastic variables via the ladder VAE architecture, our framework offers
the following beneﬁts: (1) Unlike existing ladder VAE architectures based on real-valued latent variables, the gammadistributed latent variables naturally result in non-negativity
and sparsity of the learned embeddings, and facilitate their
direct interpretation as membership of nodes into (possibly
multiple) communities/topics; (2) A novel recognition model
for our gamma ladder VAE architecture allows fast inference
of node embeddings; and (3) The framework also extends naturally to incorporate node side information (features and/or
labels). Our framework is also fairly modular and can leverage a wide variety of graph neural networks as the VAE encoder. We report both quantitative and qualitative results on
several benchmark datasets and compare our model with several state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Representation learning for the nodes in a graph is an important problem in a wide range of applications involving
graph-structured data, such as community discovery, linkprediction, node classiﬁcation, etc (Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017b). Some of the prominent prior works in this
direction include stochastic blockmodels and variants (Nowicki and Snijders 2001; Miller, Jordan, and Grifﬁths 2009;
Airoldi et al. 2008; Latouche, Birmelé, and Ambroise 2011)
and, more recently, graph neural networks (Perozzi, AlRfou, and Skiena 2014; Kipf and Welling 2016a; Hamilton,
Ying, and Leskovec 2017a). While stochastic blockmodels
and their variants are effective at learning the underlying latent structure (e.g., community structure) of the graph using
∗
Equal Contribution. Majority of the work was done when
Arindam and Nikhil were at IIT Kanpur.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5604

