The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Enhancing Natural Language Inference Using New
and Expanded Training Data Sets and New Learning Models
Arindam Mitra,∗ Ishan Shrivastava,∗ Chitta Baral
Arizona State University
{amitra7, ishrivas, chitta}@asu.edu

premise: A soccer game with multiple males playing.
hypothesis: Some men are playing a sport.
label: entailment.
premise: A man in a black shirt is playing golf outside.
hypothesis: The man in the black shirt trades Pokemon
cards with his girlfriend.
label: contradiction.
premise: A girl swings high in the air.
hypothesis: A girl is gaining momentum to ﬂip off the
swing
label: neutral.

Abstract
Natural Language Inference (NLI) plays an important role in
many natural language processing tasks such as question answering. However, existing NLI modules that are trained on
existing NLI datasets have several drawbacks. For example,
they do not capture the notion of entity and role well and often end up making mistakes such as “Peter signed a deal” can
be inferred from “John signed a deal”. As part of this work,
we have developed two datasets that help mitigate such issues and make the systems better at understanding the notion
of “entities” and “roles”. After training the existing models
on the new dataset we observe that the existing models do
not perform well on one of the new benchmark. We then propose a modiﬁcation to the “word-to-word” attention function
which has been uniformly reused across several popular NLI
architectures. The resulting models perform as well as their
unmodiﬁed counterparts on the existing benchmarks and perform signiﬁcantly well on the new benchmarks that emphasize “roles” and “entities”.

Table 1: Example premise-hypothesis pairs from SNLI
dataset with human-annotated labels.
Q: What is the middle stage in a frog’s life?
(A) tadpole with legs (B) froglet
In that paper NLI is used to answer the above question in
the following way. Using the two answer choices two natural
language textual hypothesis: “Tadpole with legs is the middle stage in a frog’s life” and “Froglet is the middle stage
in a frog’s life” are constructed. Then NLI is used to compute the degree of entailment between the textual premise
Frog-LC and each of the textual hypothesis and answer between (A) and (B) based on the degree of entailments with
respect to the corresponding textual hypothesis. Such an approach of using NLI for question answering is very attractive
as the alternative of extracting relevant facts from the textual premise Frog-LC, translating the question and answer
choices to formal representations, and connecting them has
multiple avenues where error can be introduced. Having said
that, to make the approach of using NLI for QA more useful one needs better NLI systems. Moreover since most NLI
systems are developed using supervised learning over NLI
datasets, there is a need for good and comprehensive NLI
datasets.
Recently several large scale datasets have been produced
to advance the state-of-the-art in NLI. One such dataset is
SNLI which contains a total of 570k premise-hypothesis
pairs. However, several top performing systems on SNLI
struggle when they are subjected to examples which require

Introduction
Natural language inference (NLI) is the task of determining
the truth value of a natural language text, called “hypothesis” given another piece of text called “premise”. The list of
possible truth values include entailment, contradiction and
neutral. Entailment means that the hypothesis must be true if
the premise is true. Contradiction indicates that the hypothesis can never be true if the premise is true. Neutral pertains
to the scenario where the hypothesis can be both true and
false as the premise does not provide enough information.
Table 1 shows an example of each of the three cases.
NLI has many applications in natural language processing and natural language understanding. In particular, it can
be used in various natural language question answering domains. For example, in (Mitra et al. 2019) NLI is used in
question answering on some of the ARISTO science question answering domains. In one of the example domains
of that paper, text (Frog-LC) about life cycle of a Frog is
given. With respect to that text questions and possible answer choices are given. One example of that is:
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8504

