The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Symmetrical Synthesis for Deep Metric Learning
Geonmo Gu,∗ Byungsoo Ko∗
Clova Vision, NAVER Corp.
{korgm403, kobiso62}@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep metric learning aims to learn embeddings that contain semantic similarity information among data points. To
learn better embeddings, methods to generate synthetic hard
samples have been proposed. Existing methods of synthetic
hard sample generation are adopting autoencoders or generative adversarial networks, but this leads to more hyperparameters, harder optimization, and slower training speed.
In this paper, we address these problems by proposing a novel
method of synthetic hard sample generation called symmetrical synthesis. Given two original feature points from the same
class, the proposed method ﬁrstly generates synthetic points
with each other as an axis of symmetry. Secondly, it performs
hard negative pair mining within the original and synthetic
points to select a more informative negative pair for computing the metric learning loss. Our proposed method is hyperparameter free and plug-and-play for existing metric learning
losses without network modiﬁcation. We demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method over existing methods for
a variety of loss functions on clustering and image retrieval
tasks.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed symmetrical synthesis with two steps. First, given positive points (xi , xj ) and
negative points (xk , xl ) in an embedding space, the nega

tive points generate their synthetic points (xk , xl ) with each
other as an axis of symmetry. Secondly, it selects the hardest negative point within the four feature points: two orig
inal points and two synthetic points. In the ﬁgure, xk will
be selected. Rectangles and circles represent two different
classes. Green and blue points are original features while
red points with dotted boundary are synthetic features.

Introduction

The objective of deep metric learning is to learn an embedding space where semantically similar images are embedded close together, and semantically dissimilar images
are embedded far apart. Many recent deep metric learning approaches are built on similarity or distance between
pairs of samples. Contrastive loss (Chopra et al. 2005) and
triplet loss (Weinberger and Saul 2009) are both conventional losses that consider pair and triplet feature points, respectively. Recent works (Sohn 2016; Oh Song et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2017) have modiﬁed the structures of loss functions to contain richer information by considering multiple
feature points, and they have achieved competitive performances. Along with the importance of the loss function,
sampling strategy is also known to be essential for effective training. Different sampling strategies can lead to drastically different performances for the same loss function.

This has motivated recent works to focus on sampling strategies, such as hard negative pair mining (Hermans, Beyer,
and Leibe 2017), semi-hard negative pair mining (Schroff,
Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015), and soft-hard mining (Yu
et al. 2018). However, mining strategies could lead to a biased model because they usually account for a small selected minority and a large non-selected majority (Wu et al.
2017; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015; Zheng et al.
2019).
To address this problem, recent works (Duan et al. 2018;
Zhao et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2019) have proposed using
generative adversarial networks and autoencoders to generate synthetic hard samples. These methods enable nonselected majorities to be exploited by synthesizing them into
hard samples and training a model with augmented information. Despite a performance boost of deep metric learning,
it also suffers from several limitations. First, along with a

∗

Authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10853

