The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Zero-Resource Cross-Lingual Named Entity Recognition
M Saiful Bari, ¶ Shaﬁq Joty, ¶§ Prathyusha Jwalapuram ¶
¶ Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
§ Salesforce Research Asia, Singapore

{bari0001, jwal0001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, srjoty@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

As many languages lack suitable corpora annotated with
named entities, there have been eﬀorts to design models for
cross-lingual transfer learning. This oﬀers an attractive solution that allows us to leverage annotated data from a source
language (e.g., English) to recognize named entities in a target language (e.g., German). One possible way to build such
a cross-lingual NER system is to encode knowledge about
the target language as constraints to regularize the training,
which has been tried before for part-of-speech (POS) tagging
(Ganchev et al. 2010). However, this would require extensive
knowledge of the target language.

Recently, neural methods have achieved state-of-the-art
(SOTA) results in Named Entity Recognition (NER) tasks
for many languages without the need for manually crafted features. However, these models still require manually annotated
training data, which is not available for many languages. In
this paper, we propose an unsupervised cross-lingual NER
model that can transfer NER knowledge from one language to
another in a completely unsupervised way without relying on
any bilingual dictionary or parallel data. Our model achieves
this through word-level adversarial learning and augmented
ﬁne-tuning with parameter sharing and feature augmentation.
Experiments on ﬁve diﬀerent languages demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, outperforming existing models
by a good margin and setting a new SOTA for each language
pair.

Another way is to perform cross-language projection. Most
projection-based methods use a parallel sentence-aligned
bilingual corpus, or a bi-text. For example, Yarowsky et al.
(2001) use an English NER tagger on the English side of
a bi-text, then project its token-level predictions to the target side, and ﬁnally train a NER tagger on them. Wang and
Manning (2014) project model expectations and use them
as constraints rather than directly projecting labels, to better
transfer information and uncertainty across languages. Joint
learning of NER tags and cross-lingual word alignments has
also been proposed (Wang, Che, and Manning 2013). Overall, all of these methods require a bi-text with NER tags on
one side, which is not typical for low-resource languages.
Sentence-aligned parallel corpora are often not available for
low-resource languages, and building such corpora could be
even more expensive than building the NER dataset.

Introduction
Named-entity recognition (NER) is a tagging task that seeks
to locate and classify named entities in a text into predeﬁned
semantic types such as person, organization, location, etc. It
has been a challenging problem mainly because there is not
enough labeled data for most languages to learn the speciﬁc
patterns for words that are part of a named entity. It is also
harder to generalize from a small dataset since there can be
a wide and often unconstrained variation in what constitutes
names. Traditional methods relied on carefully designed orthographic features and language or domain-speciﬁc knowledge sources like gazetteers.
With the ongoing neural tsunami, most recent approaches
use deep neural networks to circumvent the expensive steps of
designing informative features and constructing knowledge
sources (Lample et al. 2016; Ma and Hovy 2016; Strubell
et al. 2017; Peters et al. 2017; Akbik, Blythe, and Vollgraf
2018; Devlin et al. 2018). However, crucial to their success
is the availability of large amounts of labeled training data.
Unfortunately, building large labeled datasets for each new
language of interest is expensive and time-consuming and
we need fairly educated manpower to do the annotation.

It is only recently that researchers have proposed crosslingual NER models for low-resource languages. Lin et al.
(2018) propose a multi-lingual multi-task architecture to develop supervised NER models with minimal amount of labeled data in the target language. Xie et al. (2018) propose an
unsupervised transfer model by projecting source language
tags into the target language through word-to-word translation using the unsupervised word translation model of Conneau et al. (2017). However, this approach has several key
limitations. First, for each target language, they need to translate from source to target and learn a brand new NER model.
For this, they have to pre-compute a translation dictionary
based on nearest neighbour search over the vocabulary items,
which is often computationally expensive (e.g., fasttext-enwiki has ∼2M items). This makes it diﬃcult to scale time-

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7415

