The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multiple Birds with One Stone: Beating 1/2
for EFX and GMMS via Envy Cycle Elimination
Georgios Amanatidis,1 Evangelos Markakis,2 Apostolos Ntokos2
1

Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering
Sapienza University of Rome
amanatidis@diag.uniroma1.it
2
Department of Informatics
Athens University of Economics and Business
{markakis, apostntok}@gmail.com
for the context of indivisible goods. The most prominent
examples, that are also the focus of our work, include the
notions of envy-freeness up to one good (EF1) and up to
any good (EFX), maximin share fairness (MMS), as well as
pairwise and groupwise maximin share fairness (PMMS and
GMMS respectively). These relatively new concepts breathed
new life into the ﬁeld of fair division, but they do not come
without their issues. Most importantly, although they are generally easier to satisfy than envy-freeness, proving existence
results has turned out to be a very challenging task (with
the exception of EF1). For instance, it is an open problem to
resolve whether EFX or PMMS allocations always exist, even
for three agents with additive valuation functions. Surprisingly, existence remains unresolved even when the number
of items is just slightly larger than the number of agents.
A reasonable approach is to focus on approximate versions
of these relaxations. Indeed, this has led to a series of positive
results, obtaining constant factor approximation algorithms
for all the aforementioned relaxed criteria (see Related Work).
However, improving on the currently known factors seems to
be approaching a stagnation point. For example, soon after
the introduction of EFX, a 1/2-approximation was established
(Plaut and Roughgarden 2018), but there has been no progress
beyond 1/2, despite the active interest on this notion.
We should also stress that these notions capture quite different aspects of fairness. A good approximation of any one
of EF1, EFX, MMS and PMMS does not necessarily imply particularly strong guarantees for any of the others (Amanatidis,
Birmpas, and Markakis 2018). Hence, it becomes compelling
to ask for allocations that attain good guarantees with respect to several fairness notions simultaneously. Such results
are rather scarce in the literature, e.g., (Barman et al. 2018;
Garg and McGlaughlin 2019) or are purely existential (Caragiannis et al. 2019).
Motivated by the lack of such universally fair algorithms,
we look at the problem of computing allocations that (approximately) satisfy several fairness notions at the same time.
Along the way, we aim to improve the state-of-the-art for two
of these notions, namely EFX and GMMS. Somewhat unexpectedly, to do so we rely on simple subroutines that have
been repeatedly used in fair division before.
Contribution. Our main contribution is an algorithm that is

Abstract
Several relaxations of envy-freeness, tailored to fair division
in settings with indivisible goods, have been introduced within
the last decade. Due to the lack of general existence results for
most of these concepts, great attention has been paid to establishing approximation guarantees. In this work, we propose
a simple algorithm that is universally fair in the sense that it
returns allocations that have good approximation guarantees
with respect to four such fairness notions at once. In particular,
this is the ﬁrst algorithm achieving a (φ − 1)-approximation of
2
envy-freeness up to any good (EFX) and a φ+2
-approximation
of groupwise maximin share fairness (GMMS), where φ is the
golden ratio. The best known approximation factor, in polynomial time, for either one of these fairness notions prior to
this work was 1/2. Moreover, the returned allocation achieves
envy-freeness up to one good (EF1) and a 2/3-approximation
of pairwise maximin share fairness (PMMS). While EFX is our
primary focus, we also exhibit how to ﬁne-tune our algorithm
and improve further the guarantees for GMMS or PMMS.
Finally, we show that GMMS—and thus PMMS and EFX—
allocations always exist when the number of goods does not
exceed the number of agents by more than two.

1

Introduction

The mathematical study of fair division has a long and intriguing history, starting with the formal introduction of the cakecutting problem by Banach, Knaster and Steinhaus (Steinhaus
1948). Ever since, we have seen the emergence of several
fairness criteria, such as the classic notion of envy-freeness,
that has a dominant role in the literature, see e.g., (Brandt et
al. 2016) and references therein. On the other hand, the computational study of ﬁnding fair allocations when the resources
are indivisible items is more recent. It is motivated by the realization that envy-freeness and other classic fairness notions
are too demanding for the discrete setting. In particular, even
with two agents and one item, it is impossible to produce
an allocation with any reasonable worst-case approximation
guarantee with respect to envy-freeness.
Within the last decade, these considerations have led to
natural relaxations of envy-freeness, which are more suitable
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1790

