The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CoCoX: Generating Conceptual and Counterfactual Explanations via Fault-Lines
Arjun R. Akula,1 Shuai Wang,2 Song-Chun Zhu1
1

UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy
2
University of Illinois at Chicago
aakula@ucla.edu, shuaiwanghk@gmail.com, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
We present CoCoX (short for Conceptual and Counterfactual Explanations), a model for explaining decisions made
by a deep convolutional neural network (CNN). In Cognitive Psychology, the factors (or semantic-level features) that
humans zoom in on when they imagine an alternative to a
model prediction are often referred to as fault-lines. Motivated by this, our CoCoX model explains decisions made by
a CNN using fault-lines. Speciﬁcally, given an input image
I for which a CNN classiﬁcation model M predicts class
cpred , our fault-line based explanation identiﬁes the minimal
semantic-level features (e.g., stripes on zebra, pointed ears
of dog), referred to as explainable concepts, that need to be
added to or deleted from I in order to alter the classiﬁcation
category of I by M to another speciﬁed class calt . We argue that, due to the conceptual and counterfactual nature of
fault-lines, our CoCoX explanations are practical and more
natural for both expert and non-expert users to understand the
internal workings of complex deep learning models. Extensive
quantitative and qualitative experiments verify our hypotheses,
showing that CoCoX signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-ofthe-art explainable AI models. Our implementation is available
at https://github.com/arjunakula/CoCoX

Figure 1: CoCoX Explanations using Fault-Lines: Positive
fault-line explanation (Ψ+
I1 ) suggests adding stripes to the
animal in the input image (I1 ) to alter the model M ’s prediction from Dog class to Thylacine class, i.e., the concept of stripedness is critical for M to decide between Dog
and Thylacine in I1 . Similarly, negative fault-line Ψ−
I2
suggests removing bumps from I2 to alter the classiﬁcation
category from Toad to Frog. Changing the classiﬁcation
result of I3 from Goat to Sheep requires adding wool and
removing beard and horns from I3 , i.e., it needs both positive
and negative fault-lines.

Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) systems are becoming increasingly
ubiquitous from low-risk environments such as movie recommendation systems and chatbots to high-risk environments
such as self-driving cars, drones, military applications, and
medical-diagnosis and treatment. However, understanding
the behavior of these systems remains a signiﬁcant challenge
as they cannot explain why they reach a speciﬁc recommendation or a decision. This is especially problematic in high
risk environments such as banking, healthcare, and insurance,
where AI decisions can have signiﬁcant consequences. Therefore, we need explainable AI (XAI) models as tools to understand the decisions made by these AI systems (Miller 2018;
Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Ramprasaath et al. 2016;
Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Smilkov et al. 2017).
XAI models, through explanations, aim at making the
underlying inference mechanism of AI systems transpar-

ent and interpretable to expert users (system developers)
and non-expert users (end-users) (Lipton 2016; Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Hoffman 2017). In this work,
we focus mainly on increasing justiﬁed human trust (JT)
in AI systems, through explanations (Hoffman et al. 2018;
Akula et al. 2019b; 2019a). Justiﬁed trust is computed based
on human judgments of AI system’s prediction (more details
on this are described in the Experiments section). Despite
an increasing amount of work on XAI (Smilkov et al. 2017;
Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Zeiler and Fergus 2014;
Kim, Rudin, and Shah 2014; Zhang, Nian Wu, and Zhu 2018;
R Akula et al. 2019), providing explanations that can increase justiﬁed human trust remains an important research

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2594

