The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

More Accurate Learning of k-DNF Reference Classes
Brendan Juba

Hengxuan Li∗

Washington University in St. Louis
bjuba@wustl.edu

Facebook
lhx@fb.com

use for prediction. These similar examples are called a reference class for the example in question. Roth (1995) showed
how, by ﬁltering the data used for inference in an appropriate way – thus using an appropriate reference class – classic
nonmonotonic reasoning problems may be solved easily.
In other words, a reference class captures the “relevant
context” for probabilistic inference. This view of reference classes, and especially their role in artiﬁcial intelligence, was largely developed by Kyburg (1974) and Pollock
(1990), building on a view of probability originally proposed
by Reichenbach (1949). In Kyburg and Pollock’s proposals,
one should select the most speciﬁc available reference class,
ruling out disjunctive reference classes.
Bacchus et al. (1996) provide a critical review of this
framework (and the decision to disallow disjunctions). One
of the main criticisms of the reference-class framework is
that it is often unclear how to select an appropriate reference
class for inference; making the class too speciﬁc may lead us
with few prior examples or none at all. Such a problem almost always arises when reference classes are invoked. For
example, in Valiant’s “neuroidal” cognitive model (Valiant
1994; 2000), the class of scenes to be used to make a prediction (a reference class, essentially) are chosen by the currently “ﬁring” model neurons, which could easily be overly
speciﬁc. The key question is, how can we ﬁnd a reference
class for which (i) we have sufﬁcient data to make an informed prediction, but that is nevertheless (ii) sufﬁciently
speciﬁc to help inform our prediction?
Juba (2016) and Hainline et al. (2019) proposed a formulation of the reference class selection problem in the context
of making certain kinds of predictions. Speciﬁcally, Juba
considered a variant of reference class selection as a means
to perform diagnosis, or more generally abduction: we try to
ﬁnd the most likely reference class in our overall data distribution from some speciﬁed family of representations such
that a property of interest, to be diagnosed, holds. Hainline
et al. subsequently sought to ﬁnd a reference class on which
to perform linear regression: they seek a class that is sufﬁciently likely, and such that the squared-error loss (or some
other p -loss) is approximately minimized. These works focus on algorithms for ﬁnding k-DNF reference classes (ORs
of ANDs of at most k Boolean literals—attributes or their
negations) since (as we observe here—see Proposition 2)
solving such tasks for conjunctions, or any representation

Abstract
In machine learning, predictors trained on a given data distribution are usually guaranteed to perform well for further examples from the same distribution on average. This often may
involve disregarding or diminishing the predictive power on
atypical examples; or, in more extreme cases, a data distribution may be composed of a mixture of individually “atypical”
heterogeneous populations, and the kind of simple predictors
we can train may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to ﬁt all of these populations
simultaneously. In such cases, we may wish to make predictions for an atypical point by selecting a suitable reference
class for that point: a subset of the data that is “more similar” to the given query point in an appropriate sense. Closely
related tasks also arise in applications such as diagnosis or explaining the output of classiﬁers. We present new algorithms
for computing k-DNF reference classes and establish much
stronger approximation guarantees for their error rates.

Introduction
In practice, every document, every scene, or every patient for
which we wish to use machine learning to make predictions
is atypical in its own way. Fortunately, these idiosyncracies
are often irrelevant enough to the task at hand that we can ignore them, and make successful predictions with a relatively
simple model. But, the dream of “personalized medicine,”
for example, is that we can somehow identify when a patient’s case is atypical in some signiﬁcant way. Rosenfeld
et al. (2015) showed for example that there are subpopulations with risk factors for gastrointestinal cancer that are not
signiﬁcant risk factors in the overall population. For a given
patient, we want to be able to identify what, if any, such
subpopulations that patient belongs to that might yield such
risk factors. The algorithm of Hainline et al. (2019) (discussed below) ﬁnds a subpopulation on which accurate prediction is possible. Thus, in particular, the linear predictors
found by their algorithm can make use of these special risk
factors for the subpopulation the patient belongs to. Or, in
artiﬁcial intelligence applications, we may wish to identify
when a scene or a conversation is atypical in some signiﬁcant way, so that we can select similarly atypical examples to
∗
Work performed in part while afﬁliated with Washington University in St. Louis
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4385

