The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Empirical Bounds on Linear Regions of Deep Rectiﬁer Networks
Thiago Serra,1 Srikumar Ramalingam2
1

Bucknell University, USA
The University of Utah, USA
thiago.serra@bucknell.edu, srikumar@cs.utah.edu
2

the number of input regions in deep learning dates back to
at least (Bengio 2009), and recent experiments have shown
that the number of regions relates to the accuracy of similar
networks (Serra, Tjandraatmadja, and Ramalingam 2018).
The study of linear regions in different network conﬁgurations has led to some interesting observations. For example, in a rectiﬁer network with n ReLUs, we learned that not
all conﬁgurations – and in some cases none – can reach the
ceiling of 2n regions (the number of possible sets of active
units). On the one hand, we can construct networks where
the number of regions is exponential on network depth (Pascanu, Montúfar, and Bengio 2014; Montúfar et al. 2014). On
the other hand, there is a bottleneck effect by which the number of active units on each layer affects how the regions are
partitioned by subsequent layers due to the dimension of the
space containing the image of the function, up to the point
that even shallow networks deﬁne more linear regions than
their deeper counterparts as the input dimension approaches
n (Serra, Tjandraatmadja, and Ramalingam 2018). Due to
the linear local behavior, the size and shape of linear regions
have been explored for provable robustness. In that case,
one wants to identify large stable regions and move certain
points away from their boundaries (Wong and Kolter 2018;
Elsayed et al. 2018; Croce, Andriushchenko, and Hein 2019;
Guang-He Lee 2019). To some extent, we may regard the
number and the geometry of linear regions as complementary. We can also use linear regions of a network to obtain
smaller networks that are equivalent or a global approximation (Kumar, Serra, and Ramalingam 2019). However, we
need faster methods to count or reasonably approximate the
number of linear regions to make such metric practical.

Abstract
We can compare the expressiveness of neural networks that
use rectiﬁed linear units (ReLUs) by the number of linear regions, which reﬂect the number of pieces of the piecewise
linear functions modeled by such networks. However, enumerating these regions is prohibitive and the known analytical bounds are identical for networks with same dimensions.
In this work, we approximate the number of linear regions
through empirical bounds based on features of the trained
network and probabilistic inference. Our ﬁrst contribution is
a method to sample the activation patterns deﬁned by ReLUs using universal hash functions. This method is based
on a Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) formulation of the network and an algorithm for probabilistic lower
bounds of MILP solution sets that we call MIPBound, which
is considerably faster than exact counting and reaches values
in similar orders of magnitude. Our second contribution is
a tighter activation-based bound for the maximum number of
linear regions, which is particularly stronger in networks with
narrow layers. Combined, these bounds yield a fast proxy for
the number of linear regions of a deep neural network.

1

Introduction

Neural networks with piecewise linear activations have become increasingly more common along the past decade,
in particular since (Nair and Hinton 2010; Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011). The simplest and most commonly
used among such forms of activation is the Rectiﬁer Linear
Unit (ReLU), which outputs the maximum between 0 and its
input argument (Hahnloser et al. 2000; LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015). In the functions modeled by these networks
with ReLUs, we can associate each part of the domain in
which the network corresponds to an afﬁne function with a
particular set of units having positive outputs. We say that
those are the active units for that part of the domain. Consequently, over its entire input domain, the network models a piecewise-linear function (Arora et al. 2018). Counting these “pieces” into which the domain is split, which are
often denoted as linear regions, is one way to compare the
expressiveness of models deﬁned by networks with different conﬁgurations or coefﬁcients. The theoretical analysis of

Linear Regions and Network Expressiveness
The literature on counting linear regions has mainly focused on bounding their maximum number. Lower bounds
are obtained by constructing networks deﬁning increasingly
larger number of linear regions (Pascanu, Montúfar, and
Bengio 2014; Montúfar et al. 2014; Arora et al. 2018; Serra,
Tjandraatmadja, and Ramalingam 2018). Upper bounds are
proven using the theory of hyperplane arrangements (Zaslavsky 1975) along with other analytical insights (Raghu
et al. 2017; Montúfar 2017; Serra, Tjandraatmadja, and Ra-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5628

