The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Morphing and Sampling Network for Dense Point Cloud Completion∗
Minghua Liu,1 Lu Sheng,2 Sheng Yang,3 Jing Shao,4 Shi-Min Hu3
1

UC San Diego, 2 Beihang University, 3 Tsinghua University, 4 Sensetime
minghua@ucsd.edu, lsheng@buaa.edu.cn, shengyang93fs@gmail.com,
shaojing@sensetime.com, shimin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
3D point cloud completion, the task of inferring the complete geometric shape from a partial point cloud, has been
attracting attention in the community. For acquiring highﬁdelity dense point clouds and avoiding uneven distribution,
blurred details, or structural loss of existing methods’ results,
we propose a novel approach to complete the partial point
cloud in two stages. Speciﬁcally, in the ﬁrst stage, the approach predicts a complete but coarse-grained point cloud
with a collection of parametric surface elements. Then, in the
second stage, it merges the coarse-grained prediction with
the input point cloud by a novel sampling algorithm. Our
method utilizes a joint loss function to guide the distribution
of the points. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness
of our method and demonstrate that it outperforms the existing methods in both the Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) and
the Chamfer Distance (CD).

Introduction
Acquiring high-ﬁdelity 3D models from real-world scans
is challenging, which not only depends on the capability
of sensors but also relies on sufﬁcient views for scanning.
Based on such restricted raw data, shape completion is required to compensate for the structural loss and enhance the
quality, in order to beneﬁt subsequent applications, such as
shape classiﬁcation (Sarmad, Lee, and Kim 2019) and point
cloud registration (Yuan et al. 2018).
Existing learning-based methods represent 3D shapes as
volumetric grids (Dai, Ruizhongtai Qi, and Nießner 2017;
Han et al. 2017; Stutz and Geiger 2018) or view-based projection (Park et al. 2017) and then leverage 3D/2D convolution operations. These methods suffer from high computational cost or loss of geometric information. With the advances in deep learning for point cloud analysis and generation, some reasonable works on 3D point cloud completion have been presented (Yuan et al. 2018; Gurumurthy and
Agrawal 2019; Sarmad, Lee, and Kim 2019; Tchapmi et al.
2019), which prevents high memory footprints and artifacts
caused by discretization.

Figure 1: Our network predicts realistic structures from partial views and completes the point clouds evenly. Each pair
(before and after completion) is visualized in the same color,
with 32,768 points after completion.

However, due to the limited capability of analyzing and
generating point clouds, these works sometimes produce
distorted results or even fail to preserve some of the actual
structures which have been revealed in the input. For example, they may be able to complete the overall shape of a
chair, but may neglect the connectors between the chair legs
although they appear in the input point cloud. On the other
hand, the similarity metric for point cloud comparison plays
an important role. The widely used Chamfer Distance (CD)
tends to cause uneven density distribution and blurred details (Achlioptas et al. 2018). As an alternative, the Earth
Mover’s Distance (EMD) is more sensitive to details and
the density distribution, yet suffers from high computational
cost and thus have not been applied to dense point clouds.
To tackle these problems, we propose a novel network
which completes the partial point cloud in two stages. In the

∗
We would like to thank Yen-Hsiu Chou and Zhengping Zhou
for helpful comments.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11596

