The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Revisiting Graph Based Collaborative Filtering:
A Linear Residual Graph Convolutional Network Approach
Lei Chen,1,2 Le Wu,1,2,∗ Richang Hong,1,2 Kun Zhang,3 Meng Wang1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data, Hefei University of Technology
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, HeFei University of Technology
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
{chenlei.hfut, lewu.ustc, hongrc.hfut, eric.mengwang}@gmail.com, zhkun@mail.ustc.edu.cn
2

node (graph) representation learning (Li et al. 2016), semisupervised node (graph) learning (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Camps-Valls, Marsheva, and Zhou 2007), and so on.

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) are state-of-the-art
graph based representation learning models by iteratively
stacking multiple layers of convolution aggregation operations and non-linear activation operations. Recently, in Collaborative Filtering (CF) based Recommender Systems (RS),
by treating the user-item interaction behavior as a bipartite graph, some researchers model higher-layer collaborative signals with GCNs. These GCN based recommender
models show superior performance compared to traditional
works. However, these models suffer from training difﬁculty
with non-linear activations for large user-item graphs. Besides, most GCN based models could not model deeper layers due to the over smoothing effect with the graph convolution operation. In this paper, we revisit GCN based CF models from two aspects. First, we empirically show that removing non-linearities would enhance recommendation performance, which is consistent with the theories in simple graph
convolutional networks. Second, we propose a residual network structure that is speciﬁcally designed for CF with useritem interaction modeling, which alleviates the over smoothing problem in graph convolution aggregation operation with
sparse user-item interaction data. The proposed model is a
linear model and it is easy to train, scale to large datasets, and
yield better efﬁciency and effectiveness on two real datasets.
We publish the source code at https://github.com/newlei/LRGCCF.

As many real-world data show the graph structure, GCNs
have been widely applied to applications such as social
network analysis (Xu et al. 2019a), transportation network (Zhao et al. 2019), and recommender systems (Berg,
Kipf, and Welling 2018). In this paper, we focus on applying GCNs to CF based recommender systems. CF provides personalized item suggestions to users by learning
user and item embeddings from their historical behavior
data (Rendle et al. 2009; He et al. 2017). In fact, by treating
the user-item historical behavior as a bipartite graph with
edges between users and items, CF can be naturally transformed into the edge prediction problem in the graph. This
graph representation of user-item behavior advances previous user-item 6 interaction matrix with more higher-order
user and item correlations, and provides the possibility to
alleviate the data sparsity issue in CF with graph structure
modeling (Wang et al. 2019; Berg, Kipf, and Welling 2018;
Ying et al. 2018). Some earlier works applied personalized
random walks (Liu and Yang 2008) or relied on graph regularization models with auxiliary graph data (e.g., social
network) for recommendation (Gu, Zhou, and Ding 2010;
Huang, Chung, and Chen 2004). These models suffered
from a huge time complexity with personalized random
walk, and most of these models relied on carefully designing the random walk process. Recently, plenty of researchers pay more attention to apply GCNs for recommendation (Wu, Liu, and Yang 2018; Wang et al. 2019;
Berg, Kipf, and Welling 2018; Ying et al. 2018). For example, PinSage designed sampling techniques for graph convolution aggregation to alleviate the computational burden
in the recommendation process (Ying et al. 2018). By feeding the user and item free embeddings as input, NGCF was
specially designed for GCN based CF (Wang et al. 2019).
NGCF iteratively propagates user and item embeddings in
the graph to distill the collaborative signals with graph convolutions. These GCN based recommender models show
better performance compared to traditional models.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the boom of GCNs, which
are efﬁcient variants of CNNs for dealing with graph based
data (Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec
2017). The key idea of GCNs is to stack multiple layers that
iteratively perform the following two steps at each layer:
node embedding with convolutional neighborhood aggregation; followed by a non-linear transformation of node embeddings parameterized by a neural network. Therefore, the
higher-order similarity of a node could be effectively captured (Xu et al. 2019b; Li, Han, and Wu 2018). These models
show competing performance for tasks such as unsupervised
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Despite the relative success of GCN based recommendation, we argue that two important problems in GCN based
27

