The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fine-Grained Fashion Similarity
Learning by Attribute-Speciﬁc Embedding Network
Zhe Ma,1∗ Jianfeng Dong,2,3∗† Zhongzi Long,1
Yao Zhang,1∗ Yuan He,4 Hui Xue,4 Shouling Ji1,3†
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Zhejiang Gongshang Unversity,
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, 4 Alibaba Group
{maryeon, akasha, y.zhang, sji}@zju.edu.cn, dongjf24@gmail.com, {heyuan.hy, hui.xueh}@alibaba-inc.com
3

a general
embedding space

Abstract
This paper strives to learn ﬁne-grained fashion similarity.
In this similarity paradigm, one should pay more attention to the similarity in terms of a speciﬁc design/attribute
among fashion items, which has potential values in many
fashion related applications such as fashion copyright protection. To this end, we propose an Attribute-Speciﬁc Embedding Network (ASEN) to jointly learn multiple attributespeciﬁc embeddings in an end-to-end manner, thus measure the ﬁne-grained similarity in the corresponding space.
With two attention modules, i.e., Attribute-aware Spatial
Attention and Attribute-aware Channel Attention, ASEN is
able to locate the related regions and capture the essential patterns under the guidance of the speciﬁed attribute,
thus make the learned attribute-speciﬁc embeddings better
reﬂect the ﬁne-grained similarity. Extensive experiments on
four fashion-related datasets show the effectiveness of ASEN
for ﬁne-grained fashion similarity learning and its potential for fashion reranking. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/Maryeon/asen.

multiple attribute-specific
embedding spaces

lapel design

sleeve length

...
(a)

(b)

Figure 1: As fashion items typically have various attributes,
we propose to learn multiple attribute-speciﬁc embeddings,
thus the ﬁne-grained similarity can be better reﬂected in the
corresponding attribute-speciﬁc space.
There are cases where one would like to search for fashion items with certain similar designs instead of identical or
overall similar items, so the ﬁne-grained similarity matters
in such cases. In the fashion copyright protection scenario
(Martin 2019), the ﬁne-grained similarity is also important
to ﬁnd items with plagiarized designs. Hence, learning the
ﬁne-grained similarity is necessary. However, to the best of
our knowledge, such a similarity paradigm has been ignored
by the community to some extent, only one work focuses on
it. In (Veit, Belongie, and Karaletsos 2017), they ﬁrst learn
an overall embedding space, and then employ a ﬁxed mask
to select relevant embedding dimensions w.r.t. the speciﬁed
attribute. The ﬁne-grained similarity is measured in terms
of the masked embedding feature. In this work, we go further in this direction. As shown in Fig. 1, we propose to
learn multiple attribute-speciﬁc embedding spaces thus measure the ﬁne-grained similarity in the corresponding space.
For example, from the perspective of neckline design, the
similarity between two clothes can be measured in the embedding space of neckline design. To this end, we propose
an Attribute-Speciﬁc Embedding Network (ASEN) to jointly
learn multiple attribute-speciﬁc embeddings in an end-toend manner. Speciﬁcally, we introduce the novel attributeaware spatial attention (ASA) and attribute-aware channel

Introduction
Learning the similarity between fashion items is essential for
a number of fashion-related tasks including in-shop clothes
retrieval (Liu et al. 2016; Ak et al. 2018b), cross-domain
fashion retrieval (Huang et al. 2015; Ji et al. 2017), fashion
compatibility prediction (He, Packer, and McAuley 2016;
Vasileva et al. 2018) and so on. The majority of methods
are proposed to learn a general embedding space so the
similarity can be computed in the space (Zhao et al. 2017;
Ji et al. 2017; Han et al. 2017b). As the above tasks aim
to search for identical or similar/compatible fashion items
w.r.t. the query item, methods for these tasks tend to focus
on the overall similarity. In this paper, we aim for the ﬁnegrained fashion similarity. Consider the two fashion images
in Fig. 1, although they appear to be irrelevant overall, they
actually present similar characteristics over some attributes,
e.g., both of them have the similar lapel design. We consider
such similarity in terms of a speciﬁc attribute as the ﬁnegrained similarity.
∗

Zhe Ma, Jianfeng Dong and Yao Zhang are the co-ﬁrst authors.
Corresponding authors: Jianfeng Dong and Shouling Ji.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11741

