The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Person Tube Retrieval via Language Description
Hehe Fan,1,2∗ Yi Yang 2
1

Baidu Research
ReLER, CAI, University of Technology Sydney
hehe.fan@student.uts.edu.au, yi.yang@uts.edu.au
2

The task of person search with natural language description (Li et al. 2017b) then replaces image queries with natural language descriptions for re-ID. Given the textual description of a person, this task aims at ranking all the images
in the gallery and then retrieving the most relevant image
corresponding to the queried description. As the work of (Li
et al. 2017b) focuses on re-ID, images are well cropped for
all persons and descriptions are only about person appearances. The temporal and scene information is missing in
both visual modality and textual modality.

Abstract
This paper focuses on the problem of person tube (a sequence
of bounding boxes which encloses a person in a video) retrieval using a natural language query. Different from images in person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) or person search, besides appearance, person tube contains abundant action and
information. We exploit a 2D and a 3D residual networks
(ResNets) to extract the appearance and action representation, respectively. To transform tubes and descriptions into a
shared latent space where data from the two different modalities can be compared directly, we propose a Multi-Scale
Structure Preservation (MSSP) approach. MSSP splits a person tube into several element-tubes on average, whose features are extracted by the two ResNets. Any number of consecutive element-tubes forms a sub-tube. MSSP considers the
following constraints for sub-tubes and descriptions in the
shared space. 1) Bidirectional ranking. Matching sub-tubes
(resp. descriptions) should get ranked higher than incorrect
ones for each description (resp. sub-tube). 2) External structure preservation. Sub-tubes (resp. descriptions) from different persons should stay away from each other. 3) Internal
structure preservation. Sub-tubes (resp. descriptions) from
the same person should be close to each other. Experimental
results on person tube retrieval via language description and
other two related tasks demonstrate the efﬁcacy of MSSP.

Person tube retrieval via natural language queries is a
more general and practical task for person retrieval. A person tube is a sequence of bounding boxes which encloses
a person in video. We illustrate a few of examples of person tube retrieval via language description in Fig. 1. Compared with re-ID, these persons are not limited to pedestrians. They can make a variety of actions in different scenes.
Corresponding to these various person tubes, each query
contains abundant information including appearance, action
and the scene (Qi et al. 2019) around the person. Different from spatio-temporal person retrieval in videos (Yamaguchi et al. 2017), which includes person detection and
tracking, person tube retrieval is consistent with re-ID and
only focuses on the retrieval part. People in videos are well
cropped and tracked, forming the so-called person tube. We
respectively exploit a 2D residual networks (ResNet) (He et
al. 2016) (pretrained on the large-scale image dataset ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015)) to extract the appearance
and scene representation, and a 3D ResNet (Hara, Kataoka,
and Satoh 2018) (pretrained on the large-scale action dataset
Kinetics (Carreira and Zisserman 2017)) to extract the action
representation.

Introduction
Person retrieval in large-scale video databases has important applications in activity analysis and video surveillance.
One of the image-based person retrieval tasks is known as
person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) in computer vision (Zeng
et al. 2018; Fan et al. 2018; Yang, Wang, and Tao 2018;
Sun and Zheng 2019; Ding et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2017;
Miao et al. 2019; Quan et al. 2019), which aims at spotting a
person of interest in other cameras by a query image. However, these methods require an example image of the person
of interest, which is a limitation in practice. In terms of usability, it would be more desirable if the person could be
searched using more easily available natural language descriptions.

To learn a joint embedding for person tube representations and description representations into a shared latent space, we propose a Multi-Scale Structure Preservation (MSSP) approach. MSSP splits a person tube into several element-tubes on average, e.g., 16 frames per elementtube. We use the two ResNets to extract the representation
for each element-tube. Any number of consecutive elementtubes forms a sub-tube. The person tube can be seen as a
visual group, which consists of several different scale subtubes. Similarly, the descriptions about the same person are

∗
This work was done when Hehe Fan was an intern at Baidu
Research.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10754

