The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Uniﬁed Framework for Knowledge Intensive Gradient
Boosting: Leveraging Human Experts for Noisy Sparse Domains
Harsha Kokel,1 Phillip Odom,2 Shuo Yang,3 Sriraam Natarajan1
1

The University of Texas at Dallas, 2 Georgia Tech Research Institute, 3 LinkedIn Corporation
{hkokel, Sriraam.Natarajan}@utdallas.edu, phodom@gatech.edu, Shuoyang@linkedin.com

ing machine learning models, for classiﬁcation task (Cano
et al. 2019) and for regression task such as isotonic regression (Robertson, Wright, and Dykstra 1988). The key advantage of employing such constraints appears to be in the
cases of noisy and sparse domains where including such
constraints can yield signiﬁcantly faster and better convergence compared to using only data, speciﬁcally in probabilistic models like Bayesian Network (Altendorf, Restiﬁcar,
and Dietterich 2005; Yang and Natarajan 2013).
Inspired by these successes, we propose a new method
for adapting these constraints in the successful gradientboosting framework. Speciﬁcally, we develop a uniﬁed
approach that works for both classiﬁcation and regression
settings. While an earlier work attempted to address this
problem by converting the qualitative constraints (QCs) to
a preference framework (Odom and Natarajan 2018), it had
two issues - ﬁrst, the framework from QCs to preferences
is not quite natural, second, and most importantly, the preference framework reweighed examples instead of using the
QCs as constraints. From this perspective, QCs were used to
alter the data distribution as against constraining the model
as other probabilistic methods do (Altendorf, Restiﬁcar, and
Dietterich 2005; Yang and Natarajan 2013). Our current
approach follows the intuition of constraining the model.
Speciﬁcally, we change the regression values of the boosted
functions based on their violation of the advice constraints,
without reweighing the examples.
We make a few important contributions: (1) We derive
the ﬁrst uniﬁed framework for gradient-boosting that can be
adapted to classiﬁcation and regression settings. (2) Our gradient updates are directly used to constrain the model parameters rather than alter the data distribution. (3) Inspired
by the use of knowledge for learning SVMs (Fung, Mangasarian, and Shavlik 2003), we provide an interpretation of
the resulting framework using margins. (4) Finally, and most
importantly, we demonstrate both the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed approach in multiple domains – 15
standard domains for classiﬁcation and regression and 2 real
data sets (including a novel logistics data set).
Our code and data is available for public use1 . The rest
of the paper is organized as follows. After reviewing the

Abstract
Incorporating richer human inputs including qualitative constraints such as monotonic and synergistic inﬂuences has long
been adapted inside AI. Inspired by this, we consider the
problem of using such inﬂuence statements in the successful
gradient-boosting framework. We develop a uniﬁed framework for both classiﬁcation and regression settings that can
both effectively and efﬁciently incorporate such constraints
to accelerate learning to a better model. Our results in a large
number of standard domains and two particularly novel realworld domains demonstrate the superiority of using domain
knowledge rather than treating the human as a mere labeler.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning has made signiﬁcant advances in many
real problems and has recently become the most vibrant tool
for several tasks (De-Arteaga et al. 2018; Hager et al. 2019;
Rolnick et al. 2019). While successful, most research in machine learning still treats the human as a mere labeler of the
target variable in training examples. Consequently, there has
been a mild surge in developing human-allied systems that
can solicit richer human inputs (Towell and Shavlik 1994;
Kunapuli et al. 2013; 2010; Fung, Mangasarian, and Shavlik
2003). These inputs range from specifying domain knowledge in terms of decision-boundary constraints (Fung, Mangasarian, and Shavlik 2003), label preferences (Odom and
Natarajan 2018), misclassiﬁcation costs (Yang et al. 2014),
and qualitative constraints (Yang and Natarajan 2013) to
name a few.
We consider the problem of learning using qualitative
constraints such as monotonicities and synergies. In many
real-world tasks such as medicine and logistics, such knowledge is quite natural and easy to obtain. For instance, a
physician could easily explain that “as the A1C number increases, the risk of heart attack increases”. Or a domain expert in logistics could explain that “as the distance between
the source and destination increases, the price of shipping
increases”. Ignoring such valuable advice while learning a
model appears wasteful. Several prior works exist on incorporating such domain knowledge in the context of learnc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4460

https://github.com/starling-lab/KiGB

