The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neural Semantic Parsing in Low-Resource
Settings with Back-Translation and Meta-Learning
Yibo Sun,∗,1 Duyu Tang,2 Nan Duan,2 Yeyun Gong,2 Xiaocheng Feng,1 Bing Qin,1 Daxin Jiang3
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
Microsoft Search Technology Center Asia, Beijing, China
{ybsun, xcfeng, qinb}@ir.hit.edu.cn {dutang, nanduan, yegong, djiang}@microsoft.com

matching tables if necessary, but have no access to either annotated programs or execution results. Our key idea is to use
these rules to collect modest question-programs pairs as the
starting point, and then leverage automatically generated examples to improve the accuracy and generality of the model.
This presents three challenges including how to generate examples in an efﬁcient way, how to measure the quality of
generated examples which might contain errors and noise,
and how to train a semantic parser that makes robust predictions for examples covered by rules and generalizes well to
uncovered examples.

Abstract
Neural semantic parsing has achieved impressive results in
recent years, yet its success relies on the availability of large
amounts of supervised data. Our goal is to learn a neural
semantic parser when only prior knowledge about a limited
number of simple rules is available, without access to either annotated programs or execution results. Our approach
is initialized by rules, and improved in a back-translation
paradigm using generated question-program pairs from the
semantic parser and the question generator. A phrase table
with frequent mapping patterns is automatically derived, also
updated as training progresses, to measure the quality of generated instances. We train the model with model-agnostic
meta-learning to guarantee the accuracy and stability on examples covered by rules, and meanwhile acquire the versatility to generalize well on examples uncovered by rules. Results on three benchmark datasets with different domains and
programs show that our approach incrementally improves the
accuracy. On WikiSQL, our best model is comparable to the
state-of-the-art system learned from denotations.

We address the aforementioned challenges with a framework consisting of three key components. The ﬁrst component is a data generator. It includes a neural semantic parsing model, which maps a natural language question to a program, and a neural question generation model, which maps a
program to a natural language question. We learn these two
models in a back-translation paradigm using pseudo parallel
examples, inspired by its big success on unsupervised neural machine translation (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016;
Lample et al. 2018). The second component is a quality
controller, which is used for ﬁltering out noise and errors
contained in the pseudo data. We construct a phrase table
with frequent mapping patterns, therefore noise and errors
with low frequency can be ﬁltered out. A similar idea has
been worked as posterior regularization in neural machine
translation (Zhang et al. 2017; Ren et al. 2019). The third
component is a meta learner. Instead of transferring a model
pretrained with examples covered by rules to the generated
examples, we leverage model-agnostic meta-learning (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017), an elegant meta-learning algorithm which has been successfully applied to a wide range
of tasks including few-shot learning and adaptive control.
We regard different data sources as different tasks, and use
outputs of the quality controller for stable training.

Introduction
Semantic parsing aims to map natural language questions to
the logical forms of their underlying meanings, which can
be regarded as programs and executed to yield answers, aka
denotations (Berant et al. 2013). In the past few years, neural network based semantic parsers have achieved promising
performances (Liang et al. 2017), however, their success is
limited to the setting with rich supervision, which is costly to
obtain. There have been recent attempts at low-resource semantic parsing, including data augmentation methods which
are learned from a small number of annotated examples
(Guo et al. 2018), and methods for adapting to unseen domains while only being trained on annotated examples in
other domains.
This work investigates neural semantic parsing in a lowresource setting, in which case we only have our prior
knowledge about a limited number of simple mapping rules,
including a small amount of domain-independent word-level

We test our approach on three tasks with different programs, including SQL (and SQL-like) queries for both
single-turn and multi-turn questions over web tables (Zhong,
Xiong, and Socher 2017; Iyyer, Yih, and Chang 2017),
and subject-predicate pairs over a large-scale knowledge
graph (Bordes et al. 2015). The program for SQL queries
for single-turn questions and subject-predicate pairs over

∗

This work was done during an internship at MSRA.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8960

