The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Self-Paced Robust Learning for
Leveraging Clean Labels in Noisy Data
Xuchao Zhang,1 Xian Wu,2 Fanglan Chen,1 Liang Zhao,3 Chang-Tien Lu1
1

Discovery Analytics Center, Virginia Tech, Falls Church, VA,
2
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN,
3
George Mason University, Fairfax, VA
1
{xuczhang, fanglanc, ctlu}@vt.edu, 2 xwu9@nd.edu, 3 lzhao9@gmu.edu

products of Apple company. Although it is simple and inexpensive for a so-called “weak annotator” to collect a massive
amount of training data, the training samples will inevitably
contain a large amount of noise.

Abstract
The success of training accurate models strongly depends on
the availability of a sufﬁcient collection of precisely labeled
data. However, real-world datasets contain erroneously labeled data samples that substantially hinder the performance
of machine learning models. Meanwhile, well-labeled data
is usually expensive to obtain and only a limited amount is
available for training. In this paper, we consider the problem
of training a robust model by using large-scale noisy data in
conjunction with a small set of clean data. To leverage the information contained via the clean labels, we propose a novel
self-paced robust learning algorithm (SPRL) that trains the
model in a process from more reliable (clean) data instances
to less reliable (noisy) ones under the supervision of welllabeled data. The self-paced learning process hedges the risk
of selecting corrupted data into the training set. Moreover,
theoretical analyses on the convergence of the proposed algorithm are provided under mild assumptions. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that
our proposed approach can achieve a considerable improvement in effectiveness and robustness to existing methods.

1

Leveraging the prior knowledge of clean labels in noisy
data is actually a crucial issue in practice, but existing robust learning methods (McWilliams et al. 2014; Zhang et
al. 2017b) typically focus more on eliminating noisy data.
Also, the data collected by “weak annotator” or crowdsourcing can be too noisy for existing robust methods to
train an accurate model. Moreover, existing works that utilize additional clean labels are usually designed for speciﬁc tasks such as image classiﬁcation (Zhang et al. 2017a;
Veit et al. 2017). These methods typically utilize clean labels in large-scale noisy data based on their additional domain knowledge (Jiang et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017b); however, these approaches are difﬁcult to handle extremely noisy
data and heavily relied on their domain knowledge (Li et al.
2017b), which makes them difﬁcult be used in more general problems. For those seeking to address these issues, the
major challenges can be summarized as follows. 1) Infeasibility to train an accurate model by using clean or noisy
data individually. Training models in a small amount of
well-labeled data will usually cause the overﬁtting problem
and result in an inaccurate model. On the other hand, weakly
labeled data may contain a large amount of corrupted data,
e.g., more than 50% data can be corrupted, which makes it
hard for most of the robust learning approaches to resist the
noise. 2) Difﬁculty to learn models from noisy data under
the supervision of a small amount of clean labels. Models
trained in a small amount of clean data is highly prone to
overﬁtting and bias. If the biased model is directly applied
to identify the uncorrupted samples in noisy data, some corrupted samples can be mistakenly included in the training
set. 3) Lack of domain knowledge to utilize clean labels to
extract the uncorrupted samples from noisy data. Most
of the existing work using additional clean labels depends
on extra domain knowledge, such as utilizing the information of label relations in a knowledge graph (Li et al. 2017b)
for image classiﬁcation task. However, such domain knowledge is usually hard to obtain in practice and prevents these
methods to be more extensively used in general situations.

Introduction

The availability of well-labeled data is becoming a key factor for training a machine learning model with high complexity, such as deep neural networks (LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015). However, collecting a large-scale dataset with
clean labels usually requires cumbersome veriﬁcation work
by human beings, which is time-consuming and expensive.
Usually it is much easier to obtain a small set of data precisely labeled by human experts and collect large quantities
of noisy labels by using crowd-sourcing (Brabham 2008)
or “weak annotators” based on heuristics (Branson, Perona,
and Belongie 2011). For example, to collect the training
images of certain keywords, one possible solution using a
“weak annotator” is to search with the keyword in an image search engine such as Google Images1 . However, the
images collected by searching for a polysemous word such
as “apple” will show not only the fruit, but also the logo or
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://images.google.com/
6853

