The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Observe Before Play: Multi-Armed Bandit with Pre-Observations
Jinhang Zuo, Xiaoxi Zhang, Carlee Joe-Wong
Carnegie Mellon University
{jzuo, xiaoxiz2, cjoewong}@andrew.cmu.edu

1.1

Abstract
We consider the stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem in a setting where a player can pay to pre-observe arm
rewards before playing an arm in each round. Apart from
the usual trade-off between exploring new arms to ﬁnd the
best one and exploiting the arm believed to offer the highest
reward, we encounter an additional dilemma: pre-observing
more arms gives a higher chance to play the best one, but incurs a larger cost. For the single-player setting, we design an
Observe-Before-Play Upper Conﬁdence Bound (OBP-UCB)
algorithm for K arms with Bernoulli rewards, and prove a T round regret upper bound O(K 2 log T ). In the multi-player
setting, collisions will occur when players select the same
arm to play in the same round. We design a centralized algorithm, C-MP-OBP, and prove its T -round regret relative to
K4
an ofﬂine greedy strategy is upper bounded in O( M
2 log T )
for K arms and M players. We also propose distributed versions of the C-MP-OBP policy, called D-MP-OBP and DMP-Adapt-OBP, achieving logarithmic regret with respect to
collision-free target policies. Experiments on synthetic data
and wireless channel traces show that C-MP-OBP and D-MPOBP outperform random heuristics and ofﬂine optimal policies that do not allow pre-observations.

1

Introducing Pre-observations

The classical MAB exploration-exploitation tradeoff arises
because knowledge about an arm’s reward can only be obtained by playing that arm. In practice, however, this tradeoff
may be relaxed. (Yun et al. 2018), for example, suppose that
at the end of each round, the player can pay a cost to observe
the rewards of additional un-played arms, helping to ﬁnd the
best arm faster. In cascading bandits (Kveton et al. 2015a),
players may choose multiple arms in a single round, e.g., if
the “arms” are search results in a web search application.
In both examples above, the observations made in each
round do not inﬂuence the choice of arms in that round.
In this paper, we introduce the MAB problem with preobservations, where in each round, the player can pay
to pre-observe the realized rewards of some arms before choosing an arm to play. For instance, one might
play an arm with high realized reward as soon as it is
pre-observed. Pre-observations can help to reconcile the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff, but they also introduce an
additional challenge: namely, optimizing the order of the
pre-observations. This formulation is inspired by Cognitive
Radio Networks (CRNs), where users can use wireless channels when they are unoccupied by primary users. In each
round, a user can sense (pre-observe) some channels (arms)
to check their availability (reward) before choosing a channel to transmit data (play). Sensing more arms leaves less
time for data transmission, inducing a cost of making preobservations.
In this pre-observation example, there are negative network effects when multiple players attempt to play the
same arm: if they try to use the same wireless channel,
for instance, the users “collide” and all transmissions fail.
In multi-player bandit problems without pre-observations,
players generally minimize these collisions by allocating
themselves so that each plays a distinct arm with high expected reward. In our problem, the players must instead
learn ordered sequences of arms that they should preobserve, minimizing overlaps in the sequences that might induce players to play the same arm. Thus, one user’s playing
a sub-optimal arm may affect other users’ pre-observations,
leading to cascading errors. We then encounter a new challenge of designing users’ pre-observation sequences to

Introduction

Multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems have attracted much
attention as a means of capturing the trade-off between exploration and exploitation (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi 2012)
in sequential decision making. In the classical MAB problem, a player chooses one of a ﬁxed set of arms and receives
a reward based on this choice. The player aims to maximize her cumulative reward over multiple rounds, navigating a tradeoff between exploring unknown arms (to potentially discover an arm with higher rewards) and exploiting
the best known arm (to avoid arms with low rewards). Most
MAB algorithms use the history of rewards received from
each arm to design optimized strategies for choosing which
arm to play. They generally seek to prove that the regret, or
the expected difference in the reward compared to the optimal strategy when all arms’ reward distributions are known
in advance, grows sub-linearly with the number of rounds.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7023

