The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Location-Aware Graph Convolutional Networks for Video Question Answering
Deng Huang,1∗ Peihao Chen,1∗ Runhao Zeng,1 Qing Du,1 Mingkui Tan,1,2† Chuang Gan3
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
sehuangdeng@mail.scut.edu.cn, {duqing, mingkuitan}@scut.edu.cn, {phchencs, runhaozeng.cs, ganchuang1990}@gmail.com

Spin laptop

Abstract
We addressed the challenging task of video question answering, which requires machines to answer questions about
videos in a natural language form. Previous state-of-the-art
methods attempt to apply spatio-temporal attention mechanism on video frame features without explicitly modeling
the location and relations among object interaction occurred
in videos. However, the relations between object interaction
and their location information are very critical for both action recognition and question reasoning. In this work, we
propose to represent the contents in the video as a locationaware graph by incorporating the location information of an
object into the graph construction. Here, each node is associated with an object represented by its appearance and location features. Based on the constructed graph, we propose
to use graph convolution to infer both the category and temporal locations of an action. As the graph is built on objects,
our method is able to focus on the foreground action contents for better video question answering. Lastly, we leverage an attention mechanism to combine the output of graph
convolution and encoded question features for ﬁnal answer
reasoning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods. Speciﬁcally, our method signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on TGIF-QA,
Youtube2Text-QA and MSVD-QA datasets.

1

Question漣
What does the man do before
spinning bucket?

Spin bucket

Answer漣
Spinning laptop

Figure 1: One question-answer (QA) pair in video QA task.
To answer the question, the model is required to recognize
actions (labeled in green) from the interaction between objects (labeled in blue boxes) and be aware of their temporal
order (e.g., before).

Xiong, Merity, and Socher 2016), video QA is more practical since the input visual information often change dynamically, as shown in Figure 1.
Compared with image QA, video QA is much more challenging due to several reasons. (1) Visual content is more
complex in a video since it may contain thousands of frames,
as shown in Figure 1. More importantly, some frames may
be dominated with strong background content which however is irrelevant to questions. (2) Videos often contain multiple actions, but only a part of them are of interest to questions. (3) Questions in video QA task often contain queries
related to temporal cues, which implies we should consider
both temporal location of objects and complex interaction
between them for answer reasoning. For example in Figure
1, to answer the question “What does the man do before
spinning bucket?”, the robot should not only recognize the
actions “spin laptop” and “spin bucket” by understanding
the interaction between the man and objects (i.e., laptop and
bucket) in different frames, but also ﬁnd out the temporal order of actions (e.g., before/after) for answer reasoning along
time axis.
Taking video frames as inputs, most existing methods
(Chenyou Fan 2019; Li et al. 2019b) employ some spatiotemporal attention mechanism on frame features to ask the
network “where and when to look”. However, these methods
are often not robust due to complex background content in

Introduction

Recently, deep learning has witnessed a great process (Tan,
Tsang, and Wang 2014; Cao et al. 2018; 2019; Gan et al.
2019; Guo et al. 2019a). Video question answering (video
QA) has become an emerging task in computer vision and
has drawn increasing interests over the past few years due
to its vast potential applications in artiﬁcial question answering system and robot dialogue, video retrieval, etc. In
this task, a robot is required to answer a question after
watching a video. Unlike the well-studied Image Question
Answering (image QA) task which focuses on understanding static images (Anderson et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2018;
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11021

