The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Pre-Training Based Personalized
Dialogue Generation Model with Persona-Sparse Data
Yinhe Zheng,1,3∗ Rongsheng Zhang,2∗ Xiaoxi Mao,2 Minlie Huang1†
1

Institute for Artiﬁcal Intelligence, State Key Lab of Intelligent Technology and Systems.
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology.
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
2
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase Inc., Hangzhou, China.
3
Samsung Research China - Beijing (SRC-B), Beijing, China.
yh.zheng@samsung.com, {zhangrongsheng, maoxiaoxi}@corp.netease.com, aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

9VKGQKX'

9VKGQKX(

(KOPOTMOYXKGRR_NUZ ZUJG_

Endowing dialogue systems with personas is essential to deliver more human-like conversations. However, this problem
is still far from well explored due to the difﬁculties of both
embodying personalities in natural languages and the persona
sparsity issue observed in most dialogue corpora. This paper
proposes a pre-training based personalized dialogue model
that can generate coherent responses using persona-sparse dialogue data. In this method, a pre-trained language model is
used to initialize an encoder and decoder, and personal attribute embeddings are devised to model richer dialogue contexts by encoding speakers’ personas together with dialogue
histories. Further, to incorporate the target persona in the decoding process and to balance its contribution, an attention
routing structure is devised in the decoder to merge features
extracted from the target persona and dialogue contexts using dynamically predicted weights. Our model can utilize
persona-sparse dialogues in a uniﬁed manner during the training process, and can also control the amount of personarelated features to exhibit during the inference process. Both
automatic and manual evaluation demonstrates that the proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art methods for generating more coherent and persona consistent responses with
persona-sparse data.

.GNGIUSKZU.GXHOT:NK]KGZNKXNKXKOYIUUR
-UUJOJKGNU]LGXOYOZLXUS(KOPOTM%
'HU[ZNU[XYH_ZXGOT
-XKGZ/]ORRINKIQZNKYINKJ[RK
6KXYUTGULYVKGQKX'

6KXYUTGULYVKGQKX(

-KTJKX 3GRK
2UIGZOUT (KOPOTM
/TZKXKYZ:GMY :XG\KR!/:

-KTJKX ,KSGRK
2UIGZOUT .GXHOT
/TZKXKYZ:GMY 9VUXZ!3[YOI

Figure 1: An example dialogue session and the personal proﬁle of each speaker. Words in responses are in the same color
with the corresponding personal attributes.

Recent advances in pre-training methods have led to stateof-the-art results in a range of natural language processing tasks (Peters et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019; Radford
et al. 2019; Ke et al. 2019). Promising results are also obtained by applying these approaches in personalized dialogue generation models, such as ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained
model on a small set of persona-related dialogues (e.g.
PERSONA-CHAT (Zhang et al. 2018)) (Mazaré et al. 2018;
Wolf et al. 2018; Golovanov et al. 2019). However, the dialogue data used in the ﬁne-tuning stage of these methods are
usually crowd-sourced, where speakers are required to exchange their personas within limited turns of conversation.
This data collection scheme is guaranteed to yield dialogues
that cover rich persona related features (i.e., “personadense”) and thus facilitate ﬁne-tuning directly. However,
such a setting is expensive and can only produce a limited
amount of dialogues. Further, models ﬁne-tuned using these
data tend to over-ﬁt to the routine that persona-related features should be exhibited in every response. This does not
meet the common practice observed in our daily communication.
As a matter of fact, most speakers in our daily conversations are not aiming to exhibit their personas within limited
turns of interactions, namely, real-world dialogues are not
always persona-related. For example, as shown in the dialogue session of Figure 1, speakers A and B only reveal
their personas in the ﬁrst turn of the conversation, while

Introduction
Building a “human-like” conversation system has been an
important topic in artiﬁcial intelligence, where one of the
major challenges is to present a consistent persona so that
the system can interact with users in a more natural way to
gain users’ conﬁdence and trust. The user engagement of a
dialogue agent increases when the agent is conditioned on
various persona settings, including age, gender, language,
location, or even a proper accent (Shum, He, and Li 2018;
Wang et al. 2018; Huang, Zhu, and Gao 2019; Zhou et al.
2018b). Various approaches have been explored to personalize a dialogue system (Li et al. 2016b; Qian et al. 2018;
Kottur, Wang, and Carvalho 2017).
∗

Equal contributions
Corresponding Author: Minlie Huang
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

9693

