The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Smart Predict-and-Optimize for Hard Combinatorial Optimization Problems
Jayanta Mandi,1 Emir Demirović,2 Peter. J Stuckey,2 Tias Guns1

1

Data Analytics Laboratory, Vrije Universiteit Brussel {jayanta.mandi,tias.guns}@vub.be
2
University of Melbourne {emir.demirovic,pstuckey}@unimelb.edu.au

execution and predictive ML models can be used for estimation of those parameters from historical data. For instance,
Cohen et al. ﬁrst predicted future demand of products using
an ML model and then use the predicted demand to compute the optimal promotion pricing scheme over the products through non-linear integer programming.
When predictive ML is followed by optimization, it is often assumed that improvements in the quality of the predictions (with respect to some suitable evaluation metric) will
result in better optimization outcomes. However, ML models make errors and the impact of prediction errors is not
uniform throughout the underlying solution space, for example, overestimating the highest-valued prediction might
not change a maximization problem outcome, while underestimating it can. Hence, a better prediction model may not
ensure a better outcome in the optimization stage. In this
regard, Ifrim, O’Sullivan, and Simonis (2012) experienced
that a better predictive model does not always translate to
optimized energy-saving schedules.
The alternative is to take the effect of the errors on the
optimization outcome into account during learning. In the
context of linear programming problems, Elmachtoub and
Grigas proposed an approach, called “Smart Predict and Optimize” (SPO), for training ML models by minimizing a convex surrogate loss function which considers the outcome of
the optimization stage. Speciﬁcally they consider optimization problems where predictions occur as weights that are
linear in the objective.
In this work, we build on that approach and consider discrete combinatorial optimization problems. Indeed, the SPO
loss is valid for any optimization problem with a linear objective over predictions, where the constraints implicitly deﬁne a convex region. Furthermore, any black box optimization method can be used as only its outcome is used to compute the (sub)gradient of the loss.
The main challenge is the computational cost of the repeated solving of the optimization problem during training,
namely once for every evaluation of the loss function on an
instance. For NP-hard problems, this may quickly become
infeasible. In order to scale up to large problem instances,
we investigate the importance of ﬁnding the optimal discrete solution for learning, showing that continuous relax-

Abstract
Combinatorial optimization assumes that all parameters of
the optimization problem, e.g. the weights in the objective
function, are ﬁxed. Often, these weights are mere estimates
and increasingly machine learning techniques are used to for
their estimation. Recently, Smart Predict and Optimize (SPO)
has been proposed for problems with a linear objective function over the predictions, more speciﬁcally linear programming problems. It takes the regret of the predictions on the
linear problem into account, by repeatedly solving it during
learning. We investigate the use of SPO to solve more realistic discrete optimization problems. The main challenge is the
repeated solving of the optimization problem. To this end, we
investigate ways to relax the problem as well as warm-starting
the learning and the solving. Our results show that even for
discrete problems it often sufﬁces to train by solving the relaxation in the SPO loss. Furthermore, this approach outperforms the state-of-the-art approach of Wilder, Dilkina, and
Tambe. We experiment with weighted knapsack problems as
well as complex scheduling problems, and show for the ﬁrst
time that a predict-and-optimize approach can successfully be
used on large-scale combinatorial optimization problems.

Introduction
Combinatorial optimization aims to optimize an objective
function over a set of feasible solutions deﬁned on a discrete
space. Numerous real-life decision-making problems can be
formulated as combinatorial optimization problems (Korte
et al. 2012; Trevisan 2011). In the last decade, development
of time-efﬁcient algorithms for combinatorial optimization
problems paved the way for these algorithms to be widely
utilized in industry, including, but not limited to, in resource allocation (Angalakudati et al. 2014), efﬁcient energy
scheduling (Ngueveu, Artigues, and Lopez 2016), price optimization (Ferreira, Lee, and Simchi-Levi 2015), sales promotion planning (Cohen et al. 2017), etc.
The last decade has, in parallel, witnessed a tremendous
growth in machine learning (ML) methods, which can produce very accurate predictions by leveraging historical and
contextual data. In real-world applications, not all parameters of an optimization problem are known at the time of
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1603

