The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Ranking-Based Semantics for Sets of Attacking Arguments
Bruno Yun,1 Srdjan Vesic,2 Madalina Croitoru3
1

University of Aberdeen, Scotland
CRIL - CNRS, Univ. Artois, France
3
University of Montpellier, France
{yun, croitoru}@lirmm.fr; vesic@cril.fr;
2

sons 2007). In their framework arguments can jointly attack
a single other argument. For instance, let us consider the
deductive argumentation framework (Besnard and Hunter
2001), also known as the (support, conclusion) representation, where support is a set of formulas and conclusion is
a formula that follows from the support. Now, let us further
consider the standard undercut attack relation where an argument attacks another based on the contradiction between
the conclusion of the former and a formula in the support
of the latter. However, if we are given a less expressive logical language without conjunction, we are unable to model
attacks corresponding to ternary conﬂicts. Let x, y and z be
three formulas of the logic that form a ternary conﬂict. In order to attack the argument ({z}, z), one would need to construct the argument ({x, y}, x ∧ y) which is impossible if
the language does not include conjunction. To this end (Verheij 1996; Nielsen and Parsons 2007) propose to have sets
of attacking arguments (i.e. ({x}, x) and ({y}, y) jointly attack ({z}, z)). Furthermore, (Nielsen and Parsons 2007) extended the classical Dung semantics (stable, preferred, complete and grounded) to this new hypergraph framework. In
view of this, we generalise ranking-based semantics for the
hypergraph argumentation framework.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we
recall the necessary deﬁnitions of a hypergraph argumentation framework and ranking-based semantics. In Section
3, we deﬁne some desirable properties that such rankingbased semantics should satisfy. In Section 4, we propose
the ﬁrst ranking-based semantics for hypergraphs argumentation frameworks following the insights from (Besnard and
Hunter 2001), we show that this new ranking-based semantics converges and that it is a proper generalisation of the
categoriser semantics deﬁned in (Besnard and Hunter 2001)
for classic Dung graphs.

Abstract
Argumentation is a process of evaluating and comparing sets
of arguments. Ranking-based semantics received a lot of attention recently. All of the semantics introduced so far are
applicable to binary attack relations. In this paper, we study a
more general case when sets of arguments can jointly attack
an argument. We generalise existing postulates for rankingbased semantics to ﬁt this framework, deﬁne a general variant
of h-categoriser, prove that it converges for every argumentation framework and study the postulates it satisﬁes. We also
study the link between binary and hypergraph version of hcategoriser.

1

Introduction

Argumentation is the process of reasoning in presence of inconsistent information by exchanging, evaluating or ranking
interactive arguments. The most popular way of representing this argumentation process was proposed by Dung in his
seminal paper (Dung 1995) which sees arguments as nodes
and attacks as edges in a directed graph. Then, one can apply
the several argumentation semantics (Baroni, Caminada, and
Giacomin 2011) to extract meaningful subsets of arguments
called extensions. However, for many applications, this two
level of acceptance (arguments belong or not to an extension) was not enough (Leite and Martins 2011). Against
this background, a solution consisted in having many levels of acceptability by ranking arguments using the several
ranking-based semantics deﬁned in the literature (Amgoud
and Ben-Naim 2013; Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex 2005;
Leite and Martins 2011; Matt and Toni 2008) for the Dung’s
framework along with a set of desirable properties that they
should satisfy (Bonzon et al. 2016; Amgoud and Ben-Naim
2013).
Classic Dung argumentation graphs only take into account a binary attack relation. Such binary attack relation
implicitly assumes that the logical language used underneath
the argument structure is closed under the “and” logical
connective. To free oneself from such assumption, Nielsen
and Parsons proposed a generalisation of the Dung framework with sets of attacking arguments (Nielsen and Par-

2

Background

In the next deﬁnition, we extend Dung’s abstract framework
with sets of attacking arguments, i.e. sets of arguments can
now jointly attack an argument.
Deﬁnition 1 (Hypergraph argumentation framework). A hypergraph argumentation framework is a pair AS = (A, R)
with A a ﬁnite and non-empty set of arguments and R ⊆

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3033

