The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Pursuit of Low-Rank Models of Time-Varying
Matrices Robust to Sparse and Measurement Noise
Albert Akhriev, Jakub Marecek, Andrea Simonetto
IBM Research – Ireland
{albert akhriev, jakub.marecek}@ie.ibm.com, andrea.simonetto@ibm.com

to analyse high-dimensional streamed data and ﬂag abnormal
observations to operators, while adapting the model of what
is normal over time.
Our contributions are as follows:

Abstract
In tracking of time-varying low-rank models of time-varying
matrices, we present a method robust to both uniformlydistributed measurement noise and arbitrarily-distributed
“sparse” noise. In theory, we bound the tracking error. In practice, our use of randomised coordinate descent is scalable
and allows for encouraging results on changedetection.net, a
benchmark.

• we extend the low-rank + sparse model to low-rank + dense
uniformly-distributed noise + sparse, where low-rank can
be time-varying
• we provide an algorithm with convergence-rate guarantees
for the time-invariant case

Introduction

• we provide an algorithm with guarantees for the timevarying case. In Theorem 2, we bound the tracking error
of an algorithm for any low-rank factorisation problem
for the ﬁrst time. That is: we show that a sequence of
approximately optimal costs eventually reaches the optimal
cost trajectory.

Dimension reduction is a staple of Statistics and Machine
Learning. In principal component analysis, its undergraduatetextbook version, possibly correlated observations are transformed to a combination of linearly uncorrelated variables,
called principal components. Often, a low number of principal components sufﬁce for the so-called low-rank model to
represent the phenomenon observed. Notoriously, however,
a small amount of noise can change the principal components considerably. A considerable effort has focussed on the
development of robust approaches to principal component
analysis (RPCA). Two challenges remained: robustness to
both sparse and non-sparse noise and theoretical guarantees
in the time-varying setting.
We present the pursuit of time-varying low-rank models of time-varying matrices, which is robust to both
dense uniformly-distributed measurement noise and sparse
arbitrarily-distributed noise. Consider, for example, background subtraction problem in Computer Vision, where one
wishes to distinguish fast-moving foreground objects from
slowly-varying background in video data (Liu et al. 2013).
There, a matrix represents a constant number of frames of
the video data, ﬂattened to one row-vector per frame. At any
point in time, the low-rank model is captured by a shortand-wide matrix. The time-varying low-rank model makes it
possible to capture slower changes, e.g., lighting conditions
slowly changing with the cloud cover. There may also be
slight but rapid changes, e.g., leaves of grass moving in the
wind, which could be captured by the uniformly-distributed
dense noise. Finally, the moving objects are captured by the
sparse noise. Clearly, low-rank modelling has wide-ranging
applications beyond Computer Vision, wherever one needs

• we improve upon the statistical performance of RPCA
approaches on changedetection.net of (Goyette et al. 2012),
a well-known benchmark: the F1 score across 6 categories
of changedetection.net improves by 28%, from 0.44643 to
0.57099. On the baseline category, it is 0.80254.
• we improve upon run time per frame of the same RPCA approaches, as detailed in Table 1. Compared to TTD 3WD,
to give an example of a method which is still considered efﬁcient in the literature, our single-threaded implementation
is 103 times faster.

Related Work
Traditional approaches to robustness in low-rank models
(Candès and Recht 2009, to name some of the pioneering
work) are based on a long history of work in robust statistics (Huber 1981). In such approaches (Candès et al. 2011;
Feng et al. 2013; Guo, Qiu, and Vaswani 2014; Mardani,
Mateos, and Giannakis 2013), sometimes known as “Lowrank + Sparse”, one balances the number of samples of the
“sparse” noise and the rank of the model, or the nuclear norm
as a proxy for the rank. There are a number of excellent implementations, including some focused on the incremental
update (Lin, Liu, and Su 2011; He, Balzano, and Lui 2011;
Balzano and Wright 2013; Oreifej, Li, and Shah 2013;
Meng and Torre 2013; Rodriguez and Wohlberg 2013;
Dutta and Li 2017; Dutta, Li, and Richtárik 2017; Ma and Aybat 2018; Lerman and Maunu 2018; Vaswani and Narayana-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3171

