The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Explicit Sentence Compression for Neural Machine Translation
Zuchao Li,1,2,3 Rui Wang,4,∗ Kehai Chen,4 Masao Utiyama,4 Eiichiro Sumita,4
Zhuosheng Zhang,1,2,3 Hai Zhao1,2,3,∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT), Kyoto, Japan
{charlee, zhangzs}@sjtu.edu.cn, {wangrui, khchen, mutiyama, eiichiro.sumita}@nict.go.jp, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
information in a sentence (Dou et al. 2018a; Wang et
al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019a). However, it is difﬁcult to
distinguish which kind of information lying deeply under the
language is really salient for learning source representation.
Intuitively, when a person reads a source sentence, he/she
often selectively focuses on the basic sentence meaning,
and re-reads the entire sentence to understand its meaning
completely. Take the English sentence in Table 1 as an
example. We manually annotate its basic meaning as a
shorter sequence of words than in the original sentence,
called backbone information. Obviously, these words with
the basic meaning contain more important information for
human understanding than the remaining words in the
sentence. We argue that such backbone information is
also helpful for learning source representation, and is not
explicitly considered by the existing NMT system to enrich
the source sentence representation.
In this paper, we propose a novel explicit sentence
compression approach to enhance the source representation
for NMT. To this end, we ﬁrst design three sentence
compression models to accommodate the needs of various
languages and scenarios, including supervised, unsupervised, and semi-supervised ways, to learn a backbone
information words sequence (as shown in Table 1) from
the source sentence. We then propose three translation
models, including backbone source-side fusion based NMT
(BSFNMT), backbone target-side fusion (BTFNMT), and
both-side fusion based NMT (BBFNMT), to introduce this
backbone knowledge into the existing Transformer NMT
system for improving translation predictions. Empirical
results on the WMT14 English-to-German and English-toFrench translation tasks show that the proposed approach
signiﬁcantly improves the translation performance over the
strong even state-of-the-art NMT baselines.

Abstract
State-of-the-art Transformer-based neural machine translation (NMT) systems still follow a standard encoder-decoder
framework, in which source sentence representation can be
well done by an encoder with self-attention mechanism.
Though Transformer-based encoder may effectively capture
general information in its resulting source sentence representation, the backbone information, which stands for the
gist of a sentence, is not speciﬁcally focused on. In this
paper, we propose an explicit sentence compression method
to enhance the source sentence representation for NMT.
In practice, an explicit sentence compression goal used to
learn the backbone information in a sentence. We propose
three ways, including backbone source-side fusion, targetside fusion, and both-side fusion, to integrate the compressed
sentence into NMT. Our empirical tests on the WMT Englishto-French and English-to-German translation tasks show
that the proposed sentence compression method signiﬁcantly
improves the translation performances over strong baselines.

1

Introduction

Neural machine translation (NMT) is popularly implemented as an encoder-decoder framework (Vaswani et
al. 2017), in which the encoder is right in charge
of source sentence representation. Typically, the input
sentence is implicitly represented as a contextualized source
representation through deep learning networks. By further
feeding the decoder, the source representation is used to
learn dependent time-step context vectors for predicting
target translation (Bojar et al. 2018).
In state-of-the-art Transformer-based encoder, selfattention mechanisms are good at capturing the general
∗
Corresponding author. Zuchao Li and Zhuosheng Zhang
were internship research fellows at NICT when conducting this
work. Hai Zhao was partially supported by National Key Research
and Development Program of China (No. 2017YFB0304100)
and Key Projects of National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. U1836222 and No. 61733011). Rui Wang was
partially supported by JSPS grantin-aid for early-career scientists
(19K20354): “Unsupervised Neural Machine Translation in
Universal Scenarios” and NICT tenure-track researcher startup
fund “Toward Intelligent Machine Translation”.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

Explicit Sentence Compression

Generally, sentence compression1 is a typical sequence
generation task which aims to maximize the absorption and
long-term retention of large amounts of data over a relatively
1
There are many types of sentence compression. In this paper,
we focus on abstract sentence summarization.

8311

