The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Shape-Oriented Convolution Neural Network for Point Cloud Analysis
Chaoyi Zhang,1 Yang Song,2 Lina Yao,2 Weidong Cai1
1

2

School of Computer Science, University of Sydney, Australia
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia
{chaoyi.zhang, tom.cai}@sydney.edu.au, {yang.song1, lina.yao}@unsw.edu.au

ror. For the view-based methods, although an accurate classiﬁcation or a descent segmentation can be reached, it requires a large number of view images collected from different angles, to make sure the generated 2D projections contain enough discriminative representations of the 3D objects
for further point cloud analysis. Thus, a more shape-oriented
geometric learning approach needs to be developed, which
is not only expected to be able to manipulate the point cloud
data directly, but is also designed to be capable of understanding the discriminative information of each local underlying shape, by modeling the shape-oriented contextual information encoded in the point cloud.
PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) was the ﬁrst deep learning
based approach to manipulate the point cloud data directly,
learning the pointwise features independently and outputting
a global shape signature from the symmetric aggregation
function applied to these pointwise features. Following the
PointNet, the entire community started to pay more attention
to local point cloud structure modeling, which was neglected
completely by PointNet. DGCNN (Wang et al. 2019) could
be seen as the next milestone, as they generally deﬁne EdgeConv as:


xki =  hΘ xk−1
,
(1)
, xk−1
i
j

Abstract
Point cloud is a principal data structure adopted for 3D geometric information encoding. Unlike other conventional visual data, such as images and videos, these irregular points
describe the complex shape features of 3D objects, which
makes shape feature learning an essential component of point
cloud analysis. To this end, a shape-oriented message passing scheme dubbed ShapeConv is proposed to focus on the
representation learning of the underlying shape formed by
each local neighboring point. Despite this intra-shape relationship learning, ShapeConv is also designed to incorporate the contextual effects from the inter-shape relationship through capturing the long-ranged dependencies between local underlying shapes. This shape-oriented operator
is stacked into our hierarchical learning architecture, namely
Shape-Oriented Convolutional Neural Network (SOCNN),
developed for point cloud analysis. Extensive experiments
have been performed to evaluate its signiﬁcance in the tasks
of point cloud classiﬁcation and part segmentation.

Introduction
As a principal data structure adopted for 3D geometric information encoding, point cloud has been widely used in
several practical applications, such as self-driving cars and
computer graphics. Although geometrical and topological
information can be well-described as the raw point coordinates in point cloud data, the further analysis step of these
irregular points can be quite challenging, as the local underlying shapes may not be modeled or recognized appropriately. Following the signiﬁcant success recently achieved by
Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) on regular-formatted
visual data, such as images and videos, several attempts have
been made to transform raw point cloud data to either 3D
volumetric representations or a collection of 2D views, so
that it can be handled directly by the CNNs deﬁned on regular grids.
However, these approaches all have their own drawbacks
and limitations. For the voxelization-based approaches, the
potential information loss occurred in the voxelization stage
may irrupt the object shapes by introducing quantization er-

j:(i,j)∈E

where k is the network layer index, Xi and Xj indicate the
central point and the neighboring points, E denotes the local graph dynamically constructed among these points, and
 is the feature aggregation function covering the entire local neighbourhood. As one of their main contributions, the
EdgeConv proposed helps to reformulate the learning process of the geometric information as the aggregation outcomes from the edge features computed pairwisely. It indicates that to update the pointwise feature Xi , the dynamic
local graphs are ﬁrstly constructed using k-nearest neighbors searching technique, then centralized connections can
be built between the centroid point and its neighbours, and
the edge features hΘ (·, ·) are computed for the updating of
the pointwise feature for the centroid points. The deﬁnition
of EdgeConv reveals the idea that most of the authors claim
that the local underlying shapes can be learnt as the aggregated pairwise interactions between the centroid point and
its neighbor points.
Unlike their approaches, we propose the shape-oriented

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12773

