The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Spectral Vehicle Re-Identiﬁcation: A Challenge
Hongchao Li,1 Chenglong Li,1 Xianpeng Zhu,1 Aihua Zheng,1,* Bin Luo1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing of Ministry of Education,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Heifei, China
2
Key Lab of Industrial Image Processing & Analysis of Anhui Province, Hefei, China
{lhc950304, ahzheng214, lcl1314, xpzhu6325}@foxmail.com, luobin@ahu.edu.cn

RGB Camera

Abstract
Vehicle re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) is a crucial task in smart
city and intelligent transportation, aiming to match vehicle
images across non-overlapping surveillance camera views.
Currently, most works focus on RGB-based vehicle Re-ID,
which limits its capability of real-life applications in adverse
environments such as dark environments and bad weathers.
IR (Infrared) spectrum imaging offers complementary information to relieve the illumination issue in computer vision
tasks. Furthermore, vehicle Re-ID suffers a big challenge of
the diverse appearance with different views, such as trucks.
In this work, we address the RGB and IR vehicle Re-ID
problem and contribute a multi-spectral vehicle Re-ID benchmark named RGBN300, including RGB and NIR (Near Infrared) vehicle images of 300 identities from 8 camera views,
giving in total 50125 RGB images and 50125 NIR images
respectively. In addition, we have acquired additional TIR
(Thermal Infrared) data for 100 vehicles from RGBN300 to
form another dataset for three-spectral vehicle Re-ID. Furthermore, we propose a Heterogeneity-collaboration Aware
Multi-stream convolutional Network (HAMNet) towards automatically fusing different spectrum features in an endto-end learning framework. Comprehensive experiments on
prevalent networks show that our HAMNet can effectively
integrate multi-spectral data for robust vehicle Re-ID in day
and night. Our work provides a benchmark dataset for RGBNIR and RGB-NIR-TIR multi-spectral vehicle Re-ID and a
baseline network for both research and industrial communities. The dataset and baseline codes are available at: https:
//github.com/ttaalle/multi-modal-vehicle-Re-ID.

NIR Camera

RGB

NIR

Figure 1: Examples of images captured by RGB and NIR
cameras from six camera views. Middle: the RGB images of
six camera views. Bottom: the corresponding NIR images.
RGB camera can only capture visible light (0.38 − 0.78μm)
reﬂected by subjects, which signiﬁcantly affects the imaging
quality of the visible spectrum, as shown in Fig. 1 (Middle).
Therefore, identifying the vehicles with various illumination
environments in day and night is an imminent question in
vehicle Re-ID.
The NIR (near infrared) camera can capture near infrared
light (0.78 − 3μm) reﬂected by subjects and is not affected
in dark environments and bad weathers, which are more crucial for social security. As shown in Fig. 1 (Bottom), NIR information is able to handle the imaging limitations of visible
ones, herein can handle the conventional RGB vehicle Re-ID
in adverse illumination conditions and expand its application
from daytime to nighttime. Recently, some works propose
RGB-Infrared cross-modality Re-ID to overcome the limitation of RGB imagination in dark environments. However,
infrared images contain no color information. The large heterogeneous issue between RGB and NIR modalities brings
a big challenge for cross-modal matching. Furthermore, existing vehicle Re-ID methods and datasets only focus on the
single visible spectrum, which limits its capability of reallife applications in adverse environments such as dark environments and bad weathers.

Introduction
Vehicle re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) is to identify vehicle images from the gallery that shares the same identity as the
given probe. It is an active and challenging computer vision
task and has drawn much attention due to its wide applications in video surveillance, social security, smart city, and intelligent transportation, to name a few. Despite recent breakthroughs in vehicle Re-ID, it still faces huge challenging especially in adverse illumination conditions, such as strong or
poor lighting, shadow or black night. The main reason is the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11345

