The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

How the Duration of the Learning Period Affects the
Performance of Random Gradient Selection Hyper-Heuristics
Andrei Lissovoi, Pietro S. Oliveto

John Alasdair Warwicker

Rigorous Research, Department of Computer Science
The University of Shefﬁeld
Shefﬁeld S1 4DP, United Kingdom
{a.lissovoi, p.oliveto}@shefﬁeld.ac.uk

Institute of Operations Research
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
76185 Karlsruhe, Germany
john.warwicker@kit.edu
multimodal benchmark functions (Alanazi and Lehre 2016;
Lehre and Özcan 2013; Alanazi and Lehre 2014; Qian, Tang,
and Zhou 2016; Lissovoi, Oliveto, and Warwicker 2019b;
2019a; Doerr et al. 2018; Doerr, Doerr, and Yang 2016a). For
an overview of theoretical results regarding the performance
of hyper-heuristics and other parameter control mechanisms,
we refer to the recent survey by Doerr and Doerr (2019).
It is well understood that random gradient hyperheuristics need to apply low-level heuristics for some time,
i.e., the learning period τ , to estimate how good or bad
the chosen heuristic is for the current region of the search
space (Lissovoi, Oliveto, and Warwicker 2019b). In particular, Lissovoi et al. analysed the Generalised Random Gradient (GRG) hyper-heuristic that applies a randomly chosen
low-level heuristic for τ iterations and restarts the learning
period whenever the ﬁtness value is improved. They proved
that for the L EADING O NES benchmark function, any constant k, and an appropriately set τ , GRG matches the bestpossible expected runtime achievable by using k Randomized Local Search mutation operators with different neighbourhood sizes ({RLS1 , . . . , RLSk }) up to lower order
terms. In that setting, GRG was shown to have an expected
runtime of ((1 + ln(2))/4)n2 + o(n2 ) ≈ 0.423n2 + o(n2 )
when selecting between two operators, and an expected runtime of ≈ 0.388n2 when selecting between at least 18 operators. Such a performance is called optimal for the hyperheuristic, because it is the best that can be achieved with
the available low-level heuristics1 . A consequence of the result is that the hyper-heuristic is also faster than any of its
low-level heuristics applied alone for the problem (including the best one, RLS1 , which achieves an expected runtime
of 0.5n2 ) . This result required the hyper-heuristic to have a
learning period of length τ = ω(n) and τ ≤ (1/k−)·n ln n
for some constant  > 0.
However, for problems that are not so well-understood,
the identiﬁcation of optimal static values for the learning period may be more prohibitive. Furthermore, the best value
for τ may change in different areas of the search space
and thus no static value may be optimal throughout the
run. To tackle this issue, an Adaptive Random Gradient
(ARG) hyper-heuristic was recently introduced that incor-

Abstract
Recent analyses have shown that a random gradient hyperheuristic (HH) using randomised local search (RLSk ) lowlevel heuristics with different neighbourhood sizes k can optimise the unimodal benchmark function L EADING O NES in
the best expected time achievable with the available heuristics, if sufﬁciently long learning periods τ are employed. In
this paper, we examine the impact of the learning period on
the performance of the hyper-heuristic for standard unimodal
benchmark functions with different characteristics: R IDGE,
where the HH has to learn that RLS1 is always the best
low-level heuristic, and O NE M AX, where different low-level
heuristics are preferable in different areas of the search space.
We rigorously prove that super-linear learning periods τ are
required for the HH to achieve optimal expected runtime for
R IDGE. Conversely, a sub-logarithmic learning period is the
best static choice for O NE M AX, while using super-linear values for τ increases the expected runtime above the asymptotic
unary unbiased black box complexity of the problem. We
prove that a random gradient HH which automatically adapts
the learning period throughout the run has optimal asymptotic
expected runtime for both O NE M AX and R IDGE. Additionally, we show experimentally that it outperforms any static
learning period for realistic problem sizes.

1

Introduction

One of the main challenges in solving complex and poorly
understood optimisation problems is the choice of which
heuristic to apply and which related parameters to use. As a
result, time consuming trial and error phases are often used
to tune the inherent parameters.
Hyper-heuristics have been designed to mitigate such
problems by automatically conﬁguring the heuristic and parameters to be employed for the optimisation problem at
hand. Selection hyper-heuristics automate the optimisation
process by selecting from a set of existing low-level heuristics which one to apply at each decision point during the run.
Several examples of their efﬁciency for solving optimisation
problems are available (Cowling, Kendall, and Soubeiga
2001; Burke et al. 2013; 2010; Özcan, Bilgin, and Korkmaz
2008). Theoretical analyses also exist that have conﬁrmed
their effectiveness for the optimisation of both unimodal and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
This does not mean that faster runtimes cannot be achieved
with different low-level heuristics.

2376

