The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Range Attentive Bicomponent Graph
Convolutional Network for Traffic Forecasting
Weiqi Chen,1 Ling Chen,1, * Yu Xie,2 Wei Cao,2 Yusong Gao,2 Xiaojie Feng2
1 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
2 Alibaba Group, Hangzhou 311121, China

vc12301@gmail.com, lingchen@cs.zju.edu.cn,
{qianqing.xy, mingsong.cw, jianchuan.gys, xiaojie.fxj}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

ta. On the other hand, due to various unpredictable traffic
conditions, traffic data is inherently uncertain.

Traffic forecasting is of great importance to transportation
management and public safety, and very challenging due to
the complicated spatial-temporal dependency and essential
uncertainty brought about by the road network and traffic
conditions. Latest studies mainly focus on modeling the spatial dependency by utilizing graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) throughout a fixed weighted graph. However, edges, i.e., the correlations between pair-wise nodes, are much
more complicated and interact with each other. In this paper, we propose the Multi-Range Attentive Bicomponent
GCN (MRA-BGCN), a novel deep learning model for traffic forecasting. We first build the node-wise graph according to the road network distance and the edge-wise graph
according to various edge interaction patterns. Then, we implement the interactions of both nodes and edges using bicomponent graph convolution. The multi-range attention
mechanism is introduced to aggregate information in different neighborhood ranges and automatically learn the importance of different ranges. Extensive experiments on two
real-world road network traffic datasets, METR-LA and
PEMS-BAY, show that our MRA-BGCN achieves the stateof-the-art results.

Sensor 1

1

2
Sensor 2

Sensor 3

3

(b) Fixed weighted graph

1
2
(a) Traffic network

3

(c) The interaction of edges

Figure 1: The Interaction of Edges in a Node-Wise Graph

Early traffic forecasting approaches (Nikovski et al.,
2005; Chien et al., 2003; Lippi et al., 2013) mainly employ
shallow machine learning for a single observation node or
few nodes, which are limited by the capability of capturing
the nonlinearity in traffic data and neglect or barely leverage the spatial dependency. Recent advances in deep learning make it possible to model the complicated spatialtemporal dependency in traffic forecasting. Some attempts
(Ma et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018) applied Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) for traffic forecasting. However, CNNs restrict the model to process grid structures
(e.g., images and videos), and the non-Euclidean correlations dominated by irregular road networks are not considered. To tackle this problem, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs), which are efficient in handling nonEuclidean correlations, are integrated with RNNs (Li et al.,
2018) or CNNs (Yu et al., 2018) to embed the prior
knowledge of the road network and capture the correlations
between pair-wise nodes. Despite promising results of in-

Introduction
Traffic forecasting is one of the most challenging tasks in
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) (Jabbarpour et al.
2018) and of great importance to transportation management and public safety. The task of traffic forecasting is to
forecast the future traffic of a road network given the historical traffic data.
This task is very challenging mainly due to the complicated spatial-temporal dependency and essential uncertainty brought about by the road network and traffic conditions. On the one hand, the irregular underlying road network results in complicated correlations among traffic da-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3529

