The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Discriminative Adversarial Domain Adaptation
Hui Tang, Kui Jia∗
South China University of Technology
eehuitang@mail.scut.edu.cn, kuijia@scut.edu.cn

source data can be readily applied to the target domain. In
this work, we focus on the unsupervised setting where training instances on the target domain are completely unlabeled.
Recent domain adaptation methods are largely built on
modern deep architectures. They rely on great model capacities of these networks to learn hierarchical features that are
empirically shown to be more transferable across domains
(Yosinski et al. 2014; Zhang, Tang, and Jia 2018). Among
them, those based on domain-adversarial training (Ganin
et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2019) achieve the current state of
the art. Based on the seminal work of DANN (Ganin et al.
2016), they typically augment a classiﬁcation network with
an additional domain classiﬁer. The domain classiﬁer takes
features from the feature extractor of the classiﬁcation network as inputs, which is trained to differentiate between instances from the two domains. By playing a minimax game
(Goodfellow et al. 2014), adversarial training aims to learn
domain-invariant features.
Such domain-adversarial networks can largely reduce
the domain discrepancy. However, the separate design of
task and domain classiﬁers has the following shortcomings.
Firstly, feature distributions can only be aligned to a certain
level, since model capacity of the feature extractor could be
large enough to compensate for the less aligned feature distributions. More importantly, given practical difﬁculties of
aligning the source and target distributions with high granularity to the category level (especially for complex distributions with multi-mode structures), the task classiﬁer obtained by minimizing the empirical source risk cannot well
generalize to the target data due to an issue of mode collapse (Kurmi and Namboodiri 2019; Tran et al. 2019), i.e.,
the joint distributions of feature and category are not well
aligned across the source and target domains.
Recent methods (Kurmi and Namboodiri 2019; Tran et
al. 2019) take the ﬁrst step to address the above shortcomings by jointly parameterizing the task and domain classiﬁers into an integrated one. To further push this line, based
on such a classiﬁer, we propose a novel adversarial learning
method termed Discriminative Adversarial Domain Adaptation (DADA), which encourages a mutually inhibitory relation between its domain prediction and category prediction
for any input instance, as illustrated in Figure 1. This dis-

Abstract
Given labeled instances on a source domain and unlabeled
ones on a target domain, unsupervised domain adaptation
aims to learn a task classiﬁer that can well classify target instances. Recent advances rely on domain-adversarial training
of deep networks to learn domain-invariant features. However, due to an issue of mode collapse induced by the separate
design of task and domain classiﬁers, these methods are limited in aligning the joint distributions of feature and category
across domains. To overcome it, we propose a novel adversarial learning method termed Discriminative Adversarial Domain Adaptation (DADA). Based on an integrated category
and domain classiﬁer, DADA has a novel adversarial objective that encourages a mutually inhibitory relation between
category and domain predictions for any input instance. We
show that under practical conditions, it deﬁnes a minimax
game that can promote the joint distribution alignment. Except for the traditional closed set domain adaptation, we also
extend DADA for extremely challenging problem settings of
partial and open set domain adaptation. Experiments show
the efﬁcacy of our proposed methods and we achieve the new
state of the art for all the three settings on benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Many machine learning tasks are advanced by large-scale
learning of deep models, with image classiﬁcation (Russakovsky et al. 2015) as one of the prominent examples. A
key factor to achieve such advancements is the availability
of massive labeled data on the domains of the tasks of interest. For many other tasks, however, training instances on the
corresponding domains are either difﬁcult to collect, or their
labeling costs prohibitively. To address the scarcity of labeled data for these target tasks/domains, a general strategy
is to leverage the massively available labeled data on related
source ones via domain adaptation (Pan and Yang 2010).
Even though the source and target tasks share the same label space (i.e. closed set domain adaptation), domain adaptation still suffers from the shift in data distributions. The
main objective of domain adaptation is thus to learn domaininvariant features, so that task classiﬁers learned from the
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5940

