The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Coordinated Reasoning for Cross-Lingual Knowledge Graph Alignment
Kun Xu,1 Linfeng Song,1 Yansong Feng,2 Yan Song,3 Dong Yu1
1

2

Tencent AI Lab, Seattle, US
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Sinovation Ventures

Abstract

(U.S. president)

Existing entity alignment methods mainly vary on the choices
of encoding the knowledge graph, but they typically use the
same decoding method, which independently chooses the
local optimal match for each source entity. This decoding
method may not only cause the “many-to-one” problem but
also neglect the coordinated nature of this task, that is, each
alignment decision may highly correlate to the other decisions. In this paper, we introduce two coordinated reasoning methods, i.e., the Easy-to-Hard decoding strategy and
joint entity alignment algorithm. Speciﬁcally, the Easy-toHard strategy ﬁrst retrieves the model-conﬁdent alignments
from the predicted results and then incorporates them as additional knowledge to resolve the remaining model-uncertain
alignments. To achieve this, we further propose an enhanced
alignment model that is built on the current state-of-the-art
baseline. In addition, to address the many-to-one problem, we
propose to jointly predict entity alignments so that the oneto-one constraint can be naturally incorporated into the alignment prediction. Experimental results show that our model
achieves the state-of-the-art performance and our reasoning
methods can also signiﬁcantly improve existing baselines.



(Harvard University)


Harvard

George W.
Bush

U.S. president






(George Bush)



(Republic Party)

Yale

(Yale University)

Republic
Party

George H. W.
Bush

Figure 1: A challenging entity matching example.
Most recently, several approaches based on cross-lingual
entity embeddings (Hao et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017;
Sun, Hu, and Li 2017) or graph neural networks (Wang et
al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2019) have been proposed
for this task. In particular, Xu et al. introduces the topic entity graph to capture the local context information of an entity within the KG, and further tackles this task as a graph
matching problem by proposing a graph matching network.
This work signiﬁcantly advanced the state-of-the-art accuracies across several datasets.
Despite the excitingly progressive results that have been
shown, all previous works fail to consider the coordinated
nature of this task, that is, each alignment decision may
highly correlate to the other decisions. For example, all existing models independently align each source entity, which
may result in the many-to-one mapping, i.e., more than one
source entities are aligned to the same target entity. In particular, we analyze the results of Xu et al. (2019) and ﬁnd that
nearly 8% of the alignments are many-to-one mappings. One
intuitive solution is to align these entities in a greedy fashion,
that is, assign one alignment at each time with a constraint
that all alignments are one-to-one mappings. However, this
may introduce the error propagation, since each decision error may propagate to the future decisions. On the other hand,
given the fact that KGs are usually very large, it may also be
impractical to jointly assign all alignments simultaneously,
due to the massive search space.
We analyze the results of existing alignment baselines and
ﬁnd the second type of errors are caused by the existence of
adversarial entities that have similar surface strings and KG
neighbors with the ground truth. It is challenging for existing approaches to disambiguate these entities since previous methods mainly rely on the embeddings that are derived

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs), such as Freebase (Bollacker et
al. 2008) and DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007), represent worldlevel factoid information of entities and their relations in
a graph-based format. They have been successfully used
in many natural language processing applications, such as
question answering (Berant et al. 2013; Bao et al. 2014;
Yih et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2016; Das et al. 2017) and relation extraction (Mintz et al. 2009; Hoffmann et al. 2011;
Min et al. 2013; Zeng et al. 2015). To date, there have
been many KGs in different languages, with each being created in one language (Franco-Salvador, Rosso, and Montesy Gómez 2016). They share lots of the same facts, and each
also provides rich additional information that the others do
not cover. Thus, it is very beneﬁcial to establish the crosslingual alignments between KGs, so that the combined KG
can provide richer knowledge for downstream tasks. Therefore, the cross-lingual KG alignment task, which automatically matches entities between multilingual KGs, is proposed to address this problem.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9354

