The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Optimizing Reachability Sets in Temporal Graphs by Delaying
Argyrios Deligkas, Igor Potapov
University of Liverpool
{argyrios.deligkas, potapov}@liverpool.ac.uk

Since then, there is ﬂourish of work on temporal graphs
(Zschoche et al. 2018; Michail 2016; Casteigts et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2018; Michail and Spirakis 2016; Erlebach, Hoffmann, and Kammer 2015). Formally, in a temporal graph
every edge is assigned a set of integer time labels that indicate at which discrete time steps the edge is available. In
other words, a temporal graph is a schedule of edge sets
E1 , E2 , . . . , Et over a ﬁxed set of vertices.

Abstract
A temporal graph is a dynamic graph where every edge is assigned a set of integer time labels that indicate at which discrete time step the edge is available. In this paper, we study
how changes of the time labels, corresponding to delays on
the availability of the edges, affect the reachability sets from
given sources. The questions about reachability sets are motivated by numerous applications of temporal graphs in network epidemiology and scheduling problems in supply networks in manufacturing. We introduce control mechanisms
for reachability sets that are based on two natural operations
of delaying time events. The ﬁrst operation, termed merging,
is global and batches together consecutive time labels in the
whole network simultaneously. This corresponds to postponing all events until a particular time. The second, imposes
independent delays on the time labels of every edge of the
graph. We provide a thorough investigation of the computational complexity of different objectives related to reachability sets when these operations are used. For the merging operation, we prove NP-hardness results for several minimization and maximization reachability objectives, even for very
simple graph structures. For the second operation, we prove
that the minimization problems are NP-hard when the number of allowed delays is bounded. We complement this with a
polynomial-time algorithm for the case of unbounded delays.

In this paper, we study questions related to reachability
sets on temporal graphs. The reachability set of vertex v is
the set of vertices that there exist temporal paths from v to
them. Informally speaking, a temporal path is a path whose
edges, additionally to the usual connectivity, use strictly increasing time labels (Whitbeck et al. 2012). However, in
contrast to static graphs, temporal paths do not preserve
transitivity. As a result, some well known concepts from
graph theory, like Menger’s theorem, do not hold for temporal graphs and have to be redeﬁned (Akrida et al. 2019;
Mertzios et al. 2013; Erlebach and Spooner 2018).
Reachability sets emerge naturally in a wide range of
models and real life applications (Allen et al. 2014; Potapov
2004; Niskanen, Potapov, and Reichert 2020). One of them
in relation to temporal graphs, is the minimization of spread
of infectious diseases over contact networks. Data provide signiﬁcant evidence that commuter patterns and airline ﬂights (Colizza et al. 2006; Brockmann and Helbing
2013), and livestock movements between farms (Mitchell et
al. 2005) could spread an infectious disease. In particular,
the impact of animal movements has been extensively studied within the epidemics community. Recent studies have
shown that restricting of animal movements is among the
most effective methods for controlling the spread of an infection (Jones et al. 2019; Turner et al. 2019; Turner, Bowers, and Baylis 2012; Thulke, Eisinger, and Beer 2011;
Buhnerkempe, Tildesley, and others 2014) and changes in
the network of animal movements between farms (nodes in
a graph) can signiﬁcantly decrease the spread of an infection (Gates and Woolhouse 2015; Mohr et al. 2018). Contrary to the applications above, there are cases where we
wish to maximize the reachability sets. Consider for example a distribution schedule, where the use of the underlying
network for every day comes at a ﬁxed cost. Then, the goal

Introduction
A plethora of real life scenarios can be modelled as a dynamic network that changes over time. These scenarios
range from train, bus, and distribution schedules, to livestock movements between farms and virus spreading. Many
of these dynamic networks consist of a ﬁxed set of nodes and
what changes over time is the connectivity between pairs
of them; the locations of the stations, distribution centers,
and farms remain the same over time, while the connections
between any two of them can change every few minutes,
hours, or days. An equivalent way to see these networks is
as a sequence of static networks that change according to
a predetermined, known in advance, schedule. These type
of networks, known as temporal graphs, were formalized in
the seminal work of (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Kumar 2002).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9810

