The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Who Likes What? – SplitLBI in Exploring Preferential Diversity of Ratings
Qianqian Xu,1 Jiechao Xiong,2 Zhiyong Yang,3,5
Xiaochun Cao,3,5,7 Qingming Huang,1,4,6,7 Yuan Yao8
1

Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, ICT, CAS, Beijing, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
3
State Key Lab. of Information Security, IIE, CAS, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, UCAS, Beijing, China
5
School of Cyber Security, UCAS, Beijing, China
6
Key Lab. of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS, Beijing, China
7
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China 8 Department of Mathematics, HKUST, HongKong, China
xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, jcxiong@tencent.com, {yangzhiyong, caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn, yuany@ust.hk
ditional features or attributes of users and/or ranking candidates are often equipped with the preference choice in
applications. Such featured data have been seen widely in
E-commerce such as recommendations of books, movies,
and restaurants, based on their styles and categories of
users. These applications often generate discrete preferential choices leading to pairwise comparisons, together with
feature representations of candidates and users. Interesting
cases include, but are not limited to, the following motivating examples.

Abstract
In recent years, learning user preferences has received significant attention. A shortcoming of existing learning to rank
work lies in that they do not take into account the multilevel hierarchies from social choice to individuals. In this paper, we propose a multi-level model which learns both the
common preference or utility function over the population
based on features of alternatives to-be-compared, and preferential diversity functions conditioning on user categories.
Such a multi-level model, enables us to simultaneously learn
a coarse-grained social preference function together with a
ﬁne-grained personalized diversity. It provides us prediction
power for the choices of new users on new alternatives. The
key algorithm in this paper is based on Split Linearized Bregman Iteration (SplitLBI) algorithm which generates a dynamic path from the common utility to personalized preferential diversity, at different levels of sparsity on personalization. A synchronized parallel version of SplitLBI is proposed
to meet the needs of fast analysis of large-scale data. The validity of the methodology are supported by experiments with
both simulated and real-world datasets such as movie and
dining restaurant ratings which provides us a coarse-to-ﬁne
grained preference learning.

Example 1 In movie ratings such as MovieLens, the goal
is to ﬁnd the potential movies that interest a user who did
not watch it yet. It is possible to derive a common global
ranking scores of movies based on the feedback provided
by all users, then recommend based on such population
preference or utility functions. However, in reality, movies
can be described as various genres (e.g., Action, Adventure,
Animation, Comedy, Drama, Romance) and users are with
different demographics, such as gender, ages and occupations. This may lead to diverse preferences for different user
groups/individuals. For example, users under the year of 24
may prefer Drama and Comedy. When users slowly waltz
into their 25-34, they begin to enjoy the love story best. Can
we simultaneously capture the common preference on social level and the preferential diversity over the variation of
movie genres and user groups?

Introduction
In an era of data deluge, people often confront with the “information overload” dilemma over the last decades and it
is increasingly difﬁcult for them to locate and access useful information for making decisions, ranging from marketing and advertisements to competitions and election. Yet the
ubiquitous data ﬂow of user behavior provides us a plethora
of preference revelation of participants: which movie does
a user like, which restaurant does a consumer like, and so
on. All of these examples yield comparisons without explicitly revealing an underlying utility function or ranking score.
That is, only the preference choice is observed, not necessarily the strength of the preference. In such data ﬂow, ad-

Example 2 Another example can be found in dining restaurant and consumer datasets. Traditional dining preference studies generally ﬁt into a schema of aggregating
global rankings of restaurants for recommendation, such
as Michelin-stars. However, dining behavior, in fact, can
be easily inﬂuenced by user demographics (e.g., ages, occupations, living locations) and restaurant attributes (e.g.,
cuisine types, price) which are now available with online
crowdsourcing data. Can one predict which restaurant a
particular group/individual of consumers will come to dine?
It will be of great commercial value.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In all the examples above, we see the motivation to learn
262

