The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

UCF-STAR: A Large Scale Still Image Dataset for Understanding Human Actions
Marjaneh Safaei, Pooyan Balouchian, Hassan Foroosh
Department of Computer Science
University of Central Florida (UCF)
Orlando, FL 32816-2362
{marjaneh.safaei, pooyan}@knights.ucf.edu, Hassan.Foroosh@ucf.edu

Hence, the choice of keywords to crawl the Web to collect
images was driven accordingly. For instance, swinging tennis racket took precedence over simply tennis, as the term
swinging racket suggests body-motion compared to tennis.
We collected 50 different action categories, using Bing’s
Cognitive Services API, allowing 250 transactions per second, where a transaction refers to a successful Bing API call
request. UCF-STAR includes a rich set of metadata including
human visibility, number of humans, human-object interaction, caption, tags, bounding boxes, action labels, and other
metadata explained in section UCF-STAR Construction.
Human body-motion categories. While in existing
datasets many action classes, e.g. photography, are relatively
static and dependent on human-object interaction, our emphasis is on human body-motion actions, ı.e. actions dependent on body motion. Thus, UCF-STAR is constructed by
collecting images of actions with body motion, and is benchmarked in section Action Recognition Method by proposing
a new method, tackling missing motion in still images.
Person-centric action categories. Our focus is on the
actions performed by people, treated as individual agents.
There can be multiple people in a scene, however each one
serves as an individual agent. Here, the annotations are constructed to refer to the main agent.
The realistic complexity of UCF-STAR exposes the inherent difﬁculty of human body-motion action recognition,
overlooked by many well-known datasets. We perform comparative benchmarking of well-known methods on Stanford40 (Yao et al. 2011), Willow (Delaitre, Laptev, and Sivic
2010), WIDER (Xiong et al. 2015), BU-101 (Ma et al. 2017)
and UCF-STAR. Results conﬁrm the more challenging nature of UCF-STAR compared to other datasets.
While in videos one can readily infer motion (Sun, Junejo,
and Foroosh 2011; Ashraf, Sun, and Foroosh 2014; Sun,
Tappen, and Foroosh 2014; Sun et al. 2015), such information is missing in a single image. Thus, action recognition
poses a bigger challenge in still images, due to the absence
of temporal information (Zhao, Ma, and Chen 2017; Safaei
and Foroosh 2018; Zhang et al. 2016; Oquab et al. 2014;
Gkioxari, Girshick, and Malik 2015; Khan et al. 2013). The
issue is exacerbated when there is no contextual information, e.g. interaction with a recognizable object. To address

Abstract
Action recognition in still images poses a great challenge due
to (i) fewer available training data, (ii) absence of temporal
information. To address the ﬁrst challenge, we introduce a
dataset for STill image Action Recognition (STAR), containing over 1M images across 50 different human body-motion
action categories. UCF-STAR is the largest dataset in the literature for action recognition in still images. The key characteristics of UCF-STAR include (1) focusing on human bodymotion rather than relatively static human-object interaction
categories, (2) collecting images from the wild to beneﬁt from
a varied set of action representations, (3) appending multiple human-annotated labels per image rather than just the
action label, and (4) inclusion of rich, structured and multimodal set of metadata for each image. This departs from existing datasets, which typically provide single annotation in a
smaller number of images and categories, with no metadata.
UCF-STAR exposes the intrinsic difﬁculty of action recognition through its realistic scene and action complexity. To
benchmark and demonstrate the beneﬁts of UCF-STAR as
a large-scale dataset, and to show the role of “latent” motion information in recognizing human actions in still images,
we present a novel approach relying on predicting temporal information, yielding higher accuracy on 5 widely-used
datasets.

Introduction
We introduce a new large-scale multi-modal dataset, UCFSTAR, to advance the current still image-based action recognition research, and to promote future research opportunities
through its additional rich and structured metadata. UCFSTAR contains 1,038,622 annotated still images, collected
from the wild, more than 40 times the size of the largest previous action image dataset; ı.e. BU-101 (Ma et al. 2017).
Images are annotated with multiple labels, including the action, and are accompanied with rich textual metadata. Excerpts from UCF-STAR dataset are shown in Fig.1.
Broadly, human actions fall into two categories: (1) human body-motion actions, and (2) static actions. Actions can
be either person-centric, or group activity. UCF-STAR is focused on still images of person-centric body-motion actions.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2677

