The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

High Performance Depthwise and Pointwise Convolutions on Mobile Devices
Pengfei Zhang, Eric Lo, Baotong Lu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{pfzhang, ericlo, btlu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk




Abstract
Lightweight convolutional neural networks (e.g., MobileNets) are speciﬁcally designed to carry out inference directly on mobile devices. Among the various lightweight
models, depthwise convolution (DWConv) and pointwise
convolution (PWConv) are their key operations. In this paper, we observe that the existing implementations of DWConv and PWConv are not well utilizing the ARM processors
in the mobile devices, and exhibit lots of cache misses under
multi-core and poor data reuse at register level. We propose
techniques to re-optimize the implementations of DWConv
and PWConv based on ARM architecture. Experimental results show that our implementation can respectively achieve
a speedup of up to 5.5× and 2.1× against TVM (Chen et al.
2018) on DWConv and PWConv.

   -  















"




!







-

 
- 

 











   ! (/!)



Figure 1: Rooﬂine model for ARM Cortex-A57 with respect
to MobileNetV1 inference
Given the rooﬂine model of a processor, one can check
whether her implementation has fully utilized that processor or not. In Figure 1, the point ‘Unoptimized’ represents
a naive C implementation of MobileNetV1 written by us.
The point ‘TF-Lite’ represents the popular TensorFlow Lite
binary compiled with math optimization, auto vectorization
and linking to Eigen (Guennebaud, Jacob, and others 2010)
BLAS library. Since TF-Lite is open source, it is known that
it has already optimized using all the optimization tricks suggested in the rooﬂine article (e.g., using SIMD intrinsics).
Unfortunately, even the popular TensorFlow Lite (TF-Lite)
is not fully utilizing the processor. So, what is missing?
ARM processors get the lion’s share of the mobile device processor industry (SoftBank Group 2017); and DWConv and PWConv are the two most dominating operations
in state-of-the-art mobile models and they take up 90+% of
total inference time (Howard et al. 2017; Sandler et al. 2018;
Tan and Le 2019). Therefore, the goal of this paper is to optimize depthwise convolution (DWConv) and pointwise convolution (PWConv) on ARM processors. We observe there
are two major issues that hurt the performance of DWConv
and PWConv on ARM processors.
First, we point out that the existing DWConv and PWConv implementations are poor in core scalability, which
is against the trend of getting more cores in ARM processors (e.g., Huawei’s latest mobile phone SoC chipset, Kirin
980, has eight ARM cores). Second, we point out that the
optimization tricks suggested in the rooﬂine article are
necessary but insufﬁcient for ARM processors. Speciﬁ-

Introduction
Recently, there is an increasing trend to carry out convolutional neural network (CNN) inference on mobile devices directly because of both privacy and real-time latency
(user experience) requirements. (Loc, Lee, and Balan 2017;
Han et al. 2016; Howard et al. 2017; Sandler et al. 2018).
However, since mobile devices are subjected to both computational and energy constraints, recent research therefore
puts effort on designing more lightweight “mobile models”
that are composed of fewer layers and/or using less computational expensive operations.
In terms of CNN, examples of such lightweight mobile models include Xception (Chollet 2016), MobileNetV1
(Howard et al. 2017), MobileNetV2 (Sandler et al. 2018),
MnasNet (Tan et al. 2018), EfﬁcientNet (Tan and Le 2019),
to name a few.
When optimizing the performance of a program with
respect to a type of processors, developers often use the
rooﬂine model (Williams, Waterman, and Patterson 2009)
to guide their implementation. Figure 1 shows the rooﬂine
model of quad-core ARM Cortex-A57. The rooﬂine (the
dashed line) indicates the maximum achievable performance
of any program under that processor.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6795

