The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Practical Frank–Wolfe Method with Decision Diagrams
for Computing Wardrop Equilibrium of Combinatorial Congestion Games
Kengo Nakamura, Shinsaku Sakaue, Norihito Yasuda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
2-4 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto 619-0237, Japan
{kengo.nakamura.dx, shinsaku.sakaue.va, norihito.yasuda.hn}@hco.ntt.co.jp

utilizing efﬁcient polynomial-time algorithms for the mincost ﬂow or shortest path problems. In more general settings,
however, strategy sets can have more complicated structures,
for which such polynomial-time algorithms are unavailable.
Below we list two such examples:

Abstract
Computation of equilibria for congestion games has been an
important research subject. In many realistic scenarios, each
strategy of congestion games is given by a combination of elements that satisﬁes certain constraints; such games are called
combinatorial congestion games. For example, given a road
network with some toll roads, each strategy of routing games
is a path (a combination of edges) whose total toll satisﬁes
a certain budget constraint. Generally, given a ground set of
n elements, the set of all such strategies, called the strategy
set, can be large exponentially in n, and it often has complicated structures; these issues make equilibrium computation
very hard. In this paper, we propose a practical algorithm for
such hard equilibrium computation problems. We use data
structures, called zero-suppressed binary decision diagrams
(ZDDs), to compactly represent strategy sets, and we develop
a Frank–Wolfe-style iterative equilibrium computation algorithm whose per-iteration complexity is linear in the size of the
ZDD representation. We prove that an -approximate Wardrop
equilibrium can be computed in O(poly(n)/) iterations, and
we improve the result to O(poly(n) log −1 ) for some special
cases. Experiments conﬁrm the practical utility of our method.

1

Budgeted Selﬁsh Routing. We consider a variant of selﬁsh
routing based on (Jahn et al. 2005): The graph representing
a road network has some edges corresponding to toll roads,
and players do not choose s–t paths whose total toll is too expensive. Namely, each strategy must satisfy a certain budget
constraint. Given a cost value for each edge, which indicates
the degree of congestion, to ﬁnd the minimum-cost s–t path
is at least as hard as the NP-hard knapsack problem.
Multi-location Communication. We consider the multilocation communication problem on a network based on
(Imase and Waxman 1991). Let [n] be an edge set of a graph
representing the communication network. Each edge connects two cities, and there are some special cities called
terminals. In this game, a player is a group of people who are
in the terminals and have a multi-person conference. Each
strategy is a Steiner tree that includes all the terminals, and
each player chooses a Steiner tree selﬁshly to minimize communication delay. Given the degree of delay for each edge,
the problem of ﬁnding the Steiner tree with the smallest delay
reduces to the APX-hard minimum Steiner tree problem.

Introduction

Congestion games form an important subclass of noncooperative games since they can model various resource allocation scenarios. Motivated by a wide variety of applications,
computation of equilibria for congestion games, which enable
us to examine structures of equilibria (e.g., the price of anarchy), has been an attracting research subject. In many practical congestion games, each strategy forms a subset of a ﬁnite
ground set, [n] := {1, . . . , n}, and the set of all strategies, or
the strategy set, can be large exponentially in n. We call such
games combinatorial congestion games. A typical example is
selﬁsh routing (Roughgarden 2005): Given a graph with edge
set [n] and origin-destination pair (s, t), each player chooses
an s–t path selﬁshly to go from s to t as fast as possible. In
this case, the strategy set is the collection of all s–t paths,
whose size is generally exponential in n. For the standard selfish routing, efﬁcient equilibrium computation methods have
been developed (Fabrikant, Papadimitriou, and Talwar 2004;
Thai 2017). These methods handle the huge strategy sets by

Congestion games have many other applications related to
resource allocation on networks (Shakkottai, Altman, and Kumar 2007; Han et al. 2012), and their combinatorial variants
can naturally appear in practice. Therefore, to develop practical equilibrium computation methods that can handle various
combinatorial strategy sets is important for advancing studies
into real-world congestion games. However, we are currently
missing such general methods due to the difﬁculty of dealing
with a wide variety of huge and complicated strategy sets.

1.1

Our Contribution

We develop a practical equilibrium computation algorithm
for combinatorial congestion games. Motivated by the fact
that many real-world games have a huge number of players,
we employ the continuous-player setting (Sandholm 2001),
where there are inﬁnitely many players with an inﬁnitesimal mass. As elucidated later, equilibrium computation for

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2200

