The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Simple, Fast, and Safe Mediator for Congestion Management
Kei Ikegami,1 Kyohei Okumura,1 Takumi Yoshikawa1
1
Graduate School of Economics, The University of Tokyo
{ikegami-kei0120, k-okumura, takumi-yoshikawa157}@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

but many papers consider a complete information setting,
which seems to be unrealistic in our context. Even if we
admit the complete information, the coordination problem
still exists: there may be multiple equilibria, and agents will
have difﬁculty agreeing on which one to play. It is also possible that agents will have difﬁculty computing equilibrium,
as they are boundedly rational. Additionally, previous work
has shown that agents following a simple learning algorithm
may not reach equilibrium (Palaiopanos, Panageas, and Piliouras 2017). In any case, we cannot always expect agents
in the crowded market to play an equilibrium.
In order to mitigate the congestion, it is crucial to collect information from agents and coordinate their actions.
It is well known that Nash equilibria are often near-optimal
in congestion games with complete information under relatively weak assumptions; hence, it is worth investigating
how we implement such equilibria. To this end, we introduce a mediator to the large crowded market.
The mediator listens to the reports from agents and sends
back individual recommendations. For the moment, it may
be helpful to think of the mediator as a web application.
Each agent tells the mediator his preference over resources
and his opportunity cost (i.e., the degree of congestion aversion). Given this reported type proﬁle, the mediator computes a Nash equilibrium in the induced complete information game via best response dynamics (BRD); then, the mediator recommends that each agent take action in the computed equilibrium. We design the mediator so that good behavior (opt-in the mediator, report their type truthfully, and
follow the recommendation) forms an approximate ex-post
Nash equilibrium. By this property, the mediator can guide
people to the state in which each agent can use his preferred
resource with reduced congestion.
One notable feature of our mediator is that its power is
very weak: it cannot compel obedience from agents, and
agents can opt-out of the mediator, misreport their types,
and ignore the recommendation if they want. This property
makes it easy to introduce the mediator to the market.
Our mediator differs from the existing countermeasures
for congestion. First, peak-load pricing (Vickrey 1963) is
the most popular and inﬂuential way of handling congestion, but in practice, institutional barriers or regulations of-

Abstract
Congestion is a severe problem in cities. A large population with little information about each other’s preferences
hardly reaches equilibrium and causes unexpected congestion. Controlling such congestion requires us to collect information dispersed in the market and to coordinate actions
among agents. We aim to design a mediator that a) induces a
game with high social welfare in equilibrium, b) computes an
equilibrium efﬁciently, c) works without common prior, and
d) performs well even when only some of the agents in the
market use the mediator. We propose a mediator based on a
version of best response dynamics (BRD). We prove that, in a
simple setting with two resources, “good behavior” (reporting
truthfully and following the recommendation) forms an (approximate) ex-post Nash equilibrium in the mediated game;
in the equilibrium, the welfare is close to the ﬁrst-best when
preferences diverge enough. Furthermore, under a certain behavioral assumption, those who are not using the mediator
can always enjoy non-negative payoff gain by joining it even
without the full participation of others. Additionally, our experimental results suggest that such results remain valid for
more general settings.

1

Introduction

Congestion is a severe problem in cities. For example, trafﬁc congestion not only impedes the smooth transfer of inhabitants (Kreindler 2018) or causes air pollution (Gibson
and Carnovale 2015), but it also increases people’s mental
burden (Anderson et al. 2016). Congestion in public transportation also decreases productivity, as it results in many
delays and accidents. The social cost caused by congestion
in Tokyo’s railway is estimated at $3.03 billion per year
(Okano, Ota, and Hirota 2017; NAVITIME 2018). Other examples of congestion include those in museums, amusement
parks, tourist spots, or restaurants. Without a doubt, a practical solution to such congestion is urgently needed.
The crowded markets are usually large, and then, each
agent may know little to nothing about each other’s preferences, making it difﬁcult for agents to reach equilibrium,
which causes unexpected congestion. Congestion games are
extensively studied in algorithmic game theory literature,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2030

