The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

HLHLp: Quantized Neural Networks
Training for Reaching Flat Minima in Loss Surface
Sungho Shin,1 Jinhwan Park,1 Yoonho Boo,1 Wonyong Sung1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
Seoul, 08826 Korea
sungho.develop@gmail.com, wysung@snu.ac.kr

low-precision weights are employed, the loss surface may
differ from that with high precision. Therefore, ﬁne-tuning
the QDNN with quantization error feedback is not sufﬁcient
to design well-generalized QDNN.
The generalization capability of a DNN has been actively
discussed (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997a; Jastrzkebski
et al. 2017; Keskar et al. 2017). Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997a) related the generalization capability of a DNN
with a ﬂat minimum of the error or loss function. The study
by Jastrzkebski et al. (2017) reveals that the ratio of learning
rate to batch size is a key determinant of ﬂatness of loss surface and generalization. Recent studies schedule the learning rate to improve the generalization capability (Loshchilov
and Hutter 2017; Smith 2017).
In this study, we propose a QDNN training algorithm that
is intended to avoid sharp minima and reach ﬂat minima in
the discrete weight domain. The proposed approach intentionally changes the learning rate and the precision of the
parameters in an alternating manner to reach a ﬂat minimum despite abrupt increases in the training error. The experiments exhibit particularly good results in the quantization of parameter-size efﬁcient convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs). The
contributions of the study are as follows:
• We derive that the quantization noise can play a role of
escaping sharp minima in the training of QDNN.
• A high-low-high-low precision (HLHLp) training scheme
is developed to encourage a QDNN arriving at a ﬂat minimum that exhibits a high generalization capability.
• The proposed method is applied to the quantization of
RNNs and CNNs. We achieve the results that signiﬁcantly
exceed those of previous designs for RNNs and competitive results for CNNs.

Abstract
Quantization of deep neural networks is extremely essential
for efﬁcient implementations. Low-precision networks are
typically designed to represent original ﬂoating-point counterparts with high ﬁdelity, and several elaborate quantization
algorithms have been developed. We propose a novel training
scheme for quantized neural networks to reach ﬂat minima in
the loss surface with the aid of quantization noise. The proposed training scheme employs high-low-high-low precision
in an alternating manner for network training. The learning
rate is also abruptly changed at each stage for coarse- or ﬁnetuning. With the proposed training technique, we show quite
good performance improvements for convolutional neural
networks when compared to the previous ﬁne-tuning based
quantization scheme. We achieve the state-of-the-art results
for recurrent neural network based language modeling with
2-bit weight and activation.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are extremely important in
various applications. Most DNNs contain a very large number of weights, and their real-time execution typically demands a huge number of operations. In particular, many
DNN applications are deployed to mobile and embedded systems that only have limited budgets in terms of
computing and memory. Quantized deep neural networks
(QDNNs) represent the weights and activations with only
a low number of bits as opposed to 32-bit ﬂoating-point
format to relieve the complexity problem. Speciﬁcally, recent studies indicate that most DNN models are overparameterized (Neyshabur et al. 2018), and they do not necessarily demand 32-bit ﬂoating-point arithmetic for full performance (Hwang and Sung 2014).
Many previous QDNN optimization algorithms consist of
three steps: training a ﬂoating-point network, quantizing the
model, and improving the quantized network by ﬁne-tuning.
As for the ﬁne-tuning, usually low learning rates are used to
limit the deviation from the ﬂoating-point model as small
as possible (Hubara et al. 2017; Hwang and Sung 2014;
Xu et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2017). However, when only very

2
2.1

Related Works

Quantization of Deep Neural Networks

QDNN has been studied for a long time. However, earlier studies typically employed an 8-bit or higher precision
partly because the networks were small and a direct quantization method was used. Hwang and Sung (2014) and Courbariaux, Bengio, and David (2015) successfully quantized

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5784

