The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Stochastic Loss Function
Qingliang Liu, Jinmei Lai
State Key Lab of ASIC and System, School of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{qlliu17, jmlai}@fudan.edu.cn

timizing deep networks is computing gradients of network
weights for minimizing loss functions.
For training a better deep models, lots of efforts have
been made to generate appropriate gradients for a better
learning (Narasimhan 2018; Huang et al. 2019; Grabocka,
Scholz, and Schmidt-Thieme 2019; Streeter 2019; Chebotar et al. 2019; Shu et al. 2019), e.g., handcrafted or adaptive loss functions (de Boer et al. 2005; Nguyen and Sanner 2013; Liu et al. 2016; Barron 2019), curriculum learning (Bengio et al. 2009; Jiang et al. 2014), teacher-student
model (Wu et al. 2018; Agarwal et al. 2019), and so on.
Despite the observable advances, these methods still suffer from the optimizing way of the loss, i.e., ﬁxed or iterative optimization between network weights and loss parameters. This coarse optimizing manner indicates that network
weights and loss parameters can not be adjusted together. As
a result, such violent decoupling inherently limits the performance of these methods.
In order to obtain more accurate gradients to accelerate
the learning process or improve the learning performance,
we develop stochastic loss function to dynamically and automatically generating appropriate loss functions to train deep
networks in same round of back-propagation. Different from
typical learning settings in which the loss function of a machine learning model is predeﬁned and ﬁxed, in our framework, the loss function of a machine learning model is dynamically selected during training in a differentiable manner. In the same round of learning, the parameters in the network are optimized with the standard back-propagation.
To sum up, the main contributions of this work are:
• A stochastic loss function is developed to dynamically
generate appropriate gradients, which are in a position to
automatically adjusted with the performance on the validation set in a differentiable manner.
• Beneﬁting from the differentiability of the operations in
stochastic loss function, it can be seamlessly optimized
with the standard back-propagation algorithm in the same
round of back-propagation for the requisite efﬁciency.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that our stochastic
loss function can provide instructive gradients to train networks in a differentiable manner, with both effectiveness
and efﬁciency.

Abstract
Training deep neural networks is inherently subject to the predeﬁned and ﬁxed loss functions during optimizing. To improve learning efﬁciency, we develop Stochastic Loss Function (SLF) to dynamically and automatically generating appropriate gradients to train deep networks in the same round
of back-propagation, while maintaining the completeness and
differentiability of the training pipeline. In SLF, a generic loss
function is formulated as a joint optimization problem of network weights and loss parameters. In order to guarantee the
requisite efﬁciency, gradients with the respect to the generic
differentiable loss are leveraged for selecting loss function
and optimizing network weights. Extensive experiments on a
variety of popular datasets strongly demonstrate that SLF is
capable of obtaining appropriate gradients at different stages
during training, and can signiﬁcantly improve the performance of various deep models on real world tasks including
classiﬁcation, clustering, regression, neural machine translation, and objection detection.

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
signiﬁcant success in a wide variety of pattern recognition and machine learning ﬁelds, ranging from unsupervised learning to supervised learning (Wu et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2019). Given a predeﬁned and ﬁxed loss function,
the back-propagation algorithm provides an effective and efﬁcient way to calculate gradients to minimize the loss on
the training dataset. Relying on the gradients with optimization methods, DNNs are gradually in a position to handle
various tasks, such as image classiﬁcation and clustering,
the object detection, and amongst others (He et al. 2016;
Ren et al. 2017; Chang et al. 2017; 2019).
Although the achievements in the literature are brilliant, it
is unclear whether the gradients generated from the utilized
loss function are the most appropriate. Intuitively, training
a network can be recast as a process of teaching a student to learn a task, i.e., adjusting parameters with gradients yielded from a loss function. In order to learn better,
effective teaching involves progressively and dynamically
reﬁning the teaching strategy based on reﬂection and feedback from students. That is, the most important thing in opc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4884

