The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Forgetting an Argument
Ringo Baumann

Dov Gabbay

Odinaldo Rodrigues

Department of Computer Science
Leipzig University
Germany

Department of Informatics
King’s College London
United Kingdom

Department of Informatics
King’s College London
United Kingdom

answering, belief update and decision making (see (Lang,
Liberatore, and Marquis 2003) for more details).
Forgetting for a logical formalism can be roughly described as follows. Given a knowledge base K in this formalism and a variable x deemed irrelevant, the result of forgetting x in K is a knowledge base K′ , s.t.

Abstract
The notion of forgetting, as considered in the famous paper by
Lin and Reiter in 1994 has been extensively studied in classical logic and more recently, in non-monotonic formalisms
like logic programming. In this paper, we convey the idea
of forgetting to another major AI formalism, namely Dungstyle argumentation frameworks. Our approach is axiomaticdriven and not limited to any speciﬁc semantics: we propose
semantical and syntactical desiderata encoding different criteria for what forgetting an argument might mean; analyze
how these criteria relate to each other; and check whether the
criteria can be satisﬁed in general. The analysis is done for a
number of widely used argumentation semantics. Our investigation shows that almost all desiderata are individually satisﬁable. However, combinations of semantical and/or syntactical conditions reveal a much more interesting landscape. For
instance, we found that the ad hoc approach to forgetting an
argument, i.e., by the syntactical removal of the argument and
all of its associated attacks, is too restrictive and only compatible with the two weakest semantical desiderata. Amongst the
several interesting combinations identiﬁed, we showed that
one satisﬁes a notion of minimal change and presented an
algorithm that given an AF F and argument x, constructs a
suitable AF G satisfying the conditions in the combination.

1

LR1. The variable x does not occur in K′ .
LR2. All logical consequences of K′ are logical consequences of K.
LR3. All logical consequences of K that do not contain x
are logical consequences of K′ .
Lin and Reiter showed that (LR1)–(LR3) can be fulﬁlled
via a simple syntactic transformation. For the case of propositional logic, a possible construction dating back to (Boole
1854) involves replacing every formula φ in K with the disjunction of the formulas obtained from φ by substituting x
by true and false, respectively.
In this paper we study the notion of forgetting in the
realm of Dung’s Abstract Argumentation Frameworks (AFs)
(Dung 1995), in which one of the chief concerns is the handling of conﬂicts amongst arguments. A large number of semantics expressing acceptable positions for AFs (so-called
extensions) have been subsequently introduced (see (Baroni,
Caminada, and Giacomin 2018) for a good overview). In recent years, the community started to investigate the effects
of changes to an argumentation framework. One extensively
studied issue is the so-called enforcing problem (Baumann
and Brewka 2010; de Saint-Cyr et al. 2016; Wallner, Niskanen, and Järvisalo 2017), which is concerned with how to
manipulate an argumentation framework in such a way that a
certain desired set of arguments becomes an extension. Another closely related line of research is the principle-based
study of revision operators (Coste-Marquis et al. 2014;
Baumann and Brewka 2015; Diller et al. 2018) based on a
reformulation of the famous AGM postulates for belief revision (Alchourrón, Gärdenfors, and Makinson 1985).
Perhaps surprisingly, how to “forget” single arguments
has not yet received much attention. The most straightfoward way of forgetting an argument is simply by removing it from the argumentation framework (as considered in
(Bisquert et al. 2011)). Whilst such a syntactical approach
obviously guarantees that the extensions of the resulting AF

Introduction

Hiding relevant information as well as discarding irrelevant
information are tasks which are performed by humans in a
straightforward way. The need for a formalisation of the latter was recognised by Lin and Reiter in the context of reasoning about actions (Lin and Reiter 1994). Lin and Reiter
were concerned about how to update a given knowledge base
to remove (or “forget”) facts which no longer remained true
after actions were executed. Since then the topic, usually referred to as forgetting (and also known as variable elimination), has been extensively studied in the ﬁeld of knowledge
representation and reasoning for many major formalisms
like propositional logic, ﬁrst order logic and description
logics as well as non-monotonic formalisms such as answer set programming (see (Eiter and Kern-Isberner 2018;
Delgrande 2017; Gonçalves, Knorr, and Leite 2016a) for recent overviews). Applications of forgetting include query
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2750

