The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Reinforcement Learning for General Game Playing
Adrian Goldwaser, Michael Thielscher
Department of Computer Science, University of New South Wales
adrian.goldwaser@gmail.com, mit@unsw.edu.au

using self-play deep RL with almost no knowledge of the
game, giving it the potential to be extended and applied to
the more general setting of GGP.
There has previously been very little work applying RL
to the setting of GGP. A framework, RL-GGP (BenaclochAyuso 2012), allowed testing of different RL algorithms, but
little was published evaluating the performance of each for
GGP. There has also been work into using TD learning to
improve playout policies (Finnsson and Björnsson 2010).
Finally there has been some initial work looking at applying
Q-learning to GGP which found that it does converge but
quite slowly (Wang, Emmerich, and Plaat 2018), and even
when extending the Q-learning with Monte Carlo Search did
not outperform UCT. However this showed that there is potential for RL based GGP agents. Our work pushes this direction forwards further, ﬁlling this gap by extending then
applying deep RL to GGP and outperforming UCT.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. The
next section covers previous approaches to GGP as well as
an overview of the limitations of AlphaZero. In the following section, the design of the Generalised AlphaZero extension for GGP is explained. Finally, experimental results of
this agent are shown which clearly show that deep reinforcement learning within a GGP environment can perform noticeably better than a UCT benchmark agent in a number of
games.

Abstract
General Game Playing agents are required to play games they
have never seen before simply by looking at a formal description of the rules of the game at runtime. Previous successful agents have been based on search with generic heuristics,
with almost no work done into using machine learning. Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning have shown it
to be successful in some two-player zero-sum board games
such as Chess and Go. This work applies deep reinforcement
learning to General Game Playing, extending the AlphaZero
algorithm and ﬁnds that it can provide competitive results.

Introduction
Since the start of AI research, games have been used as a
testbed for progress as they can accurately capture many of
the ideas of thought, planning and reasoning in an easily
evaluable way (Shannon 1950). Recent advances have resulted in AIs being able to beat humans in more and more
games (Hsu 2002; Silver et al. 2016). While each of these
showed incredible improvement in different areas, they all
required a tremendous amount of work and each is very speciﬁc so can only do the exact game it was programmed to
do.
To address this, the idea of General Game Playing (GGP)
looks at AI agents which are programmed without any explicit knowledge of a particular game; instead they must be
general enough to play any game given a formal speciﬁcation of the game at runtime (Genesereth and Björnsson
2013). This means that they cannot use speciﬁc knowledge
or heuristics that do not apply to other games (Genesereth
and Thielscher 2014).
The ﬁeld of reinforcement learning (RL) looks at agents
which can learn to maximise some notion of reward by taking actions and noting their effect. Recently, AlphaZero (Silver et al. 2018) has shown promising limited generality in
the context of perfect information games, with the same algorithm reaching state-of-the-art in Chess, Shogi and Go.
However, it was still limited to zero-sum, two-player, playersymmetric games and had a handcrafted neural network architecture for each. This agent learnt entirely from scratch

Background
General Game Playing
The issue with using individual games as a testbed for AI is
that they encourage programs which perform very well only
in an extremely narrow domain. GGP addresses this by looking at programs which are only given the rules of the game
at runtime. This means that they must be written without
any explicit knowledge of any particular game, encouraging strategies which are applicable in different domains and
general algorithms that result in agents which can plan and
learn rather than simply using game-speciﬁc heuristics that
humans have worked out. The lack of handcrafted heuristics
means that performance should reﬂect the skill of the algorithm at that game, not the skill of the programmer (Genesereth and Thielscher 2014).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1701

