The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Identifying Model Weakness with Adversarial Examiner
Michelle Shu, Chenxi Liu,( ) Weichao Qiu, Alan Yuille
Johns Hopkins University
{mshu1, cxliu}@jhu.edu, {qiuwch, alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

1 million images under normal conditions (in which case the
car should keep driving), and 1 image with a baby in front
(in which case the car should immediately stop). Under the
current evaluation protocol, a policy to always keep driving
and give up on the rare case will be highly regarded. However, from the humans’ perspective, this strategy is clearly
problematic and alarming. Therefore, at least in some sensitive domains, placing more emphasis on the worst cases to
reveal model weaknesses may be more important than simply relying on the average case.
Revealing model weaknesses by densely sampling the input data space is clearly impractical. This is because any
input data point is usually determined by a combination of
factors, which makes the space exponentially large. For example, an image is jointly determined by the rotation angles of the objects, the positions of the objects, the material
properties, the type of lighting, the energy of lighting, the
distance to camera, etc. Larger test set certainly helps, but
no matter how large it gets, it will never be able to densely
cover this exponentially large space. Therefore our goal is to
efﬁciently and systematically identify the model weaknesses
within a reasonable number of queries.
Different models have different weaknesses, so it no
longer makes sense to have a ﬁxed test set, rather a dynamic
one. In some way, this notion of ﬁxed versus dynamic is
very similar to giving standardized tests versus conducting
interviews. In standardized tests, the questions are usually
designed to have general coverage, since all test takers answer the same questions. In interviews, the examiner may
start with general topics, but also has the freedom to deep
dive into speciﬁc ones to challenge the candidate. We also
point out that this notion of dynamic examiner is closer in
spirit to Turing test. If the human evaluator in Turing test always asks the same questions, then its role can be replaced
by a machine. It is also conceivable that the worst answer
during the exchange will contribute most to the human evaluator’s ﬁnal judgment.
Formalizing the ideas discussed above, we propose adversarial examiner, an alternative way of evaluating a model.
Provided with a model and the space of input data, the adversarial examiner will dynamically select the next test data to
hand out, based on the testing history so far. The name “ad-

Abstract
Machine learning models are usually evaluated according to
the average case performance on the test set. However, this
is not always ideal, because in some sensitive domains (e.g.
autonomous driving), it is the worst case performance that
matters more. In this paper, we are interested in systematic
exploration of the input data space to identify the weakness
of the model to be evaluated. We propose to use an adversarial examiner in the testing stage. Different from the existing
strategy to always give the same (distribution of) test data,
the adversarial examiner will dynamically select the next test
data to hand out based on the testing history so far, with the
goal being to undermine the model’s performance. This sequence of test data not only helps us understand the current
model, but also serves as constructive feedback to help improve the model in the next iteration. We conduct experiments on ShapeNet object classiﬁcation. We show that our
adversarial examiner can successfully put more emphasis on
the weakness of the model, preventing performance estimates
from being overly optimistic.

1

Introduction

The ﬁeld of machine learning is advancing at unprecedented
speed, and one evidence often cited is the reported performance on benchmark datasets. There are usually leaderboards for these public datasets with speciﬁc evaluation metrics, and the entry that achieves the highest number is regarded as the state-of-the-art. In several cases, it is claimed
that the machine learning model has surpassed human-level
performance using this criterion (He et al. 2015; Wang, Yan,
and Wu 2018).
However, the common belief is that humans are still superior, which suggests that the current testing strategy is overly
optimistic and does not reﬂect the true progress in advancing
machine learning. We think an important reason behind this
mismatch is that: the current evaluation protocol uses ﬁxed
test data and measures the average case performance, which
does not place enough emphasis on the worst case performance. To make this point concrete, imagine a model for autonomous driving. Suppose that in the testing data, there are
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11998

