The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MMM: Multi-Stage Multi-Task
Learning for Multi-Choice Reading Comprehension
Di Jin,1∗ Shuyang Gao,2 Jiun-Yu Kao,2 Tagyoung Chung,2 Dilek Hakkani-tur2
1

Computer Science & Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, MA, USA
2
Amazon Alexa AI, Sunnyvale, CA, USA
jindi15@mit.edu, {shuyag, jiunyk, tagyoung, hakkanit}@amazon.com

Dialogue
W: Come on, Peter! It’s nearly seven.
M: I’m almost ready.
W: We’ll be late if you don’t hurry.
M: One minute, please. I’m packing my things.
W: The teachers won’t let us in if we are late.
M: Ok. I’m ready. Oh, I’ll have to get my money.
W: You don’t need money when you are having the exam, do you?
M: Of course not. Ok, let’s go... Oh, my god. I’ve forgot my watch.
W: You’ll forget your head if you’re not careful.
M: My mother says that, too.
Question 1: What’s the relationship between the speakers? √
A. Brother and sister. B. Mother and son. C. Classmates.
Question 2: What does the woman think of the√man?
A. He is very serious. B. He is too careless.
C. He is very lazy.

Abstract
Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) for question answering (QA), which aims to answer a question given the
relevant context passages, is an important way to test the
ability of intelligence systems to understand human language.
Multiple-Choice QA (MCQA) is one of the most difﬁcult tasks
in MRC because it often requires more advanced reading comprehension skills such as logical reasoning, summarization,
and arithmetic operations, compared to the extractive counterpart where answers are usually spans of text within given
passages. Moreover, most existing MCQA datasets are small
in size, making the task even harder. We introduce MMM, a
Multi-stage Multi-task learning framework for Multi-choice
reading comprehension. Our method involves two sequential
stages: coarse-tuning stage using out-of-domain datasets and
multi-task learning stage using a larger in-domain dataset to
help model generalize better with limited data. Furthermore,
we propose a novel multi-step attention network (MAN) as the
top-level classiﬁer for this task. We demonstrate MMM signiﬁcantly advances the state-of-the-art on four representative
MCQA datasets.

1

√
Table 1: DREAM dataset examples ( : the correct answer)

natural language sentences and not restricted to spans in text.
Various question types exist such as arithmetic, summarization, common sense, logical reasoning, language inference,
and sentiment analysis. Therefore, it requires more advanced
reading skills for the machine to perform well on this task.
Table 1 shows an example from one of MCQA datasets,
DREAM (Sun et al. 2019). To answer the ﬁrst question in
Table 1, the system needs to comprehend the whole dialogue
and use some common sense knowledge to infer that such a
conversation are most likely to happen between classmates
rather than brother and sister. For the second question, the implicit relationship between the utterance “You’ll forget your
head if you’re not careful.” in the passage and the answer option “He is too careless.” must be inferred by the model to get
the answer right. Many MCQA datasets were collected from
language or science exams, which were purposely designed
by educational experts and consequently require non-trivial
reasoning techniques (Lai et al. 2017). As a result, the performance on these tasks may more accurately gauge language
comprehension ability of a model.
Recently large and powerful pre-trained language models
such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) have been achieving the
state-of-the-art (SOTA) results on various tasks, however, its
effectiveness on MCQA datasets has been limited by the data
insufﬁciency. For example, the MCTest dataset has two variants: MC160 and MC500, which are curated in a similar way,

Introduction

Building a system that comprehends text and answers questions is a challenging but fascinating problem, which can
serve as a proxy for measuring the machine’s ability to understand human language (Hermann et al. 2015). Many machine
reading comprehension (MRC) based question answering
(QA) datasets have been introduced over the past few years,
which differ from each other in various ways, including the
source and format of the context documents, whether external
knowledge is needed, the format of the answer, to name a
few. We can divide these QA tasks into two categories: 1) extractive/abstractive QA such as SQuAD (Rajpurkar, Jia, and
Liang 2018), and HotPotQA (Yang et al. 2018). 2) multiplechoice QA (MCQA) tasks such as MultiRC (Khashabi et al.
2018) and MCTest (Ostermann et al. 2018).
In general, in contrast to extractive/abstractive QA tasks,
the answers of the MCQA datasets are in the form of open,
∗
This work was done when the author was an intern at Amazon
Alexa AI, Sunnyvale, CA.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8010

