The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Day-Ahead Forecasting of Losses in the Distribution Network
Nisha Dalal,1* Martin Mølnå,1* Mette Herrem,1 Magne Røen,1 Odd Erik Gundersen1,2
1

2

TrønderEnergi Kraft AS, Trondheim, Norway
Norwegian Open AI Lab, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway
{nisha.dalal, martin.molna, mette.herrem, magne.roen}@tronderenergi.no, odderik@ntnu.no
∗
contributed equally

Abstract
We present a commercially deployed machine learning system that automates the day-ahead nomination of the expected
grid loss for a Norwegian utility company. It meets several
practical constraints and issues related to, among other things,
delayed, missing and incorrect data and a small data set. The
system incorporates a total of 24 different models that performs forecasts for three sub-grids. Each day one model is
selected for making the hourly day-ahead forecasts for each
sub-grid. The deployed system reduces the MAE with 41%
from 3.68 MW to 2.17 MW per hour from mid July to mid
October. It is robust and reduces manual work.

Figure 1: The graph at the top shows grid loss over one year,
while the one on the bottom shows grid loss over one week.

Introduction
Every day at noon utility companies in the Nordics have
to nominate to Nord Pool1 how much electricity that is expected to be lost in the power grid for each hour the next day.
This is called day-ahead nomination of grid losses. The grid
loss is correlated with the length of the path that the electricity is routed and the amount of electricity that is transported
through the power grid. The path through the power grid
changes daily and seemingly stochastically. The electricity
is routed based on operational decisions made by the power
grid operator. The consumption also changes every hour according to the weather, the season, time of the day, day of
the week and whether or not it is a holiday.
The power company TrønderEnergi Kraft AS nominates
losses day-ahead for the utility TrøndeEnergi Nett as a service. In the past, the losses were forecasted using a numerical method based on relatively simple heuristics and an
off-the-shelf energy consumption forecasting model. Manual work was required to recalculate constants part of the
numerical method, and the output of the forecasts were from
time to time adjusted manually if they looked off to the operators. The quality of these adjustments depended on the experience of the operators, and hence they were only as good
as the experts making these. As the forecasting using the numerical method and the adjustments were done manually by
a small set of operators, it was not very robust to changes.
Although not very time-consuming, using it required manual
work.

In this paper, we present a system that has been deployed to automate the day-ahead prediction of grid losses
for TrønderEnergi Nett. The deployed system reduces the
MAE with 41% from 3.68 MW to 2.17 MW per hour for
the period July 17 to Oct 21, 2019. The results translate to
a reduced imbalance cost of about 15 000$ per year for a
relatively small part of the power grid in Norway. Other advantages include reducing ﬁnancial risk that the utility is exposed to because of the imbalance between the nominated
loss and the actual loss in the grid, reduced manual work
(∼100 hours/year) and structured nomination not relying on
individuals. Reducing manual work reduces the potential for
human errors. Automation also frees time for the operators
that can be spent on other, more valuable tasks. It also standardize the process, so that it relies less on the expertise and
experience of individual operators.

Power Grids, Losses and Electricity Markets
The power grid transports electricity from the producers
to the customers and is divided into the transmission network and the distribution network. The transmission network transports electricity from the generation site, such as
an electrical power plant, to electrical substations, while the
distribution network distributes the electricity from the electrical substations to the customers. The transmission system
operator (TSO) operates the transmission network while the
distribution system operator (DSO) operates the distribution
network. In the Nordics, the state owned public utilities Stat-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.nordpoolgroup.com
13148

