The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Particle Swarm Based Algorithm for
Functional Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems
Moumita Choudhury,1 Saaduddin Mahmud,2 Md. Mosaddek Khan3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh
{moumitach22,1 saadmahmud142 }@gmail.com, mosaddek@du.ac.bd3

Over the years, several algorithms have been proposed to
solve DCOPs, which includes both exact and non-exact algorithms. Exact algorithms, such as ADOPT (Modi et al.
2005), DPOP (Petcu and Faltings 2005) and PT-FB (Litov
and Meisels 2017), are designed in such a way that provide the global optimal solution of a given DCOP. However, exact algorithms experience either or both exponential
memory requirements and exponential computational costs
as the system grows. On the contrary, non-exact algorithms
such as DSA (Zhang et al. 2005), MGM & MGM2 (Maheswaran, Pearce, and Tambe 2004), Max-Sum (Farinelli
et al. 2008; Khan, Tran-Thanh, and Jennings 2018), CoCoA (van Leeuwen and Pawelczak 2017), and ACO DCOP
(Chen et al. 2018) compromise some solution quality for
scalability.

Abstract
Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs) are
a widely studied constraint handling framework. The objective of a DCOP algorithm is to optimize a global objective
function that can be described as the aggregation of several distributed constraint cost functions. In a DCOP, each
of these functions is deﬁned by a set of discrete variables.
However, in many applications, such as target tracking or
sleep scheduling in sensor networks, continuous valued variables are more suited than the discrete ones. Considering this,
Functional DCOPs (F-DCOPs) have been proposed that can
explicitly model a problem containing continuous variables.
Nevertheless, state-of-the-art F-DCOPs approaches experience onerous memory or computation overhead. To address
this issue, we propose a new F-DCOP algorithm, namely
Particle Swarm based F-DCOP (PFD), which is inspired by
a meta-heuristic, Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). Although it has been successfully applied to many continuous
optimization problems, the potential of PSO has not been utilized in F-DCOPs. To be exact, PFD devises a distributed
method of solution construction while signiﬁcantly reducing the computation and memory requirements. Moreover,
we theoretically prove that PFD is an anytime algorithm. Finally, our empirical results indicate that PFD outperforms
the state-of-the-art approaches in terms of solution quality
and computation overhead.

In general, DCOPs assume that participating agents’ variables are discrete. Nevertheless, many real-world applications (e.g. target tracking sensor orientation (Fitzpatrick and
Meetrens 2003), sleep scheduling of wireless sensors (Hsin
and Liu 2004)) can be best modelled with continuous variables. Therefore, for discrete DCOPs to be able to apply
in such problems, we need to discretize the continuous domains of the variables. However, the discretization process
needs to be coarse for a problem to be tractable and must be
sufﬁciently ﬁne to ﬁnd high-quality solutions of the problem
(Stranders et al. 2009). To overcome this issue, Stranders
et al. 2009 have proposed a continuous version of DCOP,
which is later referred to as Functional DCOP (F-DCOP)
(Hoang et al. 2019). There are two main differences between
F-DCOP and DCOP. Firstly, instead of having discrete decision variables, F-DCOP has continuous variables that can
take any value between a range. Secondly, the constraint
functions are represented in functional forms in F-DCOP
rather than in the tabular forms in DCOP.

Introduction
Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs) are
an important constraint handling framework of multi-agent
systems in which multiple agents communicate with each
other in order to optimize a global objective. The global objective is deﬁned as the aggregation of cost functions (i.e.
constraints) among the agents. The cost functions can be deﬁned by a set of variables controlled by the corresponding
agents. DCOPs have been widely applied to solve a number
of multi-agent coordination problems including, multi-agent
task scheduling (Sultanik, Modi, and Regli 2007), sensor
networks (Farinelli, Rogers, and Jennings 2014), multi-robot
coordination (Yedidsion and Zivan 2016).

In order to cope with the modiﬁcation of the DCOP formulation, Continuous Max-Sum (CMS) has been proposed,
which is an extension of the discrete Max-Sum (Stranders et
al. 2009). However, this paper approximates the constraint
utility functions as piece-wise linear functions which are often not applicable in practice since a handful of real-life applications deals with only piece-wise linear functions. Toward addressing this limiting assumption of CMS, Hybrid

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7111

