The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fine-Grained Machine Teaching with Attention Modeling
Jiacheng Liu, Xiaofeng Hou, Feilong Tang∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{liujiacheng, xfhelen}@sjtu.edu.cn, tang-ﬂ@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

more complicated datasets like Visual Genome (Krishna et al.
2017), the demand for high-performance machine learning
(ML) models far exceeds the supply of specialized annotators. Thus, extensively training annotators to acquire domain
speciﬁc knowledge is needed.
Recently, machine teaching emerges as a promising approach to enhance the specialized skills of normal annotators (Chen et al. 2018; Doroudi et al. 2016). There are mainly
two categories of teaching techniques, the batch machine
teaching and interactive machine teaching. The batch machine teaching assumes the learner using a hypothesis transition model based on observed feedback (Singla et al. 2014).
Representing a new machine teaching paradigm, iterative machine teaching (IMT) selects teaching examples adaptive to
the learning progress of the crowd (Liu et al. 2017). Sequentially, more intelligent machine teaching frameworks (Zhou,
Nelakurthi, and He 2018) enable the teaching process to
achieve better converge rate in theory and in practice.
There are also massive applications (Dontcheva et al. 2014;
Honnibal and Montani 2017), which adopt machine teaching
to facilitate the annotation tasks.
However, the state-of-the-art machine teaching techniques
are too optimistic, they overestimate the ability of learners in
grasping a complex concept. In education systems (Ambrose
et al. 2010; Alkhatlan and Kalita 2018), students cannot concentrate on the overall concept of a complicated item, which
often contains multiple ﬁne-grained concepts. Instead, they
increasingly memorize partial concepts of this item. Taking
the ﬂower classiﬁcation as an example, learners always notice a few features with every example rather than remember
all the features including shape, texture, etc. Nevertheless,
most of the existing machine teaching schemes overlook the
fact that human beings can only obtain parts of a concept,
which involves multiple features. Meanwhile, a single sample contains unequal information in terms of various features
during the teaching process. Thus, learners accept the features of the whole concept at different levels. Summarily,
current techniques are insufﬁcient for modeling the teaching process of sophisticated concepts. With more and more
complicated dataset, it is challenging for us to rethink the
machine teaching frameworks.
To meet the requirement of increasingly complicated an-

Abstract
The state-of-the-art machine teaching techniques overestimate
the ability of learners in grasping a complex concept. On one
side, since a complicated concept always contains multiple
ﬁne-grained concepts, students can only grasp parts of them
during a practical teaching process. On the other side, because a single teaching sample contains unequal information
in terms of various ﬁne-grained concepts, learners accept them
at different levels. Thus, with more and more complicated
dataset, it is challenging for us to rethink the machine teaching
frameworks. In this work, we propose a new machine teaching
framework called Attentive Machine Teaching (AMT). Specifically, we argue that a complicated concept always consists
of multiple features, which we call ﬁne-grained concepts. We
deﬁne attention to represent the learning level of a learner
in studying a ﬁne-grained concept. Afterwards, we propose
AMT, an adaptive teaching framework to construct the personalized optimal teaching dataset for learners. During each
iteration, we estimate the workers’ ability with Graph Neural
Network (GNN) and select the best sample using a pool-based
searching approach. For corroborating our theoretical ﬁndings, we conduct extensive experiments with both synthetic
datasets and real datasets. Our experimental results verify the
effectiveness of AMT algorithms.

1

Introduction

In the last decades, the increasingly sophisticated dataset for
training machine learning (ML) models necessitates the need
for cultivating more specialized annotators. Namely, more annotators must acquire domain-speciﬁc knowledge to improve
the performance of ML algorithms. Taking computer vision
application as an example, At the early stage, image datasets
of vision applications like CIFAR (Krizhevsky and Hinton
2010) are small and simple. Therefore, most of the annotators can complete the annotation tasks merely based on their
knowledge of the classes from their everyday life (Daniel et
al. 2018). With the advent of larger and more informative
dataset like ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015), annotators with specialized training facilitate the performance of
ML models with more accurate classiﬁcation. Nowadays, for
∗

Feilong Tang is the corresponding author of this paper.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2585

