The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Skip-Connected Evolving Recurrent Neural Network
for Data Stream Classiﬁcation under Label Latency Scenario
Monidipa Das, Mahardhika Pratama, Jie Zhang, Yew Soon Ong
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{monidipadas, mpratama, zhangj, asysong}@ntu.edu.sg

online active learning models (Ksieniewicz et al. 2019)
which require the data labels to be immediately available
upon request. Even, the semi-supervised learning principle
(Haque, Khan, and Baron 2016) is also not truly effective in
the delay scenario of online learning, since each delayedlabeled sample is always treated as the unlabeled sample
as it appears with no label at the beginning, and in inﬁnite
delay scenario, the actual labels of the samples are never
available to guide the classiﬁer (Souza et al. 2015b). As a
consequence, the traditional procedure for monitoring error
rate and adapting with concept drift remains no longer applicable. Rather, it becomes necessary to devise a classiﬁer
model that should adapt itself by effective utilization of
the most recent and/or the most relevant labeled data, even
when the true label at the current instant is unavailable.

Abstract
Stream classiﬁcation models for non-stationary environments
often assume the immediate availability of data labels. However, in a practical scenario, it is quite natural that the data
labels are available only after some temporal lag. This paper
explores how a stream classiﬁer model can be made adaptive
to such label latency scenario. We propose SkipE-RNN, a
self-evolutionary recurrent neural network with dynamically
evolving skipped-recurrent-connection for the best utilization
of previously observed label information while classifying
the current data. When the data label is unavailable, SkipERNN uses an auto-learned mapping function to ﬁnd the best
match from the already known data labels and updates the
network parameter accordingly. Later, upon availability of
true data label, if the previously mapped label is found to
be incorrect, SkipE-RNN employs a regularization technique
along with the parameter updating process, so as to penalize
the model. In addition, SkipE-RNN has inborn power of selfadjusting the network capacity by growing/pruning hidden
nodes to cope with the evolving nature of data stream. Rigorous empirical evaluations using synthetic as well as realworld datasets reveal effectiveness of SkipE-RNN in both
ﬁnitely delayed and inﬁnitely delayed data label scenarios.

Contributions: Motivated by the limitations of the state-ofthe-art techniques, in this paper we aim to propose a virtually
supervised learning model with an embedded mapping unit
which continuously supervises the learning process by suggesting possible data label, even when there is a label latency
during stream classiﬁcation. We achieve this by proposing
a skip-connected evolving recurrent neural network (SkipERNN) following the teacher forcing policy for feature learning though analysis of temporality in the data. Our objective
of using recurrent neural network model is to exploit the
temporal dependency of a data stream as the basis for determining the current data labels, which is often ignored by
the existing classiﬁers. The proposed SkipE-RNN is ﬂexible
enough to be applied in the inﬁnitely delayed label scenario
as well. The key contributions of this work are as follows.
• This paper proposes SkipE-RNN as a novel variant of the
recurrent neural network model which is well featured for
stream classiﬁcation under label latency scenario.
• SkipE-RNN is deﬁned along with an embedded mechanism of label mapping that leads the model to dynamically evolve skip-connection for recurrent learning, and
thus, helps to continue learning under delay context.
• SkipE-RNN features ﬂexible architecture and selfadaptation power, according to which it starts learning
with a single hidden unit and automatically reﬁnes the network structure to cope with evolving data characteristic.

Introduction
Data streams are primarily unbounded and evolving data
that continuously arrive over time (Ditzler and Polikar
2013). Because of the two interesting characteristics,
namely ‘inﬁnite length’ and ‘evolving nature’ (indicating
concept drift, concept evolution, etc.), the streaming data
classiﬁcation has received considerable research attention
in present years (Masud et al. 2012). Besides, in a typical
real-world scenario, it often becomes hard to acquire labeled
data due to various issues, including high labelling cost,
lack of expertise, conﬁdentiality, etc. Thus, in practice, the
streaming data labels become available only after a certain
amount of delay which may vary from 0 to ∞ (Souza et
al. 2015a). However, majority of the existing data stream
classiﬁcation techniques are based on supervised learning
models, and hence, their performances are subjected to the
availability of the data labels. The same is also true for
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3717

