The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dynamic Programming for Predict+Optimise
Emir Demirović,1 Peter J. Stuckey,2,3 James Bailey,1 Jeffrey Chan,4
Christopher Leckie,1 Kotagiri Ramamohanarao,1 Tias Guns5
1

University of Melbourne, Australia
2
Monash University, Australia
3
Data61, Australia
4
RMIT University, Australia
5
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium
{emir.demirovic, baileyj, caleckie, kotagiri}@unimelb.edu.au,
peter.stuckey@monash.edu, jeffrey.chan@rmit.edu.au, tias.guns@vub.be
experience ei of the investigator. In addition, each project
has a cost ci and a limited amount of funding is available.
The committee decided to use a linear weighting scheme to
determine the perceived value vi of each project. They ﬁxed
the coefﬁcient for the experience component and are deciding on the coefﬁcient α for the novelty part, i.e., vi (α) =
ni · α + ei . Once the coefﬁcient α is agreed upon, the task
is to select the subset of projects to maximise the estimated
value. Consider four projects with features pi = (ni , ei , ci )
as (−1, 10, 2), (1, 2, 1), (−0.5, 5, 1), and (2, −5, 1). Note
that all but the ﬁrst project are of unit cost. Assume the
funding budget is set to two units. By varying the coefﬁcient
α, different optimal outcomes can be observed. Figure 1(a)
shows the relationship between α, the funding decisions, and
their total estimated value.
In the example above, the output is the list of projects that
are to be selected for funding. The estimated values serve
merely as proxies for deciding the outcome. However, the
true values of funding the project will only become apparent after the projects are completed. Therefore, the aim is to
learn a predictive model that results in a decision that maximises the true value, rather than the estimated values.
The main issue that arises is that conventional learning
metrics, such as mean-square error, do not necessarily reﬂect
the outcome of the optimisation procedure.
Example 1 (continued). The committee believes it would
be best to equally weigh the novelty and experience criteria, i.e., set α = 1. This results in funding project p1 .
However, a machine learning expert recommends using a
data-driven approach. When observing projects with similar features that were funded in previous years, the historical data suggests the projects are likely to result in values
V = (v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 ) = (14, 11, 12, 10). Linear regression,
a standard machine learning algorithm that
 minimises the
mean-square error, i.e., mse(V, V  (α)) = (vi − vi (α))2 ,
suggests setting the novelty coefﬁcient to α = 5. This would
lead to funding projects p2 and p4 , which has a greater outcome value than project p1 . However, had the machine
learning algorithm understood the underlying combinatorial optimisation problem, a possible suggestion would be
α = 3. This would result in funding projects p2 and p3 ,
which is the optimal funding decision according to histori-

Abstract
We study the predict+optimise problem, where machine
learning and combinatorial optimisation must interact to
achieve a common goal. These problems are important when
optimisation needs to be performed on input parameters that
are not fully observed but must instead be estimated using
machine learning. We provide a novel learning technique
for predict+optimise to directly reason about the underlying
combinatorial optimisation problem, offering a meaningful
integration of machine learning and optimisation. This is
done by representing the combinatorial problem as a piecewise linear function parameterised by the coefﬁcients of the
learning model and then iteratively performing coordinate descent on the learning coefﬁcients. Our approach is applicable to linear learning functions and any optimisation problem
solvable by dynamic programming. We illustrate the effectiveness of our approach on benchmarks from the literature.

Introduction
Machine learning and combinatorial optimisation are two
essential components of decision-making systems. The former aims to provide predictive models based on historical
data, while the latter prescribes optimal actions given input
data. While there has been signiﬁcant progress in these areas
individually, an established methodology for solving problems which require both remains an open question.
We study the predict+optimise problem (Demirović et al.
2019a; Wilder, Dilkina, and Tambe 2019; Donti, Amos, and
Kolter 2017), where the task is to learn input parameters to
a combinatorial optimisation problem, such that the resulting solutions are deemed desirable. Therefore, optimisation
needs to be performed with input that is approximated. Traditionally, predict+optimise is viewed as a two-stage process: predict the input parameters and then optimise. This is
illustrated in the following example, which will be used as a
running example throughout the paper.
Example 1. Consider a parametrised project-funding problem. The input parameters are integers that represent the
beneﬁt of funding each individual project pi . These estimates are based on the novelty ni of the project and the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1444

