The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Rethinking Generalization of Neural
Models: A Named Entity Recognition Case Study
Jinlan Fu,†∗ Pengfei Liu,†∗ Qi Zhang†‡

†Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
‡Research Institute of Intelligent and Complex Systems, Fudan University
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
825 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, China
{fujl16, pﬂiu14, qz}@fudan.edu.cn
Concretely, we take named entity recognition (NER) task as
a study case and investigate three crucial yet rarely raised
questions through entity- and class-centric generalization
analyses.
Q1: Does our model really have generalization ability, or it
just pretends to understand and make some shallow template
matches as observed in (Jia and Liang 2017)? We devise a
measure, which can break down the test set into different
interpretable groups, helping us diagnosing inadequacies in
the generalization of NER models (Sec. 4.1). Furthermore,
this measure makes it easier to ﬁnd human annotation errors,
which cover the actual generalization ability of the existing
models (Sec. 4.1). Q2: What factor of a dataset can distinguish neural networks that generalize well from those that
don’t? We introduce two metrics to quantify the dataset bias
in a cross-dataset experimental setting, enabling us to better
understand how the dataset bias inﬂuences the models’ generalization ability (Sec. 4.2). Q3: How does the relationship
between entity categories inﬂuence the difﬁculty of model
learning? Our class-centric analysis shows that if two categories, e.g. C1 and C2 , have overlaps (i.e. sharing a subset of
entities), then most of the errors on C1 made by the model
are due to mistakenly predicting C1 as C2 (Sec. 4.3). Our
experiment results show the prospects for further gains for
these problems from novel architecture design and knowledge pre-training seem quite limited (Sec. 4.3). Tab. 1 shows
the framework of our experimental designs.
Main Contributions This paper understands the generalization behavior from multiple novel angles, which contributes from the following two perspectives: 1) For the task
itself, we identify the bottleneck of existing methods on the
NER task in terms of breakdown performance analysis, annotation errors, dataset bias, and category relationships, which
suggest directions for improvement and can drive the progress
of this area. 2) Other tasks can beneﬁt from the research evidence found in this study. For example, this paper not only
shows that utilizing less but more relevant data can achieve
better performance, but also provides an effective and principled way to select more relevant training samples.
Observations Our ﬁndings are summarized as follows: (1)
The ﬁne-grained evaluation based on our proposed measure
reveals that the performance of existing models (including

Abstract
While neural network-based models have achieved impressive
performance on a large body of NLP tasks, the generalization behavior of different models remains poorly understood:
Does this excellent performance imply a perfect generalization
model, or are there still some limitations? In this paper, we
take the NER task as a testbed to analyze the generalization
behavior of existing models from different perspectives and
characterize the differences of their generalization abilities
through the lens of our proposed measures, which guides us to
better design models and training methods. Experiments with
in-depth analyses diagnose the bottleneck of existing neural
NER models in terms of breakdown performance analysis, annotation errors, dataset bias, and category relationships, which
suggest directions for improvement. We have released the
datasets: (ReCoNLL, PLONER) for the future research at
our project page: http://pﬂiu.com/InterpretNER/.

1

Introduction

Neural network-based models have achieved great success on a wide range of NLP tasks (Devlin et al. 2018;
Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014). However, the generalization behaviors of neural networks remain largely unexplained.
Recently, some researchers are beginning to realize this problem and attempt to understand the generalization behavior of
neural networks in terms of network architectures or optimization procedure (Zhang et al. 2016; Baluja and Fischer 2017;
Schmidt et al. 2018). However, it is incomplete to ignore the
characteristics of tasks and datasets for generalization analysis since it not only depends on the model’s architectures but
on the data itself (Arpit et al. 2017).
In NLP, there is a massive gap between the growing task
performance and the understanding of model generalization
behavior. Many tasks have reached a plateau in the performance on a particular dataset (Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018;
Devlin et al. 2018), which calls for a data-dependent understanding of models’ generalization behavior.
In this paper, we take a step further towards diagnosing and
characterizing generalization in the context of a speciﬁc task.
∗

These two authors contributed equally
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7732

