The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Region-Adaptive Dense Network for Efﬁcient Motion Deblurring
Kuldeep Purohit, A. N. Rajagopalan
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
kuldeeppurohit3@gmail.com, raju@ee.iitm.ac.in

32

Abstract

Ours

31.5

In this paper, we address the problem of dynamic scene deblurring in the presence of motion blur. Restoration of images affected by severe blur necessitates a network design
with a large receptive ﬁeld, which existing networks attempt
to achieve through simple increment in the number of generic
convolution layers, kernel-size, or the scales at which the image is processed. However, these techniques ignore the nonuniform nature of blur, and they come at the expense of an
increase in model size and inference time. We present a new
architecture composed of region adaptive dense deformable
modules that implicitly discover the spatially varying shifts
responsible for non-uniform blur in the input image and learn
to modulate the ﬁlters. This capability is complemented by
a self-attentive module which captures non-local spatial relationships among the intermediate features and enhances the
spatially varying processing capability. We incorporate these
modules into a densely connected encoder-decoder design
which utilizes pre-trained Densenet ﬁlters to further improve
the performance. Our network facilitates interpretable modeling of the spatially-varying deblurring process while dispensing with multi-scale processing and large ﬁlters entirely.
Extensive comparisons with prior art on benchmark dynamic
scene deblurring datasets clearly demonstrate the superiority
of the proposed networks via signiﬁcant improvements in accuracy and speed, enabling almost real-time deblurring.

Zhang CVPR19
Gao CVPR19

PSNR (dB)

31
30.5

Tao CVPR18

30
29.5

Zhang CVPR18

Nah CVPR17

29

Kupyn CVPR18
28.5 −2
10

−1

10

0

10

1

10

Runtime for an HD image (seconds)

Figure 1: Our network outperforms all existing approaches
on the dynamic scene deblurring benchmark in terms of accuracy as well as inference time.

nessed signiﬁcant advances in deblurring, wherein major efforts have gone into designing priors that are apt for recovering the underlying undistorted image and the camera trajectory (Vasu and Rajagopalan 2017; Yan et al. 2017). An exhaustive survey of uniform blind deblurring algorithms can
be found in (Lai et al. 2016). Few approaches (Chakrabarti
2016; Schuler et al. 2016) have proposed hybrid algorithms
where a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) estimates the
blur kernel, which is then used in an alternative optimization
framework for recovering the latent image.
However, these methods have been developed based on
a rather strong constraint that the scene is planar and that
the blur is governed by only camera motion. This precludes
commonly occurring blur in most practical settings. Realworld blur arises from various sources including moving
objects, camera shake and depth variations, causing different pixels to acquire different motion trajectories. A class
of algorithms involve segmentation methods to relax the
static and fronto-parallel scene assumption by independently
restoring different blurred regions in the scene (Hyun Kim,
Ahn, and Mu Lee 2013). However, these methods depend
heavily on an accurate segmentation-map. Few methods
(Sun et al. 2015; Gong et al. 2017) circumvent the segmentation stage by training CNNs to estimate locally linear blur
kernels and feeding them to a non-uniform deblurring algorithm based on patch-level prior. However, they are limited
in their capability when it comes to general dynamic scenes.

Introduction
Though computational imaging has made tremendous
progress over the years, handling motion blur in captured
content remains a challenge. Motion blur is caused by motion of objects in the scene or the camera during sensor exposure. Apart from signiﬁcantly degrading the visual quality,
the distortions arising from blur lead to considerable performance drop for many vision tasks (Vasiljevic, Chakrabarti,
and Shakhnarovich 2016). There exist a few commercially
available cameras which can capture frames at a high framerate and thus experience less blur but they suffer from noise
at high resolution and are quite expensive.
Motion deblurring is a challenging problem in computer
vision due to its ill-posed nature. The past decade has witc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11882

