The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Incorporating Expert-Based Investment Opinion
Signals in Stock Prediction: A Deep Learning Framework
Heyuan Wang,1 Tengjiao Wang,1∗ Yi Li1
1

Key Lab of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
{wangheyuan, tjwang, liyix}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Investment messages published on social media platforms are
highly valuable for stock prediction. Most previous work regards overall message sentiments as forecast indicators and
relies on shallow features (bag-of-words, noun phrases, etc.)
to determine the investment opinion signals. These methods
neither capture the time-sensitive and target-aware characteristics of stock investment reviews, nor consider the impact of investor’s reliability. In this study, we provide an
in-depth analysis of public stock reviews and their application in stock movement prediction. Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel framework which includes the following three
key components: time-sensitive and target-aware investment
stance detection, expert-based dynamic stance aggregation,
and stock movement prediction. We ﬁrst introduce our stance
detection model named MFN, which learns the representation of each review by integrating multi-view textual features and extended knowledge in ﬁnancial domain to distill bullish/bearish investment opinions. Then we show how
to identify the validity of each review, and enhance stock
movement prediction by incorporating expert-based aggregated opinion signals. Experiments on real datasets show our
framework can effectively improve the performance of both
investment opinion mining and individual stock forecasting.

(a) Huayi Brothers

(b) China Fortune

Figure 1: Dynamics of trading volumes and review amounts.

the “celebrity twin-contracts” incident. The sudden increase
in Figure 1b of China Fortune indicates an important policy announcement on April 1, 2017: establishing Xiongan
New Area. Shortly after the news release, a lot of comments
were generated from the public and related shares witnessed
a rapid rise. Therefore, it is reasonable to leverage public
opinion signals for stock prediction.
Most existing work on sentiment analysis based stock prediction aligns bullishness with the overall message sentiment, and heavily relies on word-level statistics and traditional classiﬁcation methods (Tetlock 2007; Bollen, Mao,
and Zeng 2011; Nguyen and Shirai 2015). They have a number of disadvantages. Firstly, they are limited in identifying
the matching relationship between multiple opinions and entities in a sentence. However, the author is likely to be in
favor of one object while against another. Consider the sentence “Out SANY HEAVY at 8.95, bot back some CMBC
this morning”, predictive indicators are words “Out” and
“bot back”, which represent opposite views (bearish and
bullish, respectively) toward different objects (words in uppercase). Through the statistic analysis of real-world online stock reviews (collected from guba and xueqiu), we
ﬁnd that nearly half of reviews contain more than one stock
entity. Thus the overall sentiment of a review text cannot be simply applied when it comes to a speciﬁc target

Introduction
Online forums and stock investment websites such as Stocktwits, Twitter and Weibo allow millions of investors to share
transactions, opinions, news events and so on in real time.
The numerous public comments are of great value in reﬂecting market conditions and making trading decisions, which
have been well studied in recent years. Figure 1 shows the
trading volumes of Huayi Brothers and China Fortune which
are two stocks in Chinese A-share market, and the amounts
of their relevant reviews from xueqiu1 and guba2 (two popular Chinese Twitter-like investment forums). It can be observed that for each stock, the ﬂuctuations of the two curves
are great synchronous, especially when a mutation occurs.
In Figure 1a, both the review amount and trading volume
of Huayi Brothers peaked on June 4, 2018, as a result of
∗
Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.xueqiu.com
2
http://guba.eastmoney.com

971

