The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reinforcement Learning of
Risk-Constrained Policies in Markov Decision Processes
Tomáš Brázdil,1 Krishnendu Chatterjee,2 Petr Novotný,1 Jiřı́ Vahala1
1

Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
{xbrazdil, petr.novotny, xvahala1}@ﬁ.muni.cz
2
Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria
Krishnendu.Chatterjee@ist.ac.at
policies that maximize the expected payoff. However, this
ignores that low probability failure events can have highly
negative impact on the system. In particular, in safety critical
systems, or systems with high cost for failures, policies with
high expected reward can be associated with risky actions
with undesirable chances of failure.
CCMDPs and risk-reward tradeoff. Chance- (or risk-) constrained MDPs (CCMDPs) introduce chance constraint or
risk bound which provides a bound on the allowed probability of failure of a policy (Rossman 1977; Santana, Thiébaux,
and Williams 2016; Ayton and Williams 2018). In particular, we consider MDPs equipped with a set of failure states
which represent catastrophic outcomes. The probability to
encounter any failure state represents the risk. Given a desired probability threshold for the risk bound, a risk-averse
policy ensures that the probability of failure does not exceed the given bound. On one hand, policies with low-risk
may ensure little expected payoff; on the other hand, policies
with high expected payoff can be associated with high risk.
Thus the relevant question to study is the interplay or the
tradeoff of risk and expected payoff. In this work we study
the following risk-constrained planning problem: given a
risk bound, the objective is to maximize the expected payoff
among all risk-averse policies that ensure the failure probability is at most the risk bound.
Motivating scenarios. Risk-constrained planning is natural
in several scenarios. For example, in planning under uncertainty (e.g., autonomous driving) certain events (e.g., the distance between two cars, or the distance between a car and an
obstacle, being less than a speciﬁed safe distance) must be
ensured with low probability. Similarly, in scenarios such as
a robot exploring an unknown environment for natural resources a signiﬁcant damage of the robot ends the mission,
and must be ensured with low probability. However, the goal
is to ensure effective exploration within the speciﬁed risk
bounds, which naturally gives rise to the risk-constrained
planning problem we consider.
Our contributions. The risk-constrained planning problem
(or CCMDPs) have been considered in previous works
such as (Santana, Thiébaux, and Williams 2016; Ayton and
Williams 2018). However these works consider only deterministic policies, and randomized (or mixed) policies
are strictly more powerful for the risk-constrained planning
problem (Altman 1999). A possible approach for the risk-

Abstract
Markov decision processes (MDPs) are the defacto framework for sequential decision making in the presence of
stochastic uncertainty. A classical optimization criterion for
MDPs is to maximize the expected discounted-sum payoff, which ignores low probability catastrophic events with
highly negative impact on the system. On the other hand,
risk-averse policies require the probability of undesirable
events to be below a given threshold, but they do not account
for optimization of the expected payoff. We consider MDPs
with discounted-sum payoff with failure states which represent catastrophic outcomes. The objective of risk-constrained
planning is to maximize the expected discounted-sum payoff
among risk-averse policies that ensure the probability to encounter a failure state is below a desired threshold. Our main
contribution is an efﬁcient risk-constrained planning algorithm that combines UCT-like search with a predictor learned
through interaction with the MDP (in the style of AlphaZero)
and with a risk-constrained action selection via linear programming. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
with experiments on classical MDPs from the literature, including benchmarks with an order of 106 states.

1

Introduction

MDPs with discounted-sum objectives. A classical problem in artiﬁcial intelligence is sequential decision making under uncertainty. The standard model incorporating
both decision-making choices and stochastic uncertainty are
Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Howard 1960; Puterman 1994). MDPs have a wide range of applications, from
planning (Russell and Norvig 2010), to reinforcement learning (Kaelbling, Littman, and Moore 1996), robotics (KressGazit, Fainekos, and Pappas 2009), and veriﬁcation of probabilistic systems (Baier and Katoen 2008), to name a few.
The objective in decision making under uncertainty is to
optimize a payoff function. A fundamental payoff function
is the discounted-sum payoff, where every transition of the
MDP is assigned a reward, and for an inﬁnite path (that consists of an inﬁnite sequence of transitions) the payoff is the
discounted-sum of the rewards of the transitions.
Expectation optimization and risk. In the classical studies of
MDPs with discounted-sum payoff the objective is to obtain
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9794

