The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Channel Reverse Dictionary Model
Lei Zhang,2∗† Fanchao Qi,1,2∗ Zhiyuan Liu,1,2‡ Yasheng Wang,3 Qun Liu,3 Maosong Sun1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Tsinghua University
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
zhanglei9003@gmail.com, qfc17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{liuzy, sms}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {wangyasheng, qun.liu}@huawei.com
Abstract

  

A reverse dictionary takes the description of a target word
as input and outputs the target word together with other
words that match the description. Existing reverse dictionary methods cannot deal with highly variable input queries
and low-frequency target words successfully. Inspired by the
description-to-word inference process of humans, we propose the multi-channel reverse dictionary model, which can
mitigate the two problems simultaneously. Our model comprises a sentence encoder and multiple predictors. The predictors are expected to identify different characteristics of the
target word from the input query. We evaluate our model
on English and Chinese datasets including both dictionary
deﬁnitions and human-written descriptions. Experimental results show that our model achieves the state-of-the-art performance, and even outperforms the most popular commercial reverse dictionary system on the human-written description dataset. We also conduct quantitative analyses and a case
study to demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our
model. All the code and data of this work can be obtained on
https://github.com/thunlp/MultiRD.

'         (  +
,  $

   $



$

  $

--

% (   $


'

 ( $)*&$  *  



Figure 1: An example illustrating what a forward and a reverse dictionary are.
know a limited number of words. Moreover, reverse dictionaries are believed to be helpful to word selection (or word
dictionary) anomia patients, people who can recognize and
describe an object but fail to name the object due to neurological disorder (Benson 1979). In terms of natural language
processing (NLP), reverse dictionaries can be used to evaluate the quality of sentence representations (Hill et al. 2016).
They are also beneﬁcial to the tasks involving text-to-entity
mapping including question answering and information retrieval (Kartsaklis, Pilehvar, and Collier 2018)
There have been some successful commercial reverse
dictionary systems such as OneLook1 , the most popular
one, but their architecture is usually undisclosed proprietary knowledge. Some scientiﬁc researches into building
reverse dictionaries have also been conducted. Early work
adopts sentence matching based methods, which utilize
hand-engineered features to ﬁnd the words whose stored
deﬁnitions are most similar to the input query (Bilac et al.
2004; Zock and Bilac 2004; Méndez, Calvo, and MorenoArmendáriz 2013; Shaw et al. 2013). But these methods
cannot successfully cope with the main difﬁculty of reverse
dictionaries that human-written input queries might differ
widely from target words’ deﬁnitions.
Hill et al. (2016) propose a new method based on neural
language model (NLM). They employ a NLM as the sentence encoder to learn the representation of the input query,
and return those words whose embeddings are closest to the

Introduction
A regular (forward) dictionary maps words to deﬁnitions
while a reverse dictionary (Sierra 2000) does the opposite
and maps descriptions to corresponding words. In Figure 1,
for example, a regular dictionary tells you that “expressway”
is “a wide road that allows trafﬁc to travel fast”, and when
you input “a road where cars go very quickly without stopping” to a reverse dictionary, it might return “expressway”
together with other semantically similar words like “freeway”.
Reverse dictionaries have great practical value. First and
foremost, they can effectively address the tip-of-the-tongue
problem (Brown and McNeill 1966), which severely afﬂicts
many people, especially those who write a lot such as researchers, writers and students. Additionally, reverse dictionaries can render assistance to new language learners who
∗

Indicates equal contribution
Work done during internship at Tsinghua University
‡
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1

312

https://onelook.com/thesaurus/

