The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On the Robustness of Face Recognition Algorithms Against Attacks and Bias
Richa Singh,1,2 Akshay Agarwal,1 Maneet Singh,1 Shruti Nagpal,1 Mayank Vatsa1,2
1
IIIT-Delhi, India; 2 IIT-Jodhpur, India
{rsingh, akshaya, maneets, shrutin, mayank}@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract

Class-1

Face recognition algorithms have demonstrated very high
recognition performance, suggesting suitability for real world
applications. Despite the enhanced accuracies, robustness of
these algorithms against attacks and bias has been challenged. This paper summarizes different ways in which
the robustness of a face recognition algorithm is challenged, which can severely affect its intended working. Different types of attacks such as physical presentation attacks, disguise/makeup, digital adversarial attacks, and morphing/tampering using GANs have been discussed. We also
present a discussion on the effect of bias on face recognition models and showcase that factors such as age and gender
variations affect the performance of modern algorithms. The
paper also presents the potential reasons for these challenges
and some of the future research directions for increasing the
robustness of face recognition models.

Class-2
Class-3
Attack on
FR System
Figure 1: An illustration where a face recognition algorithm learns the decision boundary to classify/identify three
classes/subjects. The singularities between the boundaries
give rise to the vulnerable points.
The data points which are in-between boundaries (i.e. maroon crosses) can potentially be used to challenge the robustness of the algorithm (intentionally or unintentionally).
Intentional variations refer to the samples/variations introduced by an adversary which attempts to attack a face recognition algorithm for obtaining unauthorized access. For example, robustness of a recognition algorithm can be affected by different kinds of impersonation techniques such
as spooﬁng or disguise variations. On the other hand, unintentional variations refer to the changes brought to the input
image without the intent of fooling the system. For example,
variations due to unintended occlusion, disease correcting
facial plastic surgery, and images captured across different
characteristics such as ethnicity and gender.
This research presents an overview of different techniques
which challenge the robustness of a face recognition algorithm, along with the potential solutions provided in the
literature. As part of this research, the variations observed
by a face recognition system have broadly been categorized as: (i) robustness due to external adversary (i.e. attacking face recognition algorithms) and (ii) robustness with
respect to bias. As mentioned earlier, an adversary can create data variations to fool the face recognition system and
this can be accomplished either via (a) physical attacks or
(b) digital attacks. Physical attacks refer to the techniques
where changes are made to the physical appearance of a face
before capturing an image. Presentation attacks, variations
due to disguise/make-up, and intentional plastic surgery are

Introduction
Face is one of the most commonly used and widely explored biometric modality for person authentication. Recent advances in machine learning, especially deep learning,
coupled with the availability of sophisticated hardware and
abundant data, have led to the development of several face
recognition algorithms achieving superlative performance
(Parkhi, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2015; Amos et al. 2016).
Due to the advancements, automated face recognition systems are now utilized in several real world scenarios ranging from photo tagging in social media, photo organization
in mobile devices to critical law enforcement applications
of missing person search and suspect identiﬁcation. While
recognition accuracy is one of the key metrics to evaluate
the effectiveness of a face recognition model, its robustness
with respect to different types of data variations must also
be evaluated.
Robustness of a face recognition algorithm refers to its
ability to handle intentional and unintentional variations in
the input space. Figure 1 presents illustrative class boundaries learned by a face recognition model for three classes.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13583

