The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Efﬁcient Evolutionary Algorithm
for Subset Selection with General Cost Constraints
Chao Bian,1 Chao Feng,2 Chao Qian,1∗ Yang Yu1
1

2

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
chaobian12@gmail.com, chaofeng@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {qianc, yuy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

with general cost constraints c(X) ≤ B. The linear cost constraint (i.e., c is a positive linear function) was ﬁrst considered. Khuller et al. (1999) showed that the greedy algorithm
fails to guarantee a bounded approximation ratio. Krause
and Guestrin (2005) proved that the generalized greedy algorithm can achieve an approximation ratio of (1/2)(1 − 1/e).
In each iteration, the generalized greedy algorithm adds one
item with the largest ratio of the marginal gain on f and c.
The subset found by this rule is compared with the best single item, and the better one is returned as the ﬁnal output.
Its approximation ratio can be improved to (1 − 1/e) by a
partial enumeration heuristic (Krause and Guestrin 2005),
which, however, leads to impractical computation time.
Later, the monotone submodular cost constraint (i.e., c
is a monotone submodular function) was considered. Note
that a positive linear function must be monotone submodular. Iyer and Bilmes (2013) proposed several algorithms with
bounded approximation guarantees by using suitable surrogate functions for f and c to optimize over. Considering that
the cost function c can be non-submodular in some real applications such as mobile robotic sensing and door-to-door
marketing, Zhang and Vorobeychik (2016) studied the more
general case where c is only required to be monotone. They
proved that the generalized greedy algorithm can achieve an
approximation ratio of (1/2)(1 − 1/e), but compared with
the optimal solution for a budget slightly smaller than B.
Besides relaxing the constraints, non-submodular objective functions have also been studied, e.g., (Bian et al. 2017;
Elenberg et al. 2018; Bogunovic, Zhao, and Cevher 2018;
Qian et al. 2019). They have many applications, such as
Bayesian experimental design (Krause, Singh, and Guestrin
2008), dictionary selection (Krause and Cevher 2010),
sparse regression (Das and Kempe 2011), and unsupervised
feature selection (Feng, Qian, and Tang 2019).
Recently, Qian et al. (2017) considered the very general
problem of maximizing monotone functions with monotone
cost constraints, i.e.,

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of selecting a subset from
a ground set to maximize a monotone objective function f
such that a monotone cost function c is bounded by an upper limit. State-of-the-art algorithms include the generalized
greedy algorithm and POMC. The former is an efﬁcient ﬁxed
time algorithm, but the performance is limited by the greedy
nature. The latter is an anytime algorithm that can ﬁnd better
subsets using more time, but without any polynomial-time approximation guarantee. In this paper, we propose a new anytime algorithm EAMC, which employs a simple evolutionary
algorithm to optimize a surrogate objective integrating f and
c. We prove that EAMC achieves the best known approximation guarantee in polynomial expected running time. Experimental results on the applications of maximum coverage,
inﬂuence maximization and sensor placement show the excellent performance of EAMC.

Introduction
The subset selection problem is a general NP-hard problem
with many applications, such as maximum coverage (Feige
1998), inﬂuence maximization (Kempe, Kleinberg, and
Tardos 2003) and sensor placement (Krause, Singh, and
Guestrin 2008), to name a few. The goal is to select a subset
of size at most B from a ground set of n items for maximizing some given monotone submodular function f , i.e.,
arg maxX⊆V f (X)

s.t.

|X| ≤ B,

where f : 2V → R is monotone submodular. Note that
submodularity is an attractive property encoding a natural
diminishing returns condition. It is known that the greedy
algorithm, which iteratively adds one item with the largest
marginal gain on f , achieves the optimal polynomial-time
approximation guarantee of (1 − 1/e) (Nemhauser, Wolsey,
and Fisher 1978; Nemhauser and Wolsey 1978).
Since there are also many applications involving complex
constraints, much attention has been drawn to the problem

arg maxX⊆V f (X)

∗

This work was supported by the NSFC (61603367, 61876077)
and the JiangsuSF (BK20170013). Chao Qian is the corresponding
author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

s.t. c(X) ≤ B,

(1)

where both f and c are monotone, but not necessarily submodular. They proved that the generalized greedy algorithm
is still a good approximation solver, achieving an approxi3267

