The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Pixel-Aware Deep Function-Mixture Network for Spectral Super-Resolution
Lei Zhang,1∗ Zhiqiang Lang,2* Peng Wang,3 Wei Wei,2 Shengcai Liao,1 Ling Shao,1 Yanning Zhang2
1

Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
3
School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong, Australia
2

Abstract

Spectrum of bush
Spectrum of bush
Spectrum of sky

Spectral super-resolution (SSR) aims at generating a hyperspectral image (HSI) from a given RGB image. Recently, a
promising direction is to learn a complicated mapping function from the RGB image to the HSI counterpart using a deep
convolutional neural network. This essentially involves mapping the RGB context within a size-speciﬁc receptive ﬁeld
centered at each pixel to its spectrum in the HSI. The focus
thereon is to appropriately determine the receptive ﬁeld size
and establish the mapping function from RGB context to the
corresponding spectrum. Due to their differences in category
or spatial position, pixels in HSIs often require different-sized
receptive ﬁelds and distinct mapping functions. However, few
efforts have been invested to explicitly exploit this prior.
To address this problem, we propose a pixel-aware deep
function-mixture network for SSR, which is composed of a
new class of modules, termed function-mixture (FM) blocks.
Each FM block is equipped with some basis functions, i.e.,
parallel subnets of different-sized receptive ﬁelds. Besides, it
incorporates an extra subnet as a mixing function to generate pixel-wise weights, and then linearly mixes the outputs
of all basis functions with those generated weights. This enables us to pixel-wisely determine the receptive ﬁeld size and
the mapping function. Moreover, we stack several such FM
blocks to further increase the ﬂexibility of the network in
learning the pixel-wise mapping. To encourage feature reuse,
intermediate features generated by the FM blocks are fused in
late stage, which proves to be effective for boosting the SSR
performance. Experimental results on three benchmark HSI
datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method.

Existing DCNN based SSR methods

Spectrum of sky

The proposed method

Figure 1: Existing DCNN based SSR methods and the proposed method. The former often take a ﬁxed-sized receptive
ﬁeld and learn a universal mapping function for all pixels,
while the latter can adaptively determine the receptive ﬁeld
size and the mapping function for each pixel.

and Shaw 2002) and tracking (Van Nguyen, Banerjee, and
Chellappa 2010) etc. However, the expense of obtaining
such spectral information is to increase the pixel size on
the sensor, which inevitably limits the spatial resolution of
HSIs (Arad and Ben-Shahar 2016). Thus, it is crucial to
investigate how to generate high-spatial-resolution (HSR)
HSIs.
Different from convnetioanl HSIs super-resolution (Mei
et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018a) that directly improves the
spatial resolution of a given HSI, spectral super-resolution
(SSR) (Arad and Ben-Shahar 2016; Xiong et al. 2017)
adopts an alternative way and attempts to produce an HSR
HSI by increasing the spectral resolution of a given RGB
image with satisfactory spatial resolution. Early SSR methods (Arad and Ben-Shahar 2016; Aeschbacher, Wu, and
Timofte 2017; Jia et al. 2017) often formulate SSR as a
linear inverse problem, and exploit the inherent low-level
statistic of HSR HSIs as priors. However, due to the limited expressive capacity of their handcrafted prior models,
these methods fail to well generalize to challenging cases.
Recently, witnessing the great success of deep convolutional
neural networks (DCNNs) in a wide range of tasks (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016; 2017), increasing efforts have been invested to learn a DCNN based

Introduction
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) that capture the reﬂectance of
scenes with extremely high spectral resolution (Chakrabarti
and Zickler 2011), often contain hundreds or thousands of
spectral bands, where each pixel has a spectrum (Zhang et
al. 2018b). Proﬁting from the abundant spectral information, HSIs have been widely applied to various tasks, e.g.,
classiﬁcation (Akhtar and Mian 2018), detection (Manolakis
∗
The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work. The corresponding author is Wei Wei (email: weiweinwpu@nwpu.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12821

