The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Attentive Pairwise Interaction for Fine-Grained Classiﬁcation
Peiqin Zhuang,∗1,2 Yali Wang,∗1,2 Yu Qiao†1,2
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
{pq.zhuang, yl.wang, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Fine-grained classiﬁcation is a challenging problem, due to
subtle differences among highly-confused categories. Most
approaches address this difﬁculty by learning discriminative
representation of individual input image. On the other hand,
humans can effectively identify contrastive clues by comparing image pairs. Inspired by this fact, this paper proposes
a simple but effective Attentive Pairwise Interaction Network (API-Net), which can progressively recognize a pair
of ﬁne-grained images by interaction. Speciﬁcally, API-Net
ﬁrst learns a mutual feature vector to capture semantic differences in the input pair. It then compares this mutual vector with individual vectors to generate gates for each input
image. These distinct gate vectors inherit mutual context on
semantic differences, which allow API-Net to attentively capture contrastive clues by pairwise interaction between two images. Additionally, we train API-Net in an end-to-end manner
with a score ranking regularization, which can further generalize API-Net by taking feature priorities into account. We
conduct extensive experiments on ﬁve popular benchmarks
in ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation. API-Net outperforms the recent SOTA methods, i.e., CUB-200-2011 (90.0%), Aircraft
(93.9%), Stanford Cars (95.3%), Stanford Dogs (90.3%), and
NABirds (88.1%).

1

Figure 1: Motivation (Best view in color). Caspian Tern and
Elegant Tern are two highly-confused bird species. Humans
often distinguish them by pairwise comparison, instead of
checking each individual image alone. First, humans would
exploit contrastive clues (e.g. body and mouth) from the image pair, and then check each image with these mutual contexts to further discover distinct attentions on each image.
Finally, humans recognize both images via comparing subtle differences jointly. To mimic this capacity, we propose a
novel API-Net. More details can be found in Section 1.

Introduction

Over the past years, CNNs have achieved remarkable successes for visual recognition (He et al. 2016; Huang et al.
2017). However, these classical models are often limited to
distinguish ﬁne-grained categories, due to highly-confused
appearances. Subsequently, a number of ﬁne-grained frameworks have been proposed by ﬁnding key part regions (Fu,
Zheng, and Mei 2017; Zheng et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2018),
learning patch relations (Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji
2015; Cai, Zuo, and Zhang 2017; Yu et al. 2018), etc. But
most of them take individual image as input, which may
limit their ability to identify contrastive clues from different
images for ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation.

On the contrary, humans often recognize ﬁne-grained objects by comparing image pairs (Bruner 2017), instead of
checking single images alone. For example, Caspian Tern
and Elegant Tern are two highly-confused bird species, as
shown in Fig. 1. If we only check individual image alone,
it is difﬁcult to recognize which categories it belongs to, especially when the bird is self-occluded with a noisy back-

∗

Equally-contributed ﬁrst authors
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13130

