The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A New Approach to Plan-Space Explanation: Analyzing
Plan-Property Dependencies in Oversubscription Planning
Rebecca Eiﬂer,1 Michael Cashmore,2 Jörg Hoffmann,1
Daniele Magazzeni,3 Marcel Steinmetz1
1

Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany,
University of Strathclyde, Computer and Information Sciences, Glasgow, UK,
3
King’s College London, Department of Informatics, London, UK,
{lastname}@cs.uni-saarland.de, {ﬁrstname.lastname}@strath.ac.uk, {ﬁrstname.lastname}@kcl.ac.uk
2

inspection. In particular, questions of the form “Why does
the plan not achieve goal G?” or “Why don’t you satisfy
preference P ?” need to be answered. Such answers require
insights about the space of possible plans. We propose to
address this by plan-property entailments, as in “Because
achieving G would necessitate to either forego G or use
> 100 energy units”. More formally, a plan property p is a
Boolean function on plans (e. g. G true at end), and p entails
q if all plans that satisfy p also satisfy q. A user question
of the form “Why not p?” can then be answered in terms of
those q entailed by p (e. g. G false at end or energy usage
> 100). We will refer to this as a local explanation, whereas
a global explanation shows the graph of all plan-property
entailments. The former makes sense in iterative planning
as outlined, the latter makes sense when an overview of plan
space is desirable. (For example, in simulated penetration
testing (Boddy et al. 2005; Hoffmann 2015), an overview of
the space of possible attacks may be useful.)
Our form of explanation falls into the class of contrastive
explanations as discussed e. g. by Miller (2019). Previous
work on local explanation, i. e., answering questions of the
form “Why not p?”, has suggested to generate a new plan π 
that satisﬁes p, and answer the question based on comparing
π and π  (Smith 2012; Fox, Long, and Magazzeni 2017). A
weakness of this idea is that there may be differences between π and π  unrelated to p. Our approach replaces the existential answer generating a single alternative plan π  with
a universal answer determining shared properties of all possible such alternatives. From this perspective, our proposal
is a new, universal variant of contrastive plan explanation.
The concept of plan-property entailments is generic and in
principle applicable to many AI Planning contexts. Here, we
instantiate it for goal dependencies in oversubscription planning (OSP, e. g. (Smith 2004; Domshlak and Mirkis 2015)),
where not all goals can be achieved. 
The plan properties
we consider are goal-fact conjunctions g∈A g or negations

¬ g∈B g thereof, and we identify goal exclusion entail

ments g∈A g ⇒ ¬ g∈B g stating that, if a plan achieves
all goals in A, then it must forego at least one goal in B.
We spell out our framework for this form of plan properties and entailment relations. We introduce algorithms for
computing local and global explanations, leveraging and

Abstract
In many usage scenarios of AI Planning technology, users
will want not just a plan π but an explanation of the space
of possible plans, justifying π. In particular, in oversubscription planning where not all goals can be achieved, users may
ask why a conjunction A of goals is not achieved by π. We
propose to answer this kind of question with the goal conjunctions B excluded by A, i. e., that could not be achieved if A
were to be enforced. We formalize this approach in terms of
plan-property dependencies, where plan properties are propositional formulas over the goals achieved by a plan, and dependencies are entailment relations in
 plan space. We
 focus
on entailment relations of the form g∈A g ⇒ ¬ g∈B g,
and devise analysis techniques globally identifying all such
relations, or locally identifying the 
implications of a single
given plan property (user question) g∈A g. We show how,
via compilation, one can analyze dependencies between a
richer form of plan properties, specifying formulas over action subsets touched by the plan. We run comprehensive experiments on adapted IPC benchmarks, and ﬁnd that the suggested analyses are reasonably feasible at the global level, and
become signiﬁcantly more effective at the local level.

1

Introduction

AI plan generation technology serves to generate a plan π
based on a world model. If the model and optimization objective reﬂect the real world and user preference with absolute accuracy, then π can be executed as-is. Yet in many usage scenarios, that is not so. Often, models are approximate,
optimization objectives are highly complex and/or implicit
in the heads of the human users, and bad plan decisions can
be highly detrimental. A prominent example are space applications as discussed e. g. by Smith (2012), but arguably
also many other applications ranging from Industry 4.0 to
robot-aided disaster recovery. As Smith pointed out, planning should then be an iterative process in which the planning system suggests plan candidates, to be inspected and
criticised by human users for iterative plan improvement.
As Smith also pointed out, plan explanation is a crucial
step of such an iterative process, as a key means for user
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9818

