The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Infomax Neural Joint Source-Channel Coding via Adversarial Bit Flip
Yuxuan Song,1 Minkai Xu,1 Lantao Yu,2 Hao Zhou,3 Shuo Shao,1 Yong Yu1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Stanford University, 3 Bytedance AI lab
{songyuxuan,mkxu,yyu}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn, lantaoyu@cs.stanford.edu,
zhouhao.nlp@bytedance.com, shuoshao@sjtu.edu.cn

case, maximum likelihood decoding was proven to be an
NP-hard problem (Berlekamp, McEliece, and Van Tilborg
1978), and relaxation approaches of this problem (Feldman,
Wainwright, and Karger 2005; Vontobel and Koetter 2007)
also suffer from high distortion rate issues.

Abstract
Although Shannon theory states that it is asymptotically optimal to separate the source and channel coding as two independent processes, in many practical communication scenarios this decomposition is limited by the ﬁnite bit-length
and computational power for decoding. Recently, neural
joint source-channel coding (NECST) (Choi et al. 2018)
is proposed to sidestep this problem. While it leverages
the advancements of amortized inference and deep learning
(Kingma and Welling 2013; Grover and Ermon 2018) to improve the encoding and decoding process, it still cannot always achieve compelling results in terms of compression and
error correction performance due to the limited robustness
of its learned coding networks. In this paper, motivated by
the inherent connections between neural joint source-channel
coding and discrete representation learning, we propose a
novel regularization method called Infomax Adversarial-BitFlip (IABF) to improve the stability and robustness of the
neural joint source-channel coding scheme. More speciﬁcally, on the encoder side, we propose to explicitly maximize
the mutual information between the codeword and data; while
on the decoder side, the amortized reconstruction is regularized within an adversarial framework. Extensive experiments
conducted on various real-world datasets evidence that our
IABF can achieve state-of-the-art performances on both compression and error correction benchmarks and outperform the
baselines by a signiﬁcant margin.

To address the above-mentioned challenges, the machine
learning community has cast the encoding process of joint
source-channel coding as a binary representation learning
problem. Recently, inspired by variational mutual information maximization, (Choi et al. 2018) proposed Neural Error
Correcting and Source Trimming (NECST), which is a deep
learning framework for joint source-channel coding. To be
more speciﬁc, the data is encoded with a network into a bitstring representation without the need of manually designing
the coding scheme. Additionally, based on amortized optimization, the framework provides an extremely fast decoder
after training.
However, while NECST leverages the advancements of
amortized inference and deep learning to improve the compression and reconstruction process, it still cannot always
achieve compelling results when concerning about compression and error correction performance, which is mainly due
to the limited informativeness and robustness of learned
coding networks. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to solve the previous problems in NECST via mutual information maximization and amortized regularization (Shu et al. 2018). On the encoder side, we employ
the idea of mutual information maximization for the better informativeness, which is predominant in representation
learning (Hu et al. 2017; Zhao, Song, and Ermon 2017;
Rolfe 2016). However, we note that the previous mutual information maximization methods in neural discrete representation learning are intractable when the dimension (i.e.
length of bit-string) is high. To address this issue, we further propose a novel loss function which can be estimated
and optimized with deep neural networks more effectively.
On the decoder side, we theoretically demonstrate that the
objective in (Choi et al. 2018) is essentially regularizing the
amortized decoder and the strength of regularization is determined by the noise level of the channel. The amortized
optimization tends to encourage the decoder to capture more
global structures during the decoding, and it is reasonable

Introduction
Shannon source-channel separation theorem (Shannon
1948) is one of the most fundamental theorems in information theory. It states that when the source and channel coding procedures are conducted separately there is an asymptotically negligible loss in the point-to-point communication
system, which indicates the system can be simpliﬁed as a
series of two subsystems without any interference to each
other. However, although the separation approach is optimal in many scenarios (Tian et al. 2013), it can be proved
to be sub-optimal when the source generates ﬁnite-length
data blocks (Kostina and Verdú 2013), which is common
in practical communication scenarios. Furthermore, in this
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5834

