The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Instance-Adaptive Graph for EEG Emotion Recognition
Tengfei Song,1,2 Suyuan Liu,1 Wenming Zheng,1∗ Yuan Zong,1 Zhen Cui3
1

Key Laboratory of Child Development and Learning Science, Ministry of Education, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{songtf, syl, wenming zheng, xhzongyuan}@seu.edu.cn; zhen.cui@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
To tackle the individual differences and characterize the dynamic relationships among different EEG regions for EEG
emotion recognition, in this paper, we propose a novel
instance-adaptive graph method (IAG), which employs a
more ﬂexible way to construct graphic connections so as to
present different graphic representations determined by different input instances. To ﬁt the different EEG pattern, we
employ an additional branch to characterize the intrinsic dynamic relationships between different EEG channels. To give
a more precise graphic representation, we design the multilevel and multi-graph convolutional operation and the graph
coarsening. Furthermore, we present a type of sparse graphic
representation to extract more discriminative features. Experiments on two widely-used EEG emotion recognition datasets
are conducted to evaluate the proposed model and the experimental results show that our method achieves the state-ofthe-art performance.

6XEMHFW

6XEMHFW

6XEMHFW

Figure 1: The individual energy distributions of three subjects in resting state.

set of objects and their relationships. Commonly, the graph
connections, used in the classical graph CNNs (Bruna et
al. 2013) and GCNN (Defferrard 2016), are mostly based
on some natural connections or spatial positions between
nodes. Apparently, these methods to construct graph connections are not suitable to model EEG signals, which contain
complicated dynamic functional connections between different EEG regions. These functional connections of brain
regions and their functional organizations are particularly
important in the cognitive generation of emotions (Kober
et al. 2008). Moreover, the imperceptible neuromechanism
makes it hard to directly predeﬁne the functional connections related to emotions. Song et.al (Song et al. 2018)
proposed the dynamical graph convolutional neural network
(DGCNN) to learn an optical connection based on the distribution of EEG data. Li et.al (Li et al. 2018a) proposed
the adaptive graph convolution neural network (AGCNN) to
modify the graph connections in a small range. Nevertheless,
these methods just provide the common graph connection or
weakly modiﬁed graph connections. The studies (Lee and
Hsieh 2014; Davidson et al. 1999) on human emotions have
investigated the signiﬁcance of individual differences, like
the energy distributions shown in Figure 1, and different patterns of functional connectivity in terms of different emotion
states, which should also be considered for EEG emotion
recognition.
To address aforementioned issues, in this paper, we propose a novel instance-adaptive graph neural network (IAG)
framework to model the relationships of different EEG channels in a more ﬂexible way. Neuroscience research (LeDoux

Introduction
Emotion recognition makes machine capture human emotional states, which is a crucial part in the research ﬁelds
of man-machine interaction and artiﬁcial intelligence. As a
hot topic in affective computing area, emotion recognition
has recently caught more attentions. The responses of emotion can be characterized by behavioral and physiological
signals. Compared to behavioral signals, such as facial expression and speech, physiological signals provide a more
reliable way to identify different emotion states since they
are difﬁcult to be disguised (Liu, Sourina, and Nguyen
2011). Among various non-invasive physiological signals
such as galvanic skin response, electrocardiogram, respiratory, blood pressure and electromyogram et al., electroencephalograph (EEG) can directly measure brain electrical
activities, which contain richer information related to emotions.Therefore, the study on EEG signals can contribute to
the revelation of human emotions.
For EEG signals, the data are distributed on irregular grid.
Graph provides an effective data structure to characterize a
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2701

