The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Question-Driven Purchasing Propensity Analysis for Recommendation
Long Chen,1 Ziyu Guan,2∗ Qibin Xu,3 Qiong Zhang,4 Huan Sun,5 Guangyue Lu,1 Deng Cai3
1

Xi’an University of Posts and Telecommunications, Xi’an, China
2
Northwest University, Xi’an, China
3
Zhejiang University, Hang Zhou, China
4
Alibaba Group, Hang Zhou, China
5
Ohio State University, Columbus, USA
1
{chenlong, gylu}@xupt.edu.cn, 2 ziyuguan@nwu.edu.cn
3
21751012@zju.edu.cn, dengcai78@qq.com 4 qz.zhang@alibaba-inc.com 5 sun.397@osu.edu
2015), they still cannot well detect purchasing propensity,
not to mention leveraging it for recommendation.
Today’s e-commerce Websites offer an online Q&A system where users can freely ask questions about a product
and receive answers from the merchant or users who bought
that product. The questions are a good indicator of users’ local demands. For instance, a user wants to buy a cellphone (a
speciﬁc product domain) which can run the PUBG smoothly
(an explicit instant demand), and he/she asks this question in
the Q&A system. Providing recommendations based on this
local demand from the cell phone domain is usually more effective for stimulating consumption than relying on general
preference of the user. In this work, we propose and study
this question-driven recommendation problem. We believe
we are the ﬁrst to explore this problem.
The basic idea of generating question-driven recommendations is that we evaluate purchasing propensity based
on the eligibility of products for the user’s local demands
and generate recommendation accordingly. Then the critical question is, how we can assess the eligibility of products given a user and a question. Since users can ask a variety of questions, heuristic methods based on enumerating product features cannot well address this problem. Recently, reviews have become a focus for recommender systems since they not only reﬂect user preference but also
show pros/cons of items (Zheng, Noroozi, and Yu 2017;
Tay, Tuan, and Hui 2018). Intuitively, diverse user questions could probably be addressed in reviews written by
other users who have similar concerns (Chen et al. 2019).
We therefore resort to user reviews to address this questiondriven recommendation problem.
In this work, we propose a Question-Driven Attentive
Neural Network (QDANN) to evaluate purchasing propensity based on which personalized recommendations can be
generated. To assess the eligibility of a product given a user
question, QDANN analyzes reviews of the product to ﬁnd
supporting evidences. Relevance and sentiment orientation
are the two important ingredients for this analysis. For example, in Figure 1 the sentence “It runs the PUBG smoothly.”
is a proper supporting evidence for the question “can the
PUBG run smoothly on it?”. This sentence contains both a
relevance evidence (“runs the PUBG”) and a positive sen-

Abstract
Merchants of e-commerce Websites expect recommender
systems to entice more consumption which is highly correlated with the customers’ purchasing propensity. However,
most existing recommender systems focus on customers’
general preference rather than purchasing propensity often
governed by instant demands which we deem to be well conveyed by the questions asked by customers. A typical recommendation scenario is: Bob wants to buy a cell phone which
can play the game PUBG. He is interested in HUAWEI P20
and asks “can PUBG run smoothly on this phone?” under it.
Then our system will be triggered to recommend the most
eligible cell phones to him. Intuitively, diverse user questions
could probably be addressed in reviews written by other users
who have similar concerns. To address this recommendation
problem, we propose a novel Question-Driven Attentive Neural Network (QDANN) to assess the instant demands of questioners and the eligibility of products based on user generated
reviews, and do recommendation accordingly. Without supervision, QDANN can well exploit reviews to achieve this goal.
The attention mechanisms can be used to provide explanations for recommendations. We evaluate QDANN in three domains of Taobao. The results show the efﬁcacy of our method
and its superiority over baseline methods.

Introduction
Online shopping has become our daily routine. Merchants
of e-commerce Websites expect recommender systems to
entice more consumption which is highly correlated with
the customers’ purchasing propensity. Purchasing propensity is mainly governed by a customer’s “local” demands
when looking for a speciﬁc kind of products. Such instant
demands are not explicitly reﬂected by user behaviors exploited by traditional recommender systems, such as purchases, clicks and review writing. Moreover, most previous
recommendation algorithms take the paradigm of summarizing users’ preference from the above behaviors and using
this “global” preference to generate recommendations (Wan
and McAuley 2018). Although there are some studies trying
to capture the dynamic preference by temporal models (Liu
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
35

