The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generalized Hidden Parameter MDPs:
Transferable Model-Based RL in a Handful of Trials
Christian F. Perez, Felipe Petroski Such, Theofanis Karaletsos
Uber AI Labs
San Francisco, CA 94105
{cfp, felipe.such, theofanis}@uber.com

(strong generalization) without learning a new policy entirely
from scratch (Hu et al. 2018).
To tackle this problem, we introduce Generalized Hidden
Parameter MDPs (GHP-MDP) to describe families of MDPs
in which dynamics and reward can change as a function of
hidden parameters (Section 3.1). This model introduces (multiple) latent variables that capture the factors of variation
implicitly represented by tasks at training time. At test time,
we infer the MDP by inferring the latent variables that form
a latent embedding space of the hidden parameters. This
extends and uniﬁes two lines of work: we augment transferable models of MDPs like (Doshi-Velez and Konidaris
2016) with structure on reward and dynamics, and combine
it with powerful approaches for learning probabilistic models (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017) to solve
challenging RL tasks.
We propose two variants of latent variable models: one
with a shared latent variable to capture all variations in reward
and dynamics, and a structured model where latent variables
may factorize causally. Our intention is to afford GHP-MDPs
the use of prior knowledge and inductive biases that could
improve sample efﬁciency, transfer, and generalization.
In our experiments, agents are trained on a small subset of
possible tasks—all related as instances from the same GHPMDP—and then generalize to novel tasks from the same
family via inference. We show that this method improves on
the state-of-the-art sample efﬁciency for complex tasks while
matching performance of model-free meta-RL approaches
(Section 5) (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Rakelly et al.
2019). Notably, our approach also succeeds with a fairly
small number of training tasks, requiring only a dozen in
these experiments.

Abstract
There is broad interest in creating RL agents that can solve
many (related) tasks and adapt to new tasks and environments
after initial training. Model-based RL leverages learned surrogate models that describe dynamics and rewards of individual
tasks, such that planning in a good surrogate can lead to good
control of the true system. Rather than solving each task individually from scratch, hierarchical models can exploit the
fact that tasks are often related by (unobserved) causal factors
of variation in order to achieve efﬁcient generalization, as in
learning how the mass of an item affects the force required to
lift it can generalize to previously unobserved masses. We propose Generalized Hidden Parameter MDPs (GHP-MDPs) that
describe a family of MDPs where both dynamics and reward
can change as a function of hidden parameters that vary across
tasks. The GHP-MDP augments model-based RL with latent
variables that capture these hidden parameters, facilitating
transfer across tasks. We also explore a variant of the model
that incorporates explicit latent structure mirroring the causal
factors of variation across tasks (for instance: agent properties,
environmental factors, and goals). We experimentally demonstrate state-of-the-art performance and sample-efﬁciency on
a new challenging MuJoCo task using reward and dynamics
latent spaces, while beating a previous state-of-the-art baseline
with > 10× less data. Using test-time inference of the latent
variables, our approach generalizes in a single episode to novel
combinations of dynamics and reward, and to novel rewards.

1

Introduction

In our pursuit of better learning algorithms, we seek those
that can learn quickly across tasks that it encounters during
training (called positive transfer when there is helpful synergy), and generalize to novel it encounters at test-time. Consider an illustrative problem of an agent with some pattern of
broken actuators (agent variation) acting in an environment
with changing surface conditions due to weather (dynamics
variation), tasked with achieving one of many possible goals
(reward variation). We would like a learning algorithm that (1)
pools information across observed tasks to learn faster (positive transfer), and generalizes from observed combinations
of agent, dynamics, and reward variations to (2) other unseen
combinations (weak generalization) and (3) novel variations

2

Model-based RL

We ﬁrst consider a reinforcement learning (RL) problem described by a Markov decision process (MDP) comprising a
state space, action space, transition function, reward function, and initial state distribution: {S, A, T , R, ρ0 } (Bellman
1957). We deﬁne a ”task” (or ”environment”) τ to be a MDP
from a set of MDPs that share S and A but differ in one or
more of {T , R, ρ0 }.
In model-based RL, the agent uses a model of the transition
dynamics T : S × A → S in order to maximize rewards
over some task-dependent time horizon H. For a (stochastic)

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5403

