The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Energy and Policy Considerations for Modern Deep Learning Research
Emma Strubell

Ananya Ganesh

Andrew McCallum

Facebook AI Research
strubell@fb.com

University of Massachusetts Amherst
aganesh@cs.umass.edu

University of Massachusetts Amherst
mccallum@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
The ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence has experienced a dramatic
methodological shift towards large neural networks trained
on plentiful data. This shift has been fueled by recent advances in hardware and techniques enabling remarkable levels of computation, resulting in impressive advances in AI
across many applications. However, the massive computation
required to obtain these exciting results is costly both ﬁnancially, due to the price of specialized hardware and electricity
or cloud compute time, and to the environment, as a result of
non-renewable energy used to fuel modern tensor processing
hardware. In a paper published this year at ACL, we brought
this issue to the attention of NLP researchers by quantifying
the approximate ﬁnancial and environmental costs of training
and tuning neural network models for NLP (Strubell, Ganesh,
and McCallum 2019). In this extended abstract, we brieﬂy
summarize our ﬁndings in NLP, incorporating updated estimates and broader information from recent related publications, and provide actionable recommendations to reduce
costs and improve equity in the machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence community.

Figure 1: Training time (petaﬂop/s-day; log scale) of notable AI models from 2012–2018. Compute used to train the
largest models continues to grow exponentially, exceeding
the rate of Moore’s Law by a wide margin. Figure and analysis from Amodei and Hernandez (2018).

Introduction
Recent advances in methodology and computational hardware have enabled exciting advances across many application areas of artiﬁcial intelligence, such as game playing
(Silver et al. 2017; OpenAI 2018), natural language processing (Devlin et al. 2019; Aharoni, Johnson, and Firat 2019),
computer vision (Chollet 2017; Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019) and robotics (Agostinelli et al. 2019). Many
of these impressive results depend on training large models
on considerable quantities of data, incurring substantial ﬁnancial and environmental costs due to the energy required
to perform this computation. Whereas a decade ago most AI
research could be performed on a commodity desktop computer, modern deep learning research increasingly requires
access to a cluster containing specialized tensor processing
hardware such as GPUs and TPUs, and obtaining state-ofthe-art performance on common benchmarks requires days
or weeks of training on tens or hundreds of these nodes.

In this article, we summarize previous work characterizing the energy required to train and develop recent deep
learning models for NLP, and share conclusions and recommendations inspired by those results that apply broadly to
artiﬁcial intelligence researchers and practitioners.

Case study 1: Training
To quantify the computational and environmental cost of
training deep neural network models for NLP, we ﬁrst perform an analysis of the energy required to train four popular off-the-shelf NLP models. We do this by training the
models described below using the default settings provided,
and sample power consumption during training using readily available command-line tools. We then estimate the time
to train to convergence using wall-clock training times and
hardware reported in the original papers, and combine training time with power draw as described under Methods below to estimate total energy consumption and corresponding
carbon footprint during training.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13693

