The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cost-Effective Incentive Allocation via Structured Counterfactual Inference
Romain Lopez,1 Chenchen Li,2,3 Xiang Yan,2,3 Junwu Xiong,2
Michael I. Jordan,1 Yuan Qi,2 Le Song2,4
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
{romain lopez, jordan}@cs.berkeley.edu
2
AI Department, Ant Financial Service Group
{junwu.xjw, yuan.qi, le.song}@antﬁn.com
3
Department of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
lcc1992@sjtu.edu.cn, xyansjtu@163.com
4
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
to the global cost of the marketing campaign or treatment
regime. This framework can be readily applied to the problem of allocating monetary values of coupons in a marketing
campaign under ﬁxed budget constraints from the management.

Abstract
We address a practical problem ubiquitous in modern marketing campaigns, in which a central agent tries to learn a policy
for allocating strategic ﬁnancial incentives to customers and
observes only bandit feedback. In contrast to traditional policy optimization frameworks, we take into account the additional reward structure and budget constraints common in this
setting, and develop a new two-step method for solving this
constrained counterfactual policy optimization problem. Our
method ﬁrst casts the reward estimation problem as a domain
adaptation problem with supplementary structure, and then
subsequently uses the estimators for optimizing the policy
with constraints. We also establish theoretical error bounds
for our estimation procedure and we empirically show that
the approach leads to signiﬁcant improvement on both synthetic and real datasets.

1

Existing work in counterfactual inference using bandit feedback (Joachims, Swaminathan, and de Rijke 2018;
Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017) does not make use
of the supplementary structure for the rewards and is limited in practice when the cardinality of the action space
is large (Lefortier et al. 2016). We therefore developed a
novel algorithm which incorporates such structure. The algorithm, which we refer to as Constrained Counterfactual
Policy Optimization via Structured Incentive Response Estimation (CCPOvSIRE), has two components. First, we build
on recent advances in representation learning for counterfactual inference (Johansson, Shalit, and Sontag 2016) and
extend this framework to estimate the incentive response
for multiple treatments while taking into account the reward
structure (SIRE). Second, we rely on the estimates to optimize the coupon assignment policy under budget constraints
(CCPO).

Introduction

Batch Learning from Bandit Feedback (BLFB) (Swaminathan and Joachims 2015a; 2015b) is a form of counterfactual inference given only observational data (Pearl 2009).
The problem arises in many real-world decision-making scenarios, including personalized medicine, where one is interested in estimating which treatment would have led to the
optimal outcome for a particular patient (Xu, Xu, and Saria
2016), or online marketing, which might focus for example
on placing ads to maximize the click-through-rate (Strehl et
al. 2010).
In this paper, we focus on a novel ﬂavor of BLFB, which
we refer to as cost-effective incentive allocation. In this
problem formulation we allocate economic incentives (e.g.,
online coupons) to customers and observe a response (e.g.,
whether the coupon is used or not). Each action is mapped to
a cost and we further assume that the response is monotonically increasing with respect to the action’s cost. Such an
assumption is natural in many of the problems domains that
motivate us, including drug-response estimation and online
marketing, and it has the virtuous side effect of improving
generalization to test data and making the model more interpretable. We also incorporate budget constraints related

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First,
we review existing approaches related to the problem of
cost-effective incentive allocation and provide a brief background on BFLB. Then, we present our novel setting and
the corresponding assumptions. In particular, we introduce
structure on the action space, cost functions and budget constraints. Furthermore, we derive theoretical upper bounds
on the reward estimates and present CCPOvSIRE as a natural approach to optimizing this bound. Finally, we evaluate our approach on fully-simulated data, and introduce
a novel benchmarking approach based on nested classiﬁcation which we apply to semi-simulated data from ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009). In both cases, we show that our
method compares favorably to approaches based on BanditNet (Joachims, Swaminathan, and de Rijke 2018), CFRNet (Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017), BART (Hill 2011)
and GANITE (Yoon, Jordon, and van der Schaar 2018).

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4997

