The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Shape-Aware Organ Segmentation by Predicting Signed Distance Maps
Yuan Xue,1∗ Hui Tang,2 Zhi Qiao,2 Guanzhong Gong,3
Yong Yin,3 Zhen Qian,2 Chao Huang,2 Wei Fan,2 Xiaolei Huang1
1

Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA
Tencent Hippocrates Research Lab, Palo Alto, CA, USA
3
Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute, Jinan, Shandong, China
{yzx139, suh972}@psu.edu, {tanghui, xiaobuqiao, qianzhen, mrchaohuang, davidwfan}@tencent.com
2

Abstract
In this work, we propose to resolve the issue existing in current deep learning based organ segmentation systems that
they often produce results that do not capture the overall
shape of the target organ and often lack smoothness. Since
there is a rigorous mapping between the Signed Distance Map
(SDM) calculated from object boundary contours and the binary segmentation map, we exploit the feasibility of learning the SDM directly from medical scans. By converting the
segmentation task into predicting an SDM, we show that our
proposed method retains superior segmentation performance
and has better smoothness and continuity in shape. To leverage the complementary information in traditional segmentation training, we introduce an approximated Heaviside function to train the model by predicting SDMs and segmentation
maps simultaneously. We validate our proposed models by
conducting extensive experiments on a hippocampus segmentation dataset and the public MICCAI 2015 Head and Neck
Auto Segmentation Challenge dataset with multiple organs.
While our carefully designed backbone 3D segmentation network improves the Dice coefﬁcient by more than 5% compared to current state-of-the-arts, the proposed model with
SDM learning produces smoother segmentation results with
smaller Hausdorff distance and average surface distance, thus
proving the effectiveness of our method.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: An example hippocampus segmentation comparison of (a) groundtruth annotation, which lacks smoothness in 3D view due to the inconsistency of annotation in
2D; (b) segmentation result from the model without predicting the signed distance map; (c) segmentation result from
the model with predicting the signed distance map, and is
clearly smoother while preserving the overall shape.
curate organ segmentation system has been desired. Traditional methods such as the atlas-based methods (Aljabar et
al. 2009) and active contour models (Kass, Witkin, and Terzopoulos 1988) suffer from computational overhead during
inference and may lack generality, deep learning based segmentation methods have been more prominent and enabled
faster and more accurate segmentation results recently.
Different from general segmentation problems such as lesion segmentation, organs have relatively stable positions,
shapes and sizes. While current state-of-the-art organ segmentation systems are dominated by deep learning based
methods (Roth et al. 2015), they often lack awareness of the
feasible shape and suffer from nonsmoothness of the training ground truth labelled by doctors, especially in 3D scenarios. See Figure 1 as an example: the ground truth label of
a hippocampus cannot maintain consistent and continuous
shape due to the fact that it is annotated in 2D slices by contours instead of 3D surfaces. In traditional medical image
segmentation methods, such smoothness issue can be mitigated by adding a regularization term with physical meaning as in snakes (Kass, Witkin, and Terzopoulos 1988) and
level sets (Osher and Sethian 1988). To leverage the shape
awareness of traditional methods, we propose to regress the
Signed Distance Map (SDM) directly from the input images
through a 3D convolutional neural network.

Introduction
In medical image segmentation, organ segmentation is of
great importance in disease diagnosis and surgical planning.
For instance, the segmented shape of hippocampus may be
useful as a biomarker for neurodegenerative disorders including the Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Scher et al. 2007).
In radiotherapy planning, accurate segmentation result of organs at risks (OARs) may help oncologists design better radiation treatment plans such as the appropriate beam paths
so that radiation concentrates on the tumour region while
minimises the dose to surrounding healthy organs (Moore
et al. 2011). Since manual annotation of organs brings extra work load and can be error-prone, an automatic and ac∗
This work was done during the ﬁrst author’s summer internship at Tencent Hippocrates Research Lab.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12565

