The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SNEQ: Semi-Supervised Attributed Network
Embedding with Attention-Based Quantisation
Tao He,1 Lianli Gao,2 Jingkuan Song,2 Xin Wang,3 Kejie Huang,4 Yuan-Fang Li1∗
1

Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800
Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan 611731
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Jinnan, Tianjin 300350
4
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310007
{tao.he, yuanfang.li}@monash.edu, lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn, jingkuan.song@gmail.com,
wangx@tju.edu.cn, huangkejie@zju.edu.cn,

2

sian distribution and achieves good performance in link prediction and node classiﬁcation.
Label information has also been incorporated in embedding methods. HCGE (Dos Santos, Piwowarski, and Gallinari 2016) is a supervised method for node classiﬁcation
with good improvement. Kipf and Welling (2017) ﬁrst proposed an end-to-end semi-supervised graph convolutional
network (GCN) architecture via a localised ﬁrst-order approximation. H-GCN (Hu et al. 2019) explored a hierarchical GCN that aggregates nodes with similar neighbourhood structure into hypernodes. Graph Attention Network
(GAT) (Velic̆ković et al. 2018) is an attention-based graph
convolutional network, focusing on weighted aggregation of
neighbourhood information. A major drawback of most existing graph embedding methods is the high computational
cost on retrieval tasks such as node recommendation. Retrieval tasks rely on expensive distance measures on ﬂoatvalued vectors such as dot product. On large networks with
hundreds of thousands or millions of nodes, retrieval becomes prohibitively expensive. At the same time, it also imposes a signiﬁcant storage overhead.
Embedding vectors usually contain a large amount of
redundant information. Hashing and quantisation methods (Lian et al. 2018; Du and Wang 2014; Zhang et al. 2014)
have been proposed to compress such learned features. The
main idea of quantisation is to learn a series of codebooks
to approximate the actual embeddings. In other words, the
original embeddings are represented by their closest centres. Although quantisation and hashing methods introduce
additional information loss, they signiﬁcantly reduce storage footprint and retrieval time. By pre-generating a lookup
table, recent quantisation methods (Cao et al. 2017a) can
achieve a retrieval speed similar to hashing. With the additional codebooks, quantisation also achieves a better retrieval accuracy than hashing.
In this paper, we present SNEQ, a novel semi-supervised
network embedding method combined with quantisation
learned through a self-attention layer. The embedding component utilises both node labels, network proximity information, as well as node attributes. Meanwhile, our selfattention based quantisation learns a compact and accurate
codebook in an end-to-end fashion. SNEQ takes all of the

Abstract
Learning accurate low-dimensional embeddings for a network is a crucial task as it facilitates many network analytics tasks. Moreover, the trained embeddings often require a signiﬁcant amount of space to store, making storage and processing a challenge, especially as large-scale networks become more prevalent. In this paper, we present a
novel semi-supervised network embedding and compression
method, SNEQ, that is competitive with state-of-art embedding methods while being far more space- and time-efﬁcient.
SNEQ incorporates a novel quantisation method based on a
self-attention layer that is trained in an end-to-end fashion,
which is able to dramatically compress the size of the trained
embeddings, thus reduces storage footprint and accelerates
retrieval speed. Our evaluation on four real-world networks of
diverse characteristics shows that SNEQ outperforms a number of state-of-the-art embedding methods in link prediction,
node classiﬁcation and node recommendation. Moreover, the
quantised embedding shows a great advantage in terms of
storage and time compared with continuous embeddings as
well as hashing methods.

Introduction
Network embedding methods learn an encoder system that
converts nodes into low-dimensional ﬂoat-valued vectors,
aiming at preserving the original network information as
much as possible. It has a wide range of applications and
has attracted signiﬁcant attention. Many algorithms have
been proposed, including DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and
Skiena 2014), LINE (Tang et al. 2015), Node2vec (Grover
and Leskovec 2016), and NetMF (Qiu et al. 2018), among
many others. Many of these methods (Perozzi, Al-Rfou,
and Skiena 2014; Lian et al. 2018; Qiu et al. 2018) are
trained in an unsupervised manner, completely disregarding the valuable node label information, leaving signiﬁcant
room for improvement on node classiﬁcation performance.
Graph2Gauss (G2G) (Bojchevski and Günnemann 2018) is
an unsupervised method that embeds each node into a Gaus∗
Lianli Gao, Jingkuan Song and Yuan-Fang Li are joint corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4091

