The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Residual-Dense Lattice Network for Speech Enhancement
Mohammad Nikzad,1 Aaron Nicolson,1 Yongsheng Gao,1
Jun Zhou,1 Kuldip K. Paliwal,1 Fanhua Shang2
1 Institute for Integrated and Intelligent Systems, Grifﬁth University, Australia
2 School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xidian University, China

{m.nikzadehaji, aaron.nicolson}@grifﬁthuni.edu.au,
{yongsheng.gao, jun.zhou, k.paliwal}@grifﬁth.edu.au
fhshang@xidian.edu.cn

Li et al. 2019) CNNs, as well as causal dilated convolutional units (Bai, Kolter, and Koltun 2018). A residual CNN
(ResNet) aggregates layer outputs via a summation operation, which is given as input to deeper layers. A densely connected CNN (DenseNet) differs by aggregating layer outputs
via a concatenation operation. Other ANNs that have been
successfully applied to speech enhancement include generative adversarial networks (GANs) and encoder-decoder
CNNs (Pascual, Bonafonte, and Serra 2017).

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with residual links
(ResNets) and causal dilated convolutional units have been
the network of choice for deep learning approaches to speech
enhancement. While residual links improve gradient ﬂow
during training, feature diminution of shallow layer outputs
can occur due to repetitive summations with deeper layer
outputs. One strategy to improve feature re-usage is to fuse
both ResNets and densely connected CNNs (DenseNets).
DenseNets, however, over-allocate parameters for feature reusage. Motivated by this, we propose the residual-dense lattice network (RDL-Net), which is a new CNN for speech enhancement that employs both residual and dense aggregations
without over-allocating parameters for feature re-usage. This
is managed through the topology of the RDL blocks, which
limit the number of outputs used for dense aggregations. Our
extensive experimental investigation shows that RDL-Nets
are able to achieve a higher speech enhancement performance
than CNNs that employ residual and/or dense aggregations.
RDL-Nets also use substantially fewer parameters and have
a lower computational requirement. Furthermore, we demonstrate that RDL-Nets outperform many state-of-the-art deep
learning approaches to speech enhancement.
Availability: https://github.com/nick-nikzad/RDL-SE.

Residual and dense aggregations of layer outputs have
been found to beneﬁt training. Residual links improve gradient ﬂow during backpropagation (He et al. 2016) and prevent the vanishing and exploding gradient problems (Bengio, Simard, and Frasconi 1994). This allows the training of
very deep neural networks. Dense aggregations offer direct
feature re-usage, as deeper layers have access to the outputs
of shallower layers (Huang et al. 2017). This allows a layer
to explore a larger set of features during training. Despite the
success of both ResNets and DenseNets, both aggregation
types have drawbacks. For ResNets, information from the
outputs of shallower layers can be lost after multiple summations with deeper layer outputs (Zhu et al. 2018). This
restricts feature re-usage and limits feature exploration during training. For DenseNets, while the concatenation of all
previous layer outputs yields total feature re-usage, a signiﬁcant number of parameters are unexploited due to large input
sizes (Wang et al. 2018). This is exempliﬁed in Figure 1 (a),
where the input size increases with the depth of the block.

Introduction
Deep learning approaches to speech enhancement represent a signiﬁcant leap in performance over previous approaches, such as the decision-directed (DD) approach
(Ephraim and Malah 1984). Multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs)
were amongst the ﬁrst artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs)
used for speech enhancement (Xu et al. 2017). Recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) employing long short-term memory (LSTM) cells provided a higher performance at the cost
of parameter inefﬁciency and extensive training times (Chen
and Wang 2017). Convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
were able to match the performance of LSTM networks,
with fewer parameters and a reduction in training time (Park
and Lee 2017). LSTM networks were not outperformed until
the introduction of residual (He et al. 2016; Rethage, Pons,
and Serra 2018) and densely connected (Huang et al. 2017;

Combining the beneﬁts of both aggregation types has also
been investigated. Mixed link networks (MLNs) are CNNs
that employ both residual and dense aggregations (Wang
et al. 2018). A network that employs densely connected
residual blocks (DenseRNet) was able to outperform both
ResNets and DenseNets on a speech recognition task (Tang
et al. 2018). As shown in (Wang et al. 2018), MLNs such
as DenseRNets follow a similar dense aggregation strategy to DenseNets. For example, DenseRNet blocks have total feature re-usage between residual blocks. This indicates
that current MLNs possess the same drawback inherent with
DenseNets: too many parameters are allocated for feature reusage in each block. In this paper, we propose a new CNN
for speech enhancement that takes advantage of both aggre-

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8552

