The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Recognizing Instagram Filtered Images with Feature De-Stylization
Zhe Wu,1∗ Zuxuan Wu,2† Bharat Singh,2 Larry S. Davis2
1

Comcast Applied AI Research, 2 University of Maryland,College Park
zhe wu@comcast.com, {zxwu, bharat, lsd}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract






Top1 ACC








25*
+XGVRQ
/RIL
+HIH
(DUO\ELUG
6XWUR
:DOGHQ

%UDQQDQ
;SUR,,
$PDUR
$SROOR
6LHUUD
5LVH
1DVKYLOOH
9DOHQFLD
3RSURFNHW
:LOORZ
.HOYLQ
*RWKDP
7RDVWHU
$YHUDJH





Feature Divergence

Deep neural networks have been shown to suffer from
poor generalization when small perturbations are added (like
Gaussian noise), yet little work has been done to evaluate
their robustness to more natural image transformations like
photo ﬁlters. This paper presents a study on how popular pretrained models are affected by commonly used Instagram ﬁlters. To this end, we introduce ImageNet-Instagram, a ﬁltered
version of ImageNet, where 20 popular Instagram ﬁlters are
applied to each image in ImageNet. Our analysis suggests
that simple structure preserving ﬁlters which only alter the
global appearance of an image can lead to large differences
in the convolutional feature space. To improve generalization,
we introduce a lightweight de-stylization module that predicts parameters used for scaling and shifting feature maps
to “undo” the changes incurred by ﬁlters, inverting the process of style transfer tasks. We further demonstrate the module can be readily plugged into modern CNN architectures
together with skip connections. We conduct extensive studies
on ImageNet-Instagram, and show quantitatively and qualitatively, that the proposed module, among other things, can effectively improve generalization by simply learning normalization parameters without retraining the entire network, thus
recovering the alterations in the feature space caused by the
ﬁlters.



Figure 1: Performance of ResNet50 pretrained on I MA GE N ET (Green) and Conv5 feature divergence (Orange). Xaxis: Different types of Instagram ﬁlters. Left-Y-axis: Top1
accuracy; right-Y-axis: Feature Divergence.

about whether these models can offer reliable recognition
performance, particularly when evaluated on images from
social media, where images are generally modiﬁed (ﬁltered) extensively by adjusting parameters like brightness,
color, and contrast or their combinations. For example, Instagram provides 40 pre-deﬁned ﬁlters and users can apply these ﬁlters to make photos look appealing with only
a few clicks. These ﬁltered images contain various visual
effects, incurring far more complicated perturbations compared to Gaussian noises (Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019;
Geirhos et al. 2018). Thus, models pretrained on natural images may fail when tested on these ﬁltered images.
Extensive studies have been conducted to improve the
generalization (Zhang et al. 2017) of deep neural networks
and techniques like Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014) and
BatchNorm (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015) can effectively reduce
overﬁtting. The generalization ability of deep networks is
usually measured on a held-out testing set; or related tasks

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) demonstrate impressive recognition accuracies on standard benchmarks like
I MAGE N ET (Deng et al. 2009), even surpassing humanlevel performance (He et al. 2015) especially when recognizing ﬁne-grained objects; and as a result, these trained
models are widely applied to a variety of applications in
real-world. However, recent studies have shown CNNs are
vulnerable to even small perturbations (Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019) like a Gaussian noise or blur, resulting in
signiﬁcant performance degradation, let alone maliciously
injected adversarial noises (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016). This raises doubts
∗

This work was done when the author was at Univ. of Maryland.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12418

