The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Video Cloze Procedure for Self-Supervised Spatio-Temporal Learning
Dezhao Luo,1,2∗ Chang Liu,3∗ Yu Zhou,1† Dongbao Yang,1 Can Ma,1 Qixiang Ye,3† Weiping Wang1
2

1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{luodezhao, zhouyu, yangdongbao, macan, wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn
liuchang615@mails.ucas.ac.cn, qxye@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
We propose a novel self-supervised method, referred to as
Video Cloze Procedure (VCP), to learn rich spatial-temporal
representations. VCP ﬁrst generates “blanks” by withholding
video clips and then creates “options” by applying spatiotemporal operations on the withheld clips. Finally, it ﬁlls the
blanks with “options” and learns representations by predicting the categories of operations applied on the clips. VCP can
act as either a proxy task or a target task in self-supervised
learning. As a proxy task, it converts rich self-supervised representations into video clip operations (options), which enhances the ﬂexibility and reduces the complexity of representation learning. As a target task, it can assess learned representation models in a uniform and interpretable manner.
With VCP, we train spatial-temporal representation models
(3D-CNNs) and apply such models on action recognition and
video retrieval tasks. Experiments on commonly used benchmarks show that the trained models outperform the state-ofthe-art self-supervised models with signiﬁcant margins.

1

Introduction

In the past few years, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have unprecedentedly advanced the ﬁeld of computer vision. Generally, vision tasks are solved by training
models on large-scale datasets with label annotations (Kim,
Cho, and Kweon 2019). Typically, CNNs pre-trained on ImageNet (Jia et al. 2009) incorporate rich representation capability and have been widely used as initial models.
Nevertheless, annotating large-scale datasets is costly
and labor-intensive, particularly when facing tasks involving complex data (e.g., videos) and concepts (e.g., action analysis and video retrieval) (Fernando et al. 2017;
Kay et al. 2017).
To conquer this issue, self-supervised representation
learning, which leverages the information from unlabelled
data to train desired models, has attracted increasing attention from the artiﬁcial intelligence community. For video
data, existing approaches usually deﬁne an annotation-free

Figure 1: VCP is a novel self-supervised method for spatialtemporal representation learning. It generates “blanks” by
withholding video clips, creates “options” by applying
spatial-temporal operations on the withheld clips, and completes cloze for feature learning.
proxy task, which provides special supervision for model
learning by fulﬁlling the objective of the proxy task.
In the early research (Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015;
Xiaolong and Abhinav 2015), relative location of the patches
in images or the order of video frames were used as a supervisory signal. However, the learned features were merely
on a frame-by-frame basis, which are implausible to video
analytic tasks where spatio-temporal features are prevailing.
Recently, (Wang et al. 2019) proposed to learn representations by regressing motion and appearance statistics. In (Fernando et al. 2017), an odd-one-out network is proposed to

∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding authors
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11701

