The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Variational Metric Scaling for Metric-Based Meta-Learning
Jiaxin Chen, Li-Ming Zhan, Xiao-Ming Wu,∗ Fu-lai Chung∗
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{jiax.chen, lmzhan.zhan}@connect.polyu.hk, xiao-ming.wu@polyu.edu.hk, cskchung@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Many metric-based meta-algorithms (short form for metalearning algorithms) employ a softmax classiﬁer with crossentropy loss, which is computed with the logits being the
distances between a query and supports in the embedding
(metric) space. However, it has been shown that the scale
of the logits – the metric scaling parameter, is critical to
the performance of the learned model. Snell, Swersky, and
Zemel (2017) found that Euclidean distance signiﬁcantly
outperforms cosine similarity in few-shot classiﬁcation, while
Oreshkin, López, and Lacoste (2018) and Wang et al. (2018)
pointed out that there is no clear difference between them
if the logits are scaled properly. They supposed that there
exists an optimal metric scaling parameter which is data and
architecture related, but they only used cross validation to
manually set the parameter, which requires pre-training and
cannot ﬁnd an ideal solution.
In this paper, we aim to design an end-to-end method that
can automatically learn an accurate metric scaling parameter.
Given a set of training tasks, to learn a data-dependent metric
scaling parameter that can generalize well to a new task,
Bayesian posterior inference over learnable parameters is
a theoretically attractive framework (Gordon et al. 2018;
Ravi and Beatson 2019). We propose to recast metric-based
meta-algorithms from a Bayesian perspective and take the
metric scaling parameter as a global parameter. As exact
posterior inference is intractable, we introduce a variational
approach to efﬁciently approximate the posterior distribution
with stochastic variational inference.
While a proper metric scaling parameter can improve classiﬁcation accuracy via adjusting the cross-entropy loss, it
simply rescales the embedding space but does not change
the relative locations of the embedded samples. To transform
the embedding space to better ﬁt the data distribution, we
propose a dimensional variational scaling method to learn a
scaling parameter for each dimension, i.e., a metric scaling
vector. Further, in order to learn task-dependent embeddings
(Oreshkin, López, and Lacoste 2018), we propose an amortized variational approach to generate task-dependent metric
scaling vectors, accompanied by an auxiliary training strategy
to avoid time-consuming pre-training or co-training.
Our metric scaling methods can be used as pluggable modules for metric-based meta-algorithms. For example, it can

Abstract
Metric-based meta-learning has attracted a lot of attention
due to its effectiveness and efﬁciency in few-shot learning.
Recent studies show that metric scaling plays a crucial role
in the performance of metric-based meta-learning algorithms.
However, there still lacks a principled method for learning
the metric scaling parameter automatically. In this paper, we
recast metric-based meta-learning from a Bayesian perspective and develop a variational metric scaling framework for
learning a proper metric scaling parameter. Firstly, we propose
a stochastic variational method to learn a single global scaling
parameter. To better ﬁt the embedding space to a given data
distribution, we extend our method to learn a dimensional
scaling vector to transform the embedding space. Furthermore,
to learn task-speciﬁc embeddings, we generate task-dependent
dimensional scaling vectors with amortized variational inference. Our method is end-to-end without any pre-training and
can be used as a simple plug-and-play module for existing
metric-based meta-algorithms. Experiments on miniImageNet
show that our methods can be used to consistently improve
the performance of existing metric-based meta-algorithms including prototypical networks and TADAM.

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning (Li, Fergus, and Perona 2006) aims to
assign unseen samples (query) to the belonging categories
with very few labeled samples (support) in each category. A
promising paradigm for few-shot learning is meta-learning,
which learns general patterns from a large number of tasks
for fast adaptation to unseen tasks. Recently, metric-based
meta-learning algorithms (Garcia and Bruna 2017; Koch,
Zemel, and Salakhutdinov 2015; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel
2017; Vinyals et al. 2016) demonstrate great potential in fewshot classiﬁcation. Typically, they learn a general mapping,
which projects queries and supports into an embedding space.
These models are trained in an episodic manner (Vinyals et
al. 2016) by minimizing the distances between a query and
same-labeled supports in the embedding space. Given a new
task in testing phase, a nearest neighbour classiﬁer is applied
to assign a query to its nearest class in the embedding space.
∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3478

