The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Enhanced Meta-Learning for Cross-Lingual
Named Entity Recognition with Minimal Resources
Qianhui Wu,1 Zijia Lin,2∗ Guoxin Wang,2∗ Hui Chen,3 Börje F. Karlsson2
Biqing Huang,1 Chin-Yew Lin2
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
3
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
wuqianhui@tsinghua.org.cn, {zijlin, guow, borje.karlsson, cyl}@microsoft.com
jichenhui2012@gmail.com, hbq@tsinghua.edu.cn
there is only one source language with rich labeled data
while no labeled data is available in target languages. To
tackle this problem, some approaches convert the crosslingual NER task into a monolingual NER task by performing annotation projection using bilingual parallel text
and word alignment information (Ni, Dinu, and Florian
2017). To eliminate the requirement of parallel texts, some
methods propose to translate the labeled data of the source
language at the phrase/word level, which inherently provides alignment information for label projection (Mayhew,
Tsai, and Roth 2017; Xie et al. 2018). Instead of generating labeled data in target languages, other works explore language-independent features and perform crosslingual NER in a direct-transfer manner, where the model
trained on the labeled data of the source language is directly tested on target languages (Tsai, Mayhew, and Roth
2016; Ni, Dinu, and Florian 2017). Among these methods,
cross-lingual word representations are the most prevalent
language-independent features. For example, the multilingual version of BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) utilizes WordPiece modeling strategy to project word embeddings of different languages into a shared space and achieved state-ofthe-art performance (Wu and Dredze 2019). In this paper,
we leverage the multilingual BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) as a
base model to produce cross-lingual word representations.
While all existing direct transfer based methods straightly
evaluate the source-trained model on target languages, we
hold the idea that the source-trained model can be further effectively improved. Indeed, recent developments in
learning cross-lingual sentence representations suggest that
any sentence can be encoded into a shared space by building universal cross-lingual encoders (Wu and Dredze 2019;
Lample and Conneau 2019). By simply calculating cosine
similarity between sentences in different languages with
multilingual BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), we ﬁnd that it is
possible to retrieve a few source examples that are quite
similar to a given target example in structure or semantics, as shown in Table 1. In Example #1, both sentences
have a structure of “Location - Date”, while in Example
#2, both sentences are about people talking about sports.
Intuitively, reviewing the structural and semantic information conveyed by similar examples might beneﬁt prediction.

Abstract
For languages with no annotated resources, transferring
knowledge from rich-resource languages is an effective solution for named entity recognition (NER). While all existing methods directly transfer from source-learned model to
a target language, in this paper, we propose to ﬁne-tune the
learned model with a few similar examples given a test case,
which could beneﬁt the prediction by leveraging the structural
and semantic information conveyed in such similar examples.
To this end, we present a meta-learning algorithm to ﬁnd a
good model parameter initialization that could fast adapt to
the given test case and propose to construct multiple pseudoNER tasks for meta-training by computing sentence similarities. To further improve the model’s generalization ability
across different languages, we introduce a masking scheme
and augment the loss function with an additional maximum
term during meta-training. We conduct extensive experiments
on cross-lingual named entity recognition with minimal resources over ﬁve target languages. The results show that our
approach signiﬁcantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art
methods across the board.

1

Introduction

Named entity recognition (NER) is the task of locating and
classifying text spans into pre-deﬁned categories such as locations, organizations, etc. It is a fundamental component
in many downstream tasks. Most state-of-the-art NER systems employ neural architectures (Huang, Xu, and Yu 2015;
Lample et al. 2016; Chiu and Nichols 2016; Ma and Hovy
2016; Peters et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2019), and thus, depend
on a large amount of manually annotated data, which prevents their adaptation to low-resource languages due to the
high annotation cost. An effective solution to this problem,
which we refer to as cross-lingual named entity recognition,
is transferring knowledge from a high-resource source language with abundant annotated data to a low-resource target
language with limited or even no annotated data.
In this paper, we attempt to address the extreme scenario
of cross-lingual transfer with minimal resources, where
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9274

