The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Zero Shot Learning with the Isoperimetric Loss
Shay Deutsch,1 Andrea Bertozzi,1 Stefano Soatto2
1

Department of Mathematics, 2 Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
{shaydeu, bertozzi}@math.ucla.edu,1 soatto@cs.ucla.edu2

Abstract
We introduce the isoperimetric loss as a regularization criterion for learning the map from a visual representation to a
semantic embedding, to be used to transfer knowledge to unknown classes in a zero-shot learning setting. We use a pretrained deep neural network model as a visual representation
of image data, a Word2Vec embedding of class labels, and linear maps between the visual and semantic embedding spaces.
However, the spaces themselves are not linear, and we postulate the sample embedding to be populated by noisy samples
near otherwise smooth manifolds. We exploit the graph structure deﬁned by the sample points to regularize the estimates
of the manifolds by inferring the graph connectivity using
a generalization of the isoperimetric inequalities from Riemannian geometry to graphs. Surprisingly, this regularization
alone, paired with the simplest baseline model, outperforms
the state-of-the-art among fully automated methods in zeroshot learning benchmarks such as AwA and CUB. This improvement is achieved solely by learning the structure of the
underlying spaces by imposing regularity.

P. Buegel, 1562

Figure 1: Find the Pottopod (Courtesy of P. Perona).

visual embedding space Z to the semantic space S, that can
serve to transfer knowledge from the seen labels (reﬂected in
Z) to the unseen ones. Alternatively, one can try to cluster
samples with unseen labels in the visual embedding space
Z, and then associate clusters to unseen labels.
Focus on regularization. Transfer of knowledge hinges on
some kind of regularity of the maps involved in ZSL. In
practice, the visual embedding space Z and the semantic
embedding S are only known through discrete samples, and
the maps are learned restricted to these ﬁnite samples. One
crucial theme in ZSL is, interpreting sample embeddings as
“noisy points” on the otherwise differentiable manifolds Z
and S, to attempt to regularize the spaces Z, S, and/or the
map between them.
Key contribution. Of all the various components of a ZSL
method, we choose the simplest possible (Romera-Paredes
and Torr 2015), except for the regularization of the semantic
map. There, we introduce a sophisticated model, based on
an extension of the isoperimetric inequalities from Riemannian geometry to discrete structures (graphs). We treat sample visual embeddings as vertices in a graph, with afﬁnities
as edges, and the visual-to-embedding map ψ interpreted
as a linear function on the graph. We then introduce the
isoperimetric loss (IPL) to enforce regularity on the domain
Z based on the ﬂow of the function deﬁned on it through
the boundary of sets of a given volume. The resulting reg-

Introduction
Motivating example. A pottopod is a pot with limbs. Not
even a single example image of a pottopod is needed to ﬁnd
one in Fig. 1. However, one has surely seen plenty of examples of animals with limbs, as well as pots. In zero-shot
learning (ZSL) one aims to exploit models trained with supervision, together with maps to some kind of attribute or
“semantic” space, to then recognize objects as belonging to
classes for which no previous examples have ever been seen.
The ingredients of a ZSL method are illustrated in Fig.
2. Seen samples Xs and their corresponding labels Ys are
used to train a model φ, typically a deep neural network
(DNN), in a supervised fashion, to yield a vector in a highdimensional (visual embedding) space Z. At the same time,
a function s maps semantic attributes such as “has legs,” “is
short,” or simply a word embedding of the ground truth (seen
and unseen) labels of interest Y = {Ys , Yu }, to some metric
space. The name of the game in ZSL is to learn a map ψ, possibly along with other components of the diagram, from the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10704

