The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Joint Learning of Answer Selection and Answer
Summary Generation in Community Question Answering∗
Yang Deng,1 Wai Lam,1 Yuexiang Xie,3 Daoyuan Chen,4 Yaliang Li,4 Min Yang,5 Ying Shen2,3†
†

Corresponding Author
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 South China University of Technology,
3
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, 4 Alibaba Group, 5 Chinese Academy of Sciences,
{ydeng, wlam}@se.cuhk.edu.hk, {xieyx, shenying}@pku.edu.cn,
{daoyuanchen.cdy, yaliang.li}@alibaba-inc.com, min.yang@siat.ac.cn
1

tackled in real-world applications. (i) The noise introduced
by the redundancy of answers makes it difﬁcult for answer
selection model to pick out correct answers from a set of
candidates. (ii) Compared with other QA systems (e.g., factoid question answering), answers in CQA are often too long
for community users to read and comprehend.

Abstract
Community question answering (CQA) gains increasing popularity in both academy and industry recently. However, the
redundancy and lengthiness issues of crowdsourced answers
limit the performance of answer selection and lead to reading
difﬁculties and misunderstandings for community users. To
solve these problems, we tackle the tasks of answer selection
and answer summary generation in CQA with a novel joint
learning model. Speciﬁcally, we design a question-driven
pointer-generator network, which exploits the correlation information between question-answer pairs to aid in attending
the essential information when generating answer summaries.
Meanwhile, we leverage the answer summaries to alleviate
noise in original lengthy answers when ranking the relevancy
degrees of question-answer pairs. In addition, we construct a
new large-scale CQA corpus, WikiHowQA, which contains
long answers for answer selection as well as reference summaries for answer summarization. The experimental results
show that the joint learning method can effectively address
the answer redundancy issue in CQA and achieves state-ofthe-art results on both answer selection and text summarization tasks. Furthermore, the proposed model is shown to be of
great transferring ability and applicability for resource-poor
CQA tasks, which lack of reference answer summaries.

Current state-of-the-art answer selection models (Tan et
al. 2016; Wu, Sun, and Wang 2018) employ the attention mechanism to attend the important correlated information between question-answer pairs. These methods perform
well when ranking short answers, while the accuracy goes
down with the increase in the length of answers (dos Santos
et al. 2016; Rücklé, Moosavi, and Gurevych 2019). Recent
studies on coarse-to-ﬁne question answering for long documents, such as Reading Comprehension (RC) (Choi et al.
2017; Wang et al. 2018a; 2018b), focus on the answer span
extraction in factoid QA, in which those factoid questions
can be answered by a certain word or a short phrase. Conversely, in non-factoid CQA, discrete and complex information from multiple sentences makes up the answers together.
Besides, generative RC methods (Nishida et al. 2019) only
give one certain answer, while there are often multiple useful answers in CQA. Thus, these approaches are not suitable
for addressing the redundancy issue of answers in CQA.

Introduction

On the other hand, text summarization provides an effective approach to alleviating the aforementioned issue.
Text summarization methods can generally be divided into
two categories: extractive summarization (Cheng and Lapata 2016; Nallapati, Zhai, and Zhou 2017) and abstractive
summarization (See, Liu, and Manning 2017; Nallapati et
al. 2016). The aim is to assemble or generate summaries
from the source article or external vocabulary, based on the
information from the source text. In the existing studies,
answer summarization in CQA is mainly explored by extractive summarization models (Tomasoni and Huang 2010;
Song et al. 2017). However, due to the length of answers,
extractive methods sometimes fall short of generalization
of all the important information in the whole answer and
consistency of the core idea. Besides, the correlation information between question and answer, which plays a crucial role in human comprehension, is underutilized by current query-based summarization studies (Nema et al. 2017;

Recent years have witnessed a spectacular increase in
real-world applications of community question answering
(CQA), such as Yahoo! Answer1 and StackExchange2 .
Many studies have been made on different tasks in CQA,
such as answer selection, question-question relatedness, and
comment classiﬁcation (Moschitti, Bonadiman, and Uva
2017; Joty, Màrquez, and Nakov 2018; Nakov et al. 2017).
However, due to the length and redundancy of answers in
CQA scenario, there are several challenges that need to be
∗
This work was ﬁnancially supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No.61602013) and a grant from the
Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, China (Project Code: 14204418).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://answers.yahoo.com/
2
https://stackexchange.com/

7651

