The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁcient Model-Based Diagnosis of Sequential Circuits
Alexander Feldman,1 Ingo Pill,2 Franz Wotawa,2 Ion Matei,1 Johan de Kleer1
1

2

Palo Alto Research Center Inc., 3333 Coyote Hill Road, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA
Institute for Software Technology, Graz Univ. of Technology, Inffeldgasse 16b/II, 8010 Graz, Austria
{afeldman, imatei, dekleer}@parc.com, {ipill, wotawa}@ist.tugraz.at

and (2) to prevent a combinational blow-up. Model checking, on the other hand, is preoccupied with the temporal aspects of a model. As a result, we can exploit model-checking
methods, languages, and tools for the advancement of MBD.
In this context it was shown, e.g., how to exploit LinearTemporal Logic (LTL) (Pnueli 1977) for diagnostic purposes and diagnose corresponding models (Pill and Quaritsch 2013). To the best of our knowledge, all existing MBD
approaches based on temporal logics make assumptions
about the temporal nature of faults. Examples are constant
intermittency (Abreu, Zoeteweij, and van Gemund 2009) or
persistence (Pill and Quaritsch 2013). These assumptions
greatly simplify the computational complexity of reasoning
but are not realistic, for example, in diagnosing soft-failures
in high-radiation environments such as space. In physical
environments periods of intermittent failures are exceptionally hard to predict. Our diagnostic framework is based on
Finite Trace Next Logic (FTNL). It is completely general:
any persistent, periodic intermittent, or aperiodic intermittent behavior is going to be diagnosed.
We furthermore propose a novel SAT-based diagnosis algorithm. Since MBD is closer to partial MaxSAT (Tompkins
and Hoos 2004) than to SAT, we have to encode cardinality constraints (Ası́n et al. 2011; Nica et al. 2013). For this,
we analyze the performance trade-offs of binary constraints
based on digital multipliers and sorting networks.
Our concepts and algorithms help in understanding why
some behavior violates a temporal model, like failed test
cases or counter-examples from model-checking. Furthermore we demonstrate a direct practical application of our
algorithms in analyzing faults in Integrated Circuits (ICs)
such as Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) as, e.g.,
resulting from radiation in space (Petersen 2011). An improved understanding of how individual gates might fail in
space and in time will allow us to create robust, and possibly
even fail-safe designs that are immune to transient failures.
Our research contributes to the ﬁeld of MBD in multiple
ways. (1) We propose a new framework using FTNL as a
simple temporal logic for diagnosing synchronous sequential logic where we do not make assumptions about the temporal behavior of multi-faults; (2) We propose a SAT-based
algorithm with a novel, more compact encoding for FTNL
diagnosis that outperforms state-of-the-art MBD SAT-based
algorithms in our tests; (3) We evaluate our approach for IS-

Abstract
In Model-Based Diagnosis (MBD), we concern ourselves
with the health and safety of physical and software systems.
Although we often use different knowledge representations
and algorithms, some tools like satisﬁability (SAT) solvers
and temporal logics, are used in both domains. In this paper
we introduce Finite Trace Next Logic (FTNL) models of sequential circuits and propose an enhanced algorithm for computing minimal-cardinality diagnoses.
Existing state-of-the-art satisﬁability algorithms for minimal
diagnosis use Sorting Networks (SNs) for constraining the
cardinality of the diagnostic candidates. In our approach we
exploit Multi-Operand Adders (MOAs). Based on extensive
tests with ISCAS-89 circuits, we found that MOAs enable
Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF) encodings that are signiﬁcantly more compact. These encodings lead to 19.7 to 67.6
times fewer variables and 18.4 to 62 times fewer clauses.
For converting an FTNL model to CNF, we could achieve a
speed-up ranging from 6.2 to 22.2. Using SNs fosters 3.4 to
5.5 times faster on-line satisﬁability checking though. This
makes MOAs preferable for applications where RAM and
off-line time are more limited than on-line CPU time.

Introduction
Model-Based Diagnosis (MBD) is a subdiscipline of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) where we study how systems
fail (Reiter 1987; de Kleer and Williams 1987). Modelchecking (Clarke, Grumberg, and Peled 1999), with its origins in logic and formal veriﬁcation, is a topic with application to AI where we develop languages and methods for
proving system properties. In MBD, we use a model of a
system’s correct speciﬁcation and derive diagnoses as fault
sets that offer explanations for what happened in the system for given observations of abnormal behavior. In modelchecking, we instead use a model of a possibly incorrect
system and ask whether it complies to the speciﬁcation—
deriving a proof or a counterexample.
What makes model-checking and MBD close is that instead of a large data set, we reason with a formally speciﬁed
model. In MBD, we often abstract a system’s dynamic behavior away, in order to (1) make the modeling task simpler,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2814

