The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Channel Pruning Guided by Classiﬁcation Loss and Feature Importance
Jinyang Guo,1 Wanli Ouyang,2 Dong Xu1
1

2

School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
{jinyang.guo, wanli.ouyang, dong.xu}@sydney.edu.au

only once. However, the layer-by-layer methods do not consider the ﬁnal loss. The channels selected in these methods
may have little effect on the ﬁnal loss, leading to a suboptimal solution for channel selection. In addition, the existing layer-by-layer approaches treat the reconstruction of
each feature equally important, which leads to the next-layer
feature removal problem. Speciﬁcally, at the current pruning
stage, the layer-by-layer approaches will minimize the reconstruction error of a feature from the next layer under the
assumption that this feature will be kept in the compressed
model. However, this assumption will be violated if this feature will be removed at the next pruning stage, and reconstruction of this feature will thus become unnecessary.

Abstract
In this work, we propose a new layer-by-layer channel pruning method called Channel Pruning guided by classiﬁcation
Loss and feature Importance (CPLI). In contrast to the existing layer-by-layer channel pruning approaches that only consider how to reconstruct the features from the next layer, our
approach additionally take the classiﬁcation loss into account
in the channel pruning process. We also observe that some
reconstructed features will be removed at the next pruning
stage. So it is unnecessary to reconstruct these features. To
this end, we propose a new strategy to suppress the inﬂuence
of unimportant features (i.e., the features will be removed
at the next pruning stage). Our comprehensive experiments
on three benchmark datasets, i.e., CIFAR-10, ImageNet, and
UCF-101, demonstrate the effectiveness of our CPLI method.

1

To solve the aforementioned problems, we propose a new
channel pruning approach called Channel Pruning guided by
classiﬁcation Loss and feature Importance (CPLI), in which
we follow the layer-by-layer approaches for faster speed and
take the ﬁnal loss into account to solve the sub-optimal problem for channel selection. In order to address the next-layer
feature removal problem, we also propose a new strategy to
pay more attention to important features (i.e., the features to
be kept in the compressed model) and ignore unimportant
features (i.e., the features to be removed at the next pruning stage) . Speciﬁcally, our newly proposed method selects
the channels in each layer by solving a LASSO optimization
problem based on two aspects: 1) the cross-entropy loss and
2) the importance of features. In order to avoid frequently
performing the ﬁne-tuning process, we adjust the weights
by solving a least square optimization problem based on the
features from the next layer, which has a close-form solution. Moreover, due to the close-form solution of the least
square optimization problem, the adjusted weights in this
process can converge better than the alternative approaches,
where the weights are adjusted by using simple ﬁne-tuning
techniques. Therefore, the channel selection process in our
method is based on well-learned weights, which is more accurate than the existing loss minimization approaches.

Introduction

While deep learning methods have achieved remarkable success in many computer vision tasks, it is still a challenging task to deploy convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on
mobile devicies due to tight computational resources. Several model compression technologies (e.g., quantization and
tensor factorization) were recently developed to improve the
efﬁciency of the CNNs, among which channel pruning is one
of the most popular techniques.
The channel pruning approaches can be roughly categorized as loss minimization methods (Molchanov et al. 2017;
LeCun, Denker, and Solla 1990; Molchanov et al. 2019)
and layer-by-layer approaches (He, Zhang, and Sun 2017;
Luo, Wu, and Lin 2017). The loss minimization methods iteratively remove the channels with least effect on the ﬁnal
loss across the entire network. However, in order to evaluate the effect of channels on the ﬁnal loss, the ﬁne-tuning
process needs to be performed frequently in these methods,
which makes the channel pruning process slow. On the other
hand, the layer-by-layer methods select informative channels and adjust model parameters by minimizing the reconstruction error of the features in the next layer. These methods are much faster because they prune the channels within
a layer in one step and the ﬁne-tuning process is performed

The main contributions of this work are as follows: First,
our newly proposed method takes advantage of efﬁciency
from the layer-by-layer channel pruning approaches while
also taking the ﬁnal loss into account, which can partially
solve the sub-optimal problem for channel selection in the

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10885

