The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Spiking-YOLO: Spiking Neural Network for Energy-Efﬁcient Object Detection
Seijoon Kim, Seongsik Park, Byunggook Na, Sungroh Yoon
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, ASRI, INMC, and Institute of Engineering Research
Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
sryoon@snu.ac.kr

which have shown promising results. Despite these efforts,
the demand for computing and power resources will increase
as deeper and more complicated neural networks achieve
higher accuracy (Tan and Le 2019).

Abstract
Over the past decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
demonstrated remarkable performance in a variety of applications. As we try to solve more advanced problems, increasing demands for computing and power resources has
become inevitable. Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have attracted widespread interest as the third-generation of neural
networks due to their event-driven and low-powered nature.
SNNs, however, are difﬁcult to train, mainly owing to their
complex dynamics of neurons and non-differentiable spike
operations. Furthermore, their applications have been limited
to relatively simple tasks such as image classiﬁcation. In this
study, we investigate the performance degradation of SNNs
in a more challenging regression problem (i.e., object detection). Through our in-depth analysis, we introduce two novel
methods: channel-wise normalization and signed neuron with
imbalanced threshold, both of which provide fast and accurate information transmission for deep SNNs. Consequently,
we present a ﬁrst spiked-based object detection model, called
Spiking-YOLO. Our experiments show that Spiking-YOLO
achieves remarkable results that are comparable (up to 98%)
to those of Tiny YOLO on non-trivial datasets, PASCAL
VOC and MS COCO. Furthermore, Spiking-YOLO on a neuromorphic chip consumes approximately 280 times less energy than Tiny YOLO and converges 2.3 to 4 times faster
than previous SNN conversion methods.

Spiking neural networks (SNNs), which are the thirdgeneration neural networks, were introduced to mimic how
information is encoded and processed in the human brain
by employing spiking neurons as computation units (Maass
1997). Unlike conventional neural networks, SNNs transmit information via the precise timing (temporal) of spike
trains consisting of a series of spikes (discrete), rather than
a real value (continuous). That is, SNNs utilize temporal
aspects in information transmission as in biological neural systems (Mainen and Sejnowski 1995), thus providing
sparse yet powerful computing ability (Mostafa et al. 2017;
Bellec et al. 2018). Moreover, the spiking neurons integrate inputs into a membrane potential when spikes are received and generate (ﬁre) spikes when the membrane potential reaches a certain threshold, which enables eventdriven computation. Driven by the sparse nature of spike
events and event-driven computation, SNNs offer exceptional power efﬁciency and are the preferred neural networks in neuromorphic architectures (Merolla et al. 2014;
Poon and Zhou 2011).
Despite their excellent potential, SNNs have been limited to relatively simple tasks (e.g., image classiﬁcation)
and small datasets (e.g., MNIST and CIFAR), on a rather
shallow structure (Lee, Delbruck, and Pfeiffer 2016; Wu et
al. 2019). One of the primary reasons for the limited application scope is the lack of scalable training algorithms
due to complex dynamics and non-differentiable operations
of spiking neurons. DNN-to-SNN conversion methods, as
an alternative approach, have been studied widely in recent years (Cao, Chen, and Khosla 2015; Diehl et al. 2015;
Sengupta et al. 2019). These methods are based on the idea
of importing pre-trained parameters (e.g., weights and biases) from a DNN to an SNN. DNN-to-SNN conversion
methods have achieved comparable results in deep SNNs to
those of original DNNs (e.g., VGG and ResNet); however,
results from MNIST and CIFAR datasets were competitive,
while those of ImageNet dataset were unsatisfactory when
compared with DNN’s accuracy.

Introduction
One of the primary reasons behind the recent success of deep
neural networks (DNNs) can be attributed to the development of high-performance computing systems and the availability of large amounts of data for model training. However, solving more intriguing and advanced problems in realworld applications requires more sophisticated models and
training data, which results in signiﬁcant increase in computational overhead and power consumption. To overcome
these challenges, many researchers have attempted to design
computationally- and energy-efﬁcient DNNs using pruning
(Guo, Yao, and Chen 2016; He, Zhang, and Sun 2017), compression (Han, Mao, and Dally 2016; Kim et al. 2015), and
quantization (Gong et al. 2014; Park et al. 2018), some of
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11270

