The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Modelling and Solving Online Optimisation Problems∗
Alexander Ek,1,2 Maria Garcia de la Banda,1 Andreas Schutt,2,3
Peter J. Stuckey,1,2 Guido Tack1,2
1

Monash University, Australia
2
CSIRO Data61, Australia
3
The University of Melbourne, Australia
{alexander.ek, maria.garciadelabanda, peter.stuckey, guido.tack}@monash.edu,
andreas.schutt@data61.csiro.au
have not started yet (be it old or new) taking any new information into account, i.e., if the problem is solved in its
natural online format.
Despite the strong similarities between all online optimisation problems, current approaches to solving them are
problem-speciﬁc. This is because every time new information arrives and a resolve is required, some previous decisions cannot be changed while others can. For example,
in an online job-shop scheduling problem, tasks known to
have already started cannot be rescheduled. Similarly, in a
dynamic vehicle routing problem, we may not be able to
add more customers to a vehicle’s route after the vehicle has
left the depot, but we may be able to change the order in
which the customers are visited. Specifying exactly which
decisions can be changed and which cannot, requires specifying how time interacts with the variables and constraints
used to model the problem. This is usually done by the modeller, who understands this interaction and can implement an
update-model, that is, a model that combines the results of
previously executed decisions with the newly arriving data.
An iterative algorithm can then be used to repeatedly instantiate and solve this update-model at each time point.
In addition, many large ofﬂine optimisation problems can
be better solved by decomposing them into smaller, simpler problems along a timeline. This popular approach is
called sliding-window decomposition (Marquant, Evins, and
Carmeliet 2015; Belov et al. 2014), where the problem is decomposed into (usually overlapping) windows, each solved
in increasing time order. In effect, this converts the ofﬂine
problem into an online one, where each new window refers
to some old parts of the problem (those overlapping with
the previous window), and to some new (the rest in the new
window). Thus, methods developed to solve online problems
can be used to solve large optimisation problems, once one
decides how to break up the data into windows.
This paper proposes a more generic approach to online
optimisation that enables modellers to specify the online aspects of a problem in a declarative way, and automates the
resolving process. To achieve this, modellers ﬁrst create an
ofﬂine model, i.e., a model of the ofﬂine version of the problem. Then, they add annotations to the ofﬂine model to specify how its data, variables and constraints interact with time.

Abstract
Many optimisation problems are of an online—also called
dynamic—nature, where new information is expected to arrive and the problem must be resolved in an ongoing fashion to (a) improve or revise previous decisions and (b) take
new ones. Typically, building an online decision-making system requires substantial ad-hoc coding to ensure the ofﬂine
version of the optimisation problem is continually adjusted
and resolved. This paper deﬁnes a general framework for
automatically solving online optimisation problems. This is
achieved by extending a model of the ofﬂine optimisation
problem, from which an online version is automatically constructed, thus requiring no further modelling effort. In doing so, it formalises many of the aspects that arise in online optimisation problems. The same framework can be applied for automatically creating sliding-window solving approaches for problems that have a large time horizon. Experiments show we can automatically create efﬁcient online and
sliding-window solutions to optimisation problems.

1

Introduction

Many important optimisation problems are online—also
called dynamic—in nature (see, e.g., Jaillet and Wagner, 2012), that is, the information that deﬁnes the problem
is not completely known and may not be ﬁnite. Rather, new
information arrives either continuously or periodically, and
must be incorporated into the problem in an ongoing fashion. Consider, for example, a traditional job-shop scheduling problem. If the complete set of jobs is known from the
start, the problem can be solved ofﬂine to generate an optimal (or good enough) schedule. However, it is common
to only know an initial set of jobs, with new ones arriving
before all previous jobs have ﬁnished executing the generated schedule. It is also common for previous jobs to take
longer/shorter than expected. While one could wait until all
previous jobs have ﬁnished to schedule the new jobs, this
will typically result in the underutilisation of the available
machines. A higher quality solution may be found if the
problem is resolved to ﬁnd a new schedule for all jobs that
∗
An earlier version of this paper has been presented at the ModRef’19 workshop and the doctoral program of CP’19.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1477

