The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Coding in the Liberal Arts through
Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning
Ursula Wolz, Jennifer Wilson
Eugene Lang School of Liberal Arts, The New School, New York, NY, USA
wolzu@newschool.edu, wilsonj@newschool.edu

Abstract
An initiative recently established at our institution is creating new opportunities for students to deepen their understanding of code and computational thinking, and to embrace questions of access, equity and social justice. In this
short paper we report on two contextualized computing
courses in this initiative that introduce coding and computational thinking through contextualizing two subfields of AI:
Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning. The
goal was two-fold: to help students gain foundational computational skills to further their own creative and critical
practices; and more broadly, to help them develop betterinformed critiques of the use of algorithmic systems, especially AI technology.

Coding in the Liberal Arts
At Eugene Lang School of Liberal Arts, an initiative that
led to a new minor in Code as a Liberal Art provides opportunities for students to explore computation and embrace questions of access, equity and social justice. The
goal was two-fold: to help students gain skills in coding
and computational thinking to further their own creative
and critical practices; and to help them develop betterinformed critiques of the use of algorithmic systems in
social and economic interactions and decision-making.
Thus, the initiative is concerned with developing coding
literacy, but also addresses a new form of civic education.
With strengths in the Social Sciences, Media studies,
and the Arts and Writing, Lang has no stand-alone mathematics department and no computer science. This provides
a unique perspective for faculty because the courses are not
for ‘non-majors,’ nor do they contribute to a major in a
liberal arts setting (Baldwin and Brady, 2010).
A set of common learning outcomes for the courses in
the a Liberal Art minor articulate goals of the program
within a liberal arts framework. These include the following: Students learn to use computation as a tool to analyze,
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13506

communicate, create, and learn. They develop collaborative skills utilizing computational and algorithmic thinking.
They also gain an understanding of the historical and social
factors leading to the increasing presence of computational
systems, and develop an ethical framework as they work
through the social and political implications of, and embedded within computing technologies. They learn to appreciate the challenges of equity and access to computing
technologies as well as how technologies can reinforce
inequalities. They learn to thinking critically about computer-mediated interaction, understanding its limits from
philosophical, logical, mathematical and policy perspectives. Finally, each course attempts to help them understand the intrinsic relationship between the physical world,
analog environments and digital experiences.
Courses within the minor are therefore contextualized
computing courses as articulated by Xu, Wolz and Greenberg (2018) who suggest that foundational computer science courses should balance a partnership between disciplines, and provide exposure to computer science that is
experiential. Students must code to learn about the context,
and they learn to code through problems provided by the
context. The courses described here provide context drawn
not only from Artificial Intelligence but also from Linguistics, Poetry, Psychology, Philosophy and Learning Science.

Liberal Arts AI
Artificial Intelligence, and more specifically Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Machine Learning (ML) are
having a profound influence on daily life. The ubiquitous
influence of recognition algorithms, whether for voice,
text, or faces, as well as search engines and recommender
systems increasingly impacts human decision-making at all
levels. Citizens have a responsibility to educate themselves
regarding the effects of these processes, to understand how
they work and how AI grew out of well-established fields.
As part of liberal learning, the question arises as to what
and how to teach AI. A 2016 survey of AI educators and

