The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

K-BERT: Enabling Language Representation with Knowledge Graph
Weijie Liu,1 Peng Zhou,2 Zhe Zhao,2 Zhiruo Wang,3 Qi Ju,2,*
∗
Haotang Deng,2 Ping Wang1,
1

Peking University, Beijing, China
Tencent Research, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
{dataliu, pwang}@pku.edu.cn, SherronWang@gmail.com,
{rickzhou, nlpzhe, zhiruowang, damonju, haotangdeng}@tencent.com
2

GPT (Radford et al. 2018), and XLNet (Yang et al. 2019),
who were pre-trained over open-domain corpora, act just
like an ordinary people. Even though they can refresh the
state-of-the-art of GLUE (Wang et al. 2018) benchmark by
learning from open-domain corpora, they may fail in some
domain-speciﬁc tasks, due to little knowledge connection
between speciﬁc and open domain. One way to solve this
problem is to pre-train a model emphasizing domain-speciﬁc
by ourselves, instead of using the publicly-provided ones.
However, pre-training is time-consuming and computationally expensive, making it unacceptable to most users.

Abstract
Pre-trained language representation models, such as BERT,
capture a general language representation from large-scale
corpora, but lack domain-speciﬁc knowledge. When reading a domain text, experts make inferences with relevant
knowledge. For machines to achieve this capability, we propose a knowledge-enabled language representation model
(K-BERT) with knowledge graphs (KGs), in which triples
are injected into the sentences as domain knowledge. However, too much knowledge incorporation may divert the sentence from its correct meaning, which is called knowledge
noise (KN) issue. To overcome KN, K-BERT introduces softposition and visible matrix to limit the impact of knowledge.
K-BERT can easily inject domain knowledge into the models by being equipped with a KG without pre-training by itself because it is capable of loading model parameters from
the pre-trained BERT. Our investigation reveals promising results in twelve NLP tasks. Especially in domain-speciﬁc tasks
(including ﬁnance, law, and medicine), K-BERT signiﬁcantly
outperforms BERT, which demonstrates that K-BERT is an
excellent choice for solving the knowledge-driven problems
that require experts.

Moreover, although injecting domain-speciﬁc knowledge
during pre-training is possible for LR models, this process
of knowledge acquisition can be inefﬁcient and expensive.
For example, if we want the model to acquire the knowledge of “Paracetamol can treat cold”, a large number of cooccurrences of ”Paracetamol” and ”cold” are required in the
pre-training corpus. Instead of this strategy, what else can
we do to make the model a domain expert? The knowledge graph (KG), which was called ontology in early research, serves as a good solution. As knowledge reﬁned into
a structured form, KGs over many ﬁelds have been constructed, e.g., SNOMED-CT (Bodenreider 2008) in medical ﬁeld, HowNet (Dong, Dong, and Hao 2006) in Chinese
conception. If KG can be integrated into the LR model, it
will equip the model with domain knowledge, enhancing the
model’s performance over domain-speciﬁc tasks, while reducing the cost of pre-training on a large scale. Besides, the
resulting models posses greater interpretability, for the injected knowledge is manually editable.

Introduction
Unsupervised pre-trained Language Representation (LR)
models like BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) have achieved
promising results in multiple NLP tasks. These models are
pre-trained over large-scale open-domain corpora to obtain general language representations and then ﬁne-tuned
in speciﬁc downstream tasks for absorbing speciﬁc-domain
knowledge. However, due to the domain-discrepancy between pre-training and ﬁne-tuning, these models do not
perform well on knowledge-driven tasks. For example, the
Google BERT pre-trained on Wikipedia can not give full
play to its value when dealing with electronic medical record
(EMR) analysis task in the medical ﬁeld.
When reading a text from a speciﬁc-domain, ordinary
people can only comprehend words according to its context, while experts are able to make inferences with relevant
domain knowledge. Publicly-provided models, like BERT,

However, there are two challenges lies in the road of
this knowledge integration: (1) Heterogeneous Embedding Space (HES): In general, the embedding vectors of
words in text and entities in KG are obtained in separate
ways, making their vector-space inconsistent; (2) Knowledge Noise (KN): Too much knowledge incorporation may
divert the sentence from its correct meaning. To overcome
these challenges, this paper propose a Knowledge-enabled
Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformers
(K-BERT). K-BERT is capable of loading any pre-trained
BERT models due to they are identical in parameters. In addition, K-BERT can easily inject domain knowledge into

∗

Corresponding Authors
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2901

