The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ElGolog: A High-Level Programming
Language with Memory of the Execution History
Giuseppe De Giacomo

Yves Lespérance

Eugenia Ternovska

Sapienza Università di Roma
Roma, Italy
degiacomo@diag.uniroma1.it

York University
Toronto, Canada
lesperan@eecs.yorku.ca

Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, BC Canada
ter@sfu.ca

may not support these ﬂuents. All it is likely to say is that
immediately after delivering an item to a location, the item
will be at this location. To be able to write the above program, the programmer would ﬁrst need to extend the action
theory/world model with these additional task-speciﬁc ﬂuents. Such an extension might be needed for every new task.
More generally, most programming languages only support queries about the current state of the system. This is
the so-called Markov property: the executability of an action
and its effects are entirely determined by the current state or
situation. This assumption is commonly made in formalisms
for reasoning about action, such as the situation calculus
(McCarthy and Hayes 1969; Reiter 2001). It is also made
in the high-level programming languages Golog (Levesque
et al. 1997) and ConGolog (De Giacomo, Lespérance, and
Levesque 2000) based on it (as well as in any standard programming language such as C, Java, etc.), where tests may
only query the current situation/state. If one wants to query
some historical information, one has to introduce some data
structures or ﬂuents to remember what happened in the past.
In contrast, in natural language instructions, one simply
refers to past states and events.
It should be clear that referring to the past to specify a task
is useful in many applications, for instance, in robotics. We
might want to order the robot to “go back to all rooms where
you saw discarded pop cans and bring them to the recycling
bin”. Note that bringing milk to people to whom one has
already delivered coffee is not necessarily just a “ﬁx” to the
earlier behavior, as the milk may only have been ordered
later, or it might not have been possible to deliver both at the
same time (perhaps the milk is stored in a fridge far from the
coffee machine).
In this paper, we show that we can conveniently extend a
programming language to support queries about the past. In
particular, we deﬁne ElGolog, which extends Golog with
the possibility of using (converse) programs in tests, as
sometimes allowed in Dynamic Logic (Harel, Kozen, and
Tiuryn 2000). However we interpret such tests on the current
history, or log, which is provided by the current situation. So
in a sense we are equipping Golog with a sort of two-way
version of Linear Dynamic Logic operators (De Giacomo
and Vardi 2013).
With this addition, we can write programs that capture
more directly the natural language instructions. For exam-

Abstract
Most programming languages only support tests that refer exclusively to the current state. This applies even to high-level
programming languages based on the situation calculus such
as Golog. The result is that additional variables/ﬂuents/data
structures must be introduced to track conditions that the program uses in tests to make decisions. In this paper, drawing inspiration from McCarthy’s Elephant 2000, we propose an extended version of Golog, called ElGolog, that supports rich tests about the execution history, where tests are
expressed in a ﬁrst-order variant of two-way linear dynamic
logic that uses ElGolog programs with converse. We show
that in spite of rich tests, ElGolog shares key features with
Golog, including a sematics based on macroexpansion into
situation calculus formulas, upon which regression can still
be applied. We also show that like Golog, our extended language can easily be implemented in Prolog.

Introduction
Suppose that we want to give the following instructions to a
robot assistant:
You have already delivered coffee to some ofﬁces. Now,
go back and deliver milk as well.
If we want to write a high-level program to represent these
instructions, we might write the following:
while ∃o.(DeliveredCoﬀee(o) ∧ ¬DeliveredM ilk(o))
do πo.[(DeliveredCoﬀee(o) ∧ ¬DeliveredM ilk(o))?;
goto(o) ; deliverM ilk(o)]
i.e., while there is an ofﬁce where coffee has been delivered
but not milk, (nondeterministically) pick such an ofﬁce and
go there and deliver milk. This program is written in Golog
(Levesque et al. 1997), but there is nothing essential about
this; any language where one can iterate over items that satisfy a condition would do.
Notice that the program relies on ﬂuents (essentially,
boolean functions that change value over time) such as
DeliveredCoﬀee(o) and DeliveredM ilk(o) that memorize
historical information. The model of the world that captures
the dynamics of the domain (i.e., the action theory in Golog)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2806

