The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Author Name Disambiguation on Heterogeneous
Information Network with Adversarial Representation Learning
Haiwen Wang,1 Ruijie Wang,2 Chuan Wen,1 Shuhao Li,1
Yuting Jia,1 Weinan Zhang,1 Xinbing Wang1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
{wanghaiwen, AlvinWen, cherish a, hnxxjyt, wnzhang, xwang8}@sjtu.edu.cn, ruijiew2@illinois.edu
2

means that the author name cannot be used to reliably identify all scholarly authors. The inadequacy of author name
ambiguity becomes evident in many practical scenarios, e.g.,
scholar searching, inﬂuence evaluating and mentor recommendation, which raises the necessity of author name disambiguation (Smalheiser and Torvik 2009).
Author name disambiguation is to split the papers under the same name into several homogeneous groups, which
has attracted substantial attention from information retrieval
and data mining communities. Most existing methods solve
this problem in a two-stage framework: (i) quantify the
similarity among papers; (ii) cluster papers into homogeneous groups. Hierarchical clustering algorithm works well
for the second part, while the ﬁrst part remains largely unsolved. To quantify the similarity among papers, content information and relation information are used. The former includes title, abstract, introduction and keywords etc. Methods focusing on the content information (Han et al. 2004;
Huang, Ertekin, and Giles 2006; Yoshida et al. 2010) usually leverage supervised learning algorithms to learn the
pairwise similarity functions. However, they solve the problem in a local way, which means that they cannot measure
the high-order connections among papers. Methods focusing
on relation information (Kanani, McCallum, and Pal 2007;
Bekkerman and McCallum 2005) usually solve the problem
on the bibliographic network, where the relation information
is represented as edges on the network. They account that
papers connected in the network are likely to be written by
the same author. Thus constructing the network becomes the
critical part of these methods, e.g., paper network (Zhang et
al. 2018), paper-author network (Zhang and Al Hasan 2017).
However, either complicated feature engineering or the supervision (Zhang et al. 2018) is required.
The two categories of methods are like the two sides of the
same coin. The ﬁrst introduces supervision but cannot process high-order connections, while the second models the
high-order connections but requires the supervision. An intuitive idea is to combine them together to build a uniﬁed
model which can eliminate the requirement of labeled samples and complicated feature engineering to some extent. Inspired by generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al.
2014), we may combine the two categories in an adversarial way. In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed framework with
discriminative module and generative module. The discrimi-

Abstract
Author name ambiguity causes inadequacy and inconvenience in academic information retrieval, which raises the
necessity of author name disambiguation (AND). Existing
AND methods can be divided into two categories: the models focusing on content information to distinguish whether
two papers are written by the same author, the models focusing on relation information to represent information as
edges on the network and to quantify the similarity among
papers. However, the former requires adequate labeled samples and informative negative samples, and are also ineffective in measuring the high-order connections among papers,
while the latter needs complicated feature engineering or supervision to construct the network. We propose a novel generative adversarial framework to grow the two categories of
models together: (i) the discriminative module distinguishes
whether two papers are from the same author, and (ii) the generative module selects possibly homogeneous papers directly
from the heterogeneous information network, which eliminates the complicated feature engineering. In such a way, the
discriminative module guides the generative module to select homogeneous papers, and the generative module generates high-quality negative samples to train the discriminative
module to make it aware of high-order connections among
papers. Furthermore, a self-training strategy for the discriminative module and a random walk based generating algorithm are designed to make the training stable and efﬁcient.
Extensive experiments on two real-world AND benchmarks
demonstrate that our model provides signiﬁcant performance
improvement over the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
A person name is used to identify a certain individual. However, different people may have the same or the similar name
in the real world, which is referred to as the name ambiguity. For example, Michael J can remind people of the US
basketball player, the King of Pop or the machine learning
professor from UC Berkeley. Name ambiguity causes inadequacy and inconvenience in information retrieval. With the
rapid development of the scholar community, academic information in digital libraries becomes increasingly tremendous. However, names appearing in the digital papers or
the webpages also suffer from the ambiguity issues, which
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
238

