The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Few Shot Network Compression via Cross Distillation
Haoli Bai,1 Jiaxiang Wu,2 Irwin King,1 Michael Lyu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Tencent AI Lab
{hlbai, king, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jonathanwu@tencent.com

pression, the reliance on the training data may result in data
leakage for customers.
To take care of security issues in network compression,
some recent works (Chen et al. 2019; Bhardwaj, Suda, and
Marculescu 2019; Lopes, Fenu, and Starner 2017) motivate from knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015; Romero et al. 2014), and propose data-free ﬁne-tuning
by constructing pseudo inputs from the pre-trained teacher
network. However, these methods highly rely on the quality
of the pseudo inputs and are therefore limited to small-scale
problems.
In order to obtain scalable network compression algorithms, a compromise between privacy and performance is
to compress the network with few shot training instances,
e.g., 1-shot for one training instances per class. Prevalent
works (Li et al. 2018; Chen, Wang, and Pan 2019b) along
this line extend knowledge distillation by minimizing layerwise estimation errors (e.g., Euclidean distances) between
the teacher and student network. The success of these approaches largely comes from the layer-wise supervision
from the teacher network. Nevertheless, a key challenge in
few shot network compression is rarely investigated in previous efforts: as there are few shot training samples available, the student network tend to over-ﬁt on the training set
and consequently suffer from high estimation errors from the
teacher network during inference. Moreover, the estimation
errors could propagate and accumulate layer-wisely (Dong,
Chen, and Pan 2017) and ﬁnally deteriorate the student network.
To deal with the above challenge, we proceed along with
few shot network compression and propose cross distillation, a novel layer-wise knowledge distillation approach.
Cross distillation can effectively reduce the layer-wisely accumulated errors in the few shot setting, leading to a more
powerful and generalizable student network. Speciﬁcally, to
correct the errors accumulated in previous layers of the student network, we direct the teacher’s hidden layers to the
student network, which is called correction. Meanwhile, to
make the teacher aware of the errors accumulated on the
student network, we reverse the strategy by directing the
student’s hidden layers to the teacher network. With erroraware supervision from the teacher, the student can better

Abstract
Model compression has been widely adopted to obtain lightweighted deep neural networks. Most prevalent methods,
however, require ﬁne-tuning with sufﬁcient training data to
ensure accuracy, which could be challenged by privacy and
security issues. As a compromise between privacy and performance, in this paper we investigate few shot network compression: given few samples per class, how can we effectively
compress the network with negligible performance drop? The
core challenge of few shot network compression lies in high
estimation errors from the original network during inference,
since the compressed network can easily over-ﬁts on the few
training instances. The estimation errors could propagate and
accumulate layer-wisely and ﬁnally deteriorate the network
output. To address the problem, we propose cross distillation, a novel layer-wise knowledge distillation approach. By
interweaving hidden layers of teacher and student network,
layer-wisely accumulated estimation errors can be effectively
reduced. The proposed method offers a general framework
compatible with prevalent network compression techniques
such as pruning. Extensive experiments n benchmark datasets
demonstrate that cross distillation can signiﬁcantly improve
the student network’s accuracy when only a few training instances are available.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success in a wide range of applications, however, they suffer from substantial computation and energy cost. In order
to obtain light-weighted DNNs, network compression techniques have been widely developed in recent years, including network pruning (He, Zhang, and Sun 2017; Luo, Wu,
and Lin 2017; Wen et al. 2019), quantization (Han, Mao,
and Dally 2016; Wu et al. 2016; 2018; Li et al. 2020) and
knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015;
Romero et al. 2014).
Despite the success of previous efforts, a majority of them
rely on the whole training data to reboot the compressed
models, which could suffer from security and privacy issues.
For instance, to provide a general service of network comc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3203

