The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Visual Domain Adaptation by Consensus-Based Transfer to Intermediate Domain
Jongwon Choi, Youngjoon Choi,∗ Jihoon Kim, Jinyeop Chang,
Ilhwan Kwon, Youngjune Gwon, Seungjai Min
Samsung SDS

Abstract
We describe an unsupervised domain adaptation framework
for images by a transform to an abstract intermediate domain
and ensemble classiﬁers seeking a consensus. The intermediate domain can be thought as a latent domain where both
the source and target domains can be transferred easily. The
proposed framework aligns both domains to the intermediate
domain, which greatly improves the adaptation performance
when the source and target domains are notably dissimilar. In
addition, we propose an ensemble model trained by confusing multiple classiﬁers and letting them make a consensus alternately to enhance the adaptation performance for ambiguous samples. To estimate the hidden intermediate domain and
the unknown labels of the target domain simultaneously, we
develop a training algorithm using a double-structured architecture. We validate the proposed framework in hard adaptation scenarios with real-world datasets from simple synthetic
domains to complex real-world domains. The proposed algorithm outperforms the previous state-of-the-art algorithms on
various environments.

Source
Domain

Target
Domain

Target
Domain

Source
Domain

(a) Wrong results from generative model-based scheme

Source
Domain

Intermediate
Domain

Target
Domain

(b) Aligned samples in intermediate domain

Figure 1: intermediate domain transfer approach. (a) The
important attributes to classify the digits were distorted by
the generative model-based algorithm (Russo et al. 2018)
when the source and target domains are far different. (b) To
tackle the problem, the proposed framework aligns the two
domains simultaneously into a hidden intermediate domain.

Introduction
With the advent of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN), supervised learning has substantially improved the
performance of image classiﬁcation algorithms. However,
supervised learning requires laborious and expensive labeling efforts to prepare the train data to cover all possible test
environments. To alleviate this effort and cost of labeling
the training data in various environments, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) has been introduced to automatically generate the labels of the unlabeled data of new domain by exploiting the knowledge of the labeled data (Saito
et al. 2018; Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Shu et al. 2018;
Bousmalis et al. 2017; Ghifary, Kleijn, and Zhang 2014).
Conventionally, the labeled data is called by source domain,
while the unlabeled data is denoted by target domain. However, UDA does not necessarily produce satisfactory results
when the characteristics of the source and target domains
are very distinct from each other. The different character-

istics include diverse backgrounds, viewpoints, and image
capturing systems.
The recent UDA approaches for CNN can be categorized
by two schemes: domain classiﬁer-based scheme (Ganin
and Lempitsky 2015; Shu et al. 2018; Saito et al. 2018)
and generative model-based scheme (Bousmalis et al. 2017;
Russo et al. 2018; Volpi et al. 2018). The domain classiﬁerbased scheme utilizes the additional classiﬁer to guess the
domain of the input samples. Then, by training the feature
generator to confuse the domain classiﬁer, the features of the
target domain become similar to the features of the source
domain. The generative model-based scheme utilizes a generative model to change the characteristics of the source images to be similar with the target images. Then, a CNN is
trained by the target-like images changed by the generative
model. The previous works are described in the following
related work section in detail.
However, both schemes have shown limited performance

∗

Y. Choi was with Samsung SDS while working on this paper.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10655

