The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Shapley Q-Value: A Local Reward Approach to Solve Global Reward Games
Jianhong Wang,1,2∗ Yuan Zhang,3∗ Tae-Kyun Kim,2 Yunjie Gu1
2

1
Control and Power Research Group, Imperial College London, UK
Imperial Computer Vision and Learning Lab, Imperial College London, UK
3
Laiye Network Technology Co.Ltd., China

method to distribute the global reward. There are two categories of approaches to solve out this problem, namely
shared reward approach (also known as shared reward game
or fully cooperative game) (Sukhbaatar, szlam, and Fergus
2016; Omidshaﬁei et al. 2018; Kim et al. 2019) and local reward approach (Panait and Luke 2005). The shared reward
approach directly assigns the global reward to all agents.
The local reward approach, on the other hand, distributes the
global reward according to each agent’s contribution, and
turns out to have superior performances in many tasks (Foerster et al. 2018; Nguyen, Kumar, and Lau 2018).
Whatever approach is adopted, a remaining open question
is whether there is an underlying theory to explain credit
assignment. Conventionally, a global reward game is built
upon non-cooperative game theory, which primarily aims to
ﬁnd Nash equilibrium as the stable solution (Osborne and
Rubinstein 1994; Basar and Olsder 1999). This formulation
can be extended to a dynamic environment with inﬁnite horizons via stochastic game (Shapley 1953a). However, Nash
equilibrium focuses on the individual reward and has no explicit incentives for cooperation. As a result, the shared reward function has to be applied to force cooperation, which
could be used as a possible explanation to the shared reward
approach, but not the local reward approach.
In our work, we introduce and investigate the cooperative game theory (or the coalitional game theory) (Chalkiadakis, Elkind, and Wooldridge 2011) in which local reward
approach becomes rationalized. In cooperative game theory,
the objective is dividing coalitions and binding agreements
among agents who belong to the same coalition. We focus
on convex game (CG) which is a typical game in cooperative game theory featuring the existence of a stable coalition
structure with an efﬁcient payoff distribution scheme (i.e., a
local reward approach) called core. This payoff distribution
is equivalent to the credit assignment, thereby the core rationalizes and well explains the local reward approach (Peleg
and Sudhölter 2007).
Referring to the previous works (Suijs and Borm 1999;
Chalkiadakis and Boutilier 2004), we extend CG to an
inﬁnite-horizon scenario, namely extended CG (ECG). In
addition, we show that a global reward game is equivalent
to an ECG with the grand coalition and an efﬁcient payoff

Abstract
Cooperative game is a critical research area in the multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL). Global reward game is a
subclass of cooperative games, where all agents aim to maximize the global reward. Credit assignment is an important
problem studied in the global reward game. Most of previous
works stood by the view of non-cooperative-game theoretical
framework with the shared reward approach, i.e., each agent
being assigned a shared global reward directly. This, however,
may give each agent an inaccurate reward on its contribution to the group, which could cause inefﬁcient learning. To
deal with this problem, we i) introduce a cooperative-game
theoretical framework called extended convex game (ECG)
that is a superset of global reward game, and ii) propose a
local reward approach called Shapley Q-value. Shapley Qvalue is able to distribute the global reward, reﬂecting each
agent’s own contribution in contrast to the shared reward
approach. Moreover, we derive an MARL algorithm called
Shapley Q-value deep deterministic policy gradient (SQDDPG), using Shapley Q-value as the critic for each agent.
We evaluate SQDDPG on Cooperative Navigation, Prey-andPredator and Trafﬁc Junction, compared with the state-of-theart algorithms, e.g., MADDPG, COMA, Independent DDPG
and Independent A2C. In the experiments, SQDDPG shows a
signiﬁcant improvement on the convergence rate. Finally, we
plot Shapley Q-value and validate the property of fair credit
assignment.

1

Introduction

Cooperative game is a critical research area in multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL). Many real-life tasks can
be modeled as cooperative games, e.g., the coordination of
autonomous vehicles (Keviczky et al. 2007), autonomous
distributed logistics (Schuldt 2012) and search-and-rescue
robots (Koes, Nourbakhsh, and Sycara 2006; Ramchurn et
al. 2010). Global reward game (Chang, Ho, and Kaelbling
2004) is a subclass of cooperative games where agents aim
to maximize the global reward. In this game, credit assignment is an important problem, which targets on ﬁnding a
∗
The ﬁrst two authors have equal contributions. Correspondence to jianhong.wang16@imperial.ac.uk.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7285

