The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

JSI-GAN: GAN-Based Joint Super-Resolution and Inverse
Tone-Mapping with Pixel-Wise Task-Speciﬁc Filters for UHD HDR Video
Soo Ye Kim,∗ Jihyong Oh,∗ Munchurl Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Republic of Korea
{sooyekim, jhoh94, mkimee}@kaist.ac.kr

EDSR+Huo

Abstract

Proposed

Deep SR-ITM

Multi-purpose CNN

Joint learning of super-resolution (SR) and inverse tonemapping (ITM) has been explored recently, to convert legacy
low resolution (LR) standard dynamic range (SDR) videos
to high resolution (HR) high dynamic range (HDR) videos
for the growing need of UHD HDR TV/broadcasting applications. However, previous CNN-based methods directly reconstruct the HR HDR frames from LR SDR frames, and are
only trained with a simple L2 loss. In this paper, we take
a divide-and-conquer approach in designing a novel GANbased joint SR-ITM network, called JSI-GAN, which is composed of three task-speciﬁc subnets: an image reconstruction
subnet, a detail restoration (DR) subnet and a local contrast
enhancement (LCE) subnet. We delicately design these subnets so that they are appropriately trained for the intended
purpose, learning a pair of pixel-wise 1D separable ﬁlters via
the DR subnet for detail restoration and a pixel-wise 2D local
ﬁlter by the LCE subnet for contrast enhancement. Moreover,
to train the JSI-GAN effectively, we propose a novel detail
GAN loss alongside the conventional GAN loss, which helps
enhancing both local details and contrasts to reconstruct high
quality HR HDR results. When all subnets are jointly trained
well, the predicted HR HDR results of higher quality are obtained with at least 0.41 dB gain in PSNR over those generated by the previous methods. The ofﬁcial Tensorﬂow code is
available at https://github.com/JihyongOh/JSI-GAN.

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison against other methods. Our
method can reconstruct ﬁne lines with realistic textures.

be achieved by joint super-resolution (SR) and inverse tonemapping (ITM), where SR up-scales LR videos to HR, and
ITM up-converts SDR videos to HDR.
In joint SR-ITM, it is important to restore details while
up-scaling the image resolution, and to enhance local contrast while increasing the signal amplitudes. In this paper, we
take a ‘divide-and-conquer’ approach by dividing this joint
problem into three sub-tasks: image reconstruction (IR), detail restoration (DR), and local contrast enhancement (LCE).
A single subnet is dedicated for each of the tasks, but all
subnets are jointly trained for the same goal of joint SRITM. To overcome the limitations of conventional sharedconvolution ﬁlters over input channels in each layer, we design a pair of pixel-wise 1D separable ﬁlters in the DR subnet for detail restoration and a pixel-wise 2D local ﬁlter in
the LCE subnet for contrast enhancement. Moreover, the 1D
separable and 2D local ﬁlters are designed to be scalable

Introduction
High dynamic range (HDR) videos can more realistically
represent natural scenes, with higher bit depth per pixel and
rich colors from a wider color gamut. They can be viewed
on HDR TVs, which also tend to be UHD (Ultra High Definition) with very high resolution. However even with the
latest UHD HDR TVs, the vast majority of the transmitted
visual contents are still low resolution (LR), standard dynamic range (SDR) videos. There are also abundant existing legacy LR SDR videos, which brings about the need for
appropriate conversion technologies that can generate high
resolution (HR) HDR videos from LR SDR videos. This can
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11287

