The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AutoRemover: Automatic Object Removal for Autonomous Driving Videos
Rong Zhang,1∗ Wei Li,2,4† Peng Wang,2 Chenye Guan,2 Jin Fang,2
Yuhang Song,3 Jinhui Yu,1 Baoquan Chen,4 Weiwei Xu,1† Ruigang Yang2
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Baidu Research, Baidu Inc.
University of Southern California, 4 Peking University
cadzhangrong@zju.edu.cn, {liweimcc, jerryking234}@gmail.com, {guanchenye, fangjin}@baidu.com,
yuhangso@usc.edu, {jhyu, xww}@cad.zju.edu.cn, baoquan@pku.edu.cn, ryang2@outlook.com
3

Abstract
Motivated by the need for photo-realistic simulation in autonomous driving, in this paper we present a video inpainting algorithm AutoRemover, designed speciﬁcally for generating street-view videos without any moving objects. In our
setup we have two challenges: the ﬁrst is the shadow, shadows are usually unlabeled but tightly coupled with the moving objects. The second is the large ego-motion in the videos.
To deal with shadows, we build up an autonomous driving
shadow dataset and design a deep neural network to detect
shadows automatically. To deal with large ego-motion, we
take advantage of the multi-source data, in particular the 3D
data, in autonomous driving. More speciﬁcally, the geometric
relationship between frames is incorporated into an inpainting deep neural network to produce high-quality structurally
consistent video output. Experiments show that our method
outperforms other state-of-the-art (SOTA) object removal algorithms, reducing the RMSE by over 19%.

1

Figure 1: 1st row shows the source image and inpainted one
from a video. 2nd row shows the usage of inpainting in data
augmentation and simulator. With the inpainted background,
the vehicle can be moved or inserted to synthesize new trafﬁc images. 3rd row shows inpainted videos are used to yield
3D model with clean texture.

Introduction

With the explosive growth of AI robotic techniques, especially the autonomous driving (AD) vehicles, countless images or videos as long as other sensor data are captured daily.
To fuel the learning-based AI algorithms (such as perception, scene parsing, planning) in those intelligence systems,
a large number of annotated data are still in great demand.
Thus, building virtual simulators for saving massive efforts
on labeling and processing the captured data are essential
to make the data best used for various AD applications (Alhaija et al. 2018; Seif and Hu 2016). One basic procedure
in those applications is removing the unwanted or hard-toannotate parts of the raw data, a.k.a the object removal or image/video inpainting. As shown in Figure 1, with the developed simulation system in (Li et al. 2019), the background
image obtained by removing the foreground vehicles can be
used to synthesize new trafﬁc images with annotations or reconstruct 3D road models with clean textures, which is one
of the desirable ways for data augmentation.
The image inpainting problem has been widely investigated, which also forms the basis of video inpainting.

Technically, image inpainting algorithms either utilize similar patches in the current image to ﬁll the hole by the
optimization-based methods or directly hallucinate from
training images by the learning-based methods. Recently,
the CNNs, especially GANs, hugely advanced the image inpainting technique (Pathak et al. 2016; Iizuka, Simo-Serra,
and Ishikawa 2017; Yu et al. 2018a), yielding visually plausible and impressive results. However, directly applying image inpainting techniques to videos suffers from jittering and
inconsistency. Thus, different kinds of temporal constraints
are introduced in recent video inpainting approaches (Huang
et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2019), whose core is jointly estimating
optical ﬂow and inpainting color.
Even several video inpainting systems have been proposed in the very close recent, their target scenarios are
usually with only small camera ego-motion in the behind
of foreground objects movements, where the ﬂow between
frames are easy to estimate. Unfortunately, the videos captured by AD vehicles have large camera ego-motion (Fig-

∗
The authors from Zhejiang University are afﬁliated with the
State Key Lab of CAD&CG.
†
Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12853

