The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Graph Convolutional Network for
Skeleton-Based Human Action Recognition by Neural Searching
Wei Peng,1 Xiaopeng Hong,3,4,1 Haoyu Chen,1 Guoying Zhao1,2,*
3

1
CMVS, University of Oulu, Finland; 2 School of Information and Technology, Northwest University, PRC
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Faculty of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, PRC
4
Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory; * Corresponding author
{wei.peng, xiaopeng.hong, chen.haoyu, guoying.zhao}@oulu.ﬁ

as there is no natural notion of locality in skeleton data.
Currently, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) (Kipf
and Welling 2016; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016) has been introduced to skeleton-based action recognition and achieved many encouraging results (Li et al. 2018;
Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Li et al. 2019a; Gao et al. 2019;
Shi et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019b). Nonetheless, most GCN
methods are based on a pre-deﬁned graph with ﬁxed topology constraint, which ignores implicit joint correlations.
Work in (Shi et al. 2019) intends to replace the ﬁxed graph
with an adaptive one based on the node similarity. However,
it provides a shared mechanism through the entire network.
Besides, the spatial-temporal correlations are barely discussed. We argue that different layers contain different semantic information thus a layer-speciﬁc mechanism should
be involved when construct a dynamic graph. Besides, mainstream GCN tends to one-order Chebyshev polynomials approximation (Kipf and Welling 2016) to reduce the computational expense, meanwhile high-order connections are not
well involved so that the representational ability is limited.
Current works, like (Gao et al. 2019), introduce high-order
approximation to have GCN with a bigger receptive ﬁled.
Nonetheless, the contribution of the each component in the
approximation is not discussed. It is apparent that designing
such different function modules for different tasks requires
exhausted try-and-error tests.

Abstract
Human action recognition from skeleton data, fuelled by the
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) with its powerful capability of modeling non-Euclidean data, has attracted lots of attention. However, many existing GCNs provide a pre-deﬁned
graph structure and share it through the entire network, which
can loss implicit joint correlations especially for the higherlevel features. Besides, the mainstream spectral GCN is approximated by one-order hop such that higher-order connections are not well involved. All of these require huge efforts to design a better GCN architecture. To address these
problems, we turn to Neural Architecture Search (NAS) and
propose the ﬁrst automatically designed GCN for this task.
Speciﬁcally, we explore the spatial-temporal correlations between nodes and build a search space with multiple dynamic
graph modules. Besides, we introduce multiple-hop modules
and expect to break the limitation of representational capacity
caused by one-order approximation. Moreover, a corresponding sampling- and memory-efﬁcient evolution strategy is proposed to search in this space. The resulted architecture proves
the effectiveness of the higher-order approximation and the
layer-wise dynamic graph modules. To evaluate the performance of the searched model, we conduct extensive experiments on two very large scale skeleton-based action recognition datasets. The results show that our model gets the stateof-the-art results in term of given metrics.

Introduction

To address these problems, in this paper, we focus on reducing the manual efforts in designing better graph convolutional architecture. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁxed graph structure
is replaced with dynamic ones by Automatic Neural Architecture Search (NAS) (Zoph and Le 2016) and with NAS,
we explore different graph generating mechanisms at different semantic levels. NAS is designed to obtain superior neural network structures with less or without human assists.
However, it is not straightforward to apply NAS to GCN.
Graph data like skeleton has no locality and order information as required by convolution operations, while current
NAS methods focus on the design of neural operations. Unfortunately, GCN itself is an emerging research topic thus
existing operations are very limited, e.g., GCN does not
even have a general pooling operation. Therefore, we propose to search in a GCN space built with multiple graph

Human action recognition is a valuable but challenging research area with widespread potential applications, say human computer interaction and autonomous driving. Nowadays, skeleton data is popularly used in action recognition.
One important reason is that skeleton data conveys compact information of body movement, thus it is robust to
the complex circumstances like the variations of the viewpoints, occlusion and self-occlusion. Previous works reorganize the skeleton data into a grid-shape structure so that the
traditional recurrent neural networks (RNN) and convolutional neural networks (CNN) can be directly implemented.
Though substantial improvements have been seen in action
recognition, the capability of deep learning is constrained
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2669

