The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Long Short-Term Sample Distillation
Liang Jiang,1 Zujie Wen,1 Zhongping Liang,1 Yafang Wang,1∗ Gerard de Melo,2
Zhe Li,1 Liangzhuang Ma,1 Jiaxing Zhang,1 Xiaolong Li,1 Yuan Qi1
1
AI Department, Ant Financial Services Group, 2 Rutgers University
{tianxuan.jl, zujie.wzj, zhongping.lzp, yafang.wyf}@antﬁn.com, gdm@demelo.org

to improve the effectiveness of a student model with identical architecture as the teacher model (Yim et al. 2017;
Furlanello et al. 2018). This is achieved by ﬁrst training a
teacher model and then training a student model with identical architecture but differently initialized parameters, supervised by both the ground truth and the teacher’s knowledge. Beyond learning from one single teacher, some studies have shown that learning from multiple teachers yields
a better student (You et al. 2017; Mehak and Balasubramanian 2018). Instead of this costly two-stage process, recent
work has considered Teacher–Student optimization in a single generation (Laine and Aila 2016; Huang et al. 2017a;
Yang et al. 2019). The core idea is to consider information about previous training updates to the current model as
teacher signals for later training steps of the same neural network in one single generation.
It has been shown that both teacher–student differences
and the quality of the teacher are very important in Teacher–
Student optimization (Yang et al. 2019). If student and
teacher are very similar, it is impossible for the former to
learn from the latter. If the teacher exhibits poor performance, it may introduce noise confusing the student. However, it is difﬁcult to guarantee both teacher–student differences and the quality of the teacher in a single generation.
During the course of the training, the predictive quality of
the model is expected to become better and better, and thus
a high-quality teacher ought to be a fairly recent one, while
a dissimilar teacher should rather be far from the student.
Previous works rely on just a single teacher, making it hard
to simultaneously satisfy these two opposing principles.
In this paper, we propose a novel training regime named
Long Short-Term Sample Distillation (LSTSD), which instead draws on numerous teachers and better leverages
knowledge from previous training. In particular, the method
decomposes the past history of training updates into longterm knowledge and short-term knowledge to guarantee
teacher–student differences while simultaneously ensuring
a high quality of the teacher. LSTSD divides the training
process into several mini-generations, each of which consists of several training epochs, and each training sample
is always guided by two teachers: a long-term teacher and
a short-term one. The long-term teacher signal comes from
the last mini-generation and remains ﬁxed during the course
of a mini-generation, so as to provide a steadfast teacher

Abstract
In the past decade, there has been substantial progress at
training increasingly deep neural networks. Recent advances
within the teacher–student training paradigm have established
that information about past training updates show promise
as a source of guidance during subsequent training steps.
Based on this notion, in this paper, we propose Long ShortTerm Sample Distillation, a novel training policy that simultaneously leverages multiple phases of the previous training
process to guide the later training updates to a neural network, while efﬁciently proceeding in just one single generation pass. With Long Short-Term Sample Distillation, the
supervision signal for each sample is decomposed into two
parts: a long-term signal and a short-term one. The long-term
teacher draws on snapshots from several epochs ago in order to provide steadfast guidance and to guarantee teacher–
student differences, while the short-term one yields more upto-date cues with the goal of enabling higher-quality updates.
Moreover, the teachers for each sample are unique, such that,
overall, the model learns from a very diverse set of teachers. Comprehensive experimental results across a range of vision and NLP tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of this new
training method.

Introduction
Our ability to train increasingly deep and increasingly large
neural networks has led to substantial progress in AI over
the past decade, and a number of techniques have been
proposed to address challenges such as overﬁtting and the
vanishing gradient problem, among others. In recent years,
several works have considered the Teacher–Student training paradigm, based on the idea of distilling knowledge
from teacher models to guide the optimization of a student model (Buciluǎ, Caruana, and Niculescu-Mizil 2006;
Ba and Caruana 2014; Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015;
Czarnecki et al. 2017; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2016).
The original motivation for this framework was the idea
of teaching a small model to mimic the behavior of a
larger model so as to speedup the inference and reduce
the model size, all while retaining the result quality of the
original model. Subsequent work adopted this framework
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4345

