The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-View Consistency for Relation Extraction
via Mutual Information and Structure Prediction
Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh,1 Franck Dernoncourt,2 My Thai,3,4 Dejing Dou,1 Thien Huu Nguyen1,5
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA
2
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA, USA
3
Department of Computer and Information Science and Engineering, University of Florida
4
VIN Bigdata Institute, Hanoi, Vietnam
5
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
{apouranb, dou, thien}@cs.uoregon.edu, mythai@cise.uﬂ.edu, dernonco@adobe.com
Aone, and Richardella 2003; Zhou et al. 2005) where extensive feature engineering is necessary to produce effective RE models. Recently, the research in RE has essentially
transformed from such feature engineering approaches to
the deep learning models that have helped to signiﬁcantly
advance our performance on the RE benchmark datasets.
Among different techniques introduced by deep learning
for RE, the syntactic tress (i.e., dependency trees and constituent trees) have been shown to be a useful resource to
impose the structures over the computational graphs of the
network architectures (Socher et al. 2012; Xu et al. 2015;
Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018). The major beneﬁts of such
syntactic structures involve the incorporation of the semantic/syntactic hierarchies in the sentence representations
(Socher et al. 2012) and the capacity to directly capture the
important context words for RE (i.e., via the dependency
paths) (Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018).

Abstract
Relation Extraction (RE) is one of the fundamental tasks in
Information Extraction. The goal of this task is to ﬁnd the semantic relations between entity mentions in text. It has been
shown in many previous work that the structure of the sentences (i.e., dependency trees) can provide important information/features for the RE models. However, the common
limitation of the previous work on RE is the reliance on some
external parsers to obtain the syntactic trees for the sentence
structures. On the one hand, it is not guaranteed that the independent external parsers can offer the optimal sentence structures for RE and the customized structures for RE might help
to further improve the performance. On the other hand, the
quality of the external parsers might suffer when applied to
different domains, thus also affecting the performance of the
RE models on such domains. In order to overcome this issue,
we introduce a novel method for RE that simultaneously induces the structures and predicts the relations for the input
sentences, thus avoiding the external parsers and potentially
leading to better sentence structures for RE. Our general strategy to learn the RE-speciﬁc structures is to apply two different methods to infer the structures for the input sentences (i.e.,
two views). We then introduce several mechanisms to encourage the structure and semantic consistencies between these
two views so the effective structure and semantic representations for RE can emerge. We perform extensive experiments
on the ACE 2005 and SemEval 2010 datasets to demonstrate
the advantages of the proposed method, leading to the stateof-the-art performance on such datasets.

Despite such advantages of the syntactic structures for the
deep learning models for RE, a major limitation in this approach is the reliance on some high-quality external parsers
to produce the effective parse trees for the models. There
are at least three issues originated from this parser reliance.
First, the high-quality external parsers might only be available for some domains and languages, thus restricting the
application of the RE models to those speciﬁc scenarios in
practice. Second, as the external parsers are often trained
only for the parsing purposes, the tree structures provided
by these syntactic parsers might not be the optimal ones for
RE, calling for more customized or task-speciﬁc structures
for the RE problem. In fact, the syntactic trees generated
by the external parsers cannot be used directly by the recent deep learning models for RE, necessitating some additional post-processing or controling mechanisms (i.e., pruning and graph attention) (Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018;
Guo, Zhang, and Lu 2019). Finally, the external parsers are
often trained for some general or speciﬁc domains for which
their performance might degrade if they are applied to new
domains (i.e., the domain shift problem) (Plank 2011). Such
performance loss of the parsers on the new domains might
eventually propagate to the RE models that critically depends on the quality of the tree structures for the sentences
to perform well.

Introduction
Relation Extraction (RE) is an important task in Information Extraction (IE) that aims to identify the semantic relations between entity mentions in text. Finding such semantic relations could be beneﬁcial for many downstream applications in Natural Language Processing, including Question Answering and Knowledge Base Population. Due to its
importance, RE has gained much attention from the natural
language processing (NLP) community, demonstrated by a
sheer amount of research on RE in the last decades.
The early methods for RE have involved the featurebased approach and the kernel-based approach (Zelenko,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9106

