The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Random Erasing Data Augmentation
Zhun Zhong,1,2 Liang Zheng,3 Guoliang Kang,4 Shaozi Li,1∗ Yi Yang2
1

Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xiamen University
2
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
3
Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University
4
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University

limited variance in occlusion. In an extreme case when all
the training objects are clearly visible, i.e., no occlusion happens, the learned CNN will probably work well on testing
images without occlusion, but, due to the limited generalization ability of the CNN model, may fail to recognize objects
which are partially occluded. While we can manually add
occluded natural images to the training set, it is costly and
the levels of occlusion might be limited.
To address the occlusion problem and improve the generalization ability of CNNs, this paper introduces a new data
augmentation approach, Random Erasing. It can be easily
implemented in most existing CNN models. In the training
phase, an image within a mini-batch randomly undergoes
either of the two operations: 1) kept unchanged; 2) we randomly choose a rectangle region of an arbitrary size, and
assign the pixels within the selected region with random values (or the ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) mean pixel value).
During Operation 2), an image is partially occluded in a
random position with a random-sized mask. In this manner,
augmented images with various occlusion levels can be generated. Examples of Random Erasing are shown in Fig. 1.
Two commonly used data augmentation approaches, i.e.,
random ﬂipping and random cropping, also work on the image level and are closely related to Random Erasing. Both
techniques have demonstrated the ability to improve the image recognition accuracy. In comparison with Random Erasing, random ﬂipping does not incur information loss during
augmentation. Different from random cropping, in Random
Erasing, 1) only part of the object is occluded and the overall
object structure is preserved, 2) pixels of the erased region
are re-assigned with random values, which can be viewed as
adding block noise to the image.
Working primarily on the fully connected (FC) layer,
Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014) is also related to our
method. It prevents over-ﬁtting by discarding (both hidden
and visible) units of the CNN with a probability p. Random Erasing is somewhat similar to performing Dropout
on the image level. The difference is that in Random Erasing, 1) we operate on a continuous rectangular region, 2)
no pixels (units) are discarded, and 3) we focus on making
the model more robust to noise and occlusion. The recent
A-Fast-RCNN (Wang, Shrivastava, and Gupta 2017) pro-

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce Random Erasing, a new data augmentation method for training the convolutional neural network (CNN). In training, Random Erasing randomly selects
a rectangle region in an image and erases its pixels with random values. In this process, training images with various
levels of occlusion are generated, which reduces the risk of
over-ﬁtting and makes the model robust to occlusion. Random Erasing is parameter learning free, easy to implement,
and can be integrated with most of the CNN-based recognition models. Albeit simple, Random Erasing is complementary to commonly used data augmentation techniques such
as random cropping and ﬂipping, and yields consistent improvement over strong baselines in image classiﬁcation, object detection and person re-identiﬁcation. Code is available
at: https://github.com/zhunzhong07/Random-Erasing.

1

Introduction

The ability to generalize is a research focus for the convolutional neural network (CNN). When a model is excessively
complex, such as having too many parameters compared to
the number of training samples, over-ﬁtting might happen
and weaken its generalization ability. A learned model may
describe random error or noise instead of the underlying
data distribution (Zhang et al. 2017). In bad cases, the CNN
model may exhibit good performance on the training data,
but fail drastically when predicting new data. To improve
the generalization ability of CNNs, many data augmentation
and regularization approaches have been proposed, such as
random cropping (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012),
ﬂipping (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015), dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), and batch normalization (Ioffe and Szegedy
2015).
Occlusion is a critical inﬂuencing factor on the generalization ability of CNNs. It is desirable that invariance to various levels of occlusion is achieved. When some parts of an
object are occluded, a strong classiﬁcation model should be
able to recognize its category from the overall object structure. However, the collected training samples usually exhibit
∗

Corresponding author (szlig@xmu.edu.cn).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13001

