The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Trading-Off Static and Dynamic Regret in Online Least-Squares and Beyond∗
Jianjun Yuan,1 Andrew Lamperski1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota
200 Union Street SE, 4-174 Keller Hall
Minneapolis, MN 55455, US
{yuanx270, alampers}@umn.edu

tion. The functions, ft (θ), can be chosen from a function
class in an arbitrary, possibly adversarial manner.
The performance of an online learning algorithm is typically assessed using various notions of regret. Static regret,
Rs , measures the difference between the algorithm’s cumulative loss and the cumulative loss of the best ﬁxed decision
in hindsight (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi 2006):

Abstract
Recursive least-squares algorithms often use forgetting factors as a heuristic to adapt to non-stationary data streams.
The ﬁrst contribution of this paper rigorously characterizes the effect of forgetting factors for a class of online
Newton algorithms. For exp-concave and strongly convex
objectives, the
algorithms achieve the dynamic regret of
√
max{O(log T ), O( T V )}, where V is a bound on the path
length of the comparison sequence. In particular, we show
how classic recursive least-squares with a forgetting factor
achieves this dynamic regret bound. By varying V , we obtain a trade-off between static and dynamic regret. In order
to obtain more computationally efﬁcient algorithms, our second contribution is a novel gradient descent step size rule
for strongly convex functions. Our gradient descent rule recovers the order optimal dynamic regret bounds described
above. For smooth problems, we can also obtain static regret of O(T 1−β ) and dynamic regret of O(T β V ∗ ), where
β ∈ (0, 1) and V ∗ is the path length of the sequence of minimizers. By varying β, we obtain a trade-off between static
and dynamic regret.

Rs =

T


ft (θt ) − min

t=1

θ∈S

T


ft (θ),

t=1

where S is a constraint set. For convex functions, varia√
tions of gradient descent achieve static regret of O( T ),
while for strongly convex functions these can be improved
to O(log T ) (Hazan 2016). However, when the underlying
environment is changing, due to the ﬁxed comparator the algorithms converge to, static regret is no longer appropriate.
In order to better track the changes of the underlying environment, dynamic regret is proposed to compare the cumulative loss against that incurred by a comparison sequence,
z1 , . . . , zT ∈ S:

Introduction
Rd =

Online learning algorithms are designed to solve prediction and learning problems for streaming data or batch data
whose volume is too large to be processed all at once. Applications include online auctions (Blum et al. 2004), online
classiﬁcation and regression (Crammer et al. 2006), online
subspace identiﬁcation (Yuan and Lamperski 2019), as well
as online resource allocation (Yuan and Lamperski 2018).
The general procedure for online learning algorithms is as
follows: at each time t, before the true time-dependent objective function ft (θ) is revealed, we need to make the prediction, θt , based on the history of the observations fi (θ),
i < t. Then the value of ft (θt ) is the loss suffered due to the
lack of the knowledge for the true objective function ft (θ).
Our prediction of θ is then updated to include the information of ft (θ). This whole process is repeated until termina-

T


ft (θt ) −

t=1

T


ft (zt )

t=1

The classic work on online gradient descent
√ (Zinkevich
2003) achieves dynamic regret of the order O( T (1 + V )),
where V is a bound on the path length of the comparison
sequence:
T

zt − zt−1  ≤ V.
t=2


This has been improved to O( T (1 + V )) in (Zhang, Lu,
and Zhou 2018) by applying a meta-optimization over step
sizes.
In works such as (Mokhtari et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2016),
it is assumed that zt = θt∗ = argminθ∈S ft (θ). We denote
that particular version of dynamic regret by:

∗
Work supported in part by NSF CMMI 1727096 and a University of MnDRIVE Informatics Graduate Fellowship.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

R∗d =

T

t=1

6712

ft (θt ) −

T

t=1

ft (θt∗ )

