The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ODIN: ODE-Informed Regression for Parameter and
State Inference in Time-Continuous Dynamical Systems
Philippe Wenk,∗1,2 Gabriele Abbati,∗3 Michael A Osborne,3
Bernhard Schölkopf,4 Andreas Krause,1 Stefan Bauer4
1

Learning and Adaptive Systems Group, ETH Zürich
2
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
3
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
4
Empirical Inference Group, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Correspondence to: wenkph@ethz.ch, gabb@robots.ox.ac.uk
match state and derivative estimates of said splines to obtain the ODE parameters. This idea gave rise to a class of
gradient matching algorithms that rely on spline regression,
kernel regression and, in a Bayesian setting, Gaussian process regression (GPR).

Abstract
Parameter inference in ordinary differential equations is an
important problem in many applied sciences and in engineering, especially in a data-scarce setting. In this work, we introduce a novel generative modeling approach based on constrained Gaussian processes and leverage it to build a computationally and data efﬁcient algorithm for state and parameter
inference. In an extensive set of experiments, our approach
outperforms the current state of the art for parameter inference both in terms of accuracy and computational cost. It also
shows promising results for the much more challenging problem of model selection.

Gaussian processes (GPs) provide a very natural and
theoretically appealing way to smooth time series, especially because they are very closely related to Kalman ﬁltering (Hartikainen and Särkkä 2010). Thus, there has been
signiﬁcant interest in incorporating them into the gradient
matching framework, starting from the pioneering theoretical work of Calderhead, Girolami, and Lawrence (2009):
they propose a GP-based probabilistic modeling scheme on
which they perform inference using MCMC. Dondelinger
et al. (2013) change this probabilistic setup to achieve a
more efﬁcient MCMC sampling procedure (AGM - Adaptive Gradient matching), while Gorbach, Bauer, and Buhmann (2017) introduce a computationally efﬁcient inference
scheme based on variational inference (VGM - Variational
Gradient Matching). Crucially, all these methods rely on a
product of experts (PoE) heuristic (an alternative approach
is formulated by Barber and Wang (2014), later questioned
by Macdonald, Higham, and Husmeier (2015)). However,
Wenk et al. (2018) show that the PoE leads to theoretical issues: indeed, in the graphical models proposed by Calderhead, Girolami, and Lawrence (2009), Dondelinger et al.
(2013) and Gorbach, Bauer, and Buhmann (2017), the ODE
parameters become statistically independent of the observations. Thus, Wenk et al. (2018) propose a new graphical
model that circumvents this issue and present an efﬁcient
MCMC-based inference scheme (FGPGM - Fast Gaussian
Process based Gradient Matching). A further formulation
that is based on variational inference and allows for additional inequality constraints on the derivatives is provided
by Lorenzi and Filippone (2018).

Introduction
Ordinary differential equations (ODEs) represent a ubiquitous tool for modeling problems in many quantitative sciences and engineering. While with ﬁrst principles and expert knowledge it is often possible to work out a parametric
form for the equations that model a system of interest, in
most cases there is no closed-form solution, making parameter identiﬁcation problematic. One needs to rely on numerical schemes, which can be sub-optimal given that the exact
system trajectory is usually unknown: typically, we observe
noisy measurements of the true trajectory only at some discrete time points. This problem has been extensively studied
in the past with classical approaches based on numerical integration (e.g. Bard (1974) and Benson (1979)), also in the
relevant context of model selection (Chen, Shojaie, and Witten 2017; Wu et al. 2014).
Classical approaches iteratively propose new sets of parameters and then evaluate them by numerical integration:
the estimated trajectory can then be compared against the
observed data. Among others, Varah (1982) argue that this
procedure can be turned on its head to improve computational performance. In principle, ﬁnding good parameters is
equivalent to denoising the states, since adequate ODE parameters will lead to a trajectory that is close to ground truth.
In particular, Varah (1982) ﬁrst ﬁt a spline curve to the observations to approximate the true trajectory, and subsequently

Similarly to Gaussian process-based gradient matching, González, Vujačić, and Wit (2014) and Niu et al.
(2016) use kernel ridge regression in a frequentist setting (RKG2/RKG3 - Reproducing Kernel based Gradient
Matching). Aiming directly for point estimates of the parameters, their approaches are naturally faster than alternatives
that build on the use of MCMC and Gaussian processes.

∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6364

