The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Let’s Learn Their Language? A Case for Planning
with Automata-Network Languages from Model Checking
Jörg Hoffmann, Holger Hermanns, Michaela Klauck, Marcel Steinmetz
Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
lastname@cs.uni-saarland.de

Erez Karpas

Daniele Magazzeni

Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
karpase@gmail.com

King’s College London, UK
daniele.magazzeni@kcl.ac.uk
certain problem characteristics, pertaining to AIP applications involving planning agents surrounded by exogenous
agents (not under control of the planner) in complex environments. Speciﬁcally, in our own work, we have considered
Minecraft planning, robot-human collaboration, and drones
control avoiding exogenous drones. After modeling these in
AIP languages, and considering MC languages based on automata networks as an alternative, we cannot help but conclude that the latter provide a superior combination of support for (I) exogenous agents, (II) pre-deﬁned plan structure,
(III) probabilistic duration uncertainty, and (IV) data structures. Various AIP dialects address some of (I)–(IV), but often with limitations and none addresses the combination.
The technical part of the paper elaborates on these points.
Before we delve into the details, let us brieﬂy discuss the
consequences of our proposal, and related prior works.
In the short term, if we model our problems in MC languages then we have to use MC tools. In the long term,
however, our vision is to synergetically combine algorithmic ideas across areas. While many ideas are related, AIP
has generally focused on fast methods ﬁnding solutions under run-time conditions, while MC has generally focused
on complete analyses under design-time conditions. So a
blueprint for combination across areas is an architecture in
which planning methods serve for online decision making,
while MC/veriﬁcation methods serve for ofﬂine analysis and
for the preparation of information to be leveraged at runtime (approximations of the safe region, etc). Note that this
could transform the connection between the two areas. Apart
from getting rid of the language barrier, we would elaborate
and leverage the complementarity across areas, rather than
their commonality as previous approaches do.
It has been previously observed in AIP that automata networks can have advantages for modeling planning problems. In the PDDL+ (Fox and Long 2006) variant of the
most common planning language PDDL, the semantics is
based on mapping PDDL+ to hybrid automata, motivated
among other things by the potential for exchange of results.
In Web service composition as planning, at the so-called
process level Web services are represented as automata (Pistore, Traverso, and Bertoli 2005). Models and tools from
probabilistic MC have become popular in the robotics and

Abstract
It is widely known that AI planning and model checking
are closely related. Compilations have been devised between
various pairs of language fragments. What has barely been
voiced yet, though, is the idea to let go of one’s own modeling language, and use one from the other area instead. We
advocate that idea here – to use automata-network languages
from model checking instead of PDDL – motivated by modeling difﬁculties relating to planning agents surrounded by
exogenous agents in complex environments. One could, of
course, address this by designing additional extended planning languages. But one can also leverage decades of work
on modeling in the formal methods community, creating potential for deep synergy and integration with their techniques
as a side effect. We believe there’s a case to be made for the
latter, as one modeling alternative in planning among others.

1

Introduction

The close relation between AI planning (AIP) and model
checking (MC) is widely known. Model checkers have been
used as planning back-ends (e. g. (Giunchiglia and Traverso
1999; Cimatti et al. 2003; Bogomolov et al. 2014)), compilations are known between a variety of language fragments
(e. g. (Edelkamp 2003a; Abdeddaı̈m et al. 2007; Klauck et
al. 2018)), various algorithmic ideas have been transferred
(e. g. (Rintanen 2003; Edelkamp, Lluch-Lafuente, and Leue
2004; Wehrle et al. 2013)), temporal logics is frequently
used in both areas (e. g. (Baier, Bacchus, and McIlraith
2009; De Giacomo and Vardi 2013)).
Despite this intense exchange across areas, it is uncommon to use a modeling language from area X to model (and
solve) a problem from area Y; we discuss exceptions below.
There seems to be an implicit assumption that the modeling languages of either area are best suited to model those
practical problems that area is interested in solving. We believe there is good reason to challenge that assumption. We
advocate the use of MC languages based on automata networks to model AIP problems, as one modeling alternative
in planning. We believe that this is the rational choice for
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13569

