The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generative-Discriminative Complementary Learning
Yanwu Xu,1 Mingming Gong,1 Junxiang Chen,1 Tongliang Liu,2
Kun Zhang,3 Kayhan Batmanghelich1

1

Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, {yanwuxu, mig73, juc91, kayhan}@pitt.edu,
2
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au
3
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, kunz1@cmu.edu

from many candidate classes, especially when the number
of classes is relatively large or the annotator is not familiar
with the characteristics of all candidate classes. However, it
is less demanding and inexpensive to choose one of the incorrect class as a complementary label for an instance. For
example, when an annotator is labelling an image containing
an animal that she has never seen before, she can easily identify that this animal does not belong the usual animal classes
he can see in daily life, such as, “not dogs”. In medical ﬁeld,
a doctor may not be able to identify the exact disease type
given symptoms. However, he/she can easily obtain complementary labels denoting some disease types a patient does
not belong to.
Existing complementary learning methods modiﬁed the
ordinary classiﬁcation loss functions to enable learning
from complementary labels. (Ishida et al. 2017) proposed
a method that provides a consistent estimate of the classiﬁer from complementarily-labeled data where the loss function satisﬁes a particular symmetric condition. However, this
method only allows classiﬁcation loss functions with certain non-convex binary losses for one-versus-all and pairwise comparison. Later, (Yu et al. 2018) proposed to use
the forward loss correction technique (Patrini et al. 2017)
that learns the conditional, PY |X , from complementary labels, where X denote the input features and Y denote labels. (Ishida et al. 2018) derived an unbiased estimator of
the true classiﬁcation risk with arbitrary loss functions from
complementarily-labeled data.
To clarify the differences between learning with ordinary
and complimentary labels, we deﬁne the notion of “effective
sample size”, which is the number of instances with ordinary labels that carries the same amount of information as
instances with complementary labels of a given size. Since
the complementary labels are weak labels, they carry only
partial information about the ordinary labels. Hence, the effective sample size nl for complementary learning is much
smaller than the given sample size n (i.e., nl << n). Current
methods for learning with complementary labels need a relatively large training set to ensure low variance for predicting
ordinary label.
Although nl is small under complementary learning settings, we can still use all samples with size n to estimate the
instance distribution PX . However, current complementary
methods focus on modeling conditional PY |X and thus fail

Abstract
The majority of state-of-the-art deep learning methods are
discriminative approaches, which model the conditional distribution of labels given inputs features. The success of
such approaches heavily depends on high-quality labeled instances, which are not easy to obtain, especially as the number of candidate classes increases. In this paper, we study
the complementary learning problem. Unlike ordinary labels, complementary labels are easy to obtain because an
annotator only needs to provide a yes/no answer to a randomly chosen candidate class for each instance. We propose
a generative-discriminative complementary learning method
that estimates the ordinary labels by modeling both the conditional (discriminative) and instance (generative) distributions. Our method, we call Complementary Conditional GAN
(CCGAN), improves the accuracy of predicting ordinary labels and is able to generate high-quality instances in spite of
weak supervision. In addition to the extensive empirical studies, we also theoretically show that our model can retrieve
the true conditional distribution from the complementarilylabeled data.

Introduction
Deep supervised learning has achieved great success in various applications such as visual recognition (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2015) and natural
language processing (Kim 2014). Despite the effectiveness
of supervised classiﬁers, acquiring labeled data is often expensive and time-consuming. As a result, learning from
weak supervision has been studied extensively in recent
decades, including but not limited to semi-supervised learning (Kingma et al. 2014), multi-instance learning (Zhou et
al. 2012), learning from side information (Hoffman, Gupta,
and Darrell 2016), and learning from data with noisy labels (Natarajan et al. 2013; Liu and Tao 2016; Xia et al.
2019; Cheng et al. 2017).
In this paper, we consider a recently proposed weaklysupervised classiﬁcation scenario, i.e., learning from complementary labels (Ishida et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2018). Unlike
an ordinary label, a complementary label speciﬁes a class
that an input instance does not belong to. Given an instance
from a class, it is laborious to choose the correct class label
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6526

