The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Causal Knowledge Extraction through Large-Scale Text Mining
Oktie Hassanzadeh, Debarun Bhattacharjya, Mark Feblowitz,
Kavitha Srinivas, Michael Perrone, Shirin Sohrabi, Michael Katz
IBM Research
{hassanzadeh, debarunb, mfeb, mpp, ssohrab}@us.ibm.com, {kavitha.srinivas, michael.katz1}@ibm.com

and analysis of causal knowledge. A highlight of our system is using state-of-the-art neural network based embeddings and neural language models to handle the enormous
variety of representations of the same cause/effect in natural
language. We have evaluated the effectiveness of using our
APIs in answering binary causal questions (Hassanzadeh et
al. 2019).

Abstract
In this demonstration, we present a system for mining causal
knowledge from large corpuses of text documents, such as
millions of news articles. Our system provides a collection
of APIs for causal analysis and retrieval. These APIs enable
searching for the effects of a given cause and the causes of
a given effect, as well as the analysis of existence of causal
relation given a pair of phrases. The analysis includes a score
that indicates the likelihood of the existence of a causal relation. It also provides evidence from an input corpus supporting the existence of a causal relation between input phrases.
Our system uses generic unsupervised and weakly supervised
methods of causal relation extraction that do not impose semantic constraints on causes and effects. We show example
use cases developed for a commercial application in enterprise risk management.

Causal Extraction Framework
Figure 1 shows our causal extraction framework. The input
is a large corpus of text documents. The documents are ingested and turned into a large collection of sentences and
phrases that are in turn used in the following two components. The ingestion and processing is performed in parallel
on a distributed processing framework.
Causal Knowledge Extraction Engine This component
ﬁrst identiﬁes sentences that are likely to be causal statements, and then extracts cause and effect text spans and
phrases from these sentences. Each input sentence results in
one or more (X, Y ) pairs where X and Y are text spans
or phrases (referred to as Causal Mentions by Sharp et
al. (2016)), extracted using a variety of NLP techniques. The
output of this component is a collection of cause-effect pairs
along with meta-data identifying the source article and sentence and the phrase extraction method (if any). This output
is indexed on a distributed Information Retrieval (IR) engine
that enables full-text search.

Introduction
Capturing and representing causal knowledge is a challenging problem in AI, with important applications in various
domains such as healthcare, legal, and enterprise risk management. While a large body of work in AI is concerned
with causal discovery and modeling (Pearl 2009; Halpern
2016), there is also a rich literature on extracting causal
knowledge expressed by humans in natural language within
text documents. Most prior work in this area puts restrictions on causes and effects, e.g., by restricting them to events
with a particular semantic representation (Do, Chan, and
Roth 2011; Radinsky, Davidovich, and Markovitch 2012).
This limits the application of such approaches to cases
where causes and effects can be extracted into a particular
representation. Existing techniques also often require large
amounts of labelled training data (Kruengkrai et al. 2017;
Dasgupta et al. 2018)], which limits the application to cases
where such training data can be obtained.
In this demonstration, we present a system that addresses
these shortcomings, and by relying on causal statements that
are prevalent in various kinds of sources (e.g., analysis reports, healthcare notes, legal and scientiﬁc literature, news
articles, etc.), provides a set of tools and APIs for retrieval

Semantic Embeddings Engine To handle the variety of
representations of causes and effects in natural language,
and enable effective retrieval and analysis, we use the
large input corpus to build distributed representations of the
words, phrases, and sentences in the corpus. For words, we
use word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013). For phrases, we use an
adaptation of word2vec based on our previous work (Hassanzadeh, Trewin, and Gliozzo 2018), by treating each sentence as a set of phrases and building embeddings that do
not take the order of the phrases or the length of the sentence into account. For sentences, we use BERT (Devlin et
al. 2018)-based embeddings. The vectors are then indexed
using a highly efﬁcient nearest neighbor search index.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13610

