The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Finding Minimum-Weight Link-Disjoint Paths with a Few Common Nodes
Binglin Tao, Mingyu Xiao,∗ Jingyang Zhao
School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
taobl@std.uestc.edu.cn, myxiao@gmail.com, 1176033045@qq.com

Rottenstreich, and Orda 2016; Yallouz and Orda 2017; Johnston, Lee, and Modiano 2015; Wei, Shen, and Bose 2014;
Choudhury, Bhadra, and De 2019). It becomes a fundamental problem in network protection to pre-compute and
reserve both primary and backup paths (or networks) between a speciﬁc pair of source and sink nodes in the network in advance during the conﬁguration phase (Beshir
and Kuipers 2009; Sherali, Özbay, and Subramanian 1998;
Wei, Shen, and Bose 2014). Usually, the primary and backup
paths need to meet some performance requirements, e.g.
Quality of Service (such as disjointness, delay, cost, failure probability, and power level limits), which is typically
quantiﬁed by the sum of some link weights. Nonetheless, a
working path with some disjoint backup paths will not suffer from malfunction caused by only a single link failure, in
reality (Wang and Doucette 2018).

Abstract
Network survivability has drawn certain interest in network
optimization. However, the demand for full protection of a
network is usually too restrictive. To overcome the limitation
of geographical environments and to save network resources,
we turn to establish backup networks allowing a few common
nodes. It comes out the problem of ﬁnding k link-disjoint
paths between a given pair of source and sink in a network
such that the number of common nodes shared by at least two
paths is bounded by a constant and the total link weight of
all paths is minimized under the above constraints. For the
case k = 2, where we have only one backup path, several
fast algorithms have been developed in the literature. For the
case k > 2, little results are known. In this paper, we ﬁrst establish the NP-hardness of the problem with general k. Motivated by the situation that each node in a network may have a
capability of multicasting, we also study a restricted version
with one more requirement that each node can be shared by
at most two paths. For the restricted version, we build an ILP
model and design a fast algorithm by using the techniques of
augmenting paths and splitting nodes. Furthermore, experimental results on synthetic and real networks show that our
algorithm is effective in practice.

The disjointness can be regarded as a constraint on nodes
or links in the network. Although node-disjoint paths can
protect from both node and link failures, link-disjoint paths
are more widely used and studied in network protection.
Recently, the concept of “partially disjoint paths” was proposed, in which the paths are link-disjoint but also have a
constraint on the number of common nodes shared by at
least two paths.

Introduction

Hu et al. (1998) proposed a new type of switches, namely
Splitter-and-Delivery Switch (SAD). It has both point-topoint and multicasting capability in networks to satisfy the
demand of data transmission from a source to several destinations, which means the nodes in one source-destination
path can be shared by other source-destination paths, saying
common nodes. Common nodes can be considered as shared
resources, such as power, spectrum, optical channel, buffer
memory, etc. Yallouz et al. (2018) mentions that common
nodes along an established link-disjoint pair of paths can
save time to retransmit the data from the closest nodes instead of the source when failures occur. However, the number of common nodes usually can not be very large due to the
hardware constraints in switches and the occurrence probability of node failures. Some models to save the spare resources by limiting the number of common nodes in the networks are also considered in (Le, Molnár, and Palaysi 2014;
Din and Lai 2015). Therefore, the number of common nodes

Dealing with network failures has become an urgent and
important research topic due to the rapid development of
network and the extensive establishment of network facilities in the past decades. In general, we can protect
from network failures by increasing the degrees of internal
nodes (Steiglitz, Weiner, and Kleitman 1969; Kerivin and
Mahjoub 2005; Kuipers 2012), limiting average distances or
hop counts between nodes (Gouveia, Simonetti, and Uchoa
2011), and increasing the connectivity (Cohen and Nutov
2013; Kortsarz and Nutov 2016) in the network.
One of the most effective and widely used methods to
protect networks from failures is to establish a backup network (or path) for each primary network (or path) with some
requirements like node degrees and connectivity (Yallouz,
∗

The corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
938

