The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Probing Natural Language Inference Models through Semantic Fragments
†

†

Kyle Richardson, Hai Hu,‡ Lawrence S. Moss,‡ Ashish Sabharwal
†

Allen Institute for AI, Seattle, WA, USA
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA
†
{kyler, ashishs}@allenai.org, ‡ {huhai, lmoss}@indiana.edu
‡

Abstract

(Linguistically interesting issue, e.g., monotonicity)
premise:
hypothesis:

Do state-of-the-art models for language understanding already have, or can they easily learn, abilities such as boolean
coordination, quantiﬁcation, conditionals, comparatives, and
monotonicity reasoning (i.e., reasoning about word substitutions in sentential contexts)? While such phenomena are involved in natural language inference (NLI) and go beyond basic linguistic understanding, it is unclear the extent to which
they are captured in existing NLI benchmarks and effectively
learned by models. To investigate this, we propose the use of
semantic fragments—systematically generated datasets that
each target a different semantic phenomenon—for probing,
and efﬁciently improving, such capabilities of linguistic models. This approach to creating challenge datasets allows direct control over the semantic diversity and complexity of the
targeted linguistic phenomena, and results in a more precise
characterization of a model’s linguistic behavior. Our experiments, using a library of 8 such semantic fragments, reveal
two remarkable ﬁndings: (a) State-of-the-art models, including BERT, that are pre-trained on existing NLI benchmark
datasets perform poorly on these new fragments, even though
the phenomena probed here are central to the NLI task; (b) On
the other hand, with only a few minutes of additional ﬁnetuning—with a carefully selected learning rate and a novel
variation of “inoculation”—a BERT-based model can master
all of these logic and monotonicity fragments while retaining
its performance on established NLI benchmarks.

All↑ dogs↓ chased↑ some↑ cat↑
(entails) All small dogs chased a cat
Construct

Formal Speciﬁcation: Fragment with Idealized NLI examples
Generate
challenge dataset (NLI pairs)
Empirical Questions
1. Is this fragment learnable using existing NLI architectures?
2. How do pre-trained NLI models perform on this fragment?
3. Can models be ﬁne-tuned/re-trained to master this fragment?

Figure 1: An illustration of our proposed method for studying NLI model behavior through semantic fragments.

reasoning about word substitutions in context); here the position of dogs in the premise occurs in a downward monotone context (marked as ↓), meaning that it can be specialized (i.e., substituted with a more speciﬁc concept such as
small dogs) to generate an entailment relation. In contrast,
substituting dogs for a more generic concept, such as animal, has the effect of generating a NEUTRAL inference.
In an empirical setting, it is desirable to be able to measure
the extent to which a given model captures such types of
knowledge. We propose to do this using a suite of controlled
dataset probes that we call semantic fragments.
While NLI has long been studied in linguistics and logic
and has focused on speciﬁc types of logical phenomena
such as monotonicity inference, attention to these topics
has come only recently to empirical NLI. Progress in empirical NLI has accelerated due to the introduction of new
large-scale NLI datasets, such as the Stanford Natural Language Inference (SNLI) dataset (Bowman et al. 2015) and
MultiNLI (MNLI) (Williams, Nangia, and Bowman 2018),
coupled with new advances in neural modeling and model
pre-training (Conneau et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2019). With
these performance increases has come increased scrutiny of
systematic annotation biases in existing datasets (Poliak et
al. 2018b; Gururangan et al. 2018), as well as attempts to

Introduction
Natural language inference (NLI) is the task of detecting
inferential relationships between natural language descriptions. For example, given the pair of sentences All dogs
chased some cat and All small dogs chased a cat shown
in Figure 1, the goal for an NLI model is to determine that
the second sentence, known as the hypothesis sentence, follows from the meaning of the ﬁrst sentence (the premise
sentence). Such a task is known to involve a wide range
of reasoning and knowledge phenomena, including knowledge that goes beyond basic linguistic understanding (e.g.,
elementary logic). As one example of such knowledge, the
inference in Figure 1 involves monotonicity reasoning (i.e.,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8713

