The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Consistent Video Style Transfer via Compound Regularization
Wenjing Wang,1 Jizheng Xu,2 Li Zhang,2 Yue Wang,2 Jiaying Liu1∗
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, 2 ByteDance Inc.
{daooshee, liujiaying}@pku.edu.cn, {xujizheng, lizhang.idm, wangyue.v}@bytedance.com

researches focus on extending NST for photo realistic rendering (Luan et al. 2017), doodle style transfer (Champandard 2016), and stereoscopy (Chen et al. 2018).
Applying style transfer to video is more interesting yet
challenging. One difﬁculty is to maintain temporal consistency for video style transfer. Ruder et al. (2016) ﬁrst proposed an online image optimization-based method. However, it takes several minutes to process a single frame even
with pre-computed optical ﬂows. To speed up the process,
feed-forward models were latter proposed (Huang et al.
2017; Chen et al. 2017a; Gupta et al. 2017), where picture
pairs with optical ﬂows are used to train the network with
a temporal consistency loss. However, their performance on
temporal consistency is not comparable with (Ruder, Dosovitskiy, and Brox 2016).
In this paper, we try to tackle the problem of consistent video style transfer. Through theoretical analysis, we
ﬁnd that both the traditional way of training with videos
and some recently proposed single-frame regularizations
have contradictions with the essence of temporal consistency, which can lead to under-ﬁtting and thus degrades network performance. Based on mathematical modeling, we
derive a new compound regularization to better ﬁt the nature of temporal variation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed regularization in balancing temporal stability and stylization effect. Another aspect to improve video style transfer is to introduce interframe relationship, which helps long-term temporal consistency. However, many models realize this by estimating optical ﬂows, which is of limited robustness and low efﬁciency.
We instead share global features. With feature distributions
aligned among the whole sequence, networks become more
robust to motions and illumination changes. One bottleneck
of stylization performance lies in feature migration. Existing modules either fail to fully reconstruct style patterns or
do not support end-to-end training. To address this problem,
we propose to adjust inner- and inter-channel feature distributions through a dynamic ﬁlter.
Combing the above improvements, we present a video
style framework. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the propose framework. We also show that the
proposed compound regularization contributes to other vi-

Abstract
Recently, neural style transfer has drawn many attentions and
signiﬁcant progresses have been made, especially for image
style transfer. However, ﬂexible and consistent style transfer
for videos remains a challenging problem. Existing training
strategies, either using a signiﬁcant amount of video data with
optical ﬂows or introducing single-frame regularizers, have
limited performance on real videos. In this paper, we propose a novel interpretation of temporal consistency, based on
which we analyze the drawbacks of existing training strategies; and then derive a new compound regularization. Experimental results show that the proposed regularization can better balance the spatial and temporal performance, which supports our modeling. Combining with the new cost formula,
we design a zero-shot video style transfer framework. Moreover, for better feature migration, we introduce a new module to dynamically adjust inter-channel distributions. Quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate the superiority of
our method over other state-of-the-art style transfer methods.
Our project is publicly available at: https://daooshee.github.
io/CompoundVST/.

Introduction
Creating artistic imagery used to take experts hours of effort.
Beneﬁting from the technique of style transfer, real scene
images can be automatically stylized to be more visually
attractive. Gatys et al. (2016) ﬁrst proposed to use Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for rendering content
images, which is referred as Neural Style Transfer. Since
(Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016) rendered images in an iterative optimization way, which is of limited time efﬁciency,
Johnson et al. (2016) proposed to do stylization in a feedforward single-style-per-model way. Later, a variety of approaches have been proposed to further fasten the stylization
process for multi-style-per-model (Chen et al. 2017b), and
zero-shot style transfer (Huang and Belongie 2017). Some
∗
Corresponding author. This work is partially supported by
ByteDance, and partially supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China under contract No.61772043, Beijing Natural
Science Foundation under contract No.L182002.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12233

