The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cut-Based Graph Learning Networks to
Discover Compositional Structure of Sequential Video Data
Kyoung-Woon On,1 Eun-Sol Kim,2 Yu-Jung Heo,1 Byoung-Tak Zhang1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
2
Kakao Brain, Seongnam, South Korea
epsilon.kim@kakaobrain.com, {kwon, yjheo, btzhang}@bi.snu.ac.kr

In terms of modeling sequential semantic ﬂows, the related work can be summarized with the following three categories: neural networks, clustering, and self-attention based
methods.

Abstract
Conventional sequential learning methods such as Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) focus on interactions between consecutive inputs, i.e. ﬁrst-order Markovian dependency. However, most of sequential data, as seen with videos, have complex dependency structures that imply variable-length semantic ﬂows and their compositions, and those are hard to be
captured by conventional methods. Here, we propose CutBased Graph Learning Networks (CB-GLNs) for learning
video data by discovering these complex structures of the
video. The CB-GLNs represent video data as a graph, with
nodes and edges corresponding to frames of the video and
their dependencies respectively. The CB-GLNs ﬁnd compositional dependencies of the data in multilevel graph forms via
a parameterized kernel with graph-cut and a message passing framework. We evaluate the proposed method on the two
different tasks for video understanding: Video theme classiﬁcation (Youtube-8M dataset (Abu-El-Haija et al. 2016)) and
Video Question and Answering (TVQA dataset (Lei et al.
2018)). The experimental results show that our model efﬁciently learns the semantic compositional structure of video
data. Furthermore, our model achieves the highest performance in comparison to other baseline methods.

In terms of neural network architectures, many problems involving sequential inputs are resolved by using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) as the networks naturally take sequential inputs frame by frame. However, as
RNN-based methods take frames in (incremental) order, the
parameters of methods are trained to capture patterns in
transition between successive frames. This makes it hard
to ﬁnd long-term dependencies through overall frames.
To consider the long-term dependency, Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) (Chung et al. 2014) introduced switches to the RNN structures and Hierarchical
RNN (Chung, Ahn, and Bengio 2018) stacked multiple
layers to ﬁnd hierarchical structures. Even though those
methods ignore noisy (unnecessary) frames and maintain
the semantic ﬂow through the whole sequence, it is still
hard for RNN variants to retain multiple semantic ﬂows
and to learn their hierarchical and compositional relationships. Interestingly, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
based methods, such as ByteNet (Kalchbrenner et al. 2016),
ConvS2S (Gehring et al. 2017) and WaveNet (Oord et al.
2016), applied 1D convolution operator to temporal sequences for modeling dependencies of adjacent frames and
their compositions. However these operators hardly captured
variable-length dependencies which play a signiﬁcant role as
semantic units.

Introduction
One of the fundamental problems in learning sequential
video data is to ﬁnd semantic structures underlying sequences for better representation learning. As most semantic ﬂows cannot be modeled with simple temporal inductive
biases, i.e., Markov dependencies, it is crucial to ﬁnd the
complex temporal semantic structures from long sequences
to understand the video data. We believe there are two ingredients to solving this problem: segmenting the whole longlength sequence into (multiple) semantic units and ﬁnding
their compositional structures. In this work, we propose a
new graph-based method which can discover composite semantic ﬂows in video inputs and utilize them for representation learning of videos. The compositional semantic structures are deﬁned as multilevel graph forms, which make it
possible to ﬁnd long-length dependencies and their hierarchical relationships effectively.

Recent researches revisited the traditional idea of clustering successive frames into representative clusters. Deep
Bag of Frame (DBoF) (Abu-El-Haija et al. 2016) randomly
selects k frames from whole sequences as the representatives. NetVLAD (Arandjelovic et al. 2016) divides all features into k clusters and calculates residuals, which are difference vectors between the feature vectors and their corresponding cluster center, as the new representations for each
feature vector. Even though the main idea of this type of research is quite simple, it helps to understand the semantics
of long sequences by focusing on a small number of representative frames. However, it is hard to consider the complex

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5315

