The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

EMSContExt: EMS Protocol-Driven Concept
Extraction for Cognitive Assistance in Emergency Response
Sarah M. Preum,1 Sile Shu,2 Homa Alemzadeh,2 John A. Stankovic1
1

Department of Computer Science, 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, 22904
{preum, ss5de, ha4d, jas9f}@virginia.edu

conditions, past medical history) and combine it with the
knowledge of established EMS protocols1 to take effective
response actions. The tasks of collecting and interpreting
this data and recalling the correct set of protocols to perform
from hundreds of overlapping EMS protocols in such a highstress situation are error-prone and cognitively demanding.
Hence, we envision an intelligent cognitive assistant system (Preum et al. 2019; 2018) that can reduce the ﬁrst responders’ cognitive burden by (i) real-time collection and interpretation of speech and other data from the incident scene
and (ii) providing context-speciﬁc feedback on the safe response actions to take. This paper presents EMSContExt,
a concept extraction system that is a critical component in
the proposed cognitive assistant and identiﬁes relevant terms
from the textual transcriptions of the spoken language at the
scene and maps them into EMS protocol-speciﬁc concepts.
It is essential for the proposed cognitive assistant to identify
relevant protocols that should be executed in each context.
Here we refer to the joint tasks of concept identiﬁcation and
mapping as concept extraction or annotation.

Abstract
This paper presents a technique for automated curation of
a domain-speciﬁc knowledge base or lexicon for resourceconstrained domains, such as Emergency Medical Services
(EMS) and its application to real-time concept extraction and
cognitive assistance in emergency response. The EMS responders often verbalize critical information describing the
situations at an incident scene, including patients’ physical
condition and medical history. Automated extraction of EMS
protocol-speciﬁc concepts from responders’ speech data can
facilitate cognitive support through the selection and execution of the proper EMS protocols for patient treatment. Although this task is similar to the traditional NLP task of concept extraction, the underlying application domain poses major challenges, including low training resources availability
(e.g., no existing EMS ontology, lexicon, or annotated EMS
corpus) and domain mismatch. Hence, we develop EMSContExt, a weakly-supervised concept extraction approach for
EMS concepts. It utilizes different knowledge bases and a semantic concept model based on a corpus of over 9400 EMS
narratives for lexicon expansion. The expanded EMS lexicon
is then used to automatically extract critical EMS protocolspeciﬁc concepts from real-time EMS speech narratives. Our
experimental results show that EMSContExt achieves 0.85
recall and 0.82 F1-score for EMS concept extraction and
signiﬁcantly outperforms MetaMap, a state-of-the-art medical concept extraction tool. We also demonstrate the application of EMSContExt to EMS protocol selection and execution and real-time recommendation of protocol-speciﬁc interventions to the EMS responders. Here, EMSContExt outperforms MetaMap with a 6% increase and six times speedup in
weighted recall and execution time, respectively.

1

CC: chest back and R arm pain . . .
A: pt A+Ox4 . . .
A: patent B: rate and quality good no sob reported C:b
skin N/D/W
pulses = reg rapid at 110 b/p as noted . . .
E: No visible trauma bleeding or resp distress noted
Text Box 1: An excerpt from an EMS narrative. The
underlined concepts are critical for cardiac-suspected chest
pain protocol.
Referring to the EMS narrative excerpt shown in Text
Box 1, the goal of EMSContExt is to automatically identify the protocol-speciﬁc terms, such as skin N/D/W and
mapping it to the standard concept of skin is normal,
dry, and warm. This concept extraction problem involves the following challenges that limit the applicability

Introduction

Based on a 2014 study, there are over 250,000 emergency
medical service (EMS) providers in the U.S. who provide care for over 30 million emergency incidents annually
(Duong et al. 2018). Upon arrival at an incident scene, the
ﬁrst responders, including EMS providers, assess the situation and provide primary medical care to the victims before transferring them to hospitals. They collect a substantial amount of data from the scene (e.g., victim’s present

1
EMS protocols are standard procedures designed by the national, state, and local medical and EMS authorities. The EMS
providers are trained to operate according to these protocols. Sample EMS protocols can be found in http://www.emsprotocols.org.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13350

