The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hypothetical Answers to Continuous Queries over Data Streams
Luı́s Cruz-Filipe

Graça Gaspar, Isabel Nunes

Dept. of Mathematics and Computer Science,
University of Southern Denmark

University of Lisbon, Faculty of Sciences,
BioISI - Biosystems & Integrative Sciences Institute,
Portugal

operations (Zaniolo 2012; Ronca et al. 2018a). Another approach uses the concept of reasoning window (Beck et al.
2015; Özçep, Möller, and Neuenstadt 2014), which bounds
the size of the input that can be used for computing each
output (either in time units or in number of events).
In several applications, it is useful to know that some answers are likely to be produced in the future, since there is
already some information that might lead to their generation.
This is the case namely in prognosis systems (e.g., medical
diagnosis, stock market prediction), where one can prepare
for the possibility of something happening. To this goal, we
propose hypothetical answers: answers that are supported
by information provided by the input stream, but that still
depend on other facts being true in the future. Knowledge
about both the facts that support the answer and possible future facts that may make it true gives users the possibility to
make timely, informed decisions in contexts where preemptive measures may have to be taken.
Moreover, by giving such hypothetical answers to the user
we cope with unbound wait in a constructive way, since the
system is no longer “mute” while waiting for an answer to
become deﬁnitive.
Many existing approaches to reasoning with data streams
adapt and extend models, languages and techniques used for
querying databases and the semantic web (Arasu, Babu, and
Widom 2006; Barbieri et al. 2009). We develop our theory in
line with the works of (Zaniolo 2012; Beck et al. 2015; DaoTran and Eiter 2017; Özçep, Möller, and Neuenstadt 2014;
Ronca et al. 2018b), where continuous queries are treated
as rules of a logic program that reasons over facts arriving
through a data stream.

Abstract
Continuous queries over data streams often delay answers until some relevant input arrives through the data stream. These
delays may turn answers, when they arrive, obsolete to users
who sometimes have to make decisions with no help whatsoever. Therefore, it can be useful to provide hypothetical answers – “given the current information, it is possible that X
will become true at time t” – instead of no information at all.
In this paper we present a semantics for queries and corresponding answers that covers such hypothetical answers, together with an online algorithm for updating the set of facts
that are consistent with the currently available information.

1

Introduction

Modern-day reasoning systems often have to react to realtime information about the real world provided by e.g. sensors. This information is typically conceptualized as a data
stream, which is accessed by the reasoning system. The reasoning tasks associated to data streams – usually called continuous queries – are expected to run continuously and produce results through another data stream in an online fashion, as new elements arrive.
A data stream is a potentially unbounded sequence of data
items generated by an active, uncontrolled data source. Elements arrive continuously at the system, potentially unordered, and at unpredictable rates. Thus, reasoning over
data streams requires dealing with incomplete or missing
data, potentially storing large amounts of data (in case it
might be needed to answer future queries), and providing answers in timely fashion – among other problems,
see e.g. (Babcock et al. 2002; Stonebraker, Çetintemel, and
Zdonik 2005; Dell’Aglio et al. 2017).
The output stream is normally ordered by time, which implies that the system may have to delay appending some answer because of uncertainty in possible answers relating to
earlier time points. The length of this delay may be unpredictable (unbound wait) or inﬁnite, for example if the query
uses operators that range over the whole input data stream
(blocking operations). In these cases, answers that have been
computed may never be output. An approach to avoid this
problem is to restrict the language by forbidding blocking

Contribution. We present a declarative semantics for
queries in Temporal Datalog, where we deﬁne the notions
of hypothetical and supported answers. We deﬁne an operational semantics based on SLD-resolution, and show that
there is a natural connection between the answers computed
by this semantics and hypothetical and supported answers.
By reﬁning SLD-resolution, we obtain an online algorithm
for maintaining and updating the set of answers that are consistent with the currently available information. Finally, we
show that our results extend to a language with negation.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2798

