The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Variational Adversarial Kernel Learned Imitation Learning
Fan Yang, Alina Vereshchaka, Yufan Zhou, Changyou Chen, Wen Dong
State University of New York at Buffalo
{fyang24, avereshc, yufanzho, changyou, wendong}@buffalo.edu

of cost functions – a linear combination of feature vectors.
Generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL) (Ho and
Ermon 2016) reduces imitation learning to the problem of
matching the state-action distribution of the learned policy
to that of the expert policy. However, similar to generative
adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), GAIL
measures the distance between the distributions using the
Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence, which does not always provide informative signals to optimize the policy, leading to
gradient vanishing.
Different approaches have been proposed to improve the
training. Variational adversarial imitation learning (VAIL)
(Peng et al. 2018) adopted a variational information bottleneck to introduce noise into the discriminator, which regulates the information ﬂow and updates the policy using more
useful features. (Kim and Park 2018) introduces generative
moment matching imitation learning (GMMIL), where the
cost function class is deﬁned as the unit ball of a reproducing Hilbert kernel space (RKHS). The goal of GMMIL is to
match the state-action distribution by minimizing the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) with a pre-deﬁned kernel.
To provide more informative signals for policy optimization, and to further improve the performance of a learned
policy, we develop a new imitation learning algorithm, called
the variational adversarial kernel learned imitation learning
(VAKLIL). This algorithm follows the paradigm of formulating imitation learning as distribution matching, but with a
novel distance measure deﬁned as the MMD with variational
kernel learning (MMD-VKL). VAKLIL has the following
appealing properties: (1) It optimizes over a more expressive class of cost functions, which provides more informative
and discriminative features for policy optimization. (2) It is
sample efﬁcient and is robust to overﬁtting.
The contributions of the paper are summarized as follows:
(1) We develop an imitation learning algorithm with a more
expressive class of cost functions, and reduce the imitation
learning problem to state-action distribution matching. (2)
We introduce a new distance measurement between distributions, the MMD-VKL, which is sample efﬁcient and robust
to overﬁtting. (3) We apply the new distance measurement
to the proposed imitation-learning paradigm and develop
VAKLIL, an imitation-learning algorithm that optimizes the

Abstract
Imitation learning refers to the problem where an agent learns
to perform a task through observing and mimicking expert
demonstrations, without knowledge of the cost function. Stateof-the-art imitation learning algorithms reduce imitation learning to distribution-matching problems by minimizing some
distance measures. However, the distance measure may not
always provide informative signals for a policy update. To this
end, we propose the variational adversarial kernel learned imitation learning (VAKLIL), which measures the distance using
the maximum mean discrepancy with variational kernel learning. Our method optimizes over a large cost-function space and
is sample efﬁcient and robust to overﬁtting. We demonstrate
the performance of our algorithm through benchmarking with
four state-of-the-art imitation learning algorithms over ﬁve
high-dimensional control tasks, and a complex transportation
control task. Experimental results indicate that our algorithm
signiﬁcantly outperforms related algorithms in all scenarios.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has made signiﬁcant progress
over a wide range of domains, ranging from Atari games
(Mnih et al. 2016; 2015), trafﬁc control (Li, Lv, and Wang
2016; Yang, Vereshchaka, and Dong 2018), to robotic control
tasks (Andrychowicz et al. 2017; Kahn et al. 2018) through
optimizing over predeﬁned reward functions. However, designing an appropriate reward function for complex and not
well-speciﬁed tasks is notoriously difﬁcult (Li, Song, and
Ermon 2017; Hadﬁeld-Menell et al. 2017).
Rather than optimizing over predeﬁned reward functions,
imitation learning (IL) has the potential to close the gap
by learning how to perform tasks through observing and
mimicking expert demonstrations. Behavior cloning (BC)
(Sammut and Webb 2011) is a classical imitation learning
approach which directly learns the mapping from state to
action through supervised learning. However, this method
fails to learn a good policy in complex environments due to
error compounding. Apprenticeship learning (AL) (Abbeel
and Ng 2004) seeks to learn a policy that performs no worse
than the expert policy. However, it assumes a restrictive class
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6599

