The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

VCG under Sybil (False-Name) Attacks — A Bayesian Analysis
Yotam Gafni, Ron Lavi, Moshe Tennenholtz
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa 32000 Israel
yotam.gafni@campus.technion.ac.il, {ronlavi, moshet}@ie.technion.ac.il

under reasonable conditions the worst case efﬁciency of any
false-name proof combinatorial auction with m items is as
2
bad as m+1
.
As for VCG, in (Alkalay-Houlihan and Vetta 2014) the
authors show that under some assumptions on the bidders’
valuations, and in a setting with complete information, if a
pure Nash equilibrium exists when false-name bids are considered, VCG still has a reasonable welfare guarantee. Naturally, Nash equilibrium might not exist. Nevertheless, the
above may hint that VCG may actually be a good false-name
proof mechanism in situations in which a pure equilibrium
exists.
Notice that when the behavior of the other bidders is uncertain, in some scenarios a false-name attack may beneﬁt
the attacker, while on others the attack can harm her. So
while truthfulness is certainly no longer a dominant strategy, it is worth asking under what circumstances it might
be a truthful Bayesian Nash Equilibrium. That is, when the
auction participants only have partial probabilistic information regarding other bidders’ valuations, when is it the best
strategy for a bidder to bid truthfully only her valuation (in a
single bid), assuming all others are truthful as well? Notice
that social welfare is optimized if such an equilibrium exists.
For a seller that wishes to maximize social welfare, under the
conditions in which a truthful Bayesian equilibrium exists,
VCG is the best choice of an auction mechanism.
In this work, we introduce — for the ﬁrst time, to the
best of our knowledge — a Bayesian equilibrium analysis
of VCG under false-name bids. In service of that we use a
bare-minimum model: an auction of two identical items, and
single-minded bidders. Namely, each bidder is interested in
a single item or in the pair of items. The Bayesian setting
is given by a per-item valuation distribution, and a probability q for a bidder to have a single-item demand. Notice
that for q = 1 we get the standard Vickrey auction which
is false-name proof. Hence, our model captures the minimal
step forward from the standard Vickrey auction setting to the
general multi-item case. As we will see, the analysis of such
a model already brings out intricate techniques and conclusions, which are essential to address the problem.
To obtain our results, we present a criterion we name
“Granularity threshold” to measure the effect of the gran-

Abstract
VCG is a classical combinatorial auction that maximizes social welfare. However, while the standard single-item Vickrey auction is false-name-proof, a major failure of multi-item
VCG is its vulnerability to false-name attacks. This occurs already in the natural bare minimum model in which there are
two identical items and bidders are single-minded. Previous
solutions to this challenge focused on developing alternative
mechanisms that compromise social welfare. We re-visit the
VCG auction vulnerability and consider the bidder behavior
in Bayesian settings. In service of that we introduce a novel
notion, termed the granularity threshold, that characterizes
VCG Bayesian resilience to false-name attacks as a function
of the bidder type distribution. Using this notion we show a
large class of cases in which VCG indeed obtains Bayesian
resilience for the two-item single-minded setting.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the scale of web auctions has grown signiﬁcantly — whether for ads, ﬂight tickets or cloud computing resources — among many other commodities. Contrary to the settings that apply to government leases or items
sold in an auction house, in such web auctions it is much
easier to forge false identities and submit multiple bids under false names. This expands the action space of an auction participant and may turn mechanisms that proved formally truthful assuming only a single bid to not be strategyproof. Such is the case of the most classic combinatorial
auction mechanism, VCG. VCG is truthful and efﬁcient assuming each bidder submits one bid under her name (Nisan
et al. 2007). However, assuming false-name attacks (a.k.a.
sybil attacks) are possible, that is no longer the case, as
demonstrated in (Yokoo, Sakurai, and Matsubara 2002). The
main effort to address this rising issue was done by Yokoo
et al. They suggested various mechanisms that are false
name attack proof (Yokoo, Sakurai, and Matsubara 2001;
Yokoo 2003). The main disadvantage of these mechanisms
is that they in a way incorporate the false-name attacks to be
built into the mechanism, and this signiﬁcantly reduces their
efﬁciency. In (Iwasaki et al. 2010) the main result shows that
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1966

