The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

LCD: Learned Cross-Domain Descriptors for 2D-3D Matching
Quang-Hieu Pham,1 Mikaela Angelina Uy,2 Binh-Son Hua,3
Duc Thanh Nguyen,4 Gemma Roig,5 Sai-Kit Yeung6
1

4

Singapore University of Technology and Design, 2 Stanford University, 3 The University of Tokyo,
Deakin University, 5 Geothe University of Frankfrut am Main, 6 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
quanghieu pham@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, mikacuy@stanford.edu, hua.binhson@mail.u-tokyo.ac.jp,
duc.nguyen@deakin.edu.au, gemmar@mit.edu, saikit@ust.hk

While 2D and 3D descriptors are widely available, ﬁnding
the association between these representations is a challenging
task. There also lacks a descriptor that can capture features
in both domains and tailored for cross-domain tasks, for
example, 2D to 3D content retrieval. In general, there is a
large discrepancy between 2D and 3D representations. Data
in 2D, i.e., images, can simply be represented by regular grids.
Meanwhile, 3D data can be represented by either meshes,
volumes, or point clouds and obtained via an image formation
model that is governed by laws of physics and optics. Even
with the recent advent of deep learning, these issues still
remain the same: features learned on 2D domain may not be
applicable in 3D space and vice versa.
In this work, we attempt to bridge the gap between 2D
and 3D descriptors by proposing a novel approach to learn
a cross-domain descriptor that works on both 2D and 3D
domains. In particular, we make the following contributions:

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel method to learn a local crossdomain descriptor for 2D image and 3D point cloud matching.
Our proposed method is a dual auto-encoder neural network
that maps 2D and 3D input into a shared latent space representation. We show that such local cross-domain descriptors in the
shared embedding are more discriminative than those obtained
from individual training in 2D and 3D domains. To facilitate
the training process, we built a new dataset by collecting ≈ 1.4
millions of 2D-3D correspondences with various lighting conditions and settings from publicly available RGB-D scenes.
Our descriptor is evaluated in three main experiments: 2D-3D
matching, cross-domain retrieval, and sparse-to-dense depth
estimation. Experimental results conﬁrm the robustness of our
approach as well as its competitive performance not only in
solving cross-domain tasks but also in being able to generalize to solve sole 2D and 3D tasks. Our dataset and code are
released publicly at https://hkust-vgd.github.io/lcd.

• A novel learned cross-domain descriptor (LCD) that is
learned using a dual auto-encoder architecture and a triplet
loss. Our setup enforces the 2D and 3D auto-encoders to
learn a cross-domain descriptor in a shared latent space
representation. This shared latent space not only provides
a common space for 2D-3D matching, but also improves
the descriptor performance in single-domain settings.

Introduction
Computer vision tasks such as structure-from-motion, visual content retrieval require robust descriptors from both
2D and 3D domains. Such descriptors, in their own domain, can be constructed from low-level features, e.g., colors, edges, etc. In image matching, a well-known task in
computer vision, several hand-crafted local descriptors, e.g.,
SIFT (Lowe 2004), SURF (Bay, Tuytelaars, and Van Gool
2006) have been proposed. With the advent of deep learning, many robust 2D descriptors are learned automatically using deep neural networks (Simo-Serra et al. 2015;
Kumar et al. 2016). These learned descriptors have shown
their robustness and advantages over the hand-crafted counterparts. The same phenomenon can also be observed in
3D domain. For example, hand-crafted 3D descriptors, e.g.,
FPFH (Rusu, Blodow, and Beetz 2009), SHOT (Tombari,
Salti, and Di Stefano 2010), as well as deep learning based descriptors (Zeng et al. 2017) have been used in many 3D tasks,
such as 3D registrations (Choi, Zhou, and Koltun 2015; Zhou,
Park, and Koltun 2016) and structure-from-motion (Hartley
and Zisserman 2003).

• A new public dataset of ≈ 1.4 millions of 2D-3D correspondences for training and evaluating the cross-domain
descriptors matching. We built our dataset based on SceneNN (Hua et al. 2016) and 3DMatch (Zeng et al. 2017).
• Applications to verify the robustness of our cross-domain
descriptor. Speciﬁcally, we apply the descriptor to solve a
sole 2D (image matching) and a sole 3D task (3D registration), and then to a 2D-3D content retrieval task (2D-3D
place recognition). Experimental results show that our
descriptor gives comparable performance to other stateof-the-art methods in all the tasks even when it is not
purposely tailored to such particular tasks.

Related work
Local descriptors are crucial components in many applications such as localization (Sattler et al. 2017), registration (Choi, Zhou, and Koltun 2015; Zhou, Park, and

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11856

