The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generative Adversarial Zero-Shot
Relational Learning for Knowledge Graphs
Pengda Qin,1 Xin Wang,2 Wenhu Chen,2 Chunyun Zhang,3 Weiran Xu,1 William Yang Wang2
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
University of California, Santa Barbara, USA
3
Shandong University of Finance and Economics, China
{qinpengda, xuweiran}@bupt.edu.cn, {xwang, wenhuchen, william}@cs.ucsb.edu,
zhangchunyun1009@126.com
Abstract
Large-scale knowledge graphs (KGs) are shown to become
more important in current information systems. To expand the
coverage of KGs, previous studies on knowledge graph completion need to collect adequate training instances for newlyadded relations. In this paper, we consider a novel formulation, zero-shot learning, to free this cumbersome curation.
For newly-added relations, we attempt to learn their semantic
features from their text descriptions and hence recognize the
facts of unseen relations with no examples being seen. For
this purpose, we leverage Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) to establish the connection between text and knowledge graph domain: The generator learns to generate the reasonable relation embeddings merely with noisy text descriptions. Under this setting, zero-shot learning is naturally converted to a traditional supervised classiﬁcation task. Empirically, our method is model-agnostic that could be potentially applied to any version of KG embeddings, and consistently yields performance improvements on NELL and Wiki
dataset.

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed approach. Through the
adversarial training between generator (G) and discriminator (D), we leverage G to generate reasonable embeddings
for unseen relations and predict new relation facts in a supervised way.

Introduction

during the training stage. Correspondingly, an appealing
characteristic of human learning is that, with a certain accumulation of knowledge, people are able to recognize new
categories merely from their text descriptions. Therefore, instead of learning from instances, the semantic features of
new classes can be reﬂected by their textual descriptions.
Moreover, textual descriptions contain rich and unambiguous information and can be easily accessed from dictionaries, encyclopedia articles or various online resources, which
is critical for large-scale recognition tasks.
In this paper, we propose a zero-shot relational learning
method for knowledge graph. As shown in Figure 1, we
convert zero-shot learning into a knowledge transfer problem. We focus on how to generate reasonable relation embeddings for unseen relations merely from their text descriptions. Once trained, this system is capable of generating relation embeddings for arbitrary relations without ﬁne-tuning.
With these relation embeddings, the facts of unseen relations
can be recognized simply by cosine similarity. To meet these
requirements, the ﬁrst challenge is how to establish an effective knowledge transfer process from text semantic space
to knowledge graph semantic space. We leverage the condi-

Large-scale knowledge graphs collect an increasing amount
of structured data, where nodes correspond to entities and
edges reﬂect the relationships between head and tail entities. This graph-structured knowledge base has become
a resource of enormous value, with potential applications
such as search engine, recommendation systems and question answering systems. However, it is still incomplete and
cannot cater to the increasing need of intelligent systems.
To solve this problem, many studies (Bordes et al. 2013;
Trouillon et al. 2016) achieve notable performance on automatically ﬁnding and ﬁlling the missing facts of existing relations. But for newly-added relations, there is still
a non-negligible limitation, and obtaining adequate training
instances for every new relation is an increasingly impractical solution. Therefore, people prefer an automatic completion solution, or even a more radical method that recognizes
unseen classes without seeing any training instances.
Zero-shot learning aims to recognize objects or facts of
new classes (unseen classes) with no examples being seen
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8673

