The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Incorporating Label Embedding and Feature
Augmentation for Multi-Dimensional Classiﬁcation
Haobo Wang,1∗ Chen Chen,1* Weiwei Liu,2† Ke Chen,1 Tianlei Hu,1† Gang Chen1
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Computing Based Big Data of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
{wanghaobo, cc33, htl, cg}@zju.edu.cn, liuweiwei863@gmail.com, chenk@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Feature augmentation, which manipulates the feature space
by integrating the label information, is one of the most
popular strategies for solving Multi-Dimensional Classiﬁcation (MDC) problems. However, the vanilla feature augmentation approaches fail to consider the intra-class exclusiveness, and may achieve degenerated performance. To ﬁll
this gap, a novel neural network based model is proposed
which seamlessly integrates the Label Embedding and Feature Augmentation (LEFA) techniques to learn label correlations. Speciﬁcally, based on attentional factorization machine, a cross correlation aware network is introduced to learn
a low-dimensional label representation that simultaneously
depicts the inter-class correlations and the intra-class exclusiveness. Then the learned latent label vector can be used to
augment the original feature space. Extensive experiments
on seven real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of
LEFA over state-of-the-art MDC approaches.

Figure 1: An example of multi-dimensional classiﬁcation
scenario. The image is manually annotated by four class
variables, each of which is multi-dimensional. The ground
truth labels snowﬁeld, house (yes), dog, sunny are in red.

D = {(xj , Sj )|1 ≤ j ≤ N }, each data point xj ∈ X ⊆ Rm
in D matches a set of labels Sj = {y1j , y2j , ..., ydj } ∈ Y where
yij ∈ Ci (1 ≤ i ≤ d). The goal of MDC is to build a classiﬁer h : X → Y which maps an instance vector to the output
space. It is noteworthy that if d = 1, the problem degenerates to a single label classiﬁcation problem. Furthermore, if
d > 1 and Ki = 2 holds for all i, we obtain a multi-label
classiﬁcation problem.
Binary Relevance (BR) (Zhang and Zhou 2014) is one
of the most popular methods for MDC problems which decomposes the multi-dimensional task into a set of multiclass classiﬁcation problems. Despite its computational efﬁciency, BR neglects the cross correlations between class
spaces. Therefore, BR works well on each single classiﬁcation task but globally underperforms. Many effective
techniques have been proposed to address this issue. Some
methods (Bielza, Li, and Larrañaga 2011; Batal, Hong, and
Hauskrecht 2013; Zhu, Liu, and Jiang 2016; Benjumeda,
Bielza, and Larrañaga 2018) use a probabilistic graph model
to learn a tree or graph structure of label correlations.
Feature augmentation is another common strategy which
models label dependencies in a manipulated feature space.
Amongst them, Classiﬁer Chains (CC) (Read et al. 2011) is
the most typical one that feeds an augmented input vector

Introduction
Multi-Dimensional Classiﬁcation (MDC) aims to deal with
the problem where each data example is associated with
multiple class variables. Due to its wide applications, MDC
has attracted tremendous attention. For example, a piece of
song can be annotated by various concepts like emotions
and instruments (Turnbull et al. 2008); a document may be
tagged by different types of labels such as topic and mood
(Theeramunkong and Lertnattee 2002; Ortigosa-Hernández
et al. 2012); a gene can be associated with different functions like transcription and protein synthesis (Barutçuoglu,
Schapire, and Troyanskaya 2006). Figure 1 (Khosla et al.
2011) shows a typical multi-dimensional image classiﬁcation scenario.
Formally, in an MDC problem, there are multiple class
i
spaces Ci = {c1i , c2i , ..., cK
i } (i = 1, 2, ..., d) where Ki
is the number of possible class assignments and d is the
number of classes. Then the output space is their Cartesian
product Y = C1 × C2 × ... × Cd . Given a training dataset
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6178

