The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Simplify-Then-Translate: Automatic Preprocessing for Black-Box Translation
Sneha Mehta,1 Bahareh Azarnoush,2 Boris Chen,2 Avneesh Saluja,2
Vinith Misra,2 Ballav Bihani,2 Ritwik Kumar2
1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, VA
2
Netﬂix Inc., CA
snehamehta@vt.edu, {bazarnoush, bchen, asaluja, vmisra, bbihani, ritwikk}@netﬂix.com

In this work, we focus on improving translation quality
for low-resource translation (i.e., from English into a lowresource language) in the black-box MT (BBMT) setting namely a system which has been trained and tuned a priori and for which we cannot access the model parameters
or training data for ﬁne-tuning or improvements. Examples
of such systems include those provided by commercial vendors e.g., Google Translate2 or Microsoft Translator3 . While
some provide the option of ﬁne-tuning on domain-speciﬁc
data under certain conditions, how to improve the performance of such black-box systems on domain-speciﬁc translation tasks remains an open question. We investigate methods to leverage the BBMT system to preprocess input source
sentences in a way that preserves meaning and improves
translation in the target language. Speciﬁcally, a large-scale
parallel corpus for English simpliﬁcation is obtained by
back-translating (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch, 2016a) the
reference translations of several high-resource target languages. The resulting parallel corpus is used to train an Automatic Preprocessing model (APP) (§ 2), which transforms
source sentence into a form that preserves meaning while
also being easier to translate into a low-resource language.
In effect, the APP model attacks the longstanding problem of
handling complex idiomatic and non-compositional phrases
(Lin, 1999; Sag et al., 2002), and simpliﬁes these expressions to more literal, compositional ones that we hypothesize are easier to translate.
We use the APP model to simplify the source sentences
of a variety of low-resource language pairs and compare the
performance of the black-box MT system on the original and
simpliﬁed sentences. Note that only one APP model needs
to be trained per source language and this model can be applied to a variety of low-resource language pairs as long as
the source language is the same. In our study we focus on
the domain of conversational language as used in dialogues
of TV shows. We picked this domain since here language
tends to be colloquial and idiomatic. We empirically show
improvement in translation quality in this domain across
a variety of low resource target languages (§3). This improvement is further corroborated with side-by-side human

Abstract
Black-box machine translation systems have proven incredibly useful for a variety of applications yet by design are hard
to adapt, tune to a speciﬁc domain, or build on top of. In
this work, we introduce a method to improve such systems
via automatic pre-processing (APP) using sentence simpliﬁcation. We ﬁrst propose a method to automatically generate
a large in-domain paraphrase corpus through back-translation
with a black-box MT system, which is used to train a paraphrase model that “simpliﬁes” the original sentence to be
more conducive for translation. The model is used to preprocess source sentences of multiple low-resource language
pairs. We show that this preprocessing leads to better translation performance as compared to non-preprocessed source
sentences. We further perform side-by-side human evaluation
to verify that translations of the simpliﬁed sentences are better
than the original ones. Finally, we provide some guidance on
recommended language pairs for generating the simpliﬁcation model corpora by investigating the relationship between
ease of translation of a language pair (as measured by BLEU)
and quality of the resulting simpliﬁcation model from backtranslations of this language pair (as measured by SARI), and
tie this into the downstream task of low-resource translation.

1

Introduction

Modern translation systems built on top of a sequence transduction approach (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le, 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio, 2014) have greatly advanced the
state and quality of machine translation (MT). These systems generally rely on the availability of large-scale parallel
corpora, and while unsupervised (Lample et al., 2017) or
semi-supervised (Saluja et al., 2014) approaches are a popular area of research, production-grade translation systems
still primarily leverage bitexts when training. Efforts such
as WMT1 provide such corpora for select language pairs,
which has enabled neural MT systems to achieve state-ofthe-art performance on those pairs. However, low resource
MT (language pairs for which parallel data is scarce) remains a challenge.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.statmt.org/wmt18/

2
3

8488

https://translate.google.com/
https://www.bing.com/translator

