The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FET-GAN: Font and Effect Transfer via K-shot Adaptive Instance Normalization
Wei Li,1 Yongxing He,1 Yanwei Qi,1 Zejian Li,1 Yongchuan Tang1,2∗
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China
2
ZhejiangLab, Hangzhou, 310027, China
{liwei 2014, heyongxing, 21921305, zejianlee, yctang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Text effect transfer aims at learning the mapping between
text visual effects while maintaining the text content. While
remarkably successful, existing methods have limited robustness in font transfer and weak generalization ability to unseen
effects. To address these problems, we propose FET-GAN, a
novel end-to-end framework to implement visual effects transfer with font variation among multiple text effects domains.
Our model achieves remarkable results both on arbitrary effect transfer between texts and effect translation from text to
graphic objects. By a few-shot ﬁne-tuning strategy, FET-GAN
can generalize the transfer of the pre-trained model to the new
effect. Through extensive experimental validation and comparison, our model advances the state-of-the-art in the text effect
transfer task. Besides, we have collected a font dataset including 100 fonts of more than 800 Chinese and English characters.
Based on this dataset, we demonstrated the generalization ability of our model by the application that complements the font
library automatically by few-shot samples. This application is
signiﬁcant in reducing the labor cost for the font designer.

1

Figure 1: FET-GAN implements two functions. 1) It can
transfer effects among texts in a few-shot manner. Particularly, the effects cover not only visual effects but also font
variations. 2) It can translate the effects of text onto non-text
graphic object. The font transfer demos in the last row are
the foot stone of our font library complements application.

Introduction

When designing a poster or web page, graphic designers adjust the visual effects of text or icons according to different
themes. Such visual effects include colors, outlines, shadows,
glows and textures. The consistent stylized effects of visual
components allow the posters or web pages to be visually
attractive. However, it is a tedious and repetitive work to
apply stylized effects to all components manually. Similarly,
when constructing a new font, the font designer also needs
to style the glyph according to the speciﬁed theme. These
style variations include factors like the stroke width, the appearance of serif, aspect ratio of the whole glyphs, and the
curvature of lines. Different characters in one font library
should have the same style, but it is tedious to manually apply these stylized effects to different characters. This problem
is especially serious when the character set is very large, such
as the Chinese or Japanese character set. In this work, we
propose a general framework for synthesizing arbitrary stylized effects into target text with font variation with the help

of deep neural networks. Furthermore, our model can extend
the transfer from the text onto other graphic objects to keep
the consistency of the style among different components.
From the perspective of design aesthetics, the choice of
fonts is highly correlated with visual expression. For example,
the Times font is an appropriate choice for a formal academic
poster, while the Comic Sans MS font can be used on the
kindergarten website. If the two are exchanged, even if the
other visual effects are unchanged, the overall style will be
uncoordinated. Therefore, the typeface should be considered
with the visual effect as a whole. However, in the existing
research of text effect transfer, typeface and visual effect are
treated as two isolated attributes (Yang et al. 2019; Yang
et al. 2017). Among them, (Yang et al. 2019) requires to
train multiple subnetworks to avoid interference from font

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1717

