The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reasoning about Political Bias in Content Moderation
Shan Jiang, Ronald E. Robertson, Christo Wilson
Northeastern University, USA
{sjiang, rer, cbw}@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract

?

Content moderation, the AI-human hybrid process of removing (toxic) content from social media to promote community
health, has attracted increasing attention from lawmakers due
to allegations of political bias. Hitherto, this allegation has
been made based on anecdotes rather than logical reasoning
and empirical evidence, which motivates us to audit its validity.
In this paper, we ﬁrst introduce two formal criteria to measure
bias (i.e., independence and separation) and their contextual
meanings in content moderation, and then use YouTube as a
lens to investigate if the political leaning of a video plays a
role in the moderation decision for its associated comments.
Our results show that when justiﬁable target variables (e.g.,
hate speech and extremeness) are controlled with propensity
scoring, the likelihood of comment moderation is equal across
left- and right-leaning videos.

Figure 1: Allegations of political bias in content moderation
based on anecdotes, not hard evidence.

Bad Content Moderation, Bad!

allegations have even spurred lawmakers to action, e.g., in
June 2019, the “Ending Support for Internet Censorship Act”
was introduced into the US Senate to limit immunity granted
by Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act to “encourage providers of interactive computer services to provide
content moderation that is politically neutral” (Hawley 2019).
These allegations of political bias, however, are based on
anecdotes, and there is little support from logical reasoning
and empirical evidence (Jiang, Robertson, and Wilson 2019;
Shen et al. 2018; Shen and Rose 2019). In this paper, we
conduct an audit on the validity of these allegations driven
by a high-level research question:

Social media has long played host to problematic content
such as partisan propaganda (Allcott and Gentzkow 2017),
misinformation (Jiang and Wilson 2018), and violent hate
speech (Olteanu et al. 2018). In an attempt to police this content and improve the health of their user community, social
media platforms publish sets of community guidelines that
explain the types of content they prohibit, and remove or hide
this content from their platforms. This practice is commonly
referred to as content moderation.
Content moderation is typically implemented as an AIhuman hybrid process. To scale with the large amount of
toxic content generated online, an AI ﬁltering layer ﬁrst ﬁnds
potential candidates for moderation (Gibbs 2017; Sloane
2018), and then sends them to human reviewers for a ﬁnal
determination (Levin 2017; Gershgorn and Murphy 2017).
This content moderation process, however, has been criticized for potential bias: biased AI systems have been documented (Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2019; Hutchinson
and Mitchell 2019), and human moderators can bring their
own biases into the moderation process (Diakopoulos and
Naaman 2011). As a result, content moderation faces a backlash from ideological conservatives, who allege that social
media platforms are biased against them and are censoring
their views (Kamisar 2018; Usher 2018), e.g., Figure 1. These

• Research question: is content moderation biased?
To approach this question, we ﬁrst introduce two formal
criteria to measure bias and how they apply in the context of
content moderation, and formulate two null hypotheses Hind
0
(for independence) and Hsep
(for separation) under these
0
criteria. Then, we use YouTube comment moderation as a
case study to investigate a more concrete question:
• Case study: does the political leaning of a video play a
role in the moderation decision for its comments?
Our results show: Hind
is rejected, i.e., comments are more
0
likely to be moderated under right-leaning videos; Hsep
0 holds,
i.e., with propensity scored justiﬁable target variables (e.g.,
hate speech and extremeness), there is no signiﬁcant difference in moderation likelihood across the political spectrum.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13669

