The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AutoShrink: A Topology-Aware NAS for Discovering Efﬁcient Neural Architecture
Tunhou Zhang,1 Hsin-Pai Cheng,1 Zhenwen Li,2 Feng Yan,3 Chengyu Huang,4 Hai Li,1 Yiran Chen1
1

ECE Department, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708
Institute of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
CSE Department, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557
4
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing
{tunhou.zhang, dave.cheng, hai.li, yiran.chen}@duke.edu,
lizhenwen@pku.edu.cn, fyan@unr.edu, huangcy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

DNN Architecture

Resource is an important constraint when deploying Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) on mobile and edge devices. Existing works commonly adopt the cell-based search approach,
which limits the ﬂexibility of network patterns in learned cell
structures. Moreover, due to the topology-agnostic nature of
existing works, including both cell-based and node-based approaches, the search process is time consuming and the performance of found architecture may be sub-optimal. To address these problems, we propose AutoShrink, a topologyaware Neural Architecture Search (NAS) for searching efﬁcient building blocks of neural architectures. Our method
is node-based and thus can learn ﬂexible network patterns
in cell structures within a topological search space. Directed
Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) are used to abstract DNN architectures and progressively optimize the cell structure through
edge shrinking. As the search space intrinsically reduces as
the edges are progressively shrunk, AutoShrink explores more
ﬂexible search space with even less search time. We evaluate AutoShrink on image classiﬁcation and language tasks by
crafting ShrinkCNN and ShrinkRNN models. ShrinkCNN is
able to achieve up to 48% parameter reduction and save 34%
Multiply-Accumulates (MACs) on ImageNet-1K with comparable accuracy of state-of-the-art (SOTA) models. Speciﬁcally, both ShrinkCNN and ShrinkRNN are crafted within 1.5
GPU hours, which is 7.2× and 6.7× faster than the crafting
time of SOTA CNN and RNN models, respectively.

Cell 1

1

Cell Topology

Node Operation &
Edge Operation

Cell 2

Cell N

Figure 1: Neural architecture structure and cell topology.
A DNN architecture is composed of several cell structures
(Cell 1, Cell 2, ...). The cell topology of a cell denotes the
network connectivity patterns within the cell structure. For
a cell topology, operators are abstracted as nodes and tensor
distributions are taken as edges, through which the tensors
are communicated.

Figure 1 depicts the neural architecture hierarchical structure and its building block – cell structures, the topology of
which can be descried as node operations and the connectivity between nodes, i.e., edge operations. When searching for more efﬁcient neural architectures, the cell-based
search approach is commonly employed (Tan and Le 2019;
Cai, Zhu, and Han 2018). These methods adopt the architecture motifs from hand-crafted models (e.g., MobileNetV2)
as backbone structures. The found architectures have compact structure and compelling performance. However, the
cell-based approach heavily relies on existing cell structures
and has constrained search space. It is not able to further
discover the topology of an existing cell structure, which is
likely to induce performance degradation.
While the node-based approach does not depend on existing cell structures, the topology-agnostic mechanism, i.e.,
pre-deﬁned node graph topology, is utilized to optimize the
corresponding operations (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018;
Pham et al. 2018). It is impossible to fully explore the network connectivity patterns within cell structures. The recently proposed randomly wired neural networks (Xie et
al. 2019) utilizes a random graph priors to facilitating the
interaction of tensors in DNN architectures. However, its
topology-agnostic nature makes the crafted models prone to
structural redundancy and sub-optimal performance.

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) emerged only in recent
years but has already demonstrated great strength in designing neural architectures automatically. Many research
works show that neural architectures obtained from NAS
surpass the performance of the hand-crafted counterpart
for challenging tasks, such as computer vision and natural language processing (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018;
Long et al. 2015; Tan et al. 2019; Tan and Le 2019). The
study on NAS methods in early stage concentrated on seeking large-scale neural architectures that can provide record
breaking performance (Long et al. 2015). As computational
power and computing time are not taken into consideration, the redundancy is inevitable for the models obtained
by these methods.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6829

