The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Error-Correcting and Veriﬁable Parallel Inference in Graphical Models
Negin Karimi

Petteri Kaski

Mikko Koivisto

Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
negin.karimi@aalto.ﬁ

Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
petteri.kaski@aalto.ﬁ

Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
mikko.koivisto@helsinki.ﬁ

of the inference is correct so that the proof can be veriﬁed
with less resources than it takes to execute inference—this
is to enable both safety considerations as well as delegation of the inference task to a counterparty that need not be
trusted. Second, computing architectures and platforms that
enable massively parallel execution, from individual GPUs
to service-providers with vast infrastructure, are becoming
more widely available. This setting calls for inference algorithms that not only support fast veriﬁability of the result,
but also support massive, efﬁcient parallelization of inference that is robust against sporadic errors in computations
and communications, which may be rare yet inevitable given
large and increasing numbers of computing units.1

Abstract
We present a novel framework for parallel exact inference in
graphical models. Our framework supports error-correction
during inference and enables fast veriﬁcation that the result of inference is correct, with probabilistic soundness. The
computational complexity of inference essentially matches
the cost of w-cutset conditioning, a known generalization of
Pearl’s classical loop-cutset conditioning for inference. Verifying the result for correctness can be done with as little as
essentially the square root of the cost of inference. Our main
technical contribution amounts to designing a low-degree
polynomial extension of the cutset approach, and then reducing to a univariate polynomial employing techniques recently
developed for noninteractive probabilistic proof systems.

Error-Correcting Probabilistic Proof Systems. To meet
the desiderata of parallelization, robustness, and fast veriﬁability for probabilistic inference, we adopt the framework
of noninteractive probabilistic proof systems (Williams
2016). Speciﬁcally, we instantiate the “Camelot template”
(Björklund and Kaski 2016), which has been applied to other
fundamental graph problems such as graph coloring and
counting small subgraphs (Kaski 2018). The key idea is to
reduce the problem at hand to the task of computing values
of a univariate polynomial

Introduction
Graphical Models and Inference. Probabilistic graphical models, Bayesian networks in particular (Pearl 1988),
have become the main tool for representation and reasoning
under uncertainty. They provide a compact way to specify
multivariate probability distributions via conditional independences, along with relatively efﬁcient means for probabilistic inference, or belief updating; that is, the task of computing the conditional marginal distribution of some query
variables, given a conﬁguration of some other variables.
Inference in graphical models is NP-hard, even if one allows approximations to within a given relative error (Dagum
and Luby 1993). While polynomial-time algorithms are
known for special cases, most notably for models where
the underlying graph has bounded treewidth (Lauritzen and
Spiegelhalter 1988; Zhang and Poole 1994; Dechter 1999),
problem instances of larger treewidth remain a major computational challenge both in theory and in practice.

ĥ(Z) = λ0 + λ1 Z + λ2 Z 2 + . . . + λd Z d

(1)

at distinct points, so that the solution of the original problem
(in our case, the result of inference) is immediate once this
polynomial (“the proof”) is available.
Accordingly, the process of preparing the proof is intrinsically parallelizable and amounts to computing sufﬁciently
many point evaluations
(ζ1 , ĥ(ζ1 )) ,

(ζ2 , ĥ(ζ2 )) ,

... ,

(ζe , ĥ(ζe ))

(2)

at distinct values ζ1 , ζ2 , . . . , ζe so that the polynomial ĥ becomes uniquely determined, a task that also admits natural error-correction by over-provisioning the evaluations.2
Once a polynomial is available—for example, when it is

A Quest for Fast, Robust, and Veriﬁable Inference. In
this paper, we present a new approach for exact inference in
graphical models, motivated by two trends. First, the result
of inference must admit fast veriﬁcation so that the computational cost of veriﬁcation is substantially less than the
cost of inference—in essence, we want a proof that the result

1

For a study of hardware reliability and errors in a leadership
supercomputing context, cf. Tiwari et al. (2015).
2
Indeed, we recall from elementary algebra that a polynomial of
degree at most d is uniquely determined from evaluations at any e

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10194

