The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

End-to-End Learning of Object Motion Estimation
from Retinal Events for Event-Based Object Tracking
Haosheng Chen,1 David Suter,2 Qiangqiang Wu,1 Hanzi Wang1∗
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Science, Edith Cowan University, Australia
{haoshengchen, qiangwu}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, d.suter@ecu.edu.au, hanzi.wang@xmu.edu.cn

Previous Snapshot

Abstract
Event cameras, which are asynchronous bio-inspired vision
sensors, have shown great potential in computer vision and
artiﬁcial intelligence. However, the application of event cameras to object-level motion estimation or tracking is still in
its infancy. The main idea behind this work is to propose a
novel deep neural network to learn and regress a parametric object-level motion/transform model for event-based object tracking. To achieve this goal, we propose a synchronous
Time-Surface with Linear Time Decay (TSLTD) representation, which effectively encodes the spatio-temporal information of asynchronous retinal events into TSLTD frames
with clear motion patterns. We feed the sequence of TSLTD
frames to a novel Retinal Motion Regression Network (RMRNet) to perform an end-to-end 5-DoF object motion regression. Our method is compared with state-of-the-art object
tracking methods, that are based on conventional cameras or
event cameras. The experimental results show the superiority
of our method in handling various challenging environments
such as fast motion and low illumination conditions.

Retinal Events

Current Snapshot

Encoding

Time-Surface with Linear Time Decay (TSLTD) Frames

Figure 1: An illustration of the encoding process of the proposed TSLTD frames. The left and right sub-ﬁgures in the
ﬁrst row show two snapshots, while the middle one shows
the retinal events between the two snapshots. Note that the
two snapshots are just for reference to show what a conventional camera would have seen before and after the retinal
events occur. The second row shows a sequence of the encoded TSLTD frames of the retinal events.

Introduction
Biological eyes are one of the most efﬁcient and sophisticated neural systems. As a vital part of eyes, the retina
can precisely and efﬁciently capture motion information
(Murphy-Baum and Awatramani 2018), especially for motions caused by moving objects (Olveczky, Baccus, and
Meister 2003), in natural scenes. Compared with the retina,
most state-of-the-art motion estimation approaches are still
limited by challenging conditions such as motion blur and
high dynamic range (HDR) illuminations. There have been
several attempts (e.g., (McIntosh et al. 2016)) trying to imitate the retina by using artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs).
However, it is difﬁcult for ANNs to imitate the asynchronous
nature of the retina. In contrast, event cameras (e.g., DAVIS
(Brandli et al. 2014)) are asynchronous visual sensors with
very high dynamic range and temporal resolution (>120 dB,
<1 ms). These bio-inspired sensors help event-based methods to perform better in many computer vision and artiﬁcial
intelligence tasks. In particular, event cameras can ﬁlter out

non-motion information from the visual input, under stable
illumination conditions or infrequent light variations: thus
saving a lot of computation power, and giving clear clues
about where object movement occurred.
Several 3D 6-DoF ego-motion estimation methods for
event-based input, such as (Mueggler, Huber, and Scaramuzza 2014; Kim, Leutenegger, and Davison 2016; Gallego
et al. 2017), have been proposed during recent years. They
have shown the superiority of event cameras on the motion
estimation task. However, there are only a few studies devoted to analyzing object-level motion, and most of these
studies are designed for some special scenarios (e.g., (Piatkowska et al. 2012) is for the pedestrian tracking scenario).
Moreover, none of these methods are based on the regression methodology, which gives an explicit motion model for
retinal events. As shown in Fig. 1, the retinal events, collected between the previous snapshot and the current snapshot, show clear visual patterns about object motions. With
this intuition, we present a 5-DoF object-level motion estimation method based on the event camera inputs.

∗

The corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10534

