The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-View Multiple Clusterings Using Deep Matrix Factorization
Shaowei Wei,1 Jun Wang,1,∗ Guoxian Yu,1,2 Carlotta Domeniconi,3 Xiangliang Zhang2
1

College of Computer and Information Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing, China
2
CEMSE, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, SA
3
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, VA, USA
{swwei2019, kingjun, gxyu}@swu.edu.cn, carlotta@cs.gmu.edu, xiangliang.zhang@kaust.edu.sa
View 1

Abstract

X(1)

Multi-view clustering aims at integrating complementary information from multiple heterogeneous views to improve
clustering results. Existing multi-view clustering solutions
can only output a single clustering of the data. Due to their
multiplicity, multi-view data, can have different groupings
that are reasonable and interesting from different perspectives. However, how to ﬁnd multiple, meaningful, and diverse
clustering results from multi-view data is still a rarely studied and challenging topic in multi-view clustering and multiple clusterings. In this paper, we introduce a deep matrix
factorization based solution (DMClusts) to discover multiple
clusterings. DMClusts gradually factorizes multi-view data
matrices into representational subspaces layer-by-layer and
generates one clustering in each layer. To enforce the diversity between generated clusterings, it minimizes a new redundancy quantiﬁcation term derived from the proximity between samples in these subspaces. We further introduce an
iterative optimization procedure to simultaneously seek multiple clusterings with quality and diversity. Experimental results on benchmark datasets conﬁrm that DMClusts outperforms state-of-the-art multiple clustering solutions.

View 2

View 3
X(3)

X(2)

Z1(V)

Factorization

Shape

Layer 1

Z2(V)

Factorization &
diversity control

Color

Layer 2

Z3(V)
Layer 3

Factorization &
diversity control

Texture

Figure 1: An example of grouping the same objects with
three views via deep matrix factorization and diversity control layer-by-layer. The Shape clustering is generated from
all three views, while the Color and Texture clusterings are
generated from the ﬁrst two views and the last two views,
respectively.

shared information of multi-view data, and perform clustering therein (Li, Jiang, and Zhou 2014; Gao et al. 2015;
Zhao, Ding, and Fu 2017; Zong et al. 2017; Kang et al.
2019).
Existing MVC solutions focus on generating a single clustering; they fail to present different but meaningful clusterings of the same multi-view data (Fanaee-T and Thoresen 2018). For example, the three-view objects in Figure
1 have different shapes, colors, and textures. The aforementioned MVC solutions group these objects mainly by
shape. But they can also be clustered according to the shared
color and texture. These groupings are meaningful but different. In other words, multiple clustering is concerned with
both the quality and diversity of alternative clusterings. Although multiple clusterings can present alternative and overlooked meaningful clusterings of the same objects, it is a
known dilemma to balance diversity and quality (Bailey
2013). Given this challenge, a number of solutions have
been introduced to generate alternative clusterings in different subspaces (Cui, Fern, and Dy 2007; Mautz et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2019), by meta clustering of base clusterings
(Caruana et al. 2006), by referring to already explored clusterings (Bae and Bailey 2006; Yang and Zhang 2017), or

Introduction
Many real-world data include diverse types of feature views.
For example, web images have both visual and textual features; a protein has structure and interactome features. The
various feature views embody consistent and complementary information of the same objects, and have produced intensive research in multi-view learning (Bickel and Scheffer 2004; Zhao et al. 2017). The fusion of feature views
enables not only the achievement of a comprehensive composite view of the objects, but also facilitates the associated
learning task (Nie, Cai, and Li 2017; Tan et al. 2018).
Various efforts have been focused on the development
of effective multi-view clustering (MVC) algorithms. Some
methods achieve clustering by co-regularization (Kumar
and Daumé 2011; Cheng et al. 2013), correlation analysis
(Chaudhuri et al. 2009), or multiple kernel learning (Gönen
and Alpaydın 2011; Liu et al. 2019); other approaches
learn the shared subspace to extract complementary and
∗

Corresponding author, kingjun@swu.edu.cn (Jun Wang).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6348

