The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Class Prior Estimation with
Biased Positives and Unlabeled Examples
Shantanu Jain, Justin D. Delano, Himanshu Sharma, Predrag Radivojac
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, U.S.A.

jor consequences in all aspects of learning and predictor
deployment. For example, during the process of scientiﬁc
discovery, examples selected for labeling may reﬂect social
biases, the priorities of funding agencies, limitations of instrumentation, or individual preferences of researchers. In
molecular biology, one can more easily crystallize small
proteins than large proteins which biases the Protein Data
Bank resource to be more representative of smaller structured molecules, because highly ﬂexible proteins are difﬁcult to crystallize (Dunker et al. 2001). Similarly, one can
more easily collect protein-protein interaction (PPI) data for
proteins that are expressed in the yeast nucleus via yeast
two-hybrid experiments (Fields and Song 1989). This leads
to biases in interaction networks with respect to positives
that in this case reﬂect two over-represented groups of protein pairs: (1) those containing small structured proteins cocrystallized with their partners and (2) those containing proteins easily expressed in a yeast’s nucleus. As link prediction is a perennial task in PPI networks, estimating the size
of the PPI network based on incomplete data as well as
estimating missing interactions will likely propagate initial
biases unless corrective measures are applied. In fact, the
strategies for mitigating the effects of sample selection bias
have long been studied in machine learning (Heckman 1979;
Zadrozny 2004; Huang et al. 2006; Cortes et al. 2008;
Hsieh, Niu, and Sugiyama 2019); however, very few authors have considered a positive-unlabeled setting (Youngs,
Shasha, and Bonneau 2015).

Abstract
Positive-unlabeled learning is often studied under the assumption that the labeled positive sample is drawn randomly
from the true distribution of positives. In many application
domains, however, certain regions in the support of the positive class-conditional distribution are over-represented while
others are under-represented in the positive sample. Although
this introduces problems in all aspects of positive-unlabeled
learning, we begin to address this challenge by focusing on
the estimation of class priors, quantities central to the estimation of posterior probabilities and the recovery of true classiﬁcation performance. We start by making a set of assumptions
to model the sampling bias. We then extend the identiﬁability
theory of class priors from the unbiased to the biased setting.
Finally, we derive an algorithm for estimating the class priors that relies on clustering to decompose the original problem into subproblems of unbiased positive-unlabeled learning. Our empirical investigation suggests feasibility of the
correction strategy and overall good performance.

Introduction
Learning from positive and unlabeled data refers to a binary classiﬁcation problem in which all labeled examples
are positive and unlabeled examples contain a mix of positive and negative examples (Denis 1998; Denis, Gilleron,
and Letouzey 2005; du Plessis, Niu, and Sugiyama 2014;
Hsieh, Natarajan, and Dhillon 2015; Chang et al. 2016).
Over the past two decades, there has been growing interest in this form of semi-supervised learning with a broad
range of applications in text mining, biology, and social networks, to name a few (Liu et al. 2003; Ward et al. 2009;
Tran 2013). Positive-unlabeled learning has also been studied and well-understood in numerous problems including
matrix completion (Hsieh, Natarajan, and Dhillon 2015),
hypothesis testing (Geurts 2011), approximation of posterior distributions (Jain et al. 2016) and performance evaluation (Menon et al. 2015; Jain, White, and Radivojac 2017;
Ramola, Jain, and Radivojac 2019).
A standard and major assumption in the positiveunlabeled setting is that one is presented with unbiased i.i.d.
samples for both positives and unlabeled data. This assumption, however, may not hold in practice and may have ma-

The focus of this work is on nonparametric estimation of
class priors; i.e., the fractions of positive and negative examples in unlabeled data, given a sample of positives and a
sample of unlabeled examples. This problem has been considered in the past decade with well-developed identiﬁability theory (Blanchard, Lee, and Scott 2010; Jain et al. 2016)
and several well-performing estimation algorithms (Elkan
and Noto 2008; Sanderson and Scott 2014; Jain et al. 2016;
Ramaswamy, Scott, and Tewari 2016; du Plessis, Niu, and
Sugiyama 2017; Bekker and Davis 2018). However, both
theory and algorithms considered only the case when both
positives and unlabeled data are i.i.d. samples from the underlying data distributions. We intend to relax this assumption and investigate the case where only a biased set of positive examples is available, whereas the unlabeled data remains unbiased.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4255

