The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Character-Centric Neural Model for Automated Story Generation
Danyang Liu,1,2∗ Juntao Li,1,3∗ Meng-Hsuan Yu,1,3 Ziming Huang,4 Gongshen Liu,2
Dongyan Zhao,1,3 Rui Yan1,2,3†
1

2

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
Key Laboratory of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
Center for Data Science, AAIS, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
IBM Research-China, Beijing, China
{danyliu, lgshen}@sjtu.edu.cn, hzmzi@cn.ibm.com.
{lijuntao, yumenghsuan, zhaody, ruiyan}@pku.edu.cn
Title (Given)
Character (Given)

Abstract
Automated story generation is a challenging task which aims
to automatically generate convincing stories composed of
successive plots correlated with consistent characters. Most
recent generation models are built upon advanced neural
networks, e.g., variational autoencoder, generative adversarial network, convolutional sequence to sequence model. Although these models have achieved prompting results on
learning linguistic patterns, very few methods consider the
attributes and prior knowledge of the story genre, especially
from the perspectives of explainability and consistency. To
ﬁll this gap, we propose a character-centric neural storytelling
model, where a story is created encircling the given character, i.e., each part of a story is conditioned on a given character and corresponded context environment. In this way, we
explicitly capture the character information and the relations
between plots and characters to improve explainability and
consistency. Experimental results on open dataset indicate
that our model yields meaningful improvements over several
strong baselines on both human and automatic evaluations.

Context
Predicted Action
Generated Sentence

Rush Hour
A Police (Represented by a
vector)
... A gun battle breaks out.
Arrest
Ofﬁce Chan arrests a group
of gun smugglers.

Table 1: An example of title, character, context, action prediction and sentence generation in our system.

black-box nature and requirements for modeling long-range
dependencies and sophisticated plots and characters.
For neural story generation, previous frameworks mainly
treat this problem as a standard long document generation
task and propose to decompose it as a multi-stage generation
process to address the long-range dependency issue. A typical generation formulation is ﬁrst using a neural language
model to generate intermediate representations, e.g., keywords (Yao et al. 2019), skeleton (Xu et al. 2018), prompts
(Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018), and then utilizing another neural language model to generate each sentence upon
these intermediate representations. In doing so, these models can well capture syntactic and lexical information from
training stories but might fail to take task-speciﬁc attributes
into account, e.g., explicitly modeling characters, plots, etc
(Riedl and Young 2010; Bahamón 2012). For one thing, paying much attention to generation framework might lead to
the generated stories unexplained from the aspects of story,
say a plausible story might consist of irrelevant plots and
mis-matched characters. For another, previous neural models mainly focus on modeling semantic-level consistency,
e.g., thematic consistency, cross-sentence coherence, leaving character consistency unexplored.
To address the aforementioned issues, we investigate to
generate stories from the perspective of story genre.
Enlightened from previous story generation methods with
prior knowledge about story genres, we attempt to explicitly combine deep neural generation networks with character modeling which was afﬁrmed to be effective for enhancing the character believability (Riedl and Young 2010). Con-

Introduction
In view of its aesthetic and entertainment values, automatic
story generation is becoming a new hotspot in the ﬁeld of
natural language generation, which involves many-faceted
challenges (Martin et al. 2018; Lukin, Hobbs, and Voss
2018; Goldfarb-Tarrant, Feng, and Peng 2019). Conventionally, various rule-based or template-based methods with explicitly prior domain knowledge are proposed for addressing this task, e.g., case-based reasoning (Gervás et al. 2004;
Swanson and Gordon 2012), agent-based simulation (Brenner 2010), plot graphs (Li et al. 2013). Recently, a myriad
of neural models is designed for modeling the story generation task without requiring hand-crafted domain knowledge and thus are more versatile for various scenarios (Fan,
Lewis, and Dauphin 2018; Peng et al. 2018; Fan, Lewis,
and Dauphin 2019; Mishra et al. 2019). Although encouraging progress has been achieved, neural methods are still
restricted by explainability and coherence owing to their
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@pku.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1725

