The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Joint Modeling of Local and Global Temporal Dynamics
for Multivariate Time Series Forecasting with Missing Values
Xianfeng Tang,† Huaxiu Yao,† Yiwei Sun,† Charu Aggarwal,‡ Prasenjit Mitra,† Suhang Wang†∗
†

College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University, PA, USA
‡
IBM T.J. Watson, NY, USA
†
{xut10, huy144, yus162, pum10, szw494}@psu.edu; ‡ charu@us.ibm.com

160

Abstract

140
120

Multivariate time series (MTS) forecasting is widely used in
various domains, such as meteorology and trafﬁc. Due to limitations on data collection, transmission, and storage, realworld MTS data usually contains missing values, making it
infeasible to apply existing MTS forecasting models such
as linear regression and recurrent neural networks. Though
many efforts have been devoted to this problem, most of them
solely rely on local dependencies for imputing missing values, which ignores global temporal dynamics. Local dependencies/patterns would become less useful when the missing
ratio is high, or the data have consecutive missing values;
while exploring global patterns can alleviate such problem.
Thus, jointly modeling local and global temporal dynamics
is very promising for MTS forecasting with missing values.
However, work in this direction is rather limited. Therefore,
we study a novel problem of MTS forecasting with missing
values by jointly exploring local and global temporal dynamics. We propose a new framework LGnet, which leverages
memory network to explore global patterns given estimations from local perspectives. We further introduce adversarial training to enhance the modeling of global temporal distribution. Experimental results on real-world datasets show
the effectiveness of LGnet for MTS forecasting with missing
values and its robustness under various missing ratios.

100
80
60
40
20
0

0

24

PM25 of Station 1

48

PM25 of Station 2

72

Figure 1: Two time series from Beijing air pollution dataset.

Qin et al. (Qin et al. 2017) designed two attention mechanisms in RNN to improve forecasting accuracy. Despite their
success, the majority of the aforementioned models assume
MTS data is complete.
In the real-world, MTS data are usually incomplete due
to various reasons, such as broken sensors, failed data transmissions, or damaged storages. For example, Figure 1 gives
two multivariate time series snippets from Beijing air pollution data, both of which contain apparent missing values
marked by gray boxes (i.e., 20 of the 144 data points are unobserved). Missing values damage temporal dependencies in
MTS sequences (Luo et al. 2018; Cao et al. 2018), make it
hard to apply existing RNN-based models on incomplete sequences and increase the difﬁculty of MTS forecasting tasks.
As shown in Figure 1, because of missing values, the second peak of the blue signal is not observed, and cannot be
inferred by simply relying on existing RNNs. Therefore, it
is vital to design models that handle missing values in MTS
data to perform accurate forecasting. Many prior efforts have
been dedicated to this direction. For example, two-step approaches that ﬁrst omit or impute missing values then process time series forecasting based on the pre-processed data
are explored in (Yi et al. 2016; Garcı́a-Laencina, SanchoGómez, and Figueiras-Vidal 2010). End-to-end solutions,
where the missing patterns are modeled jointly with forecasting tasks, are investigated in (Che et al. 2018; Cao et
al. 2018; Luo et al. 2018). However, those methods only
explore local statistical features, while the global temporal
patterns in exogenous sequences are neglected.
Jointly modeling local and global temporal dynamics is

Introduction
Multivariate time series (MTS) forecasting is widely used
in many applications such as weather forecasting (Xingjian
et al. 2015), clinical diagnosis (Che et al. 2018), sales forecasting (Wu et al. 2018; 2019) and trafﬁc analysis (Yao et
al. 2019b; 2018; 2019a; Tang et al. 2019). The popularity of MTS forecasting has attracted increasing attention,
and many efforts have been taken to address the problem
in the past few years (Box et al. 2015; Qin et al. 2017;
Chang et al. 2018). Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), a
class of deep learning frameworks designed for modeling
sequential data, have been successfully applied to this problem. For example, LSTNet (Lai et al. 2018) adopts LSTM to
capture long-term dependencies for time series forecasting.
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5956

