The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph LSTM with Context-Gated
Mechanism for Spoken Language Understanding
Linhao Zhang,1 Dehong Ma,1 Xiaodong Zhang,1 Xiaohui Yan,2 Houfeng Wang1
1

MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
2
CBG Intelligence Engineering Dept, Huawei Technologies, China
{zhanglinhao, madehong, zxdcs, wanghf}@pku.edu.cn
yanxiaohui2@huawei.com

Abstract
Much research in recent years has focused on spoken language understanding (SLU), which usually involves two
tasks: intent detection and slot ﬁlling. Since Yao et al.(2013),
almost all SLU systems are RNN-based, which have been
shown to suffer various limitations due to their sequential nature. In this paper, we propose to tackle this task with Graph
LSTM, which ﬁrst converts text into a graph and then utilizes
the message passing mechanism to learn the node representation. Not only the Graph LSTM addresses the limitations of
sequential models, but it can also help to utilize the semantic correlation between slot and intent. We further propose a
context-gated mechanism to make better use of context information for slot ﬁlling. Our extensive evaluation shows that the
proposed model outperforms the state-of-the-art results by a
large margin.

Figure 1: An example of SLU utterance with intent and annotated slots using the IOB scheme. The B- preﬁx before a
tag indicates that the tag is the beginning of a slot, and an Ipreﬁx before a tag indicates that the tag is inside a slot. An
O tag indicates that a token belongs to no slot.

As shown in Figure 1, the corresponding slot label for Seattle is B-fromloc, but it could also be B-toloc, if the utterance
is transformed into show ﬂights from San Diego to Seattle. Thirdly, the sequential nature of RNN-based methods
leads to weaker power in capturing long-range dependencies, which accounts for a large portion of SF errors (Tür,
Hakkani-Tür, and Heck 2010).
In this paper, we propose to use Graph LSTM to tackle
these problems. There are many variants of Graph LSTM
(Liang et al. 2016; Peng et al. 2017; Zayats and Ostendorf
2018; Song et al. 2018; Zhang, Liu, and Song 2018). In this
paper, we choose the S-LSTM (Zhang, Liu, and Song 2018)
because it is ideally suited for this task.
The main idea of S-LSTM is to model the hidden states
of all words simultaneously rather than sequentially, hence
can solve the non-parallelization problem. Speciﬁcally, the
S-LSTM views the whole sentence as a single graph, which
consists of word-level nodes and a sentence-level node.
These nodes are updated simultaneously through message
passing mechanism. Since message passing is conducted between consecutive word-level nodes, and between sentencelevel node and each word-level node, both local n-grams and
long-range dependencies are better captured.
Compared to other variants of Graph LSTM, the S-LSTM
has a special sentence-level node, making it ideally suited to
utilize the semantic correlation between slot and intent. We
note that intent and slot are not independent but intrinsically
correlated. As the example shown in Figure 1, an utterance
is more likely to contain departure and arrival cities if its
intent is to ﬁnd a ﬂight, and vice versa. For joint ID and
SF, we use the ﬁnal word-level nodes of S-LSTM for slots

Introduction
Spoken language understanding (SLU) is an essential part
of dialog system. It usually involves two tasks: intent detection (ID) and slot ﬁlling (SF). Typically, ID is regarded
as a semantic utterance classiﬁcation problem, and different classiﬁcation methods can be applied (Haffner, Tur, and
Wright 2003; Tür et al. 2011; Deng et al. 2012). Meanwhile,
SF is usually treated as a sequence labeling problem. Popular approaches to perform SF include support vector machines (SVMs) and conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs) (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira 2001).
Yao et al.(2013) adapted RNN language models to perform SLU, outperforming previous CRF-based models by
a large margin. RNN-based methods (including LSTM and
GRU) have since deﬁned the state-of-the-art in SLU research
(Mesnil et al. 2015; Liu and Lane 2016; Zhang and Wang
2016; Goo et al. 2018; Niu et al. 2019).
Despite their success, these RNN-based models have been
shown to suffer various limitations. Firstly, their inherently
sequential nature precludes parallelization within training
examples (Vaswani et al. 2017). Secondly, local n-grams are
not fully exploited in their models. In SLU, slots are not only
determined by the associated items, but also local context.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9539

