The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Attention-Guide Walk Model in Heterogeneous
Information Network for Multi-Style Recommendation Explanation
Xin Wang,1,3,4 Ying Wang,1,2∗ Yunzhi Ling1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China
3
School of Computer Technology and Engineering, Changchun Institute of Technology, Changchun 130012, China
4
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, China
xinwangjlu@gmail.com, wangying2010@jlu.edu.cn, yunzhiling21@163.com
Recently, the research on attention mechanism provides
an effective way to make a recommendation system more
interpretable. The most explainable recommendation methods exploit the various attention network for choosing the
explanation components, such as aspect-level (Wang et al.
2018b), review-level (Chen et al. 2018), meta path-level (Hu
et al. 2018). Although the above methods have achieved better performance, they still have some inherent limitations.
Firstly, those methods based on aspect-level or review-level
mostly focused on the interaction of user preference to item
features in the review. On the contrary, the seldom works
studied on inferring the question what user’s attributes drive
them to like the item. Secondly, when using the meta path
as interactive factor of explanation, since the combination of
multiple entities and relationships makes the number of meta
paths grow exponentially, random walk sample strategy with
obtaining low-quality context is unsuitable for generating
recommendation explanation. Thirdly, the single explanation style can not fully explore multiple interactive reasons
to infer the implicit interaction between users and items.
Therefore, we aim at developing an explainable recommendation with providing different explanation styles.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework, MSRE,
which leverages attention-guide walk model to explore afﬁliation relations and interaction relations in heterogeneous
information network, and to learn the joint representation of
user-item interactions based on multi-style explanation meta
paths for recommendation prediction and explanation. The
major contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

Abstract
Explainable Recommendation aims at not only providing the
recommended items to users, but also making users aware
why these items are recommended. Too many interactive factors between users and items can be used to interpret the
recommendation in a heterogeneous information network.
However, these interactive factors are usually massive, implicit and noisy. The existing recommendation explanation
approaches only consider the single explanation style, such
as aspect-level or review-level. To address these issues, we
propose a framework (MSRE) of generating the multi-style
recommendation explanation with the attention-guide walk
model on afﬁliation relations and interaction relations in the
heterogeneous information network. Inspired by the attention mechanism, we determine the important contexts for
recommendation explanation and learn joint representation
of multi-style user-item interactions for enhancing recommendation performance. Constructing extensive experiments
on three real-world datasets veriﬁes the effectiveness of our
framework on both recommendation performance and recommendation explanation.

Introduction
A large number of recommendation models are a black-box
which does not provide explanation to the user. However, the
ideal recommendation system should focus on explanation,
form a virtuous circle through user feedback, and constantly
improve the performance. Explainable recommendation system not only unveils the recommendation process, but also
helps to improve the effectiveness, persuasiveness and satisfaction of recommendation.
In recent years, the tasks of analyzing and mining in heterogeneous information network (Shi et al. 2017) have attracted more and more attention. The representation learning
models integrated with rich semantic information are contributed to improve the recommendation performance in the
heterogeneous information network. However, these models
are still not good at capturing the interactive factors between
users and items and reveal how users make decisions.

• We study the problem of multi-style recommendation explanations, which integrates multiple interactive factors
between users and items based on afﬁliation relation and
interaction relation to infer user’s decision on the item.
• We exploit the attention-guide walk model in heterogeneous information network to selectively sample discriminative attributes (or features) and representative explanation meta paths for recommendation explanation.
• Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets,
namely Movielens, Yelp and Amazon, verify the effectiveness and reasonableness of our recommendation explanation framework.

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6275

