The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Multiarmed Bandit Based Incentive Mechanism for a
Subset Selection of Customers for Demand Response in Smart Grids
Shweta Jain,1 Sujit Gujar2
1

Indian Institute of Technology, Ropar, 2 International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad.
shwetajain@iitrpr.ac.in, sujit.gujar@iiit.ac.in

This participation will allow consumers to be more responsive to time-varying grid conditions, including peak demand
and renewable excess or shortfall. Typically the consumers
interact with the smart grids through software agents with
capabilities of taking decisions on the behalf of the consumers (or prosumers). Thus, unlike the traditional electricity networks, the smart grid offers a promising future towards providing more reliable service to its users. The primary question we ask in this paper is, can we manage our
electricity smartly? We answer this through designing a demand response program.

Abstract
Demand response is a crucial tool to maintain the stability of
the smart grids. With the upcoming research trends in the area
of electricity markets, it has become a possibility to design a
dynamic pricing system, and consumers are made aware of
what they are going to pay. Though the dynamic pricing system (pricing based on the total demand a distributor company
is facing) seems to be one possible solution, the current dynamic pricing approaches are either too complex for a consumer to understand or are too naive leading to inefﬁciencies
in the system (either consumer side or distributor side). Due
to these limitations, the recent literature is focusing on the
approach to provide incentives to the consumers to reduce
the electricity, especially in peak hours. For each round, the
goal is to select a subset of consumers to whom the distributor should offer incentives so as to minimize the loss which
comprises of cost of buying the electricity from the market,
uncertainties at consumer end, and cost incurred to the consumers to reduce the electricity which is a private information to the consumers. Due to the uncertainties in the loss
function (arising from renewable energy resources as well as
consumption needs), traditional auction theory-based incentives face manipulation challenges. Towards this, we propose
a novel combinatorial multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithm,
which we refer to as GLS-MAB to learn the uncertainties
along with an auction to elicit true costs incurred by the consumers. We prove that our mechanism is regret optimal and is
incentive compatible. We further demonstrate efﬁcacy of our
algorithms via simulations.

Demand response is a critical part of the smart grids,
which refers to the change in consumers’ energy usage behavior with respect to the pricing signals from the distributor
company. An important point to note is that when it comes
to resources like water or electricity, it is the government’s
responsibility to supply the required electricity; thus, the option left to the government is either to install more expensive
generators to match the demand and supply or to make the
consumers voluntarily optimize their electricity load by providing some monetary incentives. When taking the second
approach, the major challenge is that different consumers
may behave differently with the given incentives. Thus, in
order to increase participation from the consumers, it becomes crucial to learn their reaction towards these incentives. Learning the customers’ behavior is challenging due
to uncertainty and randomness involved with the integrated
renewable energy resources on the smart grid and on prosumer side. We intend to learn these uncertainties over time
using multi-armed bandit approach.

Introduction
A Smart Grid is an electricity network that can intelligently
adapt according to the behaviour and actions of all the users
connected to it (def 2010). The connected users can be categorized into distributors, producers, consumers, and prosumers (that do both, producer as well as consumer). Due
to intelligent communication monitoring, the smart grid enables two-way information and power exchange between
different connected users. The smart grid allows the integration of new communication (Farhangi 2010) that induces
increased participation of prosumers to make informed decisions on consuming/producing the electricity appropriately.

We have the following demand response problem. There
are different consumers integrated into the smart grid network. Henceforth, we call consumers/prosumers as well as
the software agents acting on behalf of them agents. As
each agent derives a certain value from a unit (KWh) of
electricity, it incurs a cost per unit reduction (CPR) when
asked to reduce a unit of electricity. Hence the distributor company must ensure that when giving an offer to the
agent, it matches its CPR. Since the CPRs are private, a
simple mechanism to ask CPRs from the agents may not
work as the strategic agents may report higher CPR in order to receive higher monetary offers. In-spite of monetary

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2046

