The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Semi-Supervised Learning on Meta Structure:
Multi-Task Tagging and Parsing in Low-Resource Scenarios
KyungTae Lim,1∗ Jay Yoon Lee,2∗ Jaime Carbonell,2 Thierry Poibeau1
1

LATTICE (CNRS & École normale supérieure / PSL & Université Sorbonne nouvelle Paris 3 / USPC), Paris
2
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
1
{kyungtae.lim, thierry.poibeau}@ens.fr
2
{jaylee, jgc}@cs.cmu.edu

Given multiple views, a simple but popular approach is to
unify multiple representations into a combined one through
concatenation, averaging, or pooling. This approach is especially popular in neural networks as it is very straightforward
to concatenate multiple representations without any modiﬁcation of the model. All the aforementioned work also
considered this approach. However, is it the best usage of
multi-view data? A simple input concatenation can lead to
overﬁtting problem as the model might ignore the speciﬁc
statistical property of each view (Zhao et al. 2017).
Recently, META -B I LSTM (Bohnet et al. 2018) was proposed to extend the naive solution of concatenating input
representations in the context of POS tagging, and it showed
superior performance compared to simple view concatenation
on input representations. META -B I LSTM builds a singleview model of each view (lower layer) and concatenates
the series of single-view-model outputs to form an input to
the meta layer, as shown in Figure 2. All the components
of META -B I LSTM (per-view models and meta layer) are
trained jointly, as expressed in Eq.(2).
In this study, we ﬁrst examine whether META -B I LSTM
can be beneﬁcial in the context of more complex tasks,
namely multi-tasking in POS tagging and dependency parsing. The study then proposes Co-meta, a semi-supervised
approach, to improve each single-view model through the
consensus promotion of the multiple single-view models
on unlabeled data. The proposed Co-meta is motivated by
Co-Training (Blum and Mitchell 1998), a classic approach
similar to multi-view learning, which enables exploration of
unlabeled data and is known to be helpful in low-resource settings. Overall, Co-Training and many of its variants improve
the multi-view models by maximizing agreement between the
multi-view models on unlabeled data, and thus can improve
performance in low-resource settings.
Thus, this study raises the question of whether classical Co-Training style approaches can further improve the
META -B I LSTM model in low-resource settings. Speciﬁcally,
we explore two questions: (1) can respective models from
different views learn from each other on unlabeled data?
Moreover, (2) can this help the performance of low-resource
models? We study whether improving each multi-view model
by promoting the consensus in a Semi-Supervised Learning

Abstract
Multi-view learning makes use of diverse models arising from
multiple sources of input or different feature subsets for the
same task. For example, a given natural language processing
task can combine evidence from models arising from character,
morpheme, lexical, or phrasal views. The most common strategy with multi-view learning, especially popular in the neural
network community, is to unify multiple representations into
one uniﬁed vector through concatenation, averaging, or pooling, and then build a single-view model on top of the uniﬁed
representation. As an alternative, we examine whether building one model per view and then unifying the different models
can lead to improvements, especially in low-resource scenarios. More speciﬁcally, taking inspiration from co-training
methods, we propose a semi-supervised learning approach
based on multi-view models through consensus promotion,
and investigate whether this improves overall performance.
To test the multi-view hypothesis, we use moderately lowresource scenarios for nine languages and test the performance
of the joint model for part-of-speech tagging and dependency
parsing. The proposed model shows signiﬁcant improvements
across the test cases, with average gains of −0.9 ∼ +9.3
labeled attachment score (LAS) points. We also investigate
the effect of unlabeled data on the proposed model by varying
the amount of training data and by using different domains of
unlabeled data.

1

Introduction

Multi-view data consist of different manifestations of the
same data, often in the form of different features, and such
data are abundant in real-world applications (Xu, Tao, and
Xu 2013). Character-, word- level representations, stem, preﬁx, and sufﬁx are examples of multi-view data in Natural
Language Processing (NLP).
The use of multi-view data has resulted in considerable
success in various NLP problems. Combining different word
representations at the character, token, or sub-word levels
has proven to be helpful for dependency parsing (Botha et
al. 2017; Andor et al. 2016), Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging
(Plank, Søgaard, and Goldberg 2016), and other NLP tasks.
∗

Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8344

