The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Structured Sparsiﬁcation of Gated Recurrent Neural Networks
∗

∗

Ekaterina Lobacheva,1 Nadezhda Chirkova,1 Alexander Markovich,2 Dmitry Vetrov1,3
1

Samsung-HSE Laboratory, National Research University Higher School of Economics
2
National Research University Higher School of Economics
3
Samsung AI Center Moscow Moscow, Russia
{elobacheva, nchirkova, dvetrov}@hse.ru, amarkovich@edu.hse.ru

Abstract

it

xt ht−1

One of the most popular approaches for neural network compression is sparsiﬁcation — learning sparse weight matrices.
In structured sparsiﬁcation, weights are set to zero by groups
corresponding to structure units, e. g. neurons. We further
develop the structured sparsiﬁcation approach for the gated
recurrent neural networks, e. g. Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM). Speciﬁcally, in addition to the sparsiﬁcation of individual weights and neurons, we propose sparsifying the preactivations of gates. This makes some gates constant and simpliﬁes an LSTM structure. We test our approach on the text
classiﬁcation and language modeling tasks. Our method improves the neuron-wise compression of the model in most of
the tasks. We also observe that the resulting structure of gate
sparsity depends on the task and connect the learned structures to the speciﬁcs of the particular tasks.

W

ft
gt
ot

b

Weights

ht

Gates

Neurons

Figure 1: Proposed sparsiﬁcation scheme for LSTM with
three levels of sparsity: weights, gates, and neurons (shown
in blue).

Introduction

it

sigm

ft

sigm

gt

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) yield high-quality results
in many applications (Chan et al. 2016; Ha, Dai, and Le
2017; Ren, Kiros, and Zemel 2015; Wu et al. 2016) but often
are memory- and time-consuming due to a large number of
parameters. There are a lot of memory-limited applications
where RNN compression is desired, for example, programs
running on smartphones. In many practical problems, RNNs
can be compressed orders of times with only a slight quality drop or even with quality improvement due to the regularization effect (Chirkova, Lobacheva, and Vetrov 2018;
Narang et al. 2017; Wen et al. 2018).
Most of the methods for RNN compression can be divided
into three groups: based on matrix factorization (Jose, Cissé,
and Fleuret 2018; Tjandra, Sakti, and Nakamura 2017; Prabhavalkar et al. 2016), quantization (Liu, Cao, and Yu 2018;
Wang et al. 2018), or sparsiﬁcation (Narang et al. 2017;
Chirkova, Lobacheva, and Vetrov 2018). In this paper, we
focus on sparsiﬁcation, i. e. setting a lot of weights to zero.
In addition to the individual weight sparsiﬁcation, modern sparsiﬁcation approaches perform group sparsiﬁcation,
which is also called structured sparsiﬁcation (Wen et al.
2018). Group sparsiﬁcation implies removing weights by
groups corresponding to structure units (neurons in RNNs).

ot

=

tanh
sigm

(

Wx

ct = ft  ct−1 + it  gt ;

Wh

b

xt
+
ht−1

)

ht = ot  tanh(ct )

Figure 2: Proposed sparsiﬁcation scheme for LSTM: neuron
weight group and gate weight group. White cells represent
zero weights. Zero row along with non-zero bias leads to the
constant corresponding gate. Zero column results in removing the corresponding neuron.
In addition to compression, group sparsiﬁcation also accelerates the testing stage.
Altogether, existing approaches perform RNN sparsiﬁcation, either at the level of individual weights (Chirkova,
Lobacheva, and Vetrov 2018; Narang et al. 2017; See, Luong, and Manning 2016), or at the level of hidden neurons (Wen et al. 2018). However, most of the modern recurrent architectures (e. g. LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), or Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) (Cho et al.
2014)), have a gated structure: to compute the next hidden state, one ﬁrstly computes gate values and then updates
the hidden state based on the gates. In this paper, we propose to add an intermediate level of sparsiﬁcation between

∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4989

