The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ERNIE 2.0: A Continual Pre-Training Framework for Language Understanding
Yu Sun, Shuohuan Wang, Yukun Li, Shikun Feng, Hao Tian, Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{sunyu02, wangshuohuan, tianhao, wu hua, wanghaifeng}@baidu.com

sentence proximity enables the models to learn structureaware representations. And semantic similarity at the document level or discourse relations among sentences allow
the models to learn semantic-aware representations. In order to discover all valuable information in training corpora,
be it lexical, syntactic or semantic representations, we propose a continual pre-training framework named ERNIE 2.0
which could incrementally build and train a large variety of
pre-training tasks through continual multi-task learning.
Our ERNIE framework supports the introduction of various customized tasks continually, which is realized through
continual multi-task learning. When given one or more new
tasks, the continual multi-task learning method simultaneously trains the newly-introduced tasks together with the
original tasks in an efﬁcient way, without forgetting previously learned knowledge. In this way, our framework can
incrementally train the distributed representations based on
the previously trained parameters that it grasped. Moreover,
in this framework, all the tasks share the same encoding networks, thus making the encoding of lexical, syntactic and
semantic information across different tasks possible.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:

Abstract
Recently pre-trained models have achieved state-of-the-art
results in various language understanding tasks. Current pretraining procedures usually focus on training the model with
several simple tasks to grasp the co-occurrence of words or
sentences. However, besides co-occurring information, there
exists other valuable lexical, syntactic and semantic information in training corpora, such as named entities, semantic
closeness and discourse relations. In order to extract the lexical, syntactic and semantic information from training corpora,
we propose a continual pre-training framework named ERNIE
2.0 which incrementally builds pre-training tasks and then
learn pre-trained models on these constructed tasks via continual multi-task learning. Based on this framework, we construct
several tasks and train the ERNIE 2.0 model to capture lexical,
syntactic and semantic aspects of information in the training data. Experimental results demonstrate that ERNIE 2.0
model outperforms BERT and XLNet on 16 tasks including
English tasks on GLUE benchmarks and several similar tasks
in Chinese. The source codes and pre-trained models have
been released at https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/ERNIE.

Introduction

• We propose a continual pre-training framework ERNIE
2.0, which efﬁciently supports customized training tasks
and continual multi-task learning in an incremental way.

Pre-trained language representations such as ELMo(Peters et
al. 2018), OpenAI GPT(Radford et al. 2018), BERT (Devlin
et al. 2018), ERNIE 1.0 (Sun et al. 2019)1 and XLNet(Yang
et al. 2019) have been proven to be effective for improving
the performances of various natural language understanding
tasks including sentiment classiﬁcation (Socher et al. 2013),
natural language inference (Bowman et al. 2015), named
entity recognition (Sang and De Meulder 2003) and so on.
Generally the pre-training of models often train the model
based on the co-occurrence of words and sentences. While
in fact, there are other lexical, syntactic and semantic information worth examining in training corpora other than cooccurrence. For example, named entities like person names,
location names, and organization names, may contain conceptual information. Information like sentence order and

• We construct three kinds of unsupervised language processing tasks to verify the effectiveness of the proposed
framework. Experimental results demonstrate that ERNIE
2.0 achieves signiﬁcant improvements over BERT and XLNet on 16 tasks including English GLUE benchmarks and
several Chinese tasks.
• Our ﬁne-tuning code of ERNIE 2.0 and models pre-trained
on English corpora are available at https://github.com/
PaddlePaddle/ERNIE.

Related Work
Unsupervised Learning for Language
Representation

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In order to distinguish ERNIE 2.0 framework and the ERNIE
model, the latter is referred to as ERNIE 1.0.(Sun et al. 2019)

It is effective to learn general language representation by
pre-training a language model with a large amount of unan8968

