The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

LMLFM: Longitudinal Multi-Level Factorization Machine
Junjie Liang,1,2 Dongkuan Xu,2 Yiwei Sun,1,3 Vasant Honavar1,2,3,4
1

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University
College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University
4
Institute of Computational and Data Sciences, Pennsylvania State University
{jul672, dux19, vhonavar}@ist.psu.edu, yus162@psu.edu
2

or both (multi-level correlation) (Finch, Bolin, and Kelley
2016), and hence are not independent and identically distributed. Analysis that does not account for such correlations
can lead to misleading statistical inferences (Gibbons and
Hedeker 1997). To account for data correlations, state-of-theart longitudinal data analysis (Gibbons and Hedeker 1997;
Lozano and Swirszcz 2012; Groll and Tutz 2014) often relies on mixed effects models that include ﬁxed effects and
random effects, where the ﬁxed effects capture the regression parameters that are shared by all individuals, whereas
random effects capture those parameters that vary across individuals. In practice, the design of mixed effects models
relies on expert input to decide which variables are subject
to random effects as opposed to ﬁxed effects, or a process of
trial and error. However, existing mixed effects models are
very computationally intensive, with the computational cost
scaling with O(q 3 ), where q is the number of variables that
are subject to random effects which limits their applicability
to relatively low-dimensional data. While with the advent of
big data, variants of dimensionality reduction methods such
as LASSO have been explored in the longitudinal setting
(Schelldorfer, Bühlmann, and van de Geer 2011; Lozano and
Swirszcz 2012; Groll and Tutz 2014; Xu, Sun, and Bi 2015;
Ratkovic and Tingley 2017; Marino, Buxton, and Li 2017;
Lu et al. 2017; Finch and others 2018), most such methods are limited to selecting only ﬁxed effects. There is limited work on jointly selecting ﬁxed and random effects,
e.g., penalized likelihood methods (Ibrahim et al. 2011;
Bondell, Krishna, and Ghosh 2010; Hui, Müller, and Welsh
2017b) and Bayesian models (Chen and Dunson 2003;
Yang, Wang, and Dong 2019). However, their applicability is limited by their high computational cost and reliance
on linear models.

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning predictive models from
longitudinal data, consisting of irregularly repeated, sparse
observations from a set of individuals over time. Such data often exhibit longitudinal correlation (LC) (correlations among
observations for each individual over time), cluster correlation
(CC) (correlations among individuals that have similar characteristics), or both. These correlations are often accounted
for using mixed effects models that include ﬁxed effects and
random effects, where the ﬁxed effects capture the regression
parameters that are shared by all individuals, whereas random
effects capture those parameters that vary across individuals.
However, the current state-of-the-art methods are unable to select the most predictive ﬁxed effects and random effects from
a large number of variables, while accounting for complex correlation structure in the data and non-linear interactions among
the variables. We propose Longitudinal Multi-Level Factorization Machine (LMLFM), to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst
model to address these challenges in learning predictive models from longitudinal data. We establish the convergence properties, and analyze the computational complexity, of LMLFM.
We present results of experiments with both simulated and
real-world longitudinal data which show that LMLFM outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms of predictive
accuracy, variable selection ability, and scalability to data with
large number of variables. The code and supplemental material
is available at https://github.com/junjieliang672/LMLFM.

Introduction
Longitudinal data consist of repeated observations from
a set of individuals over time. Such data are common in
many areas, including health sciences, social sciences and
economics. Consider for example, the scenario shown in
Fig. 1. To predict an individual xi ’s health status at the
age of 38, we should take into account both xi ’s history
of physical examinations, as well as those of other individuals who are similar to xi in age and other characteristics. Clearly, such longitudinal data often exhibit longitudinal correlation (LC) (correlations among observations for
each individual over time), cluster correlation (CC) (correlations among individuals that have similar characteristics),

Contributions. This paper aims to address the urgent need
for effective models that can handle high-dimensional longitudinal data where the number of variables is very large
compared to the size of the population, the interactions
among variables can be nonlinear, the ﬁxed and random effects are a priori unspeciﬁed, and the data exhibit correlation
structure (LC, CC, or both). Speciﬁcally, we introduce Longitudinal Multi-Level Factorization Machine (LMLFM), a
novel, efﬁcient, provably convergent extension of Factoriza-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4811

