The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Idle Time Optimization for Target
Assignment and Path Finding in Sortation Centers
Ngai Meng Kou, Cheng Peng

Hang Ma

T. K. Satish Kumar, Sven Koenig

Cainiao Smart Logistics Network
{ngaimeng.knm, junpeng.pc}@alibaba-inc.com

Simon Fraser University
hangma@sfu.ca

University of Southern California
tkskwork@gmail.com, skoenig@usc.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the one-shot and lifelong versions
of the Target Assignment and Path Finding problem in automated sortation centers, where each agent needs to constantly assign itself a sorting station, move to its assigned station without colliding with obstacles or other agents, wait in
the queue of that station to obtain a parcel for delivery, and
then deliver the parcel to a sorting bin. The throughput of
such centers is largely determined by the total idle time of all
stations since their queues can frequently become empty. To
address this problem, we ﬁrst formalize and study the oneshot version that assigns stations to a set of agents and ﬁnds
collision-free paths for the agents to their assigned stations.
We present efﬁcient algorithms for this task based on a novel
min-cost max-ﬂow formulation that minimizes the total idle
time of all stations in a ﬁxed time window. We then demonstrate how our algorithms for solving the one-shot problem
can be applied to solving the lifelong problem as well. Experimentally, we believe to be the ﬁrst researchers to consider real-world automated sortation centers using an industrial simulator with realistic data and a kinodynamic model
of real robots. On this simulator, we showcase the beneﬁts of
our algorithms by demonstrating their efﬁciency and effectiveness for up to 350 agents.

1

(a) The 2D grid layout of an auto- (b) Robots delivering parcels
mated sortation center. Green cells to sorting bins (Reuters
represent sorting stations. Gray cells 2018).
represent obstacles. Blue cells represent sorting bins.

Figure 1: Example of an automated sortation center.
to its destination, a sorting bin located in a designated cell.
Typically, a sorting bin is associated with the shipping addresses of a speciﬁc ZIP code. Figure 1(b) shows agents
in action in such a center. At each sorting station, a human
worker or a machine scans the barcode of a parcel and determines its sorting bin. After an agent from the queue of
the sorting station successfully delivers the parcel, it can retask itself by waiting in another queue. In general, there are
many more parcels to be delivered than agents available for
delivery. Therefore, empty queues, i.e., idle times of sorting
stations, are the bottleneck for the throughput of the center.
In this paper, we aim to minimize the total idle time of such
a sortation center.

Introduction

With the increasing popularity of e-commerce and recent
progress in AI and robotics research, hundreds of warehouse
robots have been employed to sort express parcels in modern
automated warehouses and sortation facilities. For example,
one such automated sortation center has contributed to a new
one-day sales record of $30.8 billion during the Singles Day
Online Shopping Festival (November 11, 2018), that also
resulted in the delivery of over one billion express parcels
throughout China within one week (Alizila 2018).
Figure 1(a) shows the layout of a typical sortation center. In such a center, each agent has to assign itself a sorting
station, move to its assigned station without colliding with
obstacles or other agents, and then wait in the queue of that
station to obtain a parcel for delivery. The earliest agent in
the queue obtains a parcel from the station and delivers it

Related Work on Task and Path Planning
One-Shot Path Planning: Past research on multi-agent
path-planning problems has mostly centered around MultiAgent Path Finding (MAPF) (Ma and Koenig 2017; Stern
et al. 2019). MAPF aims to ﬁnd collision-free paths for a
given set of agents from their current locations to given targets. In general, it is NP-hard to solve optimally for minimizing ﬂowtime (the sum of the arrival times of all agents
at their targets) and NP-hard to approximate within any
constant factor less than 4/3 for minimizing makespan (the
maximum of the arrival times of all agents at their targets)
(Surynek 2010; Yu and LaValle 2013c; Ma et al. 2016). It
can be solved via reductions to other well-studied combinatorial problems (Yu and LaValle 2013b; Surynek 2015;

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9925

