The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SG-Net: Syntax-Guided Machine Reading Comprehension
∗

Zhuosheng Zhang,1,2,3, Yuwei Wu,1,2,3,4,* Junru Zhou,1,2,3 Sufeng Duan,1,2,3
Hai Zhao,1,2,3,† Rui Wang5,†
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
4
College of Zhiyuan, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
5
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT), Kyoto, Japan
{zhangzs, will8821}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, wangrui@nict.go.jp
2018). Obviously, it requires a good representation of the
meaning of a sentence.
A person reads most words superﬁcially and pays more
attention to the key ones during reading and understanding
sentences (Wang, Zhang, and Zong 2017). Although a
variety of attentive models have been proposed to imitate
human learning, most of them, especially global attention
methods (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015) equally tackle
each word and attend to all words in a sentence without
explicit pruning and prior focus, which would result
in inaccurate concentration on some dispensable words
(Mudrakarta et al. 2018).
We observe that the accuracy of MRC models decreases
when answering long questions (shown in Section 5.1).
Generally, if the text is particularly lengthy and detailedriddled, it would be quite difﬁcult for deep learning model to
understand as it suffers from noise and pays vague attention
on the text components, let alone accurately answering
questions (Zhang et al. 2018). In contrast, existing studies
have veriﬁed that human reads sentences efﬁciently by
taking a sequence of ﬁxation and saccades after a quick ﬁrst
glance (Yu, Lee, and Le 2017).
Besides, for passage involved reading comprehension,
a input sequence always consists of multiple sentences.
Nearly all of the current attentive methods and language
models regard the input sequence as a whole, e.g., a passage,
with no consideration of the inner linguistic structure inside
each sentence. This would result in process bias caused by
much noise and lack of associated spans for each concerned
word.
All these factors motivate us to seek for an informative
method that can selectively pick out important words by
only considering the related subset of words of syntactic
importance inside each input sentence explicitly. With a
guidance of syntactic structure clues, the syntax-guided
method could give more accurate attentive signals and
reduce the impact of the noise brought about by lengthy
sentences.
So far, we have two types of broadly adopted contextualized encoders for building sentence-level representation,
RNN-based and Transformer-based (Vaswani et al. 2017).
The latter has shown its superiority which is empowered

Abstract
For machine reading comprehension, the capacity of
effectively modeling the linguistic knowledge from the detailriddled and lengthy passages and getting ride of the noises
is essential to improve its performance. Traditional attentive
models attend to all words without explicit constraint, which
results in inaccurate concentration on some dispensable
words. In this work, we propose using syntax to guide the
text modeling by incorporating explicit syntactic constraints
into attention mechanism for better linguistically motivated
word representations. In detail, for self-attention network
(SAN) sponsored Transformer-based encoder, we introduce
syntactic dependency of interest (SDOI) design into the
SAN to form an SDOI-SAN with syntax-guided selfattention. Syntax-guided network (SG-Net) is then composed
of this extra SDOI-SAN and the SAN from the original
Transformer encoder through a dual contextual architecture
for better linguistics inspired representation. To verify its
effectiveness, the proposed SG-Net is applied to typical
pre-trained language model BERT which is right based on
a Transformer encoder. Extensive experiments on popular
benchmarks including SQuAD 2.0 and RACE show that
the proposed SG-Net design helps achieve substantial
performance improvement over strong baselines.

1

Introduction

Recently, much progress has been made in general-purpose
language modeling that can be used across a wide range
of tasks (Radford et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2018; Zhang
et al. 2020b; Zhou, Zhang, and Zhao 2019; Zhang et
al. 2019). Understanding the meaning of a sentence is a
prerequisite to solve many natural language understanding
(NLU) problems, such as machine reading comprehension
(MRC) based question answering (Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang
∗
These authors contribute equally. † Corresponding authors.
Part of this work was ﬁnished when Zhuosheng Zhang
visited NICT. This paper was partially supported by National
Key Research and Development Program of China (No.
2017YFB0304100) and Key Projects of National Natural Science
Foundation of China (U1836222 and 61733011).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9636

