The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Pairwise Learning with Differential Privacy Guarantees
Mengdi Huai,1 * Di Wang,2 * Chenglin Miao,2 Jinhui Xu,2 Aidong Zhang1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo
1
{mh6ck, aidong}@virginia.edu, 2 {dwang45, cmiao, jinhui}@buffalo.edu

among the data, which can be formulated as a pairwise learning problem. Apart from metric learning, many other learning tasks, such as AUC maximization (Zhao et al. 2011;
Natole, Ying, and Lyu 2018) and ranking (Tang and Wang
2018), can also be categorized as pairwise learning.
Existing pairwise learning algorithms can be roughly divided into two categories: online and ofﬂine. The online pairwise learning algorithms process the input data records in a
sequential manner and iteratively update the model upon the
arrival of each sample (Zhao et al. 2011; Kar et al. 2013).
In contrast, the ofﬂine pairwise learning algorithms require
the entire training dataset ready before the learning process
starts and take it as whole to update the model (Cao, Guo,
and Ying 2016; Jin, Wang, and Zhou 2009).
Although the importance of pairwise learning has been
recognized in many real-world applications, existing pairwise learning algorithms fail to take into consideration an
important issue in their designs, that is, the protection of sensitive information in the training set. The training datasets
for pairwise learning are often collected from individual
users and thus may contain private personal information.
The models learned by such algorithms can implicitly memorize some details of the sensitive information, which undesirably offers opportunity for malicious parties to compromise the users’ privacy. Taking the patient similarity learning task as example, a hospital may want to train a universal patient similarity learning model from patients (crossing
many hospitals) so as to obtain a better understanding of the
diseases and diagnoses. Due to trust to the hospital, patients
may be willing to provide necessary information for such a
learning process. However, without a proper mechanism, the
patients’ privacy may be breached when the trained model
by the hospital is provided to other parties (such as medical research institutes or drug makers). This is because these
parties can infer patients’ private information using various
attack techniques, such as model inversion attack (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart ) and membership attack (Shokri
et al. 2017). Thus, without a convincing privacy-preserving
mechanism, the patients may not be willing to participate in
such a learning task. Hence, a big challenge facing pairwise
learning is how to learn a model privately such that sensitive
information cannot be inferred from the learned model.
To the best of our knowledge, no existing work has addressed the above challenge. This motivates us to design,

Abstract
Pairwise learning has received much attention recently as it is
more capable of modeling the relative relationship between
pairs of samples. Many machine learning tasks can be categorized as pairwise learning, such as AUC maximization
and metric learning. Existing techniques for pairwise learning
all fail to take into consideration a critical issue in their design, i.e., the protection of sensitive information in the training set. Models learned by such algorithms can implicitly
memorize the details of sensitive information, which offers
opportunity for malicious parties to infer it from the learned
models. To address this challenging issue, in this paper, we
propose several differentially private pairwise learning algorithms for both online and ofﬂine settings. Speciﬁcally, for the
online setting, we ﬁrst introduce a differentially private algorithm (called OnPairStrC) for strongly convex loss functions.
Then, we extend this algorithm to general convex loss functions and give another differentially private algorithm (called
OnPairC). For the ofﬂine setting, we also present two differentially private algorithms (called OffPairStrC and OffPairC)
for strongly and general convex loss functions, respectively.
These proposed algorithms can not only learn the model effectively from the data but also provide strong privacy protection guarantee for sensitive information in the training set.
Extensive experiments on real-world datasets are conducted
to evaluate the proposed algorithms and the experimental results support our theoretical analysis.

Introduction
As an important family of learning problems, pairwise
learning has drawn much attention recently. Since pairwise
learning involves a loss function depending on pairs of samples, it shows great advantage in modeling the relative relationship between pairs of samples over traditional pointwise learning (e.g., classiﬁcation), in which the loss function only takes individual samples as the input. In practice,
many learning tasks can be categorized as pairwise learning
problmes. For instance, metric learning (Huai et al. 2019;
Jin, Wang, and Zhou 2009; Huai et al. 2018a; Sun et al.
2012; Huai et al. 2018b; Suo et al. 2018) aims to learn
a distance metric from a given collection of pair of similar/dissimilar samples that preserves the distance relation
* The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

694

