The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Predictive Engagement: An Efﬁcient Metric for
Automatic Evaluation of Open-Domain Dialogue Systems
Sarik Ghazarian,1 Ralph Weischedel,1 Aram Galstyan,1 Nanyun Peng1
1

University of Southern California / Information Sciences Institute
{sarik, weisched, galstyan, npeng}@isi.edu

Abstract

! &"#! !

User engagement is a critical metric for evaluating the quality of open-domain dialogue systems. Prior work has focused
on conversation-level engagement by using heuristically constructed features such as the number of turns and the total
time of the conversation. In this paper, we investigate the possibility and efﬁcacy of estimating utterance-level engagement
and deﬁne a novel metric, predictive engagement, for automatic evaluation of open-domain dialogue systems. Our experiments demonstrate that (1) human annotators have high
agreement on assessing utterance-level engagement scores;
(2) conversation-level engagement scores can be predicted
from properly aggregated utterance-level engagement scores.
Furthermore, we show that the utterance-level engagement
scores can be learned from data. These scores can be incorporated into automatic evaluation metrics for open-domain dialogue systems to improve the correlation with human judgements. This suggests that predictive engagement can be used
as a real-time feedback for training better dialogue models.

 &$
! &"#! !
&

 # !  ! 
"!  &#! $
!&"% 
 &" " !
&"!'

(!$

Figure 1: An illustrative example of a user’s conversation
with two chatbots. We anticipate that the user will prefer to
converse with the top chatbot because the responses are both
relevant and engaging, while the bottom chatbot generates
relevant but not engaging responses.

Given recent rapid development of open-domain dialogue
systems, precise evaluation metrics seem imperative. Poor
correlation between word-overlap metrics and human judgements (e.g., BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002), ROUGE (Lin
2004)) (Liu et al. 2016; Novikova et al. 2017) plus the expense and time demands of human evaluations, motivate dialogue system researchers to seek better automatic evaluation
metrics.
The evaluation of open-domain dialogue systems is especially challenging. Recent works have proposed automatic
trainable evaluation methods that focus on a speciﬁc aspect
of a dialogue system’s quality. Lowe et al. (2017) trained
an evaluation model on top of a human annotated dataset to
infer an appropriateness score for each response. Tao et al.
(2018) combined the referenced scores (the similarity of a
generated response to a ground-truth response) and the unreferenced scores (the relevancy of a generated response to a
given query) to obtain better correlation with human judgements. Ghazarian et al. (2019) further improved the accuracy
of such metrics by leveraging contextualized embeddings.

We argue that relevancy by itself can not capture all the
characteristics of open-domain dialogue systems given their
open-ended essence (Venkatesh et al. 2018; Guo et al. 2018;
See et al. 2019). For example, it is not informative to compare the output of the two dialogue systems depicted in Figure 1 based on only the relevancy of generated responses,
since both systems produce fairly relevant responses. Augmenting engagement scores would give a higher score to the
ﬁrst system, making the metric better aligned with expected
user preferences.
While engagement is recognized as one of the most important metrics for open-domain dialogue evaluation (See
et al. 2019; Venkatesh et al. 2018; Guo et al. 2018), efﬁcient calculation of this metric poses a number of important
challenges. First, existing works focus on conversation-level
engagement only, while immediate evaluation and feedback
for each utterance will be more effective in providing signals
to adjust the system as it proceeds in a dialogue. Second,
the existing methods for evaluating engagement are mostly
heuristic in nature, which can be inaccurate and usually brittle for different domains. Third, there is no systematic prior
study on how well-deﬁned and measurable utterance-level
engagement is, and whether engagement measured from a
single utterance can be predictive of a conversation-level engagement.
In this paper, we propose a new proxy1 for measuring engagement that we call predictive engagement, which, in con-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The package including code, model and data can be found at
https://github.com/SarikGhazarian/PredictiveEngagement

Introduction

7789

