The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

PedHunter: Occlusion Robust Pedestrian Detector in Crowded Scenes
Cheng Chi,1,3∗ Shifeng Zhang,2,3∗† Junliang Xing,2,3 Zhen Lei,2,3 Stan Z. Li,2,3,4 Xudong Zou1,3
1

Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macao, China
chicheng15@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {shifeng.zhang, jlxing, zlei, szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, xdzou@mail.ie.ac.cn
2

is introduced and there is still much room to improve the detection performance.

Abstract
Pedestrian detection in crowded scenes is a challenging problem, because occlusion happens frequently among different
pedestrians. In this paper, we propose an effective and efﬁcient detection network to hunt pedestrians in crowd scenes.
The proposed method, namely PedHunter, introduces strong
occlusion handling ability to existing region-based detection
networks without bringing extra computations in the inference stage. Speciﬁcally, we design a mask-guided module to
leverage the head information to enhance the feature representation learning of the backbone network. Moreover, we
develop a strict classiﬁcation criterion by improving the quality of positive samples during training to eliminate common
false positives of pedestrian detection in crowded scenes.
Besides, we present an occlusion-simulated data augmentation to enrich the pattern and quantity of occlusion samples
to improve the occlusion robustness. As a consequent, we
achieve state-of-the-art results on three pedestrian detection
datasets including CityPersons, Caltech-USA and CrowdHuman. To facilitate further studies on the occluded pedestrian
detection in surveillance scenes, we release a new pedestrian
dataset, called SUR-PED, with a total of over 162k highquality manually labeled instances in 10k images. The proposed dataset, source codes and trained models are available
at https://github.com/ChiCheng123/PedHunter.

In this work, we propose a high-performance pedestrian
detector namely PedHunter to improve occlusion robustness in crowded scenes, which mitigates the impact of occlusion without sacriﬁcing inference speed. Firstly, inspired
by human visual system that often resorts to the head information to locate each pedestrian in crowded scenes, we
propose a mask-guided module to predict head masks that
helps to enhance the representation learning of pedestrian
features during training. The mask-guided module does not
participate in inference, so it improves the accuracy without computational overhead. Secondly, we observe that error detections between occluded pedestrians are the common false positive in crowd scenes, which results from the
low-quality positive samples during training. To improve the
quality of positive samples, we develop a strict classiﬁcation
criterion by increasing the IoU threshold of positive samples
and adding jittered ground truths, which reduces aforementioned false positives. Thirdly, we introduce an occlusionsimulated data augmentation technique that generates random occlusion on ground truths during training. It signiﬁcantly enriches the pattern and quantity of occlusion, making the proposed model more robust to occlusion.
In addition, current pedestrian detection benchmarks usually focus on autonomous driving scenes. It is necessary to
build a new benchmark in the ﬁeld of surveillance, which
is another important application domain for pedestrian detection. To this end, we introduce a new SUR-PED dataset
for occluded pedestrian detection in surveillance scenes. It
has over 162k pedestrian instances manually labeled in 10k
surveillance camera images. Based on this proposed dataset
and exiting datasets including CrowdHuman (Shao et al.
2018), extented CityPersons (Zhang, Benenson, and Schiele
2017) and extented Caltech-USA (Dollár et al. 2009) with
their additional head annotations (Chi et al. 2019), several
experiments are conducted to demonstrate the superiority
of the proposed method, especially for the crowded scenes.
Notably, the proposed PedHunter detector achieves state-ofthe-art results without adding any extra overhead, i.e., 8.32%
MR−2 on CityPersons, 2.31% MR−2 on Caltech-USA and
39.5% MR−2 on CrowdHuman.

Introduction
Pedestrian detection is an important research topic in computer vision with various applications, such as autonomous
driving, video surveillance and robotics. The goal of pedestrian detection is to predict a bounding box for each pedestrian instance in an image. Although great progress has been
made in the realm of pedestrian detection (Tian et al. 2015b;
Zhang, Benenson, and Schiele 2015; Costea and Nedevschi
2016; Du et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2018; Noh et al. 2018), occlusion still remains as one of the most challenging issues.
Some efforts have been made particularly to handle the occlusion problem, but a notable amount of extra computations
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10639

