The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Toward A Thousand Lights: Decentralized Deep
Reinforcement Learning for Large-Scale Trafﬁc Signal Control
Chacha Chen,1 Hua Wei,1 Nan Xu,2 Guanjie Zheng,1 Ming Yang, Yuanhao Xiong,4
Kai Xu,3 Zhenhui Li1
1

Pennsylvania State University, 2 University of Southern California
Shanghai Tianrang Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd, 4 Zhejiang University
{cjc6647, hzw77, gjz5038, jessieli}@psu.edu, nanx@usc.edu, ya0147ng@gmail.com,
kai.xu@tianrang-inc.com, xiongyh@zju.edu.cn
3

highly correlated. Therefore, it is crucial to solve the citylevel signal control, rather than a few regions separately.
Traditional transportation approaches for trafﬁc signal
control can be categorized into following categories: pretimed control (Koonce and Rodegerdts 2008), actuated control (Cools, Gershenson, and D’Hooghe 2013), adaptive
control (Lowrie 1990; Hunt et al. 1981), and optimizationbased control (Varaiya 2013). They either rely heavily on
a given trafﬁc model or depend on pre-deﬁned rules according to expert knowledge. Hence, they fail to adjust
to dynamic trafﬁc nicely. Recently, people start to investigate reinforcement learning (RL) techniques for trafﬁc signal control. Several studies have shown the superior performance of RL techniques over traditional transportation approaches (Wei et al. 2018; El-Tantawy and Abdulhai 2012;
Van der Pol and Oliehoek 2016; Nishi et al. 2018). The
biggest advantage of RL is that it directly learns how to take
the next actions by observing the feedback from the environment after previous actions.
In this paper, we set out to develop a practical RL-based
trafﬁc signal control method to enable city-level trafﬁc signal control. The method would take the trafﬁc condition as
input and learn to decide for every intersection about their
next phase. We identify three key issues, that such a method
must be effective to address:
• Scalability. Is the method able to handle large-scale
trafﬁc network? City-level trafﬁc signal control involves
thousands of trafﬁc lights. For example, in Manhattan, NYC,
there are more than about 2800 trafﬁc signals 3 . The proposed method should be able to learn effectively on a large
scale, at the same time considering the global optimization
goal.
• Coordination. Is the method able to achieve coordination so that the global trafﬁc conditions can be optimized?
In urban environments, optimizing signal timings for trafﬁc signals must be done jointly as signals are often in close
proximity, which is commonly known as coordinating signal
timings. Failure to do so can lead to decisions made at one
signal deteriorating trafﬁc operations at the other.
• Data feasibility. Is the method using feasible data

Abstract
Trafﬁc congestion plagues cities around the world. Recent
years have witnessed an unprecedented trend in applying reinforcement learning for trafﬁc signal control. However, the
primary challenge is to control and coordinate trafﬁc lights in
large-scale urban networks. No one has ever tested RL models on a network of more than a thousand trafﬁc lights. In
this paper, we tackle the problem of multi-intersection trafﬁc signal control, especially for large-scale networks, based
on RL techniques and transportation theories. This problem
is quite difﬁcult because there are challenges such as scalability, signal coordination, data feasibility, etc. To address
these challenges, we (1) design our RL agents utilizing ‘pressure’ concept to achieve signal coordination in region-level;
(2) show that implicit coordination could be achieved by individual control agents with well-crafted reward design thus
reducing the dimensionality; and (3) conduct extensive experiments on multiple scenarios, including a real-world scenario
with 2510 trafﬁc lights in Manhattan, New York City 1 2 .

Introduction
Due to the rapid urbanization, which results in an explosive
increase in household owning cars, urban trafﬁc congestion
has been a signiﬁcant obstacle to urbanization. Trafﬁc congestion will not only waste fuel but also increase harmful
emissions, including greenhouse gases (e.g., carbon dioxide)
and other particles (e.g., nitrogen oxides) that may harm human’s health (Bharadwaj et al. 2017). According to existing
studies, the transport sector contributes to 23% of total CO2
emission from fuel combustion (Grote et al. 2016), and road
trafﬁc makes up about three-fourths of them. Further, for
vehicles in urban cities, trafﬁc congestion may increase the
discharge by 40% (Grote et al. 2016). Therefore, mitigating
trafﬁc congestion is extremely urgent. To achieve this, one of
the most effective approaches is to control the trafﬁc signal
more intelligently. Note that, the urban city is densely connected, and the signal control strategies of intersections are
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A demo video of the Manhattan experiment is provided in
https://trafﬁc-signal-control.github.io/a-thousand-lights.html
2
Datasets and code are available at https://trafﬁc-signalcontrol.github.io/

3
https://www1.nyc.gov/html/dot/html/infrastructure/signals.
shtml

3414

