The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Training Decision Trees as Replacement for Convolution Layers
Wolfgang Fuhl, Gjergji Kasneci, Wolfgang Rosenstiel, Enkeljda Kasneci
Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen
Sand 14
Tübingen, Germany
{wolfgang.fuhl, gjergji.kasneci, wolfgang.rosenstiel, enkelejda.kasneci}@uni-tuebingen.de

There are four main categories of Conditional Neural Networks:
1 Neural Networks that use loss functions for optimizing
decision parameters.
2 Probabilistic approaches that learn a selection of experts.
3 Neural networks with decision tree architectures.
4 Replacement layers for the convolutions, which map hierarchical decision graphs conditionally to the input feature
space.
The ﬁrst category uses non-differentiable decision functions where the parameters for these are learned by an additional loss function. A loss function which maximizes the
distances of the subcluster was presented in (Xiong et al.
2015). The path loss function is used in (Baek, Kim, and
Kim 2017). This is based on the purity of the data activation
with respect to its class label distribution. The information
gain is used in (Bicici, Keskin, and Akarun 2018) to learn an
evaluation function which allows to activate paths through
the network.
In the second category, probabilistic approaches are pursued. Weights are assigned to each branch and treated as
a sum over a loss function (Ioannou et al. 2016). A similar approach is followed in (Shazeer et al. 2017). The main
difference is that a very high number of branches per layer
is considered and the best k branches are followed in the
training phase as well as in the test phase. Another approach
trains two neural networks where one provides the decision
probability at the output and the second network performs
the classiﬁcation (Kontschieder et al. 2015). Both nets are
trained jointly.
In the third category, the architecture of the neural network is similar to a decision tree. Randomized multi-layer
perceptrons are used in (Rota Bulo and Kontschieder 2014)
as branch accounts and trained together with the entire net.
An alternative architecture is presented in (Denoyer and Gallinari 2014). Here, each account in a net has three possible subsequent nodes. The selection of the following node
is done via an evaluation function which is learned via the
REINFORCE algorithm (Denoyer and Gallinari 2014). In
(Wang, Aggarwal, and Liu 2017), partitioning features are
learned which make it possible to train the whole network

Abstract
We present an alternative layer to convolution layers in convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Our approach reduces
the complexity of convolutions by replacing it with binary
decisions. Those binary decisions are used as indexes to conditional distributions where each weight represents a leaf in a
decision tree. This means that only the indices to the weights
need to be determined once, thus reducing the complexity of
convolutions by the depth of the output tensor. Index computation is performed by simple binary decisions that require
fewer cycles compared to conventionally used multiplications. In addition, we show how convolutions can be replaced
by binary decisions. These binary decisions form indices in
the conditional distributions and we show how they are used
to replace 2D weight matrices as well as 3D weight tensors.
These new layers can be trained like convolution layers in
CNNs based on the backpropagation algorithm, for which we
provide a formalization.
Our results on multiple publicly available data sets show that
our approach performs similar to conventional neuronal networks. Beyond the formalized reduction of complexity and
the improved qualitative performance, we show the runtime
improvement empirically compared to convolution layers.

Introduction and Related Work
Conditioning CNNs is a modern approach to reducing runtime which is typically achieved by activating only parts of
the models or by pursuing the scalability of model complexity (Shazeer et al. 2017; Ioannou et al. 2016; Chen et al.
2018) to reduce computational costs without compromising
accuracy. Recent approaches even reduce the complexity of
convolution layers (Keskin and Izadi 2018) without affecting the accuracy. This paper describes a new approach for
the practical implementation of conditional neural networks
using conditional distributions and binary decisions. Similar
to (Keskin and Izadi 2018), we replace convolutional layers to reduce computational complexity with the addition of
indexing by simple binary decisions. We show analytically
and empirically the reduction of the computational runtime
on the basis of public data sets as well as the retention or
increase of the accuracy of the model.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3882

