The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reinforcement Learning with Non-Markovian Rewards
Maor Gaon, Ronen I. Brafman
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel
maorga@post.bgu.ac.il
brafman@cs.bgu.ac.il

better understanding of the relationship between NMRs
speciﬁed using temporal and dynamic logics and automata
to provide even better methods (Camacho et al. 2017a;
Brafman, De Giacomo, and Patrizi 2018). Yet, such model
transformations are performed ofﬂine with complete knowledge of the model and the reward structure, and are not useful
for a reinforcement learning agent equipped with some ﬁxed
state model and state variables.
In this paper, we combine our recent, better understanding of NMRs and automata (Camacho et al. 2017a;
Brafman, De Giacomo, and Patrizi 2018) with automata learning algorithms (Angluin 1987; Cottone, Ortolani, and Pergola
2016) and classical RL algorithms (Watkins and Dayan 1992;
Brafman and Tennenholtz 2002) to address RL with NMRs.
We describe algorithms that allow a learning agent with no
prior knowledge of the reward conditions to learn how to augment its state space with new features w.r.t. which rewards
are Markovian. The added state variables are not directly
observable. However, while regular state variables are affected stochastically by actions, for the rich class of NMRs
discussed in this and past work, these state variables are affected deterministically by the actions. Hence, in practice,
their value can be tracked and updated by the agent.
Like standard RL algorithms, our algorithms explore the
state space, learning a transition model or estimating the Q
function. They also maintain a record of executions (traces)
leading to a reward as well as traces not leading to a reward.
These traces are fed into an off-the-shelf automata learning algorithm, yielding a deterministic ﬁnite-state automata (DFA).
The state of this DFA is added as a new state feature. Since
this feature is a regular function of the agent’s history, the
agent can constantly update it and maintain its correct value.
Given the augmented state-space, the reward is Markovian,
and is always obtained when the DFA reaches an accepting
state. The algorithm now adjusts its model to take account of
the new state space, and can continue to explore or to exploit.
We describe four algorithms of this type obtained by
combining Q-learning (Watkins and Dayan 1992) and
Rmax (Brafman and Tennenholtz 2002) with two automata
learning algorithms, the online L∗ (Angluin 1987) and the
ofﬂine EDSM (Lang, Pearlmutter, and Price 1998). We show
that under certain assumptions, the algorithms that use L∗
will converge to an optimal policy in the limit, and we evaluate them empirically.

Abstract
The standard RL world model is that of a Markov Decision
Process (MDP). A basic premise of MDPs is that the rewards
depend on the last state and action only. Yet, many real-world
rewards are non-Markovian. For example, a reward for bringing coffee only if requested earlier and not yet served, is
non-Markovian if the state only records current requests and
deliveries. Past work considered the problem of modeling and
solving MDPs with non-Markovian rewards (NMR), but we
know of no principled approaches for RL with NMR. Here,
we address the problem of policy learning from experience
with such rewards. We describe and evaluate empirically four
combinations of the classical RL algorithm Q-learning and
R-max with automata learning algorithms to obtain new RL
algorithms for domains with NMR. We also prove that some
of these variants converge to an optimal policy in the limit.

Introduction
The standard reinforcement learning (RL) world model is
that of a Markov Decision Process (MDP). In MDPs, rewards
depend on the last state and action only. But a reward given
for bringing coffee only if one was requested earlier and was
not served yet, is non-Markovian if the state only records
current requests and deliveries; and so is a reward for food
served only if one’s hands were washed earlier, and no activity that made them unclean occurred in between. An RL
agent that attempts to learn in such domains without realizing
that the rewards are non-Markovian will display sub-optimal
behavior. For example, depending on how often coffee is requested and how costly making coffee is, the agent may learn
never to make coffee or always to make coffee – regardless
of the user’s requests.
We can address non-Markovian rewards (NMRs) by augmenting the state with information that makes the new
model Markovian. Except for pathological cases, this is always possible. For example, the robot can maintain a variable indicating whether an order for coffee was received
and not served. Similarly, it can keep track of whether the
user’s hands are clean. Indeed, early work on this topic
described various methods for efﬁciently augmenting the
state to handle NMRs (Bacchus, Boutilier, and Grove 1996;
Thiebaux et al. 2006). More recent work leveraged our
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3980

