The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Point Semantic Representation for Intent Classiﬁcation
Jinghan Zhang,1,2∗ Yuxiao Ye,2,4 Yue Zhang,3 Likun Qiu,2,5†
Bin Fu,2 Yang Li,2 Zhenglu Yang,1 Jian Sun2
1

Nankai University, China, 2 Alibaba Group, China, 3 Westlake University, China
4
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5 Minjiang University, China
jhzhang@mail.nankai.edu.cn, yy477@cl.cam.ac.uk, yue.zhang@wias.org.cn, likun.qiu@foxmail.com
{bingo.fb, ly200170, jian.sun}@alibaba-inc.com, yangzl@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Detecting user intents from utterances is the basis of natural language understanding (NLU) task. To understand the
meaning of utterances, some work focuses on fully representing utterances via semantic parsing in which annotation cost
is labor-intentsive. While some researchers simply view this
as intent classiﬁcation or frequently asked questions (FAQs)
retrieval, they do not leverage the shared utterances among
different intents. We propose a simple and novel multi-point
semantic representation framework with relatively low annotation cost to leverage the ﬁne-grained factor information,
decomposing queries into four factors, i.e., topic, predicate,
object/condition, query type. Besides, we propose a compositional intent bi-attention model under multi-task learning
with three kinds of attention mechanisms among queries, labels and factors, which jointly combines coarse-grained intent and ﬁne-grained factor information. Extensive experiments show that our framework and model signiﬁcantly outperform several state-of-the-art approaches with an improvement of 1.35%-2.47% in terms of accuracy.

Figure 1: One sentence is represented by three representation frameworks. In “full representation”, words in green are
the semantic roles, while in blue are the concepts.
annotation task, it is unimaginable to construct an annotated
corpus for each domain or customer.
The other is the single-point representation framework.
Some work (Niu et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019) views language understanding as a query classiﬁcation problem (and
in some cases jointly trained with additional tasks such as
entity detection and slot ﬁlling), where class labels are intent
names or standard FAQs (frequently asked questions). We
refer to this line of research as the single-point representation framework. The single-point representation framework
is usually understood as intent classiﬁcation or FAQ retrieval
task, in which data annotation is relatively easy. However,
since the meaning of a sentence is mainly represented by an
intent label, we can not utilize the shared text spans of different sentences belonging to difference intents, e.g., ORDER
as in ORDER PRODUCT and ORDER TAXI.
We proposes a simple and novel annotation framework,
called the multi-point representation framework, which lies
somewhere between the two aforementioned frameworks.
Under this framework, we try to distinguish different intents
through four types of key factors, i.e., topic, predicate, object/condition, and query type. We focus on differentiating
intents by four key concepts instead of fully representing

Introduction
As intelligent assistants and customer service robots have
been widely applied, there is a need to improve their capacity to understand spoken or written utterance of users.
A challenging step is to represent the meaning of user utterances.
Recent research has been focusing on two approaches.
One is to fully represent the meaning of sentences in tree
or graph structures, such as Combinatory Categorial Grammar(CCG) (Steedman 2000) and Abstract Meaning Representation(AMR) (Banarescu et al. 2013). We refer to this
line of research as the full representation framework. The
full representation framework is usually viewed as a semantic parsing task, which relies on sufﬁcient labeled data. However, data annotation for semantic parsing is labor-intensive
and time consuming. Considering the heavy workload of the
∗
This work was done when Jinghan Zhang was interning at Alibaba Group,China.
†
Likun Qiu is the corresponding author of the paper.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9531

