The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Text Perceptron: Towards End-to-End Arbitrary-Shaped Text Spotting
Liang Qiao,1 Sanli Tang,1 Zhanzhan Cheng,2,1∗ Yunlu Xu,1 Yi Niu,1 Shiliang Pu,1 Fei Wu2
1

Hikvision Research Institute, China; 2 Zhejiang University, China
{qiaoliang6, tangsanli, chengzhanzhan, xuyunlu, niuyi, pushiliang}@hikvision.com, wufei@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Many approaches have recently been proposed to detect irregular scene text and achieved promising results. However,
their localization results may not well satisfy the following
text recognition part mainly because of two reasons: 1) recognizing arbitrary shaped text is still a challenging task, and
2) prevalent non-trainable pipeline strategies between text detection and text recognition will lead to suboptimal performances. To handle this incompatibility problem, in this paper we propose an end-to-end trainable text spotting approach
named Text Perceptron. Concretely, Text Perceptron ﬁrst employs an efﬁcient segmentation-based text detector that learns
the latent text reading order and boundary information. Then
a novel Shape Transform Module (abbr. STM) is designed to
transform the detected feature regions into regular morphologies without extra parameters. It unites text detection and the
following recognition part into a whole framework, and helps
the whole network achieve global optimization. Experiments
show that our method achieves competitive performance on
two standard text benchmarks, i.e., ICDAR 2013 and ICDAR
2015, and also obviously outperforms existing methods on
irregular text benchmarks SCUT-CTW1500 and Total-Text.

1

(a)
Detection

Rectification

Recognition

Epoch
10

(b)

Epoch
20

Detection

Recognition

Epoch
50

Shape Transform Module

Figure 1: Illustration of the traditional pipelined text spotting process and Text Perceptron. Sub-ﬁgure (a) is a traditional pipeline strategy by combining text detection, rectiﬁcation and recognition into a framework. Sub-ﬁgure (b) is
an end-to-end trainable text spotting approach by applying
the proposed STM. The black and red arrows mean the forward and backward processing, respectively. The red points
denote generated ﬁducial points generated.

Introduction

common pipeline of text spotting is to crop the masked texts
within bounding-box regions, and then adopt a recognition
model with rectiﬁcation functions to generate ﬁnal character sequences. Unfortunately, such strategy decreases the robustness of text spotting mainly in two aspects: 1) one needs
to design extra rectiﬁcation network, like methods in (Luo,
Jin, and Sun 2019) and (Zhan and Lu 2019), to transform irregular texts into regular ones. In practice, it is hard to be optimized without human-labeled geometric ground truth, and
also introduces extra computational cost. 2) Pipelined text
spotting methods are not end-to-end trainable and result in
suboptimal performance because the errors from the recognition model cannot be utilized for optimizing the text detector. In Figure 1(a), although the text detector provides true
positive results, the clipped text masks still lead to wrong
recognition results. We denote above problem incompatibility between text detection and recognition.
Recently, two methods were proposed for spotting irregular text in the end-to-end manners. (Lyu et al. 2018) proposed an end-to-end trainable network inspired by MaskRCNN (He et al. 2017), aiming at reading irregular text
character-by-character. However, this approach loses the

Spotting scene text is a hot research topic due to its various
applications such as invoice recognition and road sign reading in advanced driver assistance systems. With the advances
of deep learning, many deep neural-network-based methods
(Wang et al. 2012; Jaderberg, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014;
Li, Wang, and Shen 2017; Liu et al. 2018; He et al. 2018)
have been proposed for spotting text from a natural image,
and have achieved promising results.
However, in the real-world, many texts appear in arbitrary layouts (e.g. multi-oriented or curved), which make
quadrangle-based methods (Liao et al. 2017; Zhou et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2018) cannot be well adapted in many
situations. Some works (Dai et al. 2018; Long et al. 2018;
Xie et al. 2019) began to focus on irregular text localization
by segmenting text masks as detection results and achieved
relatively good performance in terms of Intersection-overUnion (IoU) evaluation. However, they still leave many challenges to the following recognizing task. For example, a
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11899

