The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adapting to Smoothness: A More
Universal Algorithm for Online Convex Optimization
Guanghui Wang,1 Shiyin Lu,1 Yao Hu,2 Lijun Zhang1,∗
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
YouKu Cognitive and Intelligent Lab, Alibaba Group, Beijing 100102, China
{wanggh, lusy, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, yaoohu@alibaba-inc.com

general convexity (Zinkevich 2003), exponential concavity
(abbr. exp-concavity) and strong convexity (Hazan, Agarwal, and Kale 2007). However, existing methods can only
deal with one type of loss functions. Moreover, for expconcave and strongly convex functions, they require prior
knowledge of loss functions as inputs for parameter tuning. This lack of universality not only leaves a heavy burden to users, but also impedes the applications to board
domains. To overcome this obstacle, recent advances in
OCO have developed a series of universal algorithms, such
as AOGD (Hazan, Rakhlin, and Bartlett 2008) and MetaGrad (van Erven and Koolen 2016), which are able to handle various types of loss functions simultaneously. Among
them, the state-of-the-art method is Maler (Wang, Lu, and
Zhang 2019), which can adapt to general convex, √expconcave and strongly convex functions, and achieve O( T ),
O(d log T ) and O(log T ) regret bounds respectively. These
bounds are known to be minimax optimal, as matching lower
bounds have been established (Ordentlich and Cover 1998;
Abernethy et al. 2008).
On the other hand, in a wide range of online learning tasks
such as online least square and 2 -regularized regressions,
the loss functions enjoy the property of smoothness. While
there do exist several algorithms that can exploit this property for one single type of loss functions, such as convex
and smooth (Srebro, Sridharan, and Tewari 2010), or expconcave and smooth (Orabona, Cesa-Bianchi, and Gentile
2012), it remains unclear whether universal algorithms can
make use of smoothness to achieve better performance. In
this paper, we provide an afﬁrmative answer by developing
a novel algorithm, named UFO, which can automatically attain tighter bounds for smooth functions, and thus achieves
broader universality.
Following previous work, our proposed method adopts
the classic Learning with Experts Algorithm (LEA) (CesaBianchi and Lugosi 2006). The basic idea is to maintain multiple algorithms with different learning rates in parallel as
experts, and employ a meta-algorithm to identify the best
on the ﬂy. To exploit smoothness, the most straightforward
idea is to use algorithms for smooth functions as experts.
However, it does not provide tight results, because of the
following technical challenges:

Abstract
We aim to design universal algorithms for online convex
optimization, which can handle multiple common types of
loss functions simultaneously. The previous state-of-the-art
universal method has achieved the minimax optimality for
general convex, exponentially concave and strongly convex
loss functions. However, it remains an open problem whether
smoothness can be exploited to further improve the theoretical guarantees. In this paper, we provide an afﬁrmative answer by
developing a novel algorithm, namely UFO, which
√
achieves O( L∗ ), O(d log L∗ ) and O(log L∗ ) regret bounds
for the three types of loss functions respectively under the
assumption of smoothness, where L∗ is the cumulative loss
of the best comparator in hindsight, and d is dimensionality.
Thus, our regret bounds are much tighter when the comparator has a small loss, and ensure the minimax optimality in the
worst case. In addition, it is worth pointing out that UFO is
the ﬁrst to achieve the O(log L∗ ) regret bound for strongly
convex and smooth functions, which is tighter than the existing small-loss bound by an O(d) factor.

Introduction
Online Convex Optimization (OCO) has become a popular paradigm for modeling many real-world applications, including ad placement, portfolio management and web ranking (Shalev-Shwartz and others 2012). It is conducted in
a repeated manner: In each round t = 1, . . . , T , ﬁrstly a
learner selects an action xt from a convex set X ⊆ Rd , at the
same time an adversary reveals a loss function ft : X → R,
and then the learner suffers a loss ft (xt ). The learner’s goal
is to minimize regret, which is deﬁned as the cumulative loss
of the learner and that of the best action in hindsight (Hazan
and others 2016):
R(T ) =

T

t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈X

T


ft (x).

(1)

t=1

In the literature, various algorithms have been developed
for minimizing the regret under OCO, based on different
assumptions on the properties of loss functions, including
∗

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6162

