The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Source Distilling Domain Adaptation
Sicheng Zhao,1∗# Guangzhi Wang,2# Shanghang Zhang,1# Yang Gu,2 Yaxian Li,2,3
Zhichao Song,2 Pengfei Xu,2 Runbo Hu,2 Hua Chai,2 Kurt Keutzer1
1

University of California, Berkeley, USA, 2 Didi Chuxing, China, 3 Renmin University of China, China
{schzhao, gzwang98, shzhang.pku}@gmail.com, liyaxian@ruc.edu.cn,
{guyangdavid, songzhichao, xupengfeipf, hurunbo, chaihua}@didiglobal.com, keutzer@berkeley.edu

Deep neural networks suffer from performance decay when
there is domain shift between the labeled source domain and
unlabeled target domain, which motivates the research on domain adaptation (DA). Conventional DA methods usually assume that the labeled data is sampled from a single source
distribution. However, in practice, labeled data may be collected from multiple sources, while naive application of the
single-source DA algorithms may lead to suboptimal solutions. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-source distilling
domain adaptation (MDDA) network, which not only considers the different distances among multiple sources and the
target, but also investigates the different similarities of the
source samples to the target ones. Speciﬁcally, the proposed
MDDA includes four stages: (1) pre-train the source classiﬁers separately using the training data from each source; (2)
adversarially map the target into the feature space of each
source respectively by minimizing the empirical Wasserstein
distance between source and target; (3) select the source training samples that are closer to the target to ﬁne-tune the source
classiﬁers; and (4) classify each encoded target feature by
corresponding source classiﬁer, and aggregate different predictions using respective domain weight, which corresponds
to the discrepancy between each source and target. Extensive
experiments are conducted on public DA benchmarks, and the
results demonstrate that the proposed MDDA signiﬁcantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches. Our source code
is released at: https://github.com/daoyuan98/MDDA.

ᇱ
ଵ

ଵ

ଶ

ᇱ
ଶ

ଶ

ଷ

ᇱ
ଷ

ଷ

ᇱ
ସ

ସ

ଵ

ଵ

ଶ

ଷ
ସ

ସ

$JJUHJDWLRQ

Abstract

Figure 1: Illustration of MDDA which explores the relationships among different sources and the target. We employ a
discriminator D to measure the similarity ω between each
source and target in an adversarial manner. The samples that
are closer to the target are selected to distill the source classiﬁer C  . The prediction of different distilled source classiﬁers
are aggregated based on the domain similarity to obtain the
ﬁnal prediction of the target samples.
tional deep learning approaches suffer from performance decay. Directly transferring the learned models trained on labeled source domains to unlabeled target domains may result in unsatisfying performance, because of the presence
of domain shift (Torralba and Efros 2011), which calls for
domain adaptation (DA) methods (Bousmalis et al. 2016;
Zhao et al. 2018b; Hoffman et al. 2018). Unsupervised
DA (UDA) addresses such problems by establishing knowledge transfer from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain, and exploring domain-invariant structures and representations to bridge the domain gap (Netzer
et al. 2011). Both theoretical results (Ben-David et al. 2010;
Gopalan, Li, and Chellappa 2014; Tzeng et al. 2017) and
algorithms for domain adaptation (Pan and Yang 2010;
Long et al. 2015; Hoffman et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2019b)
have been proposed recently.
Though these methods make progress on DA, most of

Introduction
One key element of the signiﬁcant success of deep learning
algorithms is the availability of large-scale labeled data (He
et al. 2016). However, in many practical applications, only
limited or even no training data is provided. On the one
hand, it is prohibitively labor-intensive and expensive to
obtain abundant labeled data. On the other hand, visual
data possess variance in nature, which fundamentally limits the scalability and applicability of supervised learning
models for handling new scenarios with few labeled examples (Ni, Zhang, and Xie 2019). In such cases, conven∗

Corresponding Author. # Equal Contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12975

