The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Crowdfunding Dynamics Tracking: A Reinforcement Learning Approach
Jun Wang,1 Hefu Zhang,1 Qi Liu,1∗ Zhen Pan,1 Hanqing Tao1
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
{wjhxsg, zhf2011, pzhen, hqtao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn,

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the increasing interests in research of crowdfunding mechanism. In this area, dynamics tracking is a signiﬁcant issue but is still under exploration. Existing studies either ﬁt the ﬂuctuations of timeseries or employ regularization terms to constrain learned tendencies. However, few of them take into account the inherent
decision-making process between investors and crowdfunding dynamics. To address the problem, in this paper, we propose a Trajectory-based Continuous Control for Crowdfunding (TC3) algorithm to predict the funding progress in crowdfunding. Speciﬁcally, actor-critic frameworks are employed
to model the relationship between investors and campaigns,
where all of the investors are viewed as an agent that could interact with the environment derived from the real dynamics of
campaigns. Then, to further explore the in-depth implications
of patterns (i.e., typical characters) in funding series, we propose to subdivide them into fast-growing and slow-growing
ones. Moreover, for the purpose of switching from different
kinds of patterns, the actor component of TC3 is extended
with a structure of options, which comes to the TC3-Options.
Finally, extensive experiments on the Indiegogo dataset not
only demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods, but also
validate our assumption that the entire pattern learned by
TC3-Options is indeed the U-shaped one.

Day 14
49.2%

102%

Day 15
50.9%

Day 13
44.7%

Figure 1: Funding series of a campaign example.

means the cumulative funding amount expressed as a percentage concerning the pledged goal (e.g, this ended campaign reached 102% of the goal). The task concentrates on
forecasting a series of percentages for campaigns that are
still funding (e.g, in the 12th day, the future progress series
is 44.7%, 49.2%, 50.9%, ...). Actually, it is a meaningful
question for funding raisers and investors. For raisers, they
may acquire the forthcoming expectations of campaigns and
could make quick adaptations to the market. While for potential backers, before making their possible backing decisions, they will get more detailed advice for estimating the
following tendencies. Some methods have been explored
in the literature, including hierarchical regression (Zhao et
al. 2017b) and basis-synthesis techniques (Ren et al. 2018).
Moreover, others turn to predict the backing distribution of
campaigns through a Seq2Seq framework (Jin et al. 2019).
However, there are still challenges on funding process modeling and series pattern utilization.
On the one hand, few of these works treat the dynamic
tracking as a decision-making process. Actually, the transformation of campaigns and decision process of investors
affect and depend on each other, which evolves to a complicated system (Xie et al. 2019). Hence, compared with viewing dynamics of funding series as a whole process, the inner relationship between investors and campaigns that leads
to the exterior results might not be ignored. For instance,
the future tendencies of campaigns (e.g., expectation of success) will impact on the investment decision of investors,
and vice versa. Nevertheless,while modeling the strong relationship between investors and campaigns, it is difﬁcult to

Introduction
In recent years, crowdfunding has rapidly developed into a
popular way of ﬁnancial investment. It is an emerging approach that aims to solicit funds from individuals rather than
traditional venture investors, such as angel investors and
banks. More and more people are willing to launch a project
(or named campaign on the Internet) for different purposes.
Indeed, tremendous efforts have been made by researchers
to comprehend the internal mechanism in crowdfunding.
Most of the existing works focus on analyzing factors that
affect the ﬁnal results and predicting the probability of success. However, dynamics tracking, i.e., predicting the funding progress of campaigns, is still a problem under research.
As shown in Figure 1, the funding progress of a campaign
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6210

