The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Conditional Generative Neural Decoding with Structured CNN Feature Prediction
1

Changde Du,1,2,3 Changying Du,4 Lijie Huang,1 Huiguang He1,2,5,∗

Research Center for Brain-Inspired Intelligence & NLPR, CASIA, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Huawei Cloud BU EI Innovation Lab, China
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Beijing 100085, China
5
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
{duchangde, ducyatict}@gmail.com, {lijie.huang, huiguang.he}@ia.ac.cn
images (Shen et al. 2019) from the CNN features decoded
from brain activities.
In deep neural decoding, the most critical point is how to
convert the brain activities into the hierarchical CNN features.
Almost all existing methods assume that the units of a CNN
are conditionally independent of each other, and hence they ﬁt
multiple independent single-output linear regression models
to decode the CNN features from the fMRI voxels (Horikawa
and Kamitani 2017; Wen et al. 2017). However, the CNN
features are often related to each other via some underlying
structures, and this structural information may be useful for
decoding prediction. Throughout the paper, we refer to the
dependencies among the different CNN features as output
structure, which can be seen as the covariance structure in
the output noise. Also, the fMRI voxels are generally highly
correlated, and the correlation can carry relevant information
about the stimuli. Exploiting the dependencies among the different voxels not only beneﬁts generalization but also helps
us to understand the functional networks in the human brain.
We refer to the dependencies among the fMRI voxels as input structure. Finally, treating each single-output regression
model as a learning task, we refer to the dependencies among
different tasks as task structure, which can be captured under the multi-task learning (by imposing some appropriate
constraints on the regression coefﬁcients of different tasks).
Traditional neural decoding methods ignore these structural
informations when modelling the mappings between multivariate inputs and outputs. This greatly limits their decoding
performance and interpretability. It is therefore desirable to
simultaneously leverage all these three kinds of structures
in deep neural decoding for improved predictions and better
interpretability.
On the other hand, how to accurately reconstruct the corresponding image based on the decoded CNN features is
also a very important problem. Typically, this problem can
be solved by maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation. For
example, one can apply gradient-based optimization to ﬁnd
an optimal image that minimizes the reconstruction error in
the CNN feature space with a natural image prior such as total variation (TV) regularizer (Mahendran and Vedaldi 2015)
or deep generation network (Nguyen et al. 2016; Shen et al.
2019). Alternatively, one can train a de-convolutional neural
network (De-CNN) on a large training set of natural images
to minimize the reconstruction error in image space (Doso-

Abstract
Decoding visual contents from human brain activity is a
challenging task with great scientiﬁc value. Two main facts
that hinder existing methods from producing satisfactory results are 1) typically small paired training data; 2) underexploitation of the structural information underlying the data.
In this paper, we present a novel conditional deep generative
neural decoding approach with structured intermediate feature
prediction. Speciﬁcally, our approach ﬁrst decodes the brain
activity to the multilayer intermediate features of a pretrained
convolutional neural network (CNN) with a structured multioutput regression (SMR) model, and then inverts the decoded
CNN features to the visual images with an introspective conditional generation (ICG) model. The proposed SMR model can
simultaneously leverage the covariance structures underlying
the brain activities, the CNN features and the prediction tasks
to improve the decoding accuracy and interpretability. Further,
our ICG model can 1) leverage abundant unpaired images to
augment the training data; 2) self-evaluate the quality of its
conditionally generated images; and 3) adversarially improve
itself without extra discriminator. Experimental results show
that our approach yields state-of-the-art visual reconstructions
from brain activities.

Introduction
Brain-sensing signals usually convey rich information about
the external stimuli. Effectively decoding these signals
could lead to new insights into brain function and boost
the development of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs). A
challenging task in this ﬁled is visual information decoding, which aims to classify (Haxby et al. 2001; Kamitani and Tong 2005), identify (Kay et al. 2008; Horikawa
and Kamitani 2017) or reconstruct (Miyawaki et al. 2008;
Naselaris et al. 2009) the perceived visual stimuli from the
evoked brain activities measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Recently, the hierarchical visual
features from convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are
found to be helpful for connecting the visual stimuli and
brain signals. To overcome the small paired training data issue, researchers have tried to use external database to pretrain
the CNNs and then reconstruct human faces (Güçlütürk et al.
2017), handwritten characters (Du et al. 2018a) and natural
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2629

