The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Topic Modeling on Document Networks with Adjacent-Encoder
Ce Zhang, Hady W. Lauw
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
{cezhang.2018, hadywlauw}@smu.edu.sg

Problem. Let G = (D, E) be a given document network.
D = {d1 , d2 , ..., dN } is a set of documents, where each
document d ∈ R|V | is a vector in the vocabulary space.
In turn, the adjacency matrix E ∈ RN ×N is a 0-1 matrix where εij = 1 indicates document di links to dj , and
εij = 0 otherwise. Here we model an undirected network,
i.e., εij = εji and E = E T , though the proposed models
could generalize to directed networks as well. We would use
edge and link interchangeably. For a document d, its neighbors are those directly linked to d. For simplicity, we use
N (d) = {d1 , d2 , ..., dk } to denote d’s neighbors. The deﬁnition of neighborhood here is reﬂexive, i.e., we also regard
d as its own neighbor, d ∈ N (d) and εii = 1.
Given G as input, our aim is to embed documents in G
within a low-rank topic space. Recent neural topic models
are based on the traditional Auto-Encoder family, which naturally embodies the notion of a topic model, by learning the
association between documents and topics (hidden neurons),
as well as topics and words. However, in seeking to reconstruct the input document, it would model each document
independently and disregard the network structure in G.
Proposed Approach. To deal with networked documents,
we propose an approach called Adjacent-Encoder or AdjEnc, whose key distinction is to also reconstruct the neighbors of the input document, in addition to the document
itself. Hypothetically, this allows documents in a network
to collaboratively learn from one another, such that close
neighbors would have similar representations in the topic
space. The realization of this principle leads to novel structures within the AdjEnc architecture, i.e.,

Abstract
Oftentimes documents are linked to one another in a network structure,e.g., academic papers cite other papers, Web
pages link to other pages. In this paper we propose a holistic
topic model to learn meaningful and uniﬁed low-dimensional
representations for networked documents that seek to preserve both textual content and network structure. On the basis of reconstructing not only the input document but also
its adjacent neighbors, we develop two neural encoder architectures. Adjacent-Encoder, or AdjEnc, induces competition
among documents for topic propagation, and reconstruction
among neighbors for semantic capture. Adjacent-Encoder-X,
or AdjEnc-X, extends this to also encode the network structure in addition to document content. We evaluate our models
on real-world document networks quantitatively and qualitatively, outperforming comparable baselines comprehensively.

Introduction
Text corpora constitute an important class of data, covering
academic papers, Web pages, product descriptions, etc. To
better make sense of the meaning within text documents, we
seek to learn a lower-dimensional representation. One such
representation is based on the notion of topics. Essentially,
a document is associated with a set of topics, and in turn a
topic is associated with pertinent words. Classically, many
topic models are based on graphical models, such as LDA
(Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). More recently, topic models are
often based on neural approaches including Auto-Encoders
and its variants, such as KATE (Chen and Zaki 2017).
In this work, we investigate neural topic models not for
plain-text documents per se, but for networked documents.
In addition to textual content, oftentimes documents link to
one another in a network structure. For example, academic
papers form a citation network, Web pages form a hyperlink
network. Many previous works on topic modeling focus on
textual content of documents; some do incorporate the network structure to jointly learn representations, such as RTM
(Chang and Blei 2009). To this end, novel approaches to unsupervised topic modeling for document networks are germane, because of their importance and wide applicability.

• Neighbor Competition: Neighbors contribute information differentially. In the encoding phase, we evaluate attentions between the target document and its neighbors. In
turn, neighbors propagate topics to the target document.
• Neighbor Reconstruction: In the decoding phase, the
target document reconstructs the contents of its adjacent
neighbors. This increases the robustness and invariance
of topic representations with respect to output documents,
while also incorporating the neighborhood structure without additional parameters over those of Auto-Encoders.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Beyond reconstructing the content of neighbors, it is fea6737

