The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ElixirNet: Relation-Aware Network
Architecture Adaptation for Medical Lesion Detection
∗

∗

Chenhan Jiang,2 Shaoju Wang,1 Hang Xu,2 Xiaodan Liang,1†
Nong Xiao1
1

Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Most advances in medical lesion detection network are limited to subtle modiﬁcation on the conventional detection network designed for natural images. However, there exists a
vast domain gap between medical images and natural images
where the medical image detection often suffers from several
domain-speciﬁc challenges, such as high lesion/background
similarity, dominant tiny lesions, and severe class imbalance.
Is a hand-crafted detection network tailored for natural image
undoubtedly good enough over a discrepant medical lesion
domain? Is there more powerful operations, ﬁlters, and subnetworks that better ﬁt the medical lesion detection problem
to be discovered? In this paper, we introduce a novel ElixirNet that includes three components: 1) TruncatedRPN balances positive and negative data for false positive reduction;
2) Auto-lesion Block is automatically customized for medical images to incorporates relation-aware operations among
region proposals, and leads to more suitable and efﬁcient classiﬁcation and localization. 3) Relation transfer module incorporates the semantic relationship and transfers the relevant
contextual information with an interpretable graph, thus alleviates the problem of lack of annotations for all types of
lesions. Experiments on DeepLesion and Kits19 prove the effectiveness of ElixirNet, achieving improvement of both sensitivity and precision over FPN with fewer parameters.





Figure 1: A vast domain gap between medical and natural
images. FPN works well on MSCOCO (a), while it fails on
DeepLesion (b) with the tiny-size lesion, identical nearby regions and overmuch false positive (ground-truth is red box).

2018) fuses RetinaNet detector (Lin et al. 2017b) with the
U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) architecture
to improve detection performance with full segmentation
supervision. Moreover, (Yan, Bagheri, and Summers 2018)
sends multiple neighbouring slices into the R-FCN (Dai et
al. 2016) to generate feature maps separately, which are
then aggregated for ﬁnal prediction. Those methods ﬁnetune
common detection framework on medical datasets without
designing a special network for medical images. Different
from natural images, only one to three lesions exist in a medical image and look similar to the nearby non-lesions. Also,
lesions are usually tiny-sized and severe class imbalanced,
illustrated in Figure 1. Using the conventional detection network for natural images directly is inefﬁcient and will lead
to a performance drop in those scenarios. Thus, customizing
networks for medical lesion detection is in great need.
Conventional natural images detection pipelines most
consist of three components: feature extractor; region proposal network (RPN) and RCNN head for processing proposals feature. While it is well-known that ImageNet pretrained feature extractor (Russakovsky et al. 2015) is beneﬁcial to medical images networks (Tajbakhsh et al.; Shin
et al. 2016; 2016), RPN and RCNN head designed for natural images are inconsistent for medical images. To maintain a sufﬁciently high recall for proposals in natural images, uniformly sampling anchors over the whole localization in RPN leads to severe false candidates in medical im-

Introduction
Lesion detection in medical CT images is an important prerequisite for computer-aided detection/diagnosis
(CADe/CADx). Recently, remarkable progress has been
brought to the application of deep learning paradigms, especially Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), to CADe/CADx (Yan,
Bagheri, and Summers 2018; Wang et al. 2017; Greenspan,
Van Ginneken, and Summers 2016). Most of the works in
this area directly use the natural image detection pipelines
without adapting to the medical imaging domain. (Shin et
al. 2016) transfers the CNN model with pre-trained ImageNet to medical images detection directly. (Jaeger et al.
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding Author: xdliang328@gmail.com
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11093

