The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Infusing Knowledge into the Textual
Entailment Task Using Graph Convolutional Networks
Pavan Kapanipathi,† Veronika Thost,∗† Siva Sankalp Patel,† Spencer Whitehead,§
Ibrahim Abdelaziz,† Avinash Balakrishnan,† Maria Chang,† Kshitij Fadnis,†
Chulaka Gunasekara,† Bassem Makni,† Nicholas Mattei,‡ Kartik Talamadupula,† Achille Fokoue†
†

IBM Research, ∗ MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, § University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, ‡ Tulane University
{kapanipa, avinash.bala, kpfadnis, krtalamad, achille}@us.ibm.com
{veronika.thost, siva.sankalp.patel, ibrahim.abdelaziz1, maria.chang, chulaka.gunasekara, bassem.makni}@ibm.com
srw5@illinois.edu
nsmattei@tulane.edu

ing the complexities of human-level natural language understanding, and in aiding systems tuned for downstream tasks
such as question answering (Harabagiu and Hickl 2006).

Abstract
Textual entailment is a fundamental task in natural language
processing. Most approaches for solving this problem use
only the textual content present in training data. A few approaches have shown that information from external knowledge sources like knowledge graphs (KGs) can add value,
in addition to the textual content, by providing background
knowledge that may be critical for a task. However, the proposed models do not fully exploit the information in the usually large and noisy KGs, and it is not clear how it can be
effectively encoded to be useful for entailment. We present
an approach that complements text-based entailment models
with information from KGs by (1) using Personalized PageRank to generate contextual subgraphs with reduced noise and
(2) encoding these subgraphs using graph convolutional networks to capture the structural and semantic information in
KGs. We evaluate our approach on multiple textual entailment datasets and show that the use of external knowledge
helps the model to be robust and improves prediction accuracy. This is particularly evident in the challenging BreakingNLI dataset, where we see an absolute improvement of
5-20% over multiple text-based entailment models.

1

Figure 1: A premise and hypothesis pair along with a relevant subgraph from ConceptNet. Blue concepts occur in the
premise, green in the hypothesis, and purple connect them.
Most existing textual entailment models focus only on the
text of premise and hypothesis to improve classiﬁcation accuracy (Parikh et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2019a). A recent and
promising line of work has turned towards extracting and
harnessing relevant semantic information from knowledge
graphs (KGs) for each textual entailment pair (Chen et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2019). These approaches map terms in
the premise and hypothesis text to concepts in a KG, such
as Wordnet (Miller 1995), ConceptNet (Speer, Chin, and
Havasi 2017), or DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007) and use these
mapped concepts for the textual entailment task. Figure 1
shows an example of such mapping, where select terms from
the premise and hypothesis are mapped to concepts from a
knowledge graph (blue and green nodes, respectively). However these models suffer from one or more of the following drawbacks: (1) they do not possess the ability to explicitly capture the semantic and structural information from the
KG. For example, in Figure 1, the ability for models to encode information from paths between blue and green nodes

Introduction

Given two natural language sentences, a premise P and
a hypothesis H, the textual entailment task – also known
as natural language inference (NLI) – consists of determining whether the premise entails, contradicts, or is
neutral with respect to the given hypothesis (MacCartney and Manning 2009). In practice, this means that
textual entailment is characterized as either a threeclass (ENTAILS / NEUTRAL / CONTRADICTS) or a two-class
(ENTAILS / NEUTRAL) classiﬁcation problem (Bowman et al.
2015; Khot, Sabharwal, and Clark 2018).
Performance on the textual entailment task can be an indicator of whether a system, and the models it uses, are able
to reason over text. This has tremendous value for modelc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8074

