The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Variational Point Process Model for Social Event Sequences
Zhen Pan,1 Zhenya Huang,1 Defu Lian,1 Enhong Chen1∗
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, School of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China
{pzhen, huangzhy}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {liandefu, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn

110

Abstract

IPhone Xs, etc.

Many events occur in real-world and social networks. Events
are related to the past and there are patterns in the evolution
of event sequences. Understanding the patterns can help us
better predict the type and arriving time of the next event.
In the literature, both feature-based approaches and generative approaches are utilized to model the event sequence.
Feature-based approaches extract a variety of features, and
train a regression or classiﬁcation model to make a prediction.
Yet, their performance is dependent on the experience-based
feature exaction. Generative approaches usually assume the
evolution of events follow a stochastic point process (e.g.,
Poisson process or its complexer variants). However, the true
distribution of events is never known and the performance depends on the design of stochastic process in practice. To solve
the above challenges, in this paper, we present a novel probabilistic generative model for event sequences. The model is
termed Variational Event Point Process (VEPP). Our model
introduces variational auto-encoder to event sequence modeling that can better use the latent information and capture
the distribution over inter-arrival time and types of event sequences. Experiments on real-world datasets prove effectiveness of our proposed model.

Interest over time

100

90

Christmas

80

Apple
Special
Event

70

60

50

40
2018/6/3

New iPad
Pro, etc.

2018/8/3 2018/10/3 2018/12/3

2019/2/3

2019/4/3

Time

Figure 1: Google trends about “Apple”. We add the relative
events on the ﬁgure.

Introduction

The so-called event sequences contain a series of events of
different types in the continuous time domain. In an event sequence, the past events and the next event are related (Chang
et al. 2015). Take the previous three types of events as examples: buyers’ historical behaviors can be considered as their
decision making processes. The aftershocks can happen with
a month, or within days, from the main shock. Retweets
could be grouped with topics of interest and timeline. The
pattern of events may help cause or prevent future events.
Thus, techniques to discover patterns among events are urgently required, so that the future of an event sequence can
be accurately predicted (Xu et al. 2018).
In the literature, feature based methods extract relevant
features and apply different machine learning algorithms to
predict the type and arrival time of the future events (Naveed
et al. 2011; Cheng et al. 2014; Bakshy et al. 2011; Zaman et al. 2010). However, these models heavily depend
on manually selected features. It is a fatal ﬂaw as designing
features requires much expertise, especially for large-scale

Events happen in real-world and on social networks. In online shopping, an event can represent user behaviors, such
as click, cart or purchase (Liu et al. 2015). In geophysics,
an event can be an earthquake (Sakaki, Okazaki, and Matsuo 2010). In online social media, events can be user actions (e.g., like, comment and retweet) over time, which have
some features like user inﬂuence, content, time and connectivity of the social network (Fu 2011; Rizoiu et al. 2017;
Shi et al. 2017). Online events usually follow the hot topics
that caused by some signiﬁcant news. For example, Figure 1
shows the interest about “Apple” over time in the last year1 .
Apparently, the peaks are related to special events of Apple
company (e.g., product launch conference) or holidays like
Christmas.
∗
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://trends.google.com/trends/explore?q=apple

173

