The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Solving Sum-of-Costs Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding with Answer-Set Programming
Rodrigo N. Gómez,1 Carlos Hernández,2 Jorge A. Baier1,3
1

Departamento de Ciencia de la Computación, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile
2
Departamento de Ciencias de la Ingenierı́a, Universidad Andrés Bello, Chile
3
Instituto Milenio Fundamentos de los Datos, Chile
rigomez@uc.cl, carlos.hernandez.u@unab.cl, jabaier@ing.puc.cl

we report here. First, search-based solvers (e.g., Standley 2010), which use heuristic search as the main component. A state-of-the-art search-based solver is ConﬂictBased Search (CBS) (Sharon et al. 2012; Felner et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2019), which uses A* at its core. A second class
is compilation-based solvers; for example, compilers from
MAPF to Satisﬁability Testing (SAT) (e.g., Surynek et
al. 2016; Barták et al. 2017; Barták and Svancara 2019),
and Answer-Set Programming (ASP) (Erdem et al. 2013;
Gebser et al. 2018).
When seeking for an optimal solution for MAPF, different
objective functions can be considered. Under sum-of-costs,
the most popular variant of MAPF, the objective is to minimize the moves agents perform before stopping at the goal.
In this paper, we continue to explore the potential of ASP
solvers for MAPF, and propose the ﬁrst compilation that
solves MAPF optimally under the sum-of-costs assumption.
A second contribution consists of proposing the ﬁrst compilation from MAPF to ASP that grows linearly with the number of agents, unlike existing compilations to ASP that are
quadratic on the number of agents. In addition, we propose
an optimization which uses information drawn from a search
algorithm that is run as a preprocessing step to make the encoding more compact.
We evaluate our approach on synthetic square grids and
warehouse grids with an increasing number of agents. We
compare against MDD-SAT (Surynek et al. 2016), SMTCBS (Surynek 2019) two state-of-the-art compilation-based
solvers, and iCBS-h (Felner et al. 2018), a representative
of the state-of-the-art in search-based MAPF. We observe
that our approach outperforms both MDD-SAT and iCBSh when congestion is high. Speciﬁcally, our approach has a
greater coverage as the number of agents increase.
We conclude that ASP is a viable approach to solving
MAPF problems. Another interesting conclusion is that ASP
also provides a very compact and elegant representation of
sum-of-costs MAPF. Indeed, most of the code needed to
solve a MAPF instance is included in this paper.

Abstract
Solving a Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding (MAPF) problem involves
ﬁnding non-conﬂicting paths that lead a number of agents to
their goal location. In the sum-of-costs variant of MAPF, one
is also required to minimize the total number of moves performed by agents before stopping at the goal. Not surprisingly, since MAPF is combinatorial, a number of compilations to Satisﬁability solving (SAT) and Answer Set Programming (ASP) exist. In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst family
of compilations to ASP that solve sum-of-costs MAPF over
4-connected grids. Unlike existing compilations to ASP that
we are aware of, our encoding is the ﬁrst that, after grounding, produces a number of clauses that is linear on the number of agents. In addition, the representation of the optimization objective is also carefully written, such that its size after grounding does not depend on the size of the grid. In
our experimental evaluation, we show that our approach outperforms search- and SAT-based sum-of-costs MAPF solvers
when grids are congested with agents.

Introduction
Given a graph G and k agents, each of which is associated
with an initial and a goal vertex of G, Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding (MAPF) is the problem of ﬁnding k conﬂict-free paths
connecting the initial vertex with the goal of each agent.
A number of applications of MAPF exist, ranging from
industrial applications, in which the increase in automation may promote the need for dozens—perhaps hundreds—
of robots navigating in indoor environments (e.g., warehouses), to aviation, underground mining, and multi-agent
videogames (Wang and Botea 2008).
Solving MAPF optimally is NP-complete (Yu and
LaValle 2013; Ma and Koenig 2017). When viewed as a
standard AI search problem, it is straightforward to notice
that the branching factor of MAPF is exponential on the
number of agents, since at each moment in time each agent
can perform a number of actions, relatively ﬁxed. It is not
surprising, then, that building algorithms that scale reasonably well with the number of agents has been challenging.
In its simplest version, that is, MAPF over 4-connected
grids, a number of approaches have been proposed, but
two classes of solvers are most relevant for the research

Background

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In this section we describe MAPF and ASP. Our deﬁnition
of MAPF follows closely that of Stern et al. (2019).
9867

