The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

What Makes A Good Story? Designing Composite Rewards for Visual Storytelling
Junjie Hu,1 Yu Cheng,2 Zhe Gan,2 Jingjing Liu,2 Jianfeng Gao,3 Graham Neubig1
1

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research, 3 Microsoft Research
{junjieh, gneubig}@cs.cmu.edu, {yu.cheng, zhe.gan, jingjl, jfgao}@microsoft.com

be telling a story that accurately describes the objects and
the concepts that appear in the photos. This can be termed
as the “Relevance” dimension. Secondly, the created story
should read smoothly. In other words, the consecutive sentences should be semantically and logically coherent with
each other, instead of being mutually-independent sentences
describing each photo separately. This can be termed as the
“Coherence” dimension. Lastly, to tell a compelling story
that can vividly describe the visual scenes and actions in the
photos, the language used for creating the story should contain a rich vocabulary and diverse style. We call this the “Expressiveness” dimension.
Most existing storytelling approaches that optimize on
BLEU or CIDEr do not perform very well on these dimensions. As shown in Figure 1, compared with the modelgenerated story, the human-written one is more semantically
relevant to the content of the photo stream (e.g., describing
more ﬁne-grained visual concepts such as “ﬂower girls”),
more structurally coherent across sentences, and more diversiﬁed in language style (e.g., less repetition in pattern such
as “great time”).
Motivated by this, we propose a reinforcement learning
framework with composite reward functions designed to encourage the model to generate a relevant, expressive and coherent story given a photo stream. The proposed ReCo-RL
(Relevance-Expressiveness-Coherence through Reinforcement Learning) framework consists of two layers: a highlevel decoder (i.e., manager) and a low-level decoder (i.e.,
worker). The manager summarizes the visual information
from each image into a goal vector, by taking into account
the overall story ﬂow, the visual context, and the sentences
generated for previous images. Then it passes on the goal
vector to each worker, which generates a word-by-word description for each image, guided by the manager’s goal.
The proposed model consists of three quality evaluation
components. The ﬁrst relevance function gives a high reward to a generated description that mentions ﬁne-grained
concepts in an image. The second coherence function measures the ﬂuency of a generated sentence given its preceding sentence, using a pre-trained language model. The
third expressiveness function penalizes phrasal overlap between a generated sentence and its preceding sentences. The

Abstract
Previous storytelling approaches mostly focused on optimizing traditional metrics such as BLEU, ROUGE and CIDEr.
In this paper, we re-examine this problem from a different angle, by looking deep into what deﬁnes a natural and topicallycoherent story. To this end, we propose three assessment criteria: relevance, coherence and expressiveness, which we observe through empirical analysis could constitute a “highquality” story to the human eye. We further propose a reinforcement learning framework, ReCo-RL, with reward functions designed to capture the essence of these quality criteria.
Experiments on the Visual Storytelling Dataset (VIST) with
both automatic and human evaluation demonstrate that our
ReCo-RL model achieves better performance than state-ofthe-art baselines on both traditional metrics and the proposed
new criteria.

Introduction
There has been a recent surge of interest in enabling machines to understand the semantics of complex visual scenarios and depict visual objects/relations with natural language.
One main line of research is grounding the visual concepts
of a single image to textual descriptions, known as image
captioning (Fang et al. 2015; Vinyals et al. 2015; You et al.
2016). Visual storytelling (Huang et al. 2016) takes one step
further, aiming at understanding photo streams and generating a sequence of sentences to describe a coherent story.
Most existing visual storytelling methods focus on maximizing data likelihood (Yu, Bansal, and Berg 2017), topic
consistency (Huang et al. 2019), or expected rewards by imitation learning (Wang et al. 2018b). However, maximizing
data likelihood or implicit rewards does not necessarily optimize the quality of generated stories. In fact, we ﬁnd that
simply optimizing on standard automatic evaluation metrics
may even hurt the performance of story generation according to other assessments that are more important to the human eye.
In this paper, we revisit the visual storytelling problem
by asking ourselves the question: what makes a good story?
Given a photo stream, the ﬁrst and foremost goal should
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7969

