The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FAS-Net: Construct Effective Features
Adaptively for Multi-Scale Object Detection
Jiangqiao Yan,1,2,3 Yue Zhang,1 Zhonghan Chang,1 Tengfei Zhang,1
Menglong Yan,1 Wenhui Diao,1 Hongqi Wang,1 Xian Sun1∗
1

Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100094, China
2
Key Laboratory of Network Information System Technology(NIST),
Institute of Electronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
3
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
yanjiangqiao16@mails.ucas.edu.cn, zhangyuereal@163.com, {changzhonghan16, zhangtengfei16}@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
yanmenglong@foxmail.com, Wiecas@sina.com, {whdiao, sunxian}@mail.ie.ac.cn
over a number of scaled input images, which is called featurized image pyramids (Lin et al. 2017). But this method
increases the inference time and memory usage of the detector signiﬁcantly. In contrast, considering the inherent hierarchical structure of convolutional neural networks (CNN),
algorithms using multiple CNN layers have been proposed
in recent years (Liu et al. 2018a). As the low-level and highlevel information are complementary for object detection,
the feature pyramid structure is proposed (Lin et al. 2017;
Kong et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018) and becomes the
mainstream method to solve the multi-scale object detection
problem. Among them, FPN (Lin et al. 2017) is the most
representative method. It integrates features via lateral connections in the sequential manner and each proposal is predicted based on feature grids pooled from one feature level,
which is assigned heuristically (Fig. 1(a)).

Abstract
Feature pyramid is the mainstream method for multi-scale object detection. In most detectors with feature pyramid, each
proposal is predicted based on feature grids pooled from only
one feature level, which is assigned heuristically. Recent studies report that the feature representation extracted using this
method is sub-optimal, since they ignore the valid information exists on other unselected layers of the feature pyramid.
To address this issue, researchers present to fuse valid information across all feature levels. However, these methods can
be further improved: the feature fusion strategies, which use
common operation (element-wise max or sum) in most detectors, should be replaced by a more ﬂexible way. In this
work, a novel method called feature adaptive selection subnetwork (FAS-Net) is proposed to construct effective features
for detecting objects of different scales. Particularly, its adaption consists of two level: global attention and local adaptive selection. First, we model the global context of each feature map with global attention based feature selection module (GAFSM), which can strengthen the effective features
across each layer adaptively. Then we extract the features
of each region of interest (RoI) on the entire feature pyramid to construct a RoI feature pyramid. Finally, the RoI feature pyramid is sent to the feature adaptive selection module (FASM) to integrate the strengthened features according
to the input adaptively. Our FAS-Net can be easily extended
to other two-stage object detectors with feature pyramid, and
supports to analyze the importance of different feature levels for multi-scale objects quantitatively. Besides, FAS-Net
can also be further applied to instance segmentation task and
get consistent improvements. Experiments on PASCAL07/12
and MSCOCO17 demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization of the proposed method.

Although achieving encouraging results, FPN still has
some limitations. For example, Libra R-CNN (Pang et al.
2019) proves that feature integration via lateral connections
in the sequential manner will make the integrated features
focus more on adjacent resolution but less on others. This
means that some useful semantic information in highestlevel can not transfer to the lowest-level features effectively.
They propose the balanced feature pyramid (BFP) structure
to resolve the feature level imbalance (Fig. 1(b)). PANet (Liu
et al. 2018b) ﬁnds it is not optimal that each proposal is
predicted from a single heuristically assigned feature level.
In PANet, the adaptive feature pooling (AFP) is proposed
to use all levels feature maps for each proposal and fusing
them for following prediction (Fig. 1(c)). M2Det (Zhao et al.
2019) points out that objects of the same size with different
apparent complexity also need to extract valid information
from different levels of feature layers. Thus, each feature
map (used for detecting objects in a speciﬁc range of size in
FPN) in the pyramid mainly or only consists of single-level
features will result in suboptimal detection performance. In
order to solve the shortcomings of the general FPN structure,
they propose multi-level feature pyramid network (MLFPN)
to construct more effective feature pyramids for detecting
objects of different scales.

Introduction
Large scale variation across objects is one of the main factors affecting the performance of the object detectors. To alleviate this problem, multiple solutions have been proposed.
A classical strategy to address this issue is to run the detector
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12573

