The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Model-Based Diagnosis with Uncertain Observations
Dean Cazes, Meir Kalech
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
deanc@post.bgu.ac.il, kalech@bgu.ac.il

We formalize the MBD problem with uncertain observations, both for abductive and consistency-based diagnosis.
An abductive model is a model where for each component,
all its behaviors are known and deﬁned (Reiter 1987). For
instance, if for each component in a Boolean circuit model
(e.g. an OR gate), its output can be one of the three: (1)
healthy (i.e. logical OR) (2) ﬂipped (i.e. logical N OR) or
(3) stuck at 1 (i.e. output is always 1), then we can say this
model is abductive. A diagnosis in an abductive model is an
assignment of a behavior mode for each component. A consistent model is a model where there exist components with
an undeﬁned behavior (Console, Dupré, and Torasso 1991).
This means that given an input to this component, there can
be multiple possible outputs. This is contrary to an abductive model, where a component and a behavior mode map to
a single possible output.
We propose three algorithms to solve the MBD with uncertain observations problem. The ﬁrst, O2D, reduces the
uncertainty into multiple MBD problems with certainty. The
second, D2O, saves the effort of applying an MBD solver
multiple times, by iterating all behavior modes assignment
combinations and for each - deriving the observation(s) it explains. Both algorithms ultimately ﬁnd all of the diagnoses
and their probability. If only the most probable diagnosis is
desired, a third algorithm, MstLikeDiag, is proposed to handle this case. This algorithm is similar to the ﬁrst algorithm,
only that it stops after a certain condition is met. Meeting
this condition ensures no other unseen diagnosis can have a
probability larger than our current maximum.
Evaluation on Boolean circuit diagnosis for the abductive domain and software projects for the consistent domain,
compares the runtime over these algorithms under the inﬂuence of some independent variables. The results on the abductive domain show an unequivocal preference of D2O to
O2D, independently of other variables. In the consistencybased domain, in the other hand, O2D outperforms D2O.
Also, we conclude that MstLikeDiag runs faster than the
other two under certain circumstances that will be discussed
later.

Abstract
Classical model-based diagnosis uses a model of the system
to infer diagnoses – explanations – of a given abnormal observation. In this work, we explore how to address the case
where there is uncertainty over a given observation. This can
happen, for example, when the observations are collected by
noisy sensors, that are known to return incorrect observations with some probability. We formally deﬁne this common scenario for consistency-based and abductive models.
In addition, we analyze the complexity of two complete algorithms we propose for ﬁnding all diagnoses and correctly
ranking them. Finally, we propose a third algorithm that returns the most probable diagnosis without ﬁnding all possible
diagnoses. Experimental evaluation shows that this third algorithm can be very effective in cases where the number of
faults is small and the uncertainty over the observations is not
large. If, however, all possible diagnoses are desired, then the
choice between the ﬁrst two algorithms depends on whether
the domain’s diagnosis form is abductive or consistent.

1

Introduction

Model-based diagnosis (MBD) is a principled approach for
automated diagnosing the root cause of faults in systems (de
Kleer and Williams 1987; Reiter 1987; Stern et al. 2012).
In MBD, a model of the system is needed along with observations of the system’s behavior. These observations are
checked against the given model, and inference algorithms
are used to produce diagnoses, which are possible assumptions about which components are faulty that are consistent
with the given model and the observations.
Previous works assume the observations are certain. Unfortunately, this assumption is not always correct. Experiments show that for some cases a completely different diagnosis is output when considering uncertainty.
In this paper, we address the MBD problem where there is
an uncertainty over the observations. This can happen when
a noisy sensor is used to collect the output. A noise can be
interpreted differently across domains. In the Boolean circuits domain, for instance, the sensor collecting the output
(1 or 0) might be affected by spontaneous electric pulses, in
addition to the original output, causing the observed output
to ﬂip its value.

2

Related Work

MBD has been studied in a range of different settings and
models (Feldman, Provan, and Van Gemund 2010; Stern et
al. 2012; Metodi et al. 2014) including discrete event sys-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2766

