The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Minimizing the Bag-of-Ngrams Difference for
Non-Autoregressive Neural Machine Translation
Chenze Shao,1,2 Jinchao Zhang,3 Yang Feng,1,2∗ Fandong Meng,3 Jie Zhou3
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICT/CAS)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China
{shaochenze18z, fengyang}@ict.ac.cn
{dayerzhang, fandongmeng, withtomzhou}@tencent.com
Abstract
Non-Autoregressive Neural Machine Translation (NAT)
achieves signiﬁcant decoding speedup through generating target words independently and simultaneously. However, in
the context of non-autoregressive translation, the word-level
cross-entropy loss cannot model the target-side sequential dependency properly, leading to its weak correlation with the
translation quality. As a result, NAT tends to generate inﬂuent translations with over-translation and under-translation
errors. In this paper, we propose to train NAT to minimize
the Bag-of-Ngrams (BoN) difference between the model output and the reference sentence. The bag-of-ngrams training
objective is differentiable and can be efﬁciently calculated,
which encourages NAT to capture the target-side sequential
dependency and correlates well with the translation quality.
We validate our approach on three translation tasks and show
that our approach largely outperforms the NAT baseline by
about 5.0 BLEU scores on WMT14 En↔De and about 2.5
BLEU scores on WMT16 En↔Ro.

1

Figure 1: The cross-entropy loss gives a large penalty to the
unaligned translation and may cause the overcorrection. The
bag-of-2grams difference is robust to the unaligned translation and correlates well with the translation quality.

same encoder-decoder architecture as Transformer (Vaswani
et al. 2017). Instead of using previously generated tokens
as in autoregressive models, NAT takes other global signals as decoder inputs (Gu et al. 2017; Guo et al. 2019;
Kaiser et al. 2018; Akoury, Krishna, and Iyyer 2019), which
enables the simultaneous and independent generation of target words and achieves signiﬁcant decoding speedup.
However, in the context of non-autoregressive translation,
the word-level cross-entropy loss cannot model the targetside sequential dependency properly, leading to its weak correlation with the translation quality. The cross-entropy loss
encourages NAT to generate the golden token in each position without considering the global correctness. For example, as Figure 1 illustrates, though the translation “I have to
get up and start working” is semantically close to the reference, the cross-entropy loss will give it a large penalty
due to its unalignment with the reference. Under the guidance of cross-entropy loss, the translation may be corrected
to “I have to up up start start working” that is preferred by
the cross-entropy loss but actually gets worse and contains
repeated words, which is named as the overcorrection error (Zhang et al. 2019). The limitation of the cross-entropy
loss aggravates the weakness of NAT in modeling target sequential dependency, which often causes inﬂuent translation results with over-translation and under-translation errors (Shao et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019). In addition, since

Introduction

Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has achieved impressive performance over the recent years (Cho et al. 2014;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Wu et al. 2016; Vaswani et al. 2017). NMT models
are typically built on the encoder-decoder framework where
the encoder encodes the source sentence into distributed representations and the decoder generates the target sentence
from the representations in an autoregressive manner: to predict the next word, previously predicted words have to be fed
as inputs. The word-by-word generation manner of NMT
determined by the autoregressive mechanism leads to high
translation latency during inference and restricts application
scenarios of NMT.
To reduce the translation latency for neural machine
translation, non-autoregressive translation models (Gu et al.
2017) have been proposed. A basic NAT model takes the
∗

Corresponding author: Yang Feng.
Reproducible code: https://github.com/ictnlp/BoN-NAT.
Joint work with Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
198

