The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Designing Committees for Mitigating Biases∗
Michal Feldman,1,2 Yishay Mansour,1,3 Noam Nisan,4
Sigal Oren,5 Moshe Tennenholtz6
1

Tel-Aviv University, Israel, 2 Microsoft Research, Israel, 3 Google Research, Israel, 4 Hebrew University, Israel
5
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel, 6 Technion — Israel Institute of Technology, Israel
michal.feldman@cs.tau.ac.il, mansour.yishay@gmail.com, noam@cs.huji.ac.il, orensi@cs.bgu.ac.il, moshet@ie.technion.ac.il

the decision has a more public nature (e.g., hiring for a ﬁrm
or for an academic department), mitigating this bias can be
valuable. As we will see in this paper, entrusting decisions
such as who to hire in the hands of a committee may help in
reducing this bias.
Committees are chosen to make decisions for various reasons. Sometimes individuals have different preferences and
the committee is formed to make a decision that will maximize the individuals’ “happiness” (“aggregation of preferences”). Other times there is a true state of the world which
individuals have noisy signals about and a planner wishes
to discover what this true state is (“aggregation of information”). Here we suggest that there are some settings in which
there is an additional beneﬁt for using a committee instead of
a single decision maker – that is to reduce individual biases.
To further study the advantages of a committee when the individuals are biased, we devise a simple model in which a
planner wishes to learn the true state of the world. To this
end he organizes a committee that consists of experts that
have biased views of the true state of the world. By utilizing
some information on the experts’ biases the planner is able
to extract a less biased estimate of the true state.
A concrete example of such a setting, from which we will
also borrow our terminology, is academic hiring. Consider a
dean that needs to form a hiring committee to choose among
several different candidates, each working in a different subarea of some academic ﬁeld. In our setting, the dean, who is
not from the academic ﬁeld in question, has no information
about the “quality” of the candidates. All faculty members
in the academic area – the “experts” – have estimates of the
candidates qualities that are shaped by the “true” qualities of
the candidates and their own cognitive biases. Speciﬁcally,
faculty members prefer candidates that are more similar to
them and as a result underestimate the qualities of candidates in sub-ﬁelds that are far from their own sub-ﬁeld. The
dean, who is aware of these biases, will thus naturally attempt to construct a committee that is “diverse” in terms of
its biases as to enable him to negate some of these biases and
determine who the highest quality candidate is.
To model the similarities between the experts and candidates we assume that the candidates and experts reside
in known locations in some metric space1 . The similar-

Abstract
It is widely observed that individuals prefer to interact with
others who are more similar to them (this phenomenon is
termed homophily). This similarity manifests itself in various
ways such as beliefs, values and education. Thus, it should
not come as a surprise that when people make hiring choices,
for example, their similarity to the candidate plays a role in
their choice. In this paper, we suggest that putting the decision in the hands of a committee instead of a single person
can reduce this bias.
We study a novel model of voting in which a committee of experts is constructed to reduce the biases of its members. We
ﬁrst present voting rules that optimally reduce the biases of a
given committee. Our main results include the design of committees, for several settings, that are able to reach a nearly optimal (unbiased) choice. We also provide a thorough analysis
of the trade-offs between the committee size and the obtained
error. Our model is inherently different from the well-studied
models of voting that focus on aggregation of preferences or
on aggregation of information due to the introduction of similarity biases.

1

Introduction

Homophily – the tendency of people to prefer others who
are more similar to them – was long studied in several disciplines including sociology and economics (see (McPherson,
Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001) and references within as well
as (Currarini, Jackson, and Pin 2009)). The similarity can be
over different dimensions varying from values and beliefs
to social status and gender. Usually homophily is discussed
in the context of structure of social networks – individuals
choose friends or spouses based on similarity. However, it
was observed that homophily also plays a role in other settings, such as hiring (Rivera 2012). When the decision is of
a personal nature (e.g., choosing a spouse) this bias towards
similar individuals is natural and expected. However, when
∗

This project has received funding from the European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 740282
and 740435), the European Research Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013)
(grant agreement No 337122), and by the Israel Science Foundation (grant numbers 317/17, 993/17 and 2167/19).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1942

This is in line with to the way similarity between voters and

