The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Low Resource Sequence Tagging with Weak Labels
Edwin Simpson, Jonas Pfeiffer, Iryna Gurevych
Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab (UKP)
Department of Computer Science, Technische Universität Darmstadt.
{simpson, pfeiffer, gurevych}@ukp.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de

tasks, and consider how to learn a sequence labeller using
pre-trained models and noisy crowdsourced data.
Transfer learning can be used to adapt pre-trained models
to a target task, however, typical methods require either labelled training examples or large unlabelled datasets in the
target domain, or parallel examples in each domain (Ruder
2019). Fine-tuning techniques can also take several hours on
a GPU, which renders these methods unsuitable for adapting
rapidly to a user’s request or in realtime. Instead, we need
a solution that can perform transfer learning quickly with
small amounts of noisy annotations.
When faced with a new sequence labelling task for which
there is very little training data, one possibility is to apply
several pre-trained models from different domains to the
new task and combine their predictions. This forms an ensemble of weak labellers that often performs better than any
available individual labeller. Various methods have been introduced to combine sequence labels from multiple annotators, including a recent method, Bayesian sequence combination (BSC) (Simpson and Gurevych 2019), which models
sequential dependencies between labels. The Bayesian approach reduces over-ﬁtting and handles uncertainty in the
model when learning from sparse, unreliable data, such as
that obtained by current crowdsourcing methods.
We propose to combine multiple sequence labellers using BSC to learn the correlations between a model’s labels
and the target variable. While the idea is closely related to
ensemble learning, typical ensemble methods such as boosting, bagging or random forests are concerned with generating base classiﬁers, whereas we wish to use existing models. BSC uses variational Bayes (VB) to approximately infer
the target labels in a Bayesian manner without the computational cost of sampling methods (Simpson and Gurevych
2019). Here, we propose a technique that extends the VB algorithm to learn a sequence labeller as part of an ensemble
with human annotators, in order to reduce the workload of a
crowd. Our variational technique lets us train the sequence
labeller when gold labels are unavailable, while still providing an approximate Bayesian treatment to the BSC model.
Our key contributions are: (1) a transfer learning method
for pre-trained sequence labellers using Bayesian sequence
combination; (2) a variational inference technique that trains

Abstract
Current methods for sequence tagging depend on large quantities of domain-speciﬁc training data, limiting their use in
new, user-deﬁned tasks with few or no annotations. While
crowdsourcing can be a cheap source of labels, it often introduces errors that degrade the performance of models trained
on such crowdsourced data. Another solution is to use transfer
learning to tackle low resource sequence labelling, but current approaches rely heavily on similar high resource datasets
in different languages. In this paper, we propose a domain
adaptation method using Bayesian sequence combination to
exploit pre-trained models and unreliable crowdsourced data
that does not require high resource data in a different language. Our method boosts performance by learning the relationship between each labeller and the target task and trains a
sequence labeller on the target domain with little or no goldstandard data. We apply our approach to labelling diagnostic classes in medical and educational case studies, showing
that the model achieves strong performance though zero-shot
transfer learning and is more effective than alternative ensemble methods. Using NER and information extraction tasks,
we show how our approach can train a model directly from
crowdsourced labels, outperforming pipeline approaches that
ﬁrst aggregate the crowdsourced data, then train on the aggregated labels.

1

Introduction

NLP systems are often needed for bespoke tasks, such as
extracting a particular type of information in the form of
text spans from documents in a speciﬁc domain. The lack of
training data for each task motivates the reuse of pre-trained
models and crowdsourcing. Current methods for crowdsourcing often result in errors, and agreement even between
expert annotators is far from perfect for many NLP tasks.
This leads to the following questions: How can existing NLP
models be adapted to new domains or tasks with minimal
training data? How can we make the most of small amounts
of unreliable, crowdsourced annotations? In this paper, we
focus on the generic task of sequence labelling, which has
broad applications to information extraction, named entity
recognition, question answering, and other span annotation
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8862

