The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Release the Power of Online-Training for Robust Visual Tracking
Yifan Yang,1 Guorong Li,∗1,3 Yuankai Qi,2 Qingming Huang,∗1,3,4
1

School of Computer and Control Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China.
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS, Beijing, China
4
Key Laboratory of Intell. Info. Process. (IIP), Inst. of Computi. Tech., CAS, China.
yangyifan@yeah.net, {liguorong, qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn, qykshr@gmail.com

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been widely
adopted in the visual tracking community, signiﬁcantly improving the state-of-the-art. However, most of them ignore
the important cues lying in the distribution of training data
and high-level features that are tightly coupled with the target/background classiﬁcation. In this paper, we propose to
improve the tracking accuracy via online training. On the
one hand, we squeeze redundant training data by analyzing
the dataset distribution in low-level feature space. On the
other hand, we design statistic-based losses to increase the
inter-class distance while decreasing the intra-class variance
of high-level semantic features. We demonstrate the effectiveness on top of two high-performance tracking methods:
MDNet and DAT. Experimental results on the challenging
large-scale OTB2015 and UAVDT demonstrate the outstanding performance of our tracking method.
*URXQG7UXWK

Introduction
Visual tracking aims at predicting the trajectory of a target in
an image sequence. Although much effort has been devoted
in the past decades, it is still challenging to develop an efﬁcient tracking method in the face of interfering factors such
as heavy occlusions, out-of-plane rotations, and fast motion,
etc.
Recent CNN-based trackers (Yan et al. 2019; Bertinetto et
al. 2016; Nam and Han 2015; Qi et al. 2016; Pu et al. 2018;
Bhat et al. 2018; Song et al. 2018; Qi et al. 2019) have
shown the great success of hierarchical features learned by
deep convolutional neural networks. Most of the existing
trackers ﬁrst pre-train a classiﬁcation model using off-line
data. Then the tracker is initialized via ﬁnetuning the learned
models with the given target in the ﬁrst frame. In the following frames, it is further ﬁnetuned with the collected samples,
which is known as online training. However, the online training data is usually dominated by easy samples, and thus the
model is prone to overﬁtting. Besides, the structure of the
learned feature space is not always preserved. While the targets and the backgrounds lay close in the feature space, it is
difﬁcult to train a classiﬁer to identify the targets.

0'1HW

2XUV

Figure 1: A comparison of our approach with the baseline
MDNet on three example sequences. Trackers face four visual tracking challenges: large occlusion (top row), fast motion and illumination variation (middle row), and scale variations (bottom row). Through improved online-training, our
approach achieves more accurate tracking results than MDNet.

To address the problems mentioned above, we propose a
novel discriminative tracking method, which improves the
online training method from two perspectives, i.e., delivering more compact and informative training data, and introducing statistic-based losses to obtain more discriminative
features. To ﬁnetune tracker with a high-quality online training set, we propose a sample squeezing method to eliminate redundant samples. Different from existing approaches,
the proposed method eliminates redundant samples by estimating the similarity of both old and new samples with
novel proximity. The proposed proximity is more sensitive
to the sample location in the feature space and is more capable of identifying the redundancy from a global perspective.
As the proximity is updated efﬁciently, the sample squeezing method improves the diversity of the online-training set

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12645

