The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Invariant Representations through Adversarial Forgetting
Ayush Jaiswal, Daniel Moyer, Greg Ver Steeg, Wael AbdAlmageed, Premkumar Natarajan
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California
{ajaiswal, gregv, wamageed, pnataraj}@isi.edu, moyerd@usc.edu

augmentation, due to their approach of invariance by exclusion rather than inclusion (Jaiswal et al. 2018; 2019b;
Hsu, Jaiswal, and Natarajan 2019).
We propose a novel framework for invariance in DNNs
that promotes removal of information about s from z̃
through an adversarial forgetting mechanism. The working
principle of the model is to map data x to an embedding z
that encodes everything about x and use a forget-mask to
ﬁlter out s information from z while retaining information
about y to produce the invariant z̃. Speciﬁcally, an encoder
network generates a latent code z from x, which is used to
reconstruct x through a decoder. At the same time, a forgetgate network generates a mask m from x, which is multiplied elementwise with z to produce z̃. The encoding z̃ is
used by a predictor to infer the target y. These components
of the framework are trained adversarially with a discriminator that aims to predict s from z̃. However, during training, gradients from the discriminator are allowed to only affect the training of the forget-gate. Finally, the framework
is augmented with a regularizer that pushes the components
mi of the forget-mask to be close to either 0 or 1, inducing
disentanglement within the components of z and effective
masking of s to produce an invariant representation z̃.
We show that the forgetting mechanism is equivalent to a
bound on the mutual information I(z̃ : z) and that coupled
with the y-prediction task, can be interpreted as an information bottleneck. Further, by the data processing inequality,
the forgetting mechanism bounds I(z̃ : s). The generated
mask can be manipulated through adversarial training to remove information about s from z. Empirical results show
that the proposed framework exhibits state-of-the-art performance at inducing invariance to both nuisance and biasing
factors across a diverse collection of datasets and tasks.

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to achieving invariance for deep
neural networks in the form of inducing amnesia to unwanted
factors of data through a new adversarial forgetting mechanism. We show that the forgetting mechanism serves as an
information-bottleneck, which is manipulated by the adversarial training to learn invariance to unwanted factors. Empirical results show that the proposed framework achieves stateof-the-art performance at learning invariance in both nuisance
and bias settings on a diverse collection of datasets and tasks.

1

Introduction

Supervised machine learning models learn to associate a target y with underlying factors of data x that are informative
of y. However, trained models often learn to associate irrelevant factors of x with y (Domingos 2012), e.g., stroke-width
of text in optical character recognition. Learning incorrect
associations between y and nuisance factors leads to overﬁtting. Models might also learn associations between the target
y and factors that are correlated with y in collected training
data due to external (sometimes historical) reasons, e.g., age,
gender, and race in socio-economical prediction tasks. These
biasing factors, which are sometimes known a priori, make
trained models unfair to under-represented groups, posing
ethical and legal challenges to the usage of such models. It
is, therefore, imperative to develop models that are invariant
to both nuisance and biasing factors.
Popular approaches for achieving invariance to undesired factors s have involved training with data augmentation through small perturbations to real x with respect
to s (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). While these
methods have been utilized for training deep neural networks (DNNs) (Ko et al. 2015; Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012), in recent years methods have emerged
that remove s from the latent representations z̃, penalizing the model for the presence of s (Jaiswal et al. 2018;
2019a; Li, Swersky, and Zemel 2014; Lopez et al. 2018;
Louizos et al. 2016; Moyer et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2017;
Zemel et al. 2013). These methods perform better than data

2

Related Work

Recent work (Achille and Soatto 2018b; Alemi et al. 2016;
Moyer et al. 2018) has modeled invariance in supervised
DNNs through information bottleneck (Tishby, Pereira, and
Bialek 1999), wherein representations minimize the mutual
information I(x : z̃) while maximizing I(z̃ : y). For nuisance variables (s ⊥ y), these methods bring about compression in the latent space, which removes information about

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4272

