The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neural Snowball for Few-Shot Relation Learning
Tianyu Gao,1 Xu Han,1 Ruobing Xie,2 Zhiyuan Liu,1∗ Fen Lin,2 Leyu Lin,2 Maosong Sun1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
2
Search Product Center, WeChat Search Application Department, Tencent, China
{gty16, hanxu17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge graphs typically undergo open-ended growth of
new relations. This cannot be well handled by relation extraction that focuses on pre-deﬁned relations with sufﬁcient
training data. To address new relations with few-shot instances, we propose a novel bootstrapping approach, Neural Snowball, to learn new relations by transferring semantic knowledge about existing relations. More speciﬁcally, we
use Relational Siamese Networks (RSN) to learn the metric of relational similarities between instances based on existing relations and their labeled data. Afterwards, given a
new relation and its few-shot instances, we use RSN to accumulate reliable instances from unlabeled corpora; these instances are used to train a relation classiﬁer, which can further identify new facts of the new relation. The process is
conducted iteratively like a snowball. Experiments show that
our model can gather high-quality instances for better fewshot relation learning and achieves signiﬁcant improvement
compared to baselines. Codes and datasets are released on
https://github.com/thunlp/Neural-Snowball.

Existing Relations

The New Relation

Unlabeled Corpora

Large-Scale Data

Few-Shot Instances

Large-Scale Data

Transfer

Learn

Annotate &
Supervise

Neural
Snowball

Figure 1: An illustration of how Neural Snowball utilizes
three different kinds of data to learn new relations.

To extract relation facts of novel relations, many existing approaches have studied bootstrapping RE, which extracts triplets for a new relation with few seed relation facts.
Brin (1998) proposes to extract author-book facts with a
small set of (author, book) pairs as input. It iteratively ﬁnds
mentions of seed pairs from the web, and then extracts sentence patterns from those mentions and ﬁnds new pairs by
pattern matching. Agichtein and Gravano (2000) further improve this method and name it as Snowball, for that relation
facts and their mentions accumulate like a snowball.
However, most existing bootstrapping models conﬁne
themselves to only utilize seed relation facts and fail to take
advantage of available large-scale labeled datasets, which
have been proved to be a valuable resource. Though data
of existing relations might have a very different distribution
with new relations, it still can be used to train a deep learning model that extracts abstract features at the higher levels of the representation, suiting both historical and unseen
relations (Bengio 2012). This technique, named as transfer
learning, has been widely adopted in image few-shot tasks.
Previous work has investigated transferring metrics (Koch,
Zemel, and Salakhutdinov 2015) to measure similarities between objects and meta-information (Ravi and Larochelle
2017) to fast adapt to new tasks.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) such as WordNet (Miller 1995),
Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008) and Wikidata (Vrandečić
and Krötzsch 2014) have multiple applications in information retrieval, question answering and recommender systems. Such KGs consist of relation facts with triplet format
(eh , r, et ) representing a relation r between entities eh and
et . Though existing KGs have acquired large amounts of
facts, they still have huge growth space compared to realworld data. To enrich KGs, relation extraction (RE) is investigated to extract relation facts from plain text.
One challenge of RE is that novel relations emerge rapidly
in KGs, yet most RE models cannot handle those new relations well since they rely on RE datasets with only a limited number of predeﬁned relations. One of the largest RE
dataset, FewRel (Han et al. 2018), only has 100 relations,
yet there were already 920 relations in Wikidata in 2014
(Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014), let alone it contains nearly
6,000 relations now.
∗

Corresponding author: Z. Liu (liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7772

