The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Proximity Preserving Binary
Code Using Signed Graph-Cut
Inbal Lavi,1 Shai Avidan,1 Yoram Singer,2 Yacov Hel-Or3
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Israel
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, NJ, USA
3
School of Computer Science, The Interdisciplinary Center, Israel
inballavi@mail.tau.ac.il, toky@idc.ac.il

2

Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015) embedding), and a new
query may be compared to the existing images by nearestneighbor (NN) search. As the number of images scales up,
the memory required to store all the examples becomes too
large, and the time complexity to apply NN search becomes
a critical bottleneck.
Many solutions have been proposed to mitigate this issue,
including dimensionality reduction (Liu and Schisterman
2004) and approximate NN search (Muja and Lowe 2014).
In recent years, a family of algorithms called Binary Hashing
or Hamming Embedding has gained popularity. These algorithms ﬁnd a mapping from a feature space into a Hamming
space using a variety of methods. The main advantages of a
binary representation are the signiﬁcant reduction in storage
and in the time required to apply vector comparisons: vectors
are compared not in high-dimensional Euclidean space, but
rather in the Hamming space, utilizing the extremely fast
XOR operation. This representation is highly valuable in
mobile systems, as on-device training is limited due to computational shortage. This requires ad-hoc hashing methods
that can be computed on simple hardware, and that can be
generalized well to novel data points.
Many modern Hamming embedding techniques are datadependent. Data-dependent methods work by learning an
afﬁnity matrix between data points while attempting to preserve their afﬁnities in Hamming space. In-sampled techniques aim at generating a set of binary codes, a single code
for each data point, whose Hamming distances conform with
the afﬁnity matrix. Out-of-sample techniques deal with novel
samples that are not known in advance. These techniques
learn a general functional mapping that maps query points
from feature space into Hamming space.
Afﬁnity between data pairs can be, for example, related
to the metric distances between their associated features, or
semantic relations indicating data points belonging to the
same semantic class. The afﬁnity matrix is usually relaxed to
positive values, where small values indicate weak proximity
(far pairs), and large values indicate strong proximity (near
pairs). This encourages near pairs to be located close by in
the Hamming space but does not constrain the far pairs.
We propose a binary hashing framework called Proximity
Preserving Code (PPC). The main contribution of our method

Abstract
We introduce a binary embedding framework, called Proximity Preserving Code (PPC), which learns similarity and
dissimilarity between data points to create a compact and
afﬁnity-preserving binary code. This code can be used to apply
fast and memory-efﬁcient approximation to nearest-neighbor
searches. Our framework is ﬂexible, enabling different proximity deﬁnitions between data points. In contrast to previous
methods that extract binary codes based on unsigned graph
partitioning, our system models the attractive and repulsive
forces in the data by incorporating positive and negative graph
weights. The proposed framework is shown to boil down to
ﬁnding the minimal cut of a signed graph, a problem known to
be NP-hard. We offer an efﬁcient approximation and achieve
superior results by constructing the code bit after bit. We show
that the proposed approximation is superior to the commonly
used spectral methods with respect to both accuracy and complexity. Thus, it is useful for many other problems that can be
translated into signed graph cut.

Introduction
Content-based image retrieval is a fundamental problem in
computer vision, media indexing, and data analysis. A common solution to the problem consists of assigning each image
an indicative feature vector and retrieving similar images by
deﬁning a distance metric in the feature vector space.
One of the successful uses of deep learning is data embedding (Chopra, Hadsell, and LeCun 2005; Koch, Zemel,
and Salakhutdinov 2015), where a network is used to map
input data into a feature vector space, satisfying some desired
distance properties. This technique has many applications,
such as word embedding for machine translation (Mikolov
et al. 2013), face embedding for identity recognition (Taigman et al. 2014; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015;
Wen et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2017), and many more. The main
idea behind data embedding is to ﬁnd a mapping from input
space into a vector space where the distances in the embedding space conform with the desired task.
In a typical scenario, the embedding space is several hundreds of bytes long (e.g., 512 bytes in FaceNet (Schroff,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4535

