The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Monocular 3D Object Detection with Decoupled
Structured Polygon Estimation and Height-Guided Depth Estimation
Yingjie Cai,1 Buyu Li,1 Zeyu Jiao,2 Hongsheng Li,1 Xingyu Zeng,2 Xiaogang Wang1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Sensetime Group Limited
caiyingjie@link.cuhk.edu.hk, {jiaozeyu, zengxingyu}@sensetime.com, {byli, hsli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection task aims to predict the 3D
bounding boxes of objects based on monocular RGB images.
Since the location recovery in 3D space is quite difﬁcult on
account of absence of depth information, this paper proposes
a novel uniﬁed framework which decomposes the detection
problem into a structured polygon prediction task and a depth
recovery task. Different from the widely studied 2D bounding
boxes, the proposed novel structured polygon in the 2D image consists of several projected surfaces of the target object.
Compared to the widely-used 3D bounding box proposals, it
is shown to be a better representation for 3D detection. In order to inversely project the predicted 2D structured polygon to
a cuboid in the 3D physical world, the following depth recovery task uses the object height prior to complete the inverse
projection transformation with the given camera projection
matrix. Moreover, a ﬁne-grained 3D box reﬁnement scheme
is proposed to further rectify the 3D detection results. Experiments are conducted on the challenging KITTI benchmark,
in which our method achieves state-of-the-art detection accuracy.

Figure 1: 3D detection from 2D monocular images is challenging as even accurate 2D detection boxes (top) correspond to ambiguous 3D detection boxes (bottom). Best
viewed in color.
object (Fig. 1 (a)), its 3D location is still difﬁcult to recover
because one 2D box has an inﬁnite number of corresponding 3D boxes (Fig. 1 (b)) according to 2D-to-3D projection.
However, the projection of the 3D bounding box on the 2D
image plane is unique and much easier to estimate with features in a 2D image. Since the projected 3D box follows
prior knowledge of being a polygon consisting of several
quadrilaterals (corresponding to the visible surfaces of the
3D box), we refer it as structured polygon for convenience.
The 3D box can be completely recovered given the structured polygon, depth and the projection matrix. As the camera projection matrix is generally known in auto-driving scenarios, the only additional information required is the depth
of the object.
Inspired by the analysis above, we propose a novel framework that decomposes the 3D object detection task into a
structured polygon prediction task and a depth estimation
task. Different from the commonly used 2D bounding boxes
in most previous works (Chen et al. 2016), (Mousavian et al.
2017), (Xu and Chen 2018) and (Qi et al. 2018), the structured polygon can provide richer information for the 3D box
recovery. Since the challenging depth estimation task is decoupled, the speciﬁc module can be designed to accurate

Introduction
3D object detection is an important computer vision task
since it is an essential component of autonomous driving
and robot perception to avoid collisions with surrounding
objects. Most existing 3D object detection methods heavily rely on LiDAR devices to obtain accurate and direct
depth measurements. However, such sensors can not widely
adopted due to the expensive cost and limited perception
range (∼100m). The farther away the objects are, the fewer
and sparser depth measurements would be on the objects.
In contrast, cameras are much cheaper and can be installed
on any vehicles. This paper mainly focuses on 3D detection
with monocular images. In general, a 3D bounding box can
be described by 7 parameters in autonomous driving scenarios, i.e. the location (x, y, z), size (l, w, h) and orientation θ
on the ground. For 3D detection from monocular images, recovering the location in 3D space is challenging on account
of the absence of the accurate depth measurements. As illustrated in Fig. 1, given an accurate 2D bounding box of an
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10478

