The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TRENDNERT: A Benchmark for Trend
and Downtrend Detection in a Scientiﬁc Domain
Alena Moiseeva, Hinrich Schütze
Center for Information and Language Processing (CIS), LMU Munich, Germany
alena@cis.lmu.de; inquiries@cislmu.org

a strongly increasing number of publications in a particular time interval. We deﬁne a downtrend as the converse: a
downtrend is a research topic that has a strongly decreasing
number of publications in a particular time interval. Downtrends can be as important to detect as trends, e.g., for a
funding agency that is planning its budget.
There has been a lot of work on detecting trends in textual data, both in NLP and machine learning. However, despite the overall importance of trend analysis, no large publicly available benchmark for trend detection currently exists, making a comparative evaluation of methods impossible. Most of the prior work has used proprietary data or
small datasets; or evaluation measures were not directly tied
to the objectives of trend detection (Gollapalli and Li 2015).
We remedy this situation by publishing the benchmark
TRENDNERT.1 The benchmark consists of the following:

Abstract
Computational analysis and modeling of the evolution of
trends is an important area of research in Natural Language
Processing (NLP) because of its socio-economic impact.
However, no large publicly available benchmark for trend
detection currently exists, making a comparative evaluation
of methods impossible. We remedy this situation by publishing the benchmark TRENDNERT, consisting of a set of gold
trends and downtrends and document labels that is available
as an unrestricted download, and a large underlying document collection that can also be obtained for free. We propose
Mean Average Precision (MAP) as an evaluation measure for
trend detection and apply this measure in an investigation of
several baselines.

1

Introduction

Science changes and evolves rapidly: novel research areas
emerge, while others fade away. Keeping pace with these
changes is challenging. Therefore, recognizing and forecasting research trends is of great importance for researchers
and academic publishers as well as for funding agencies,
companies and journalists. The task of trend detection is
often solved by domain experts who use special tools to
investigate the data and get useful insights from it, e.g.,
through data visualization. However, manual analysis of
large amounts of data can be time-consuming, and domain
experts are expensive. Also, the overall increase of research
publications (e.g., on Google Scholar, PubMed, DBLP) in
the past decade makes an approach based on human domain
experts increasingly difﬁcult whereas automated approaches
become a more desirable solution for the task of trend detection (Kontostathis et al. 2004).
At its inception, a new research topic often does not attract a lot of attention from the scientiﬁc community and is
represented by just a few publications. He and Chen (2018)
attribute the emergence of a trend to some triggering event,
e.g., the publication of an article in a high-impact journal.
Then the research topic starts to grow faster and becomes a
trend (He and Chen 2018). We adopt this as our deﬁnition
of trend in this paper: a trend is a research topic that has

1. A set of gold trends compiled based on an extensive analysis of the metaliterature;
2. A set of labeled documents, where each document is assigned to a trend, a downtrend or to a third class, the ﬂat
topics;
3. An evaluation script to compute Mean Average Precision
as the measure for the accuracy of trend detection algorithms;
We make the benchmark available as an unrestricted download.2 The underlying research corpus can be obtained for
free from Semantic Scholar (Ammar et al. 2018).3

1.1

Outline and Contributions

In this work, we address the challenge of benchmark creation for (down)trend detection. This paper is structured as
follows: Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 introduces our model for corpus creation and its components. In
Section 4, we present the crowdsourcing procedure for labeling the benchmark. Section 5 introduces our evaluation
measure. Section 6 describes the proposed baseline for trend
1

The name is a concatenation of trend and its ananym dnert
because it supports evaluation of both trends and downtrends.
2
https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/DHZCT
3
https://api.semanticscholar.org/corpus/

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8512

