The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

PCONV: The Missing but Desirable Sparsity in
DNN Weight Pruning for Real-Time Execution on Mobile Devices
Xiaolong Ma,†1 Fu-Ming Guo,†1 Wei Niu,2 Xue Lin,1 Jian Tang3,4
Kaisheng Ma,5 Bin Ren,2 Yanzhi Wang1
1

Northeastern University, 2 College of William and Mary, 3 DiDi AI Labs, 4 Syracuse University, 5 Tsinghua University
E-mail: 1 {ma.xiaol, guo.fu}@husky.neu.edu, 1 {xue.lin, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu,
2
wniu@email.wm.edu, 2 bren@cs.wm.edu, 3 tangjian@didiglobal.com, 5 kaisheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

and MobileNet (Howard et al. 2017) involve intensive computation and high memory storage, making it very challenging to execute inference system on current mobile platforms
in a real-time manner.
Recently, high-end mobile platforms are rapidly overtaking desktop and laptop as primary computing devices
for broad DNN applications such as wearable devices,
video streaming, unmanned vehicles, smart health devices, etc. (Philipp, Durr, and Rothermel 2011)(Lane et al.
2015)(Boticki and So 2010). Developing a real-time DNN
inference system is desirable but still yield to the limited
computation resources of embedded processors on a mobile platform. Multiple end-to-end mobile DNN acceleration
frameworks, such as TVM (Chen et al. 2018), TensorFlowLite (TFLite) (Ten ) and Alibaba Mobile Neural Network
(MNN) (Ali ), have been developed. However, the inference
time of large-scale DNNs (e.g., 242ms inference time using
TVM on Adreno 640 GPU with VGG-16) is still far from
real-time requirement.
In order to mitigate the challenge brings by the DNN’s
bulky computation and achieve the goal of real-time inference, it is necessary to consider algorithm-level innovations. Various DNN model compression techniques are studied, among which weight pruning (Han, Mao, and Dally
2015)(Mao et al. 2017)(Dai, Yin, and Jha 2017)(Wen et
al. 2016)(He, Zhang, and Sun 2017) can result in a notable reduction in the model size. Early work (Han, Mao,
and Dally 2015) on non-structured weight pruning (ﬁnegrained) prunes weights at arbitrary location, resulting in
a sparse model to be stored in the compressed sparse column (CSC) format. It leads to an undermined processing
throughput because the indices in the compressed weight
representation cause stall or complex workload on highly
parallel architectures (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015)(Wen et al.
2016). On the other hand, structured weight pruning (Wen
et al. 2016) (coarse-grained) is more hardware friendly. By
exploiting ﬁlter pruning and channel pruning, the pruned
model is more regular in its shape, which eliminates the
storage requirement in weight indices. However, it is observed that structured pruning hurts accuracy more signiﬁcantly than non-structured sparsity.
It is imperative to ﬁnd a new granularity level that

Abstract
Model compression techniques on Deep Neural Network
(DNN) have been widely acknowledged as an effective way
to achieve acceleration on a variety of platforms, and DNN
weight pruning is a straightforward and effective method.
There are currently two mainstreams of pruning methods representing two extremes of pruning regularity: non-structured,
ﬁne-grained pruning can achieve high sparsity and accuracy,
but is not hardware friendly; structured, coarse-grained pruning exploits hardware-efﬁcient structures in pruning, but suffers from accuracy drop when the pruning rate is high. In this
paper, we introduce PCONV, comprising a new sparsity dimension, – ﬁne-grained pruning patterns inside the coarsegrained structures. PCONV comprises two types of sparsities, Sparse Convolution Patterns (SCP) which is generated
from intra-convolution kernel pruning and connectivity sparsity generated from inter-convolution kernel pruning. Essentially, SCP enhances accuracy due to its special vision properties, and connectivity sparsity increases pruning rate while
maintaining balanced workload on ﬁlter computation. To deploy PCONV, we develop a novel compiler-assisted DNN inference framework and execute PCONV models in real-time
without accuracy compromise, which cannot be achieved
in prior work. Our experimental results show that, PCONV
outperforms three state-of-art end-to-end DNN frameworks,
TensorFlow-Lite, TVM, and Alibaba Mobile Neural Network
with speedup up to 39.2×, 11.4×, and 6.3×, respectively,
with no accuracy loss. Mobile devices can achieve real-time
inference on large-scale DNNs.

Introduction
Deep neural network (DNN) has emerged as the fundamental element and core enabler in machine learning applications due to its high accuracy, excellent scalability, and selfadaptiveness (Goodfellow et al. 2016). A well trained DNN
model can be deployed as inference system for multiple objectives, such as image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012), object detection (Ren et al. 2015), and
natural language processing (Hinton, Deng, and Yu 2012).
However, the state-of-art DNN models such as VGG-16 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), ResNet-50 (He et al. 2016)
†

These authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5117

