The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

That and There: Judging the Intent of Pointing Actions with Robotic Arms
Malihe Alikhani, Baber Khalid,∗ Rahul Shome,∗ Chaitanya Mitash
Kostas Bekris, Matthew Stone
Computer Science, Rutgers University
110 Frelinghuysen Road
Piscataway, NJ 08854-8019
ﬁrstname.lastname@rutgers.edu

robotic arm with a directional end-effector can exploit a fundamental ingredient of human communication (Kita 2003).
This has motivated roboticists to study simple pointing gestures that identify objects (Han, Kennington, and Schlangen
2018; Holladay, Dragan, and Srinivasa 2014; Zhao et al.
2016). This paper develops an empirically-grounded approach to robotic pointing that extends the range of physical
settings, task contexts and communicative goals of robotic
gestures. This is a step towards the richer and diverse interpretations that human pointing exhibits (Kendon 2004).

Abstract
Collaborative robotics requires effective communication between a robot and a human partner. This work proposes a
set of interpretive principles for how a robotic arm can use
pointing actions to communicate task information to people by extending existing models from the related literature. These principles are evaluated through studies where
English-speaking human subjects view animations of simulated robots instructing pick-and-place tasks. The evaluation distinguishes two classes of pointing actions that arise
in pick-and-place tasks: referential pointing (identifying objects) and locating pointing (identifying locations). The study
indicates that human subjects show greater ﬂexibility in interpreting the intent of referential pointing compared to locating
pointing, which needs to be more deliberate. The results also
demonstrate the effects of variation in the environment and
task context on the interpretation of pointing. Our corpus, experiments and design principles advance models of context,
common sense reasoning and communication in embodied
communication.

This work has two key contributions. First, we create a
systematic dataset, involving over 7000 human judgments,
where crowd workers describe their interpretation of animations of simulated robots instructing pick-and-place tasks.
Planned comparisons allow us to compare pointing actions
that identify objects (referential pointing) with those that
identify locations (locating pointing). They also allow us to
quantify the effect of accompanying speech, task constraints
and scene complexity, as well as variation in the spatial content of the scene. This new resource documents important
differences in the way pointing is interpreted in different
cases. For example, referential pointing is typically robust
to the exactness of the pointing gesture, whereas locating
pointing is much more sensitive and requires more deliberate
pointing to ensure a correct interpretation. The Experiment
Design section explains the overall process of data collection, the power analysis for the preregistered protocol, and
the content presented to subjects across conditions.

Introduction
Recent years have seen a rapid increase of robotic deployment, beyond traditional applications in cordoned-off workcells in factories, into new, more collaborative use-cases. For
example, social robotics and service robotics have targeted
scenarios like rehabilitation, where a robot operates in close
proximity to a human. While industrial applications envision
full autonomy, these collaborative scenarios involve interaction between robots and humans and require effective communication. For instance, a robot that is not able to reach
an object may ask for a pick-and-place to be executed in
the context of collaborative assembly. Or, in the context of
a robotic assistant, a robot may ask for conﬁrmation of a
pick-and-place requested by a person.
When the robot’s form permits, researchers can design
such interactions using principles informed by research
on embodied face-to-face human–human communication.
In particular, by realizing pointing gestures, an articulated

The second contribution is a set of interpretive principles,
inspired by the literature on vague communication, that summarize the ﬁndings about robot pointing. They suggest that
pointing selects from a set of candidate interpretations determined by the type of information speciﬁed, the possibilities
presented by the scene, and the options compatible with the
current task. In particular, we propose that pointing picks
out all candidates that are not signiﬁcantly further from the
pointing ray than the closest alternatives. Based on our empirical results, we present design principles that formalize
the relevant notions of “available alternatives” and “signiﬁcantly further away”, which can be used in future pointing
robots. The Analysis and Design Principles sections explain
and justify this approach.

∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10343

