The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Simultaneous Learning of Pivots and
Representations for Cross-Domain Sentiment Classiﬁcation
Liang Li,1 Weirui Ye,1 Mingsheng Long,1 () Yateng Tang,2 Jin Xu,2 Jianmin Wang1
1

School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
2
Data Quality Team, Wechat, Tencent Inc., China
{liliang17, ywr16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {mingsheng, jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {fredyttang, jinxxu}@tencent.com
1

Blitzer et al. (2007) set up multiple pivot-prediction tasks to
induce a projected joint low-dimensional space that bridges
the domains, and these auxiliary tasks are highly correlated
with the sentiment classiﬁcation task.
With the advances of deep learning in NLP, some early
studies explored deep models for sentiment domain adaptation (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011; Chen et al. 2012)
by learning cross-domain representations to disentangle the
variational factors behind data. Recently, some works integrated pivot selection with deep models. Ziser and Reichart (2016) presented the AE-SCL-SR model to marry
pivot based and autoencoder based approaches. They also incorporated the pivot to language modeling, and their PBLM
model (Ziser and Reichart 2018; 2019) yielded superiority over many previous approaches. Despite their promising
results, they cannot learn pivots during training and completely depend on feature selection methods to engineer the
pivots, which may be discriminative for source domain task
but do not transfer well across domains. Further, these works
share another limitation: Akin to left-to-right language modeling, the prediction task conditions on previous words including pivots and non-pivots, which may not sufﬁciently
model the connections between pivot and non-pivot features.
How to detect pivots effectively still remains an important
challenge for sentiment domain adaptation. In this paper, we
propose the Transferable Pivot Transformer (TPT) for crossdomain sentiment classiﬁcation. TPT consists of two networks: one Pivot Selector for learning to ﬁnd transferable ngram pivots, based on its mutual information and the uncertainty of distinguishing them between domains, and another
Transferable Transformer for explicitly modeling the relationship between pivots and non-pivots. Unlike pivot engineering, our pivot learning can be seamlessly combined with
representation learning, which enables end-to-end learning
of expressive pivots and representations from scratch. The
experiments conducted on a number of different source and
target domains show that our method achieves the best accuracy compared with a number of strong baselines.

Abstract
Cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation aims to leverage useful
knowledge from a source domain to mitigate the supervision
sparsity in a target domain. A series of approaches depend on
the pivot features that behave similarly for polarity prediction
in both domains. However, the engineering of such pivot features remains cumbersome and prevents us from learning the
disentangled and transferable representations from rich semantic and syntactic information. Towards learning the pivots
and representations simultaneously, we propose a new Transferable Pivot Transformer (TPT). Our model consists of two
networks: a Pivot Selector that learns to detect transferable ngram pivots from contexts, and a Transferable Transformer
that learns to generate domain-invariant representations by
modeling the correlation between pivot and non-pivot words.
The Pivot Selector and Transferable Transformer are jointly
optimized through end-to-end back-propagation. We experiment with real tasks of cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation
over 20 domain pairs where our model outperforms prior arts.

Introduction
Despite the great progress achieved by previous works in
the area of Natural Language Processing (NLP), crossdomain sentiment classiﬁcation is still a challenging task.
The key challenge lies in that data from different domains
are drawn from different distributions, and there are a lot
of domain-speciﬁc words and expressions in practice. There
is a dilemma that domain-common words are usually not
discriminative enough for distinguishing sentiment polarity,
while many sentiment-words are domain-speciﬁc and cannot transfer well across domains. Several techniques have
been proposed for sentiment domain adaptation. The aim
is to bridge the source and target domains by learning
domain-invariant feature representations so that a classiﬁer
trained on a source domain can be adapted to another target
domain. In cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation, previous
works (Blitzer, Dredze, and Pereira 2007; Pan et al. 2010;
Wu and Huang 2016; Yu and Jiang 2016) mainly rely on
a basic intuition that non-pivot features could be aligned
with the help of pivot features. For sentiment classiﬁcation,

Related Work

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation: In the scenario of unsupervised domain adaptation, we have access to labeled
8220

