The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Effective Hard Thresholding Method Based on
Stochastic Variance Reduction for Nonconvex Sparse Learning
Guannan Liang, Qianqian Tong, Chunjiang Zhu, Jinbo Bi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
{guannan.liang, qianqian.tong, chunjiang.zhu, jinbo.bi}@uconn.edu

been developed to solve the problems such as matching pursuit (Mallat and Zhang 1993), orthogonal matching pursuit (Pati, Rezaiifar, and Krishnaprasad 1993), compressive
sampling matching pursuit (Needell and Tropp 2009), hard
thresholding pursuit (Foucart 2011), iterative hard thresholding (Blumensath and Davies 2009) and subspace pursuit
(Dai and Milenkovic 2009). These algorithms largely fall
into the regimes of either matching pursuit methods or iterative hard thresholding (HT) methods.
For an arbitrary loss function (not restricted to quadratic
functions), (Bahmani, Raj, and Boufounos 2013) proposed a
greedy algorithm called Gradient Support Pursuit (GraSP).
However, GradSP requires to ﬁnd an optimal solution to
argmin f (x) over the identiﬁed support after thresholding,
which does not have analytical solutions for an arbitrary
loss, and thus could be time-consuming. For the general
form of Problem (1), matching pursuit methods encounter
the same issue as GraSP. Later, coordinate-wise algorithms
and block decomposition algorithms also were developed
(Patrascu and Necoara 2015; Yuan, Shen, and Zheng 2019).
However, they may either cycle indeﬁnitely, if the minimization step has multiple solutions, or need to solve a subproblem globally using combinatorial search methods at each iteration, which may fail for very large sparsity k. Hence, iterative gradient-based HT methods have gained signiﬁcant
interest and become popular for nonconvex sparse learning.
Iterative HT methods include gradient descent HT (GDHT) method (Jain, Tewari, and Kar 2014), stochastic gradient descent HT (SG-HT) method (Nguyen, Needell, and
Woolf 2017), hybrid stochastic gradient HT (HSG-HT)
method (Zhou, Yuan, and Feng 2018), and stochastic variance reduced gradient HT (SVRG-HT) method (Li et al.
2016b). These algorithms update the parameter iterate xt
via gradient descent or its variants, and then apply the HT
operator to enforce sparsity of x. The computation can be
concisely written as xt+1 = Hk (xt − ηv t ), where η is the
learning rate, v t can be the full gradient, stochastic gradient or variance reduced gradient at the tth iteration, and
Hk (·) : Rd → Rd denotes the HT operator that preserves
the top k elements in x and sets other elements to 0.
Importantly, we point out that the computational complexity of iterative HT methods mainly consists of two parts:

Abstract
We propose a hard thresholding method based on stochastically controlled stochastic gradients (SCSG-HT) to solve
a family of sparsity-constrained empirical risk minimization
problems. The SCSG-HT uses batch gradients where batch
size is pre-determined by the desirable precision tolerance
rather than full gradients to reduce the variance in stochastic
gradients. It also employs the geometric distribution to determine the number of loops per epoch. We prove that, similar to the latest methods based on stochastic gradient descent or stochastic variance reduction methods, SCSG-HT
enjoys a linear convergence rate. However, SCSG-HT now
has a strong guarantee to recover the optimal sparse estimator. The computational complexity of SCSG-HT is independent of sample size n when n is larger than 1 , which enhances the scalability to massive-scale problems. Empirical
results demonstrate that SCSG-HT outperforms several competitors and decreases the objective value the most with the
same computational costs.

Introduction
We consider the following sparsity-constrained empirical
risk minimization (ERM) problems, which have been widely
used in high-dimensional data analyses (Donoho and others 2006; Tropp and Gilbert 2007; Bahmani, Raj, and
Boufounos 2013; Jalali, Johnson, and Ravikumar 2011),
n
1
min f (x) :=
fz (x) subject to x0 ≤ k, (1)
n z=1
x∈Rd
where f (x) is a smooth and (non-strongly) convex function,
fz (x) (z ∈ [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n}) is an individual loss associated with the z th sample, x0 denotes the l0 -norm of
a vector, i.e., computes the number of nonzero entries in x,
and the integer k is the required sparsity parameter. Problem (1) plays an essential role in many statistical learning,
machine learning, and signal processing problems.
Due to the non-convexity of the cardinality constraint,
ﬁnding a solution to Problem (1) is generally NP-hard
(Natarajan 1995). The l0 -constrained linear regression problems or those with a quadratic loss function gained signiﬁcant attention ﬁrst. Many greedy-based algorithms have
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1585

