The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Tell Me What They’re Holding: Weakly-Supervised Object
Detection with Transferable Knowledge from Human-Object Interaction
Daesik Kim,1,2,* Gyujeong Lee,1,* Jisoo Jeong,1,* Nojun Kwak1,†
1

Seoul National University, 2 NAVER WEBTOON Corp.
{daesik.kim, regulation.lee, soo3553, nojunk}@snu.ac.kr

1)

Abstract

Bottle ?

In this work, we introduce a novel weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) paradigm to detect objects belonging to rare classes that have not many examples using transferable knowledge from human-object interactions (HOI).
While WSOD shows lower performance than full supervision, we mainly focus on HOI as the main context which
can strongly supervise complex semantics in images. Therefore, we propose a novel module called RRPN (relational region proposal network) which outputs an object-localizing
attention map only with human poses and action verbs. In
the source domain, we fully train an object detector and the
RRPN with full supervision of HOI. With transferred knowledge about localization map from the trained RRPN, a new
object detector can learn unseen objects with weak verbal supervision of HOI without bounding box annotations in the
target domain. Because the RRPN is designed as an add-on
type, we can apply it not only to the object detection but also
to other domains such as semantic segmentation. The experimental results on HICO-DET dataset show the possibility that
the proposed method can be a cheap alternative for the current supervised object detection paradigm. Moreover, qualitative results demonstrate that our model can properly localize
unseen objects on HICO-DET and V-COCO datasets.

A. for Human

What he is holding is..
B. for Machine

(20,320,220,540)
2)

{person, bottle}

{person(bbox) {person(pixel labels)
, bottle(bbox)} , bottle(pixel labels)}

1 sec per class

10 sec per
instance

79 sec per
instance

{person, hold,
bottle}

How long it takes
per relation ?

Figure 1: 1) Two different types of description of an object.
A is human’s way of identifying an object while B is for
machines. 2) Manually annotating time for three tasks. Bearman et al. (Bearman et al. 2016) estimated annotation times
for image level, bounding box and pixel level. At rightmost,
annotating time of relation sentence can be similar to that of
image-level since only action verb “hold” is added.

Introduction
In a decade, object detection has become one of the most
successful ﬁelds in computer vision with various applications (Ren et al. 2015; Dai et al. 2016; Redmon et
al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016). Most of the successful models have emerged after the release of large scale datasets
(e.g. PASCAL VOC, MS-COCO (Everingham et al. 2010;
Lin et al. 2014)) with bounding box annotations. Given input
images, conventional object detection models can localize
boxes with the corresponding class scores. Thus, they normally require manually annotated bounding boxes containing accurate coordinate values and object labels for training.
However, annotating bounding boxes is time-consuming
and labor-intensive. It can also be difﬁcult to expand the volume of a dataset by adding more object classes or adding

more images. Therefore, researches to reduce those costs in
various ways have drawn attentions these days.
Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) has been
proposed to tackle the aforementioned problems (Zhu et al.
2017; Shi, Caesar, and Ferrari 2017; Jie et al. 2017). It is
to detect objects within images by weak supervision such as
image-level labels. At the cost of lowered annotation cost,
WSOD performs worse than full supervision.
To overcome a limitation of weak supervision, some approaches (Shi, Caesar, and Ferrari 2017) rely on another
type of full supervision with transfer learning. Transferred
knowledge from a source domain could support weak super-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*All of authors equally contributed to this work.
†Corresponding author.
11246

