The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Visualizing Deep Networks by Optimizing with Integrated Gradients
Zhongang Qi,1,2 Saeed Khorram,1 Li Fuxin1
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University
2
Applied Research Center, PCG, Tencent
zhongangqi@tencent.com, {khorrams, lif}@oregonstate.edu

and other image domains that humans currently lack understanding, heatmaps can also be used to help humans gain
further insights on which part of the images are important.
Some heatmap approaches achieve good visual qualities for human understanding, such as several onestep backpropagation-based visualizations including Guided
Backpropagation (GBP) (Springenberg et al. 2015) and the
deconvolutional network (DeconvNet) (Zeiler and Fergus
2014). These approaches utilize the gradient or variants of
the gradient and backpropagate them back to the input image, in order to decide which pixels are more relevant to the
change of the deep network prediction. However, whether
they are actually correlated to the decision-making of the
network is not that clear (Nie, Zhang, and Patel 2018). (Nie,
Zhang, and Patel 2018) proves that GBP and DeconvNet are
essentially doing (partial) image recovery, and thus generate
more human-interpretable visualizations that highlight object boundaries, which do not necessarily represent what the
model has truly learned.
An issue with these one-step approaches is that they only
reﬂect inﬁnitesimal changes of the prediction of a deep network. In the highly nonlinear function estimated by the deep
network, such inﬁnitesimal changes are not necessarily reﬂective of changes large enough to alter the decision of the
model. (Petsiuk, Das, and Saenko 2018) proposed evaluation
metrics based on masking the image with heatmaps and verifying whether the masking will indeed change deep network
predictions. Ideally, if the highlighted regions for a category
are removed from the image, the deep network should no
longer predict that category. This is measured by the deletion metric. On the other hand, the network should predict a
category only using the regions highlighted by the heatmap,
which is measured by the insertion metric (Fig. 1).
If these are the goals of a heatmap, a natural idea would be
to directly optimize them. The mask approach proposed in
(Fong and Vedaldi 2017) generates heatmaps by solving an
optimization problem, which aims to ﬁnd the smallest and
smoothest area that maximally decrease the output of a neural network, directly optimizing the deletion metric. It can
generate very good heatmaps, but usually takes a long time
to converge, and sometimes the optimization can be stuck in
a bad local optimum due to the strong nonconvexity of the

Abstract
Understanding and interpreting the decisions made by deep
learning models is valuable in many domains. In computer vision, computing heatmaps from a deep network is a popular
approach for visualizing and understanding deep networks.
However, heatmaps that do not correlate with the network
may mislead human, hence the performance of heatmaps in
providing a faithful explanation to the underlying deep network is crucial. In this paper, we propose I-GOS, which optimizes for a heatmap so that the classiﬁcation scores on the
masked image would maximally decrease. The main novelty
of the approach is to compute descent directions based on
the integrated gradients instead of the normal gradient, which
avoids local optima and speeds up convergence. Compared
with previous approaches, our method can ﬂexibly compute
heatmaps at any resolution for different user needs. Extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets show that the
heatmaps produced by our approach are more correlated with
the decision of the underlying deep network, in comparison
with other state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
In recent years, there has been signiﬁcant focus on explaining deep networks (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016;
Lundberg and Lee 2017; Elenberg et al. 2017; Bau et
al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2018; Zhang, Wu, and Zhu 2018;
Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018). Explainability is important for humans to trust the deep learning model, especially
in crucial decision-making scenarios. In the computer vision domain, one of the most important explanation techniques is the heatmap approach (Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Selvaraju et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2016), which focuses on generating heatmaps
that highlight parts of the input image that are most important to the decision of the deep networks on a particular classiﬁcation target. The heatmaps can be used to diagnose deep models to understand whether the models utilize
the right contents to make the classiﬁcation. This diagnosis is important when deep networks malfunction in highstake cases, e.g. autonomous driving. In medical imaging
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11890

