The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Rumor Detection on Social Media with
Bi-Directional Graph Convolutional Networks
Tian Bian,1,2 Xi Xiao,1 Tingyang Xu,2 Peilin Zhao,2 Wenbing Huang,2 Yu Rong,2 Junzhou Huang2
1

Tsinghua University
2
Tencent AI Lab
bt18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xiaox@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, hwenbing@126.com, yu.rong@hotmail.com
{tingyangxu, masonzhao, joehhuang}@tencent.com

Decision Tree (Castillo, Mendoza, and Poblete 2011), Random Forest (Kwon et al. 2013), Support Vector Machine
(SVM) (Yang et al. 2012). Some studies apply more effective features, such as user comments (Giudice 2010),
temporal-structural features (Wu, Yang, and Zhu 2015), and
the emotional attitude of posts (Liu et al. 2015). However,
those methods mainly rely on feature engineering, which is
very time-consuming and labor-intensive. Moreover, those
handcrafted features are usually lack of high-level representations extracted from the propagation and the dispersion of
rumors.

Abstract
Social media has been developing rapidly in public due to
its nature of spreading new information, which leads to rumors being circulated. Meanwhile, detecting rumors from
such massive information in social media is becoming an arduous challenge. Therefore, some deep learning methods are
applied to discover rumors through the way they spread, such
as Recursive Neural Network (RvNN) and so on. However,
these deep learning methods only take into account the patterns of deep propagation but ignore the structures of wide
dispersion in rumor detection. Actually, propagation and dispersion are two crucial characteristics of rumors. In this paper, we propose a novel bi-directional graph model, named
Bi-Directional Graph Convolutional Networks (Bi-GCN), to
explore both characteristics by operating on both top-down
and bottom-up propagation of rumors. It leverages a GCN
with a top-down directed graph of rumor spreading to learn
the patterns of rumor propagation; and a GCN with an opposite directed graph of rumor diffusion to capture the structures of rumor dispersion. Moreover, the information from
source post is involved in each layer of GCN to enhance the
inﬂuences from the roots of rumors. Encouraging empirical
results on several benchmarks conﬁrm the superiority of the
proposed method over the state-of-the-art approaches.

Recent studies have exploited deep learning methods that
mine high-level representations from propagation path/trees
or networks to identify rumors. Many deep learning models
such as Long Short Term Memory (LSTM), Gated Recurrent
Unit (GRU), and Recursive Neural Networks (RvNN) (Ma
et al. 2016; Ma, Gao, and Wong 2018) are employed since
they are capable to learn sequential features from rumor
propagation along time. However, these approaches have a
signiﬁcant limitation on efﬁciency since temporal-structural
features only pay attention to the sequential propagation of
rumors but neglect the inﬂuences of rumor dispersion. The
structures of rumor dispersion also indicate some spreading behaviors of rumors. Thus, some studies have tried to
involve the information from the structures of rumor dispersion by invoking Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
based methods (Yu et al. 2017; 2019). CNN-based methods
can obtain the correlation features within local neighbors but
cannot handle the global structural relationships in graphs or
trees (Bruna et al. 2014). Therefore, the global structural features of rumor dispersion are ignored in these approaches.
Actually, CNN is not designed to learn high-level representations from structured data but Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) is (Kipf and Welling 2017).

Introduction
With the rapid development of the Internet, social media
has become a convenient online platform for users to obtain
information, express opinions and communicate with each
other. As more and more people are keen to participate in
discussions about hot topics and exchange their opinions on
social media, many rumors appear. Due to a large number
of users and easy access to social media, rumors can spread
widely and quickly on social media, bringing huge harm to
society and causing a lot of economic losses. Therefore, regarding to the potential panic and threat caused by rumors,
it is urgent to come up with a method to identify rumors on
social media efﬁciently and as early as possible.
Conventional detection methods mainly adopt handcrafted features such as user characteristics, text contents
and propagation patterns to train supervised classiﬁers, e.g.,

So can we simply apply GCN to rumor detection since
it has successfully made progress in various ﬁelds, such as
social networks (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017), physical systems (Battaglia et al. 2016), and chemical drug discovery (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016)? The
answer is no. As shown in Figure 1(a), GCN, or called undirected GCN (UD-GCN), only aggregates information relied
on the relationships among relevant posts but loses the se-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
549

