The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

PEIA: Personality and Emotion Integrated Attentive
Model for Music Recommendation on Social Media Platforms
Tiancheng Shen,1 Jia Jia,1∗ Yan Li,2 Yihui Ma,1 Yaohua Bu,1
Hanjie Wang,2 Bo Chen,2 Tat-Seng Chua,3 Wendy Hall4
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
The Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Tsinghua University
2
WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China, 3 School of Computing, National University of Singapore
4
Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton
users, while CBM utilizes the acoustic signals and the track
metadata (Sarwar et al. 2001; Dieleman and Schrauwen
2013; Lee et al. 2018).
Besides the tracks, user traits also play an important role
in music recommendation. Researches show that people listen to music for multiple purposes, including interpersonal
relationships promotion, moods optimization, identity development and surveillance (Lonsdale and North 2011). Music preference, on the one hand, is related to long-term
traits including a wide array of personality dimensions, selfviews, and cognitive abilities (Rentfrow and Gosling 2003).
On the other hand, since music is an emotion-loaded type
of content, the emotion context also impacts music preferences, but in a short-term manner (Ferwerda, Schedl,
and Tkalcic 2015). Some researches also work towards
user-centric music recommendation, incorporating either
personality-oriented or emotion-oriented features (Deng et
al. 2015; Cheng and Tang 2016; Cheng et al. 2017; Dhahri,
Matsumoto, and Hoashi 2018). While advance has been
achieved, these works only adopt limited information for
one-sided modeling of users, lacking systematic analysis of
user traits targeted on music recommendation. This inspires
us that: can we model the users systematically from perspectives of both personality and emotion, with music content
incorporated as well, to improve music recommendation?
Nowadays, people are increasingly relying on social media platforms like WeChat 1 and Twitter 2 to share their
daily lives, which may reﬂect their personal traits and states.
This makes it possible to incorporate users’ personality and
emotion together for music recommendation. Still, it is a
non-trivial task owing to the following challenges: (1) Since
social media data is quite complicated, how to effectively
capture useful information for in-depth user-modeling? (2)
Since the problem involves multi-faceted features, how to
model the user-music correlations with all of them, as well
as adaptively discriminating the most important factors?
In this work, we focus on music recommendation on social media platforms. We ﬁrst construct a WeChat dataset
containing 171,254 active users, 35,993 popular music
tracks and 18,508,966 user-music-interaction records. The

Abstract
With the rapid expansion of digital music formats, it’s indispensable to recommend users with their favorite music.
For music recommendation, users’ personality and emotion
greatly affect their music preference, respectively in a longterm and short-term manner, while rich social media data
provides effective feedback on these information. In this paper, aiming at music recommendation on social media platforms, we propose a Personality and Emotion Integrated Attentive model (PEIA), which fully utilizes social media data
to comprehensively model users’ long-term taste (personality) and short-term preference (emotion). Speciﬁcally, it takes
full advantage of personality-oriented user features, emotionoriented user features and music features of multi-faceted
attributes. Hierarchical attention is employed to distinguish
the important factors when incorporating the latent representations of users’ personality and emotion. Extensive experiments on a large real-world dataset of 171,254 users demonstrate the effectiveness of our PEIA model which achieves
an NDCG of 0.5369, outperforming the state-of-the-art methods. We also perform detailed parameter analysis and feature
contribution analysis, which further verify our scheme and
demonstrate the signiﬁcance of co-modeling of user personality and emotion in music recommendation.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of informatization, Internet has
become the major source of retrieving multimedia information. Music, as a signiﬁcant approach of communication
and expression, has been consumed by people as a common daily-life activity (Song, Dixon, and Pearce 2012). Although massive amounts of digital music have been accessible to people, to pick the favorite music out of the complete
database, however, is difﬁcult and time-consuming for users.
Hence, targeted on music applications, stores and communities, research efforts on music recommendation have been
made to generate potentially desired music playlists for
users, of which the most common approaches are collaborative ﬁltering (CF) and content-based methods (CBM).
Speciﬁcally, CF recommends items via the choice of similar
∗

Corresponding author: J. Jia (jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

206

https://weixin.qq.com/.
https://twitter.com/.

