The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Calorie Estimation in a Real-World Recipe Service
Jun Harashima, Makoto Hiramatsu, Satoshi Sanjo
Cookpad Inc.
Yebisu Garden Place Tower 12F, 4-20-3 Ebisu, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo
{jun-harashima, himkt, satoshi-sanjo}@cookpad.com

are available, and related workshops such as CEA and
MADiMa are held every year.
However, there has been little effort to address calorie estimation, which is one of the most important tasks in the ﬁeld
of healthcare. More precisely, although some studies have
addressed calorie estimation from food photos, few studies
have addressed this task from recipes.
One of our challenges in this study is to address the calorie estimation task for a recipe. To do so, we must tackle two
challenging subtasks. The ﬁrst is ingredient normalization,
in which the goal is to convert the ingredients written in a
recipe into their canonical forms in an ingredient dictionary.
For user-generated recipes especially, we observe a variety
of issues in the ingredient lists, such as orthographic variants, abbreviations, symbols, and parentheses. We have to
overcome these issues to enable the calorie contents of the
ingredients to be looked up in an ingredient dictionary.
The second subtask is serving estimation, which aims to
convert an amount written in a recipe into a number of servings. The amount describes how much volume the recipe
produces. The amount in a user-generated recipe is often
written freely. Thus, an amount may not be expressed in
terms of M people but as, for example, N pieces, N slices,
or N plates. These amounts need to be converted into the
number of servings (i.e., for M people) so that the calories
per serving can be calculated.
Another challenge in this study is to deploy ML-based
methods for the above tasks in our real-world recipe service.
Relatively little is known about the practical issues of introducing ML-based methods into real industrial scenarios. We
consider this issue for each task, design a deployment architecture for our methods, and deploy them in our service.
In summary, the contributions of this study are as follows:
• This is a pioneering attempt at calorie estimation for online recipes that exposes the fundamental difﬁculties of
such a task.
• The two subtasks of ingredient normalization and serving
estimation are introduced and explored using ML-based
methods.
• Practical issues related to deploying our methods in Cookpad, a real-world recipe service, are highlighted through a
case study.

Abstract
Cooking recipes play an important role in promoting a
healthy lifestyle, and a vast number of user-generated recipes
are currently available on the Internet. Allied to this growth
in the amount of information is an increase in the number
of studies on the use of such data for recipe analysis, recipe
generation, and recipe search. However, there have been few
attempts to estimate the number of calories per serving in
a recipe. This study considers this task and introduces two
challenging subtasks: ingredient normalization and serving
estimation. The ingredient normalization task aims to convert
the ingredients written in a recipe (e.g.,
, which
says “sesame oil (for ﬁnishing)” in Japanese) into their canonical forms (e.g.,
, sesame oil) so that their caloriﬁc content can be looked up in an ingredient dictionary. The serving estimation task aims to convert the amount written in the
recipe (e.g., N
, N pieces) into the number of servings
(e.g., M
, M people), thus enabling the calories per serving to be calculated. We apply machine learning-based methods to these tasks and describe their practical deployment in
Cookpad, the largest recipe service in the world. A series of
experiments demonstrate that the performance of our methods is sufﬁcient for use in real-world services.

Introduction
Developments in machine learning (ML)-related technologies continue to advance and focus on an ever-wider range
of data and applications. In particular, the ﬁeld of healthcare
is likely to be dramatically changed by the data-processing
capabilities of ML.
Cooking recipes are one such source of data, and there
are a vast number of recipes currently available on the Internet. For example, Cookpad and Yummly, the largest recipe
services in the world, contain more than 5.5 million and 2.0
million recipes, respectively. A considerable proportion of
these recipes are homemade—many people write their own
recipes and upload them to the Internet.
As the popularity of recipes has grown, so too has the
number of ML-related studies that use the data included
within them to perform tasks such as recipe analysis, recipe
generation, and recipe search. A variety of recipe datasets
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13306

