The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Chain Length and CSPs Learnable with Few Queries
Christian Bessiere,1 Clément Carbonnel,1 George Katsirelos2
1

LIRMM, CNRS, University of Montpellier, France
{christian.bessiere, clement.carbonnel}@lirmm.fr
2
UMR MIA-Paris, INRA, AgroParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, Paris, France
gkatsi@gmail.com

For constraint acquisition systems, there is a tradeoff between the computational difﬁculty of answering the queries
and the number of queries needed to identify the target network. Some queries that could guarantee quick convergence
towards a constraint network are too difﬁcult for a human
to answer with certainty. For instance, equivalence queries
provide the user with a candidate constraint network N and
ask if it captures his problem; if it does not, the user must
reply with an assignment misclassiﬁed by N . Other queries
(such as membership queries) are easy to answer but convergence may require exponentially many queries, even on
very simple constraint networks (Bessiere et al. 2017).
Partial membership queries are generalisations of membership queries in which the user is required to classify partial assignments. In 2013, Bessiere et al. presented a constraint acquisition algorithm Quacq based on partial membership queries, and they observed that on certain elementary constraint languages ({=, =} and {>} on the Boolean
domain) their algorithm is guaranteed to converge after
O(n log(n)) queries (Bessiere et al. 2013). These languages
are learnable with few, simple queries, but they are not very
useful for modelling. Are there more expressive languages
with similar learning properties?
Our ﬁrst contribution is a proof that Quacq-like algorithms can learn a considerably larger class of languages
with a quasi-linear number of partial membership queries.
Our argument revolves around the notion of chain length.
When one constraint is removed from a constraint network,
the solution set may either remain unchanged (if the constraint is redundant) or increase in size. The chain length
of a constraint language corresponds roughly to the maximum number of times the size of the solution set may increase when the constraints of an n-variables network are
removed one by one. We ﬁnd that Quacq-like algorithms
always learn constraint networks with O(CL(n) · log(n))
queries, where CL(n) is the chain length of the language.
As an example, consider a system of homogeneous linear equations over a ﬁnite ﬁeld. The solution set is a vector
space. When an equation (a constraint) is removed, either
the solution set remains the same, or new linearly independent solutions appear and the dimension increases. Since
the dimension of the solution set is bounded by the num-

Abstract
The goal of constraint acquisition is to learn exactly a constraint network given access to an oracle that answers truthfully certain types of queries. In this paper we focus on partial
membership queries and initiate a systematic investigation of
the learning complexity of constraint languages. First, we use
the notion of chain length to show that a wide class of languages can be learned with as few as O(n log(n)) queries.
Then, we combine this result with generic lower bounds to
derive a dichotomy in the learning complexity of binary languages. Finally, we identify a class of ternary languages that
eludes our framework and hints at new research directions.

1

Introduction

Constraint programming is a declarative programming
paradigm for solving combinatorial problems, with a wide
range of applications in artiﬁcial intelligence (van Beek and
Chen 1999; Négrevergne and Guns 2015) and operational
research (Shaw 1998; Hooker and van Hoeve 2018). The
user declares a list of variables, which range over a domain
of his choice, and then constraints, which specify forbidden assignments to certain subsets of variables. A solver will
then either ﬁnd an assignment to the variables that satisﬁes
every constraint or prove that no such assignment exists.
From the user’s perspective, the difﬁculty lies in the modelling phase. Variables and domain values are often easily
derived from the unkowns in the original problem, but specifying rigorously what a solution is using only relations imposed upon subsets of variables may require considerable
expertise, especially if the solver only offers a limited catalog of possible relations. Constraint acquisition systems are
learning agents designed to assist the user in modelling his
problem. Such systems provide the user with simple queries
— for instance membership queries, in which a given assignment must be labelled as either “solution” or “non-solution”
— and use the collected data to construct a constraint network that hopefully corresponds to user’s problem. There
exist a number of constraint acquisition systems (Bessiere et
al. 2005; 2013; Beldiceanu and Simonis 2012), with various
learning strategies and theoretical guarantees.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1420

