The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adaptive Cross-Modal
Embeddings for Image-Text Alignment
Jônatas Wehrmann, Camila Kolling, Rodrigo C. Barros
Machine Intelligence and Robotics Research Group
School of Technology, Pontifı́cia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul
Av. Ipiranga, 6681, 90619-900, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
Email: {jonatas.wehrmann, camila.kolling}@edu.pucrs.br, rodrigo.barros@pucrs.br
tasks: (i) Image Retrieval by using a textual query; and (ii)
Image Annotation, which consists in ﬁnding proper textual
descriptions for a given image. A typical framework for
training Image-Text Alignment models is the use of neural
networks to extract high-level features of both images and
captions. Those features are then projected onto the same
shared space, the so-called multimodal embedding space –
or visual-semantic embedding space (Kiros, Salakhutdinov,
and Zemel 2014; Faghri et al. 2017; Vendrov et al. 2016). A
pairwise loss function is used to approximate similar pairs,
while making uncorrelated ones to be far from each other
in that space. Recent work have demonstrated that the use
of more integrated representations can be helpful as the
model would be able to learn ﬁne-grained correlations. For
instance, work in (Lee et al. 2018) used visual features to
compute textual ones and vice-versa with the aid of stacked
attention layers, which helped to achieve better predictive
results. Nevertheless, such an upgrade comes with a cost: it
is much slower during both training and test times due to the
need of computing distinct features for each image-text pair.

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach for training
image-text alignment models, namely ADAPT. Image-text
alignment methods are often used for cross-modal retrieval,
i.e., to retrieve an image given a query text, or captions that
successfully label an image. ADAPT is designed to adjust
an intermediate representation of instances from a modality
a using an embedding vector of an instance from modality b.
Such an adaptation is designed to ﬁlter and enhance important information across internal features, allowing for guided
vector representations – which resembles the working of attention modules, though far more computationally efﬁcient.
Experimental results on two large-scale Image-Text alignment datasets show that ADAPT-models outperform all the
baseline approaches by large margins. Particularly, for Image Retrieval, ADAPT, with a single model, outperforms the
state-of-the-art approach by a relative improvement of R@1
≈ 24% and for Image Annotation, R@1 ≈ 8% on Flickr30k
dataset. On MS COCO it provides an improvement of R@1
≈ 12% for Image Retrieval, and ≈ 7% R@1 for Image Annotation. Code is available at https://github.com/jwehrmann/
retrieval.pytorch.

This work introduces ADAPT, a method to improve the
embedded representation of instances from modality a based
on the global information of the modality b. ADAPT is
designed to modify intermediate features (word-level or
region-wise projections) by using parameters predicted by
the vector representation of the other modality. Such a feature adaptation procedure works as a ﬁltering strategy. For
instance, we can use visual-based features in order to ﬁlter
the most important hidden-state dimensions of captions to
build a better textual embedding. We show that such an approach, despite being quite faster during both training and
test times, is able to outperform attention-based ones, specially in the Image Retrieval task.

Introduction
Neural networks can been seen as fully-differentiable endto-end computational graphs, allowing for data-driven training of complete models. This particular feature enabled
the possibility of learning multimodal representations and
models, that have been used in many tasks, such as Image Captioning (Vinyals et al. 2015), VQA (Anderson
et al. 2017), Text-to-Image Generation (Goodfellow et
al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2017), Visually-grounded Translation (Elliott et al. 2016), and Image Search via textual
queries (Kiros, Salakhutdinov, and Zemel 2014; Faghri et
al. 2017; Wehrmann and Barros 2018; Lee et al. 2018).
Even though multimodal model is a broad term that comprises roughly any model trained over more than a single
modality (e.g., images, videos, text, audio), in this work
we focus only on the Images-Text Alignment problem –
which is also referred in the literature as Multimodal Retrieval, Cross-modal Retrieval and Bidirectional Alignment.
Image-Text alignment models are mainly used for two main

We also provide a comprehensive study on the impact of
each component within ADAPT. This allows us to present
the importance of each architectural decision, as well as better understand the achieved results. Such a study have shown
that it is possible to make our models even lighter and faster
while sill outperforming SCAN (same R@1 but 25× faster).
Finally, we introduce a strategy to visualize model predictions, and better understand its behavior.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12313

