The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CASTER: Predicting Drug Interactions
with Chemical Substructure Representation
Kexin Huang,1,2 Cao Xiao,2 Trong Nghia Hoang,3 Lucas M. Glass,2 Jimeng Sun4
1

Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA
2
Analytic Center of Excellence, IQVIA, Cambridge, MA, USA
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, Cambridge, MA, USA
4
Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
kexinhuang@hsph.harvard.edu, {cao.xiao, lucas.glass}@iqvia.com, nghiaht@ibm.com, jsun@cc.gatech.edu
Fu, Xiao, and Sun 2020). These methods are based on the
assumption that drugs with similar representations (of chemical structure) will have similar properties (e.g., DDIs). Despite the reported good performance, these works still have
the following limitations:
1. Lack of specialized drug representation for DDI prediction. One of the major mechanism of drug interactions results from the chemical reactions among only a
few functional sub-structures of the entire drug’s molecular structure (Silverman and Holladay 2014), while
the remaining substructures are less relevant. Many drug
pairs that are not similar in terms of DDI interaction
can still have signiﬁcant overlap on irrelevant substructures. Previous works (Ryu, Kim, and Lee 2018; GómezBombarelli et al. 2018; Jaeger, Fulle, and Turk 2018) often generate drug representations using the entire chemical representation, which causes the learned representations to be potentially biased toward irrelevant substructures. This undermines the learned drug similarity
and DDI predictions.
2. Limited labels and generalizability. Some of the previous methods need external biomedical knowledge for improved performance and cannot be generalized to drugs
in early development phase (Ma et al. 2018; Ferdousi,
Safdari, and Omidi 2017; Zhang et al. 2015). Others rely
on a small set of labelled training data, which impairs
their generalizability to new drugs or DDIs (Ryu, Kim,
and Lee 2018; Zhang et al. 2015).
3. Non-interpretable prediction. Although DL models
show good performance in DDI prediction, they often
produce predictions that are characterized by a large
number of parameters, which is hard to interpret (GómezBombarelli et al. 2018; Jaeger, Fulle, and Turk 2018).
In this paper, we present a new ChemicAl SubstrucTurE
Representation (CASTER) framework that performs DDI
predictions based on chemical structure data of drugs.
CASTER mitigates the aforementioned limitations via the
following technical contributions:
1. Specialized representation for DDI. We developed a
sequential pattern mining module (Alg. 1) to account
for the interaction mechanism between drugs, which
boils down to the reaction between their functional sub-

Abstract
Adverse drug-drug interactions (DDIs) remain a leading
cause of morbidity and mortality. Identifying potential DDIs
during the drug design process is critical for patients and society. Although several computational models have been proposed for DDI prediction, there are still limitations: (1) specialized design of drug representation for DDI predictions is
lacking; (2) predictions are based on limited labelled data
and do not generalize well to unseen drugs or DDIs; and
(3) models are characterized by a large number of parameters, thus are hard to interpret. In this work, we develop
a ChemicAl SubstrucTurE Representation (CASTER) framework that predicts DDIs given chemical structures of drugs.
CASTER aims to mitigate these limitations via (1) a sequential pattern mining module rooted in the DDI mechanism to
efﬁciently characterize functional sub-structures of drugs; (2)
an auto-encoding module that leverages both labelled and unlabelled chemical structure data to improve predictive accuracy and generalizability; and (3) a dictionary learning module that explains the prediction via a small set of coefﬁcients
which measure the relevance of each input sub-structures to
the DDI outcome. We evaluated CASTER on two real-world
DDI datasets and showed that it performed better than stateof-the-art baselines and provided interpretable predictions.

1

Introduction

Adverse drug-drug interactions (DDIs) are caused by pharmacological interactions of drugs. They result in a large
number of morbidity and mortality, and incur huge medical costs (Giacomini et al. 2007; Onakpoya, Heneghan,
and Aronson 2016). Thus gaining accurate and comprehensive knowledge of DDIs, especially during the drug design process, is important to both patients and pharmaceutical industry. Traditional strategies of gaining DDI knowledge includes preclinical in vitro safety proﬁling and clinical safety trials, however they are restricted in terms of
small scales, long duration, and huge costs (Whitebread
et al. 2005). Recently, deep learning (DL) models that
leverage massive biomedical data for efﬁcient DDI predictions emerged as a promising direction (Lo et al. 2018;
Ryu, Kim, and Lee 2018; Xiao et al. 2017; Jin et al. 2017;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
702

