The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Gait Recognition for Co-Existing Multiple People Using Millimeter Wave Sensing
Zhen Meng,1 Song Fu,1 Jie Yan,1 Hongyuan Liang,1 Anfu Zhou,1
Shilin Zhu,2 Huadong Ma,1 Jianhua Liu,3 Ning Yang3
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Telecommunications Software and Multimedia, BUPT, Beijing, China
2
University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, United States
3
OPPO Co. Ltd., Beijing, China
{zhenmeng, fusong, yanjie, hongyuanliang, zhouanfu, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn,
shz338@eng.ucsd.edu, {liujianhua, yangning}@oppo.com
conditions. They cannot obtain clear images in dark/weaklight/blockage scenarios, which lead to gait recognition failures.
Recently, researchers propose to utilize wireless signal for
gait recognition. In particular, each person’s unique walking posture leads to a unique wireless signal variation pattern. By analyzing the pattern, we can identify the person just from the wireless signal, which eliminates the privacy concern and is also independent of the lighting conditions. Moreover, driven by the emerging 5G technologies,
gait recognition using the 5G mmWave wireless signal has
gained much interest. Compared with the traditional recognition using low-frequency omni-directional Wi-Fi signal
(Zou et al. 2018), mmWave gait recognition is promising to
achieve higher accuracy, in particular for co-existent multiple persons, because mmWave radios, with 100× bandwidth, can provide much ﬁne-grained spatial resolution.
Despite the potential, however, there is not a mmWave
gait data set open to researchers, which hinders the research
progress. In this paper, we build and publicly achieve a ﬁrstof-its-kind mmWave gait data set, which is collected from
95 volunteers and lasts about 30 hours in total. In particular, we use two mmWave devices in two different scenes as
shown in Figure 1. We let each device capture the reﬂected
mmWave signal from walking persons, which forms point
clouds. Then we segment the point cloud of multi-people
who are walking at the same time to get a single person’s
gait point cloud data. We propose a novel method to tagging
the data: ﬁrstly, we use clustering algorithm DBscan (Ester et al. 1996) to automatically cluster point clouds without given the number of clustering categories. Secondly, we
use the Hungarian algorithm (Kuhn 2010) to track the point
cloud clusters of one person’s routes. Thirdly, the routes are
matched to corresponding volunteers one by one. We believe
that the data set can provide an open base for designing and
comparing various mmWave gait recognition methods in a
fair way, so as to facilitate further research.
Using the data set, we evaluate ﬁve state-of-the-art deep
learning based gait recognition algorithms, and have two
observations: (i) the accuracy of gait recognition decreases
with the increase of the number of co-existent walking people. (ii) the accuracy of gait recognition increases if us-

Abstract
Gait recognition, i.e., recognizing persons from their walking postures, has found versatile applications in security
check, health monitoring, and novel human-computer interaction. The millimeter-wave (mmWave) based gait recognition represents the most recent advance. Compared with traditional camera-based solutions, mmWave based gait recognition bears unique advantages of being still effective under non-line-of-sight scenarios, such as in black, weak light,
or blockage conditions. Moreover, they are able to accomplish person identiﬁcation while preserving privacy. Currently, there are only few works in mmWave gait recognition,
since no public data set is available. In this paper, we build
a ﬁrst-of-its-kind mmWave gait data set, in which we collect gait of 95 volunteers ’seen’ from two mmWave radars in
two different scenarios, which together lasts about 30 hours.
Using the data set, we propose a novel deep-learning driven
mmWave gait recognition method called mmGaitNet, and
compare it with ﬁve state-of-the-art algorithms. We ﬁnd that
mmGaitNet is able to achieve 90% accuracy for single-person
scenarios, 88% accuracy for ﬁve co-existing persons, while
the existing methods achieve less than 66% accuracy for both
scenarios.

Introduction
Gait is an important biological feature of human beings.
In recent years, gait recognition has been found versatile applications in security check, health monitoring, and
novel human-computer interaction. For instance, the home
automation system can automatically adjust the lighting
brightness or temperature according to each person’s preference once it identiﬁes each person via gait recognition.
The most common gait recognition is based on computer vision, which utilizes camera to capture visual images
when a human walks, and then performs the identiﬁcation
(Makihara et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018; Chao et al. 2019;
Li, Liu, and Ma 2019). However, the vision solution bears
several limitations. Firstly, it raises severe privacy threats
for capturing the real images of human daily life, especially considering that the camera could be hijacked by malicious users. Secondly, cameras are easily affected by lighting
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
849

