The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Embedded Complementary and
Interactive Information for Multi-View Classiﬁcation
Jinglin Xu,1† Wenbin Li,2† Xinwang Liu,3 Dingwen Zhang,1,4 Ji Liu,5 Junwei Han1∗
1

3

Northwestern Polytechnical University, China, 2 Nanjing University, China
National University of Defense Technology, China, 4 Xidian University, China, 5 Kwai Inc.

can be described by heterogeneous visual descriptors. These
extracted visual feature sets may show tremendous diversity and complementarity in heterogeneous feature spaces.
Therefore, many efforts have been devoted to combining
various features from different views to help the classiﬁcation tasks.
A straightforward way (Dong et al. 2013; Simonyan et
al. 2013) is to concatenate all the views into a single view
and then treat the task as a single view task. This seems unreasonable in some applications since the concatenation of
different views either causes very high dimensional feature
vectors or neglects the inter-view discriminant information
(Kan et al. 2016). Moreover, it might be suboptimal to treat
the important view and the less important view equally (Cai,
Nie, and Huang 2013).
Several prior algorithms (Hotelling 1936; Akaho 2006;
Hardoon et al. 2007; Blaschko and Lampert 2008; Rupnik
and Shawe-Taylor 2010) focus on constructing the linear or
non-linear transformations projected into a new space and
encourage different projected feature sets to be as correlative as possible. Typically, Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Hotelling 1936), attempts to learn two transformations which project two views into a common space by
maximizing their cross-correlation. Kernel Canonical Correlation Analysis (KCCA) (Akaho 2006) ﬁnds maximally
correlated nonlinear projections limited to the Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Spaces. With the increased number of views,
Multi-view CCA (MCCA) (Rupnik and Shawe-Taylor 2010)
is proposed to obtain multiple transformations by maximizing the total correlations of all the pairwise views. However,
the above works are unsupervised, which may lead to the
obtained transformations adverse for classiﬁcation.
To further take label information into account, as a supervised extension of CCA, Generalized Multi-view Analysis (GMA) (Sharma et al. 2012) learns a common discriminative subspace to solve the problem of cross-view classiﬁcation. As a combination of CCA and Uncorrelated Linear Discriminant Analysis (ULDA), Multi-view Uncorrelated Linear Discriminant Analysis (MULDA) (Yang and
Sun 2014) extracts mutual uncorrelated features for different views and computes their projected transformations in a
common subspace. Besides, Multi-view Discriminant Anal-

Abstract
Multi-view classiﬁcation optimally integrates various features from different views to improve classiﬁcation tasks.
Though most of the existing works demonstrate promising
performance in various computer vision applications, we observe that they can be further improved by sufﬁciently utilizing complementary view-speciﬁc information, deep interactive information between different views, and the strategy
of fusing various views. In this work, we propose a novel
multi-view learning framework that seamlessly embeds various view-speciﬁc information and deep interactive information and introduces a novel multi-view fusion strategy to
make a joint decision during the optimization for classiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, we utilize different deep neural networks to
learn multiple view-speciﬁc representations, and model deep
interactive information through a shared interactive network
using the cross-correlations between attributes of these representations. After that, we adaptively integrate multiple neural
networks by ﬂexibly tuning the power exponent of weight,
which not only avoids the trivial solution of weight but also
provides a new approach to fuse outputs from different deterministic neural networks. Extensive experiments on several
public datasets demonstrate the rationality and effectiveness
of our method.

Introduction
In recent years, multi-view classiﬁcation has been a fundamental topic of computer vision community (Su et al. 2009;
Sun et al. 2009; Ozay, Walas, and Leonardis 2014; Farfade,
Saberian, and Li 2015; Qi et al. 2016; Kanezaki, Matsushita,
and Nishida 2018). The ability of multi-view classiﬁcation
can be used for object recognition, scene interpretation, and
visual search, which is crucial for an intelligent visual recognition system (Savarese and Li 2010).
It is worth mentioning that ‘multi-view’ in this paper
means multiple distinct representations of the object and
comprehensively describes all the information of the object. In practical applications, many objects have a set of
diverse and complementary representations in the form of
multiple views. The most common example is that images
∗

Corresponding author, † Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6494

