The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Feature Deformation Meta-Networks in Image Captioning of Novel Objects
Tingjia Cao,1 Ke Han,1 Xiaomei Wang,1 Lin Ma,3 Yanwei Fu,2 Yu-Gang Jiang,1 Xiangyang Xue1
1
2

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science Fudan University
School of Data Science, and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University, 3 Tencent AI Lab
{tjcao16, yanweifu, ygj, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn, forest.linma@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper studies the task of image captioning with novel
objects, which only exist in testing images. Intrinsically, this
task can reﬂect the generalization ability of models in understanding and captioning the semantic meanings of visual concepts and objects unseen in training set, sharing the similarity
to one/zero-shot learning. The critical difﬁculty thus comes
from that no paired images and sentences of the novel objects
can be used to help train the captioning model. Inspired by
recent work (Chen et al. 2019b) that boosts one-shot learning by learning to generate various image deformations, we
propose learning meta-networks for deforming features for
novel object captioning. To this end, we introduce the feature
deformation meta-networks (FDM-net), which is trained on
source data, and learn to adapt to the novel object features
detected by the auxiliary detection model. FDM-net includes
two sub-nets: feature deformation, and scene graph sentence
reconstruction, which produce the augmented image features
and corresponding sentences, respectively. Thus, rather than
directly deforming images, FDM-net can efﬁciently and dynamically enlarge the paired images and texts by learning
to deform image features. Extensive experiments are conducted on the widely used novel object captioning dataset,
and the results show the effectiveness of our FDM-net. Ablation study and qualitative visualization further give insights
of our model.

Figure 1: The idea of feature deformation meta-networks
(FDM-net). (a) Inconsistent visual problems of directly
learning deformed images and the mismatching problem
applying deformed methods (Chen et al. 2019a; 2019b)
to novel object captioning; (b) Feature deformation metanetworks solve the problems in (a).

MSCOCO (Lin et al. 2014) dataset only contains 91 underlying object classes. Thus, novel object captioning (Tran et
al. 2016; Anne Hendricks et al. 2016) is recently studied
to generate appropriate descriptions for novel classes which
have no training instances. To address this problem, extra
resources have been investigated. These resources should be
easy to be collected and contain abundant visual concepts.
Previous works attempt to leverage object detection
datasets and text corpora for novel object captioning. Particularly, these methods explored transferring knowledge by
designing template-based caption models (Lu et al. 2018;
Wu et al. 2018), multi-task models (Anne Hendricks et al.
2016), or creating weakly-annotated data (Anderson, Gould,
and Johnson 2018). While these methods have got promising
results, we argue that tackling this problem more explicitly
from another perspective can lead to better performance.
Humans are good at describing visual scenes with novel
objects. Not surprisingly, cognitive evidence (Marr 1982)
shows that the visually grounded language generation is not

Introduction
It is one of the long term goals for the AI community to
pursue an agent that can automatically and linguistically describe the captured visual signals. Recently, this task is formulated as the task of image captioning, which has made
signiﬁcant progress powered by deep architectures (Xu et
al. 2015). Such a task relies on large-scale datasets containing the image and sentence pairs, like MSCOCO (Chen et al.
2015) and Flickr 30K (Plummer et al. 2015). However, the
expensive cost of manually annotating limits the richness of
visual concepts in image captioning dataset. For example,
compared to the recently released object detection dataset
Open Images V4 (Rom et al. 2017) with 600 object classes,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10494

