The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

RiskOracle: A Minute-Level Citywide Trafﬁc Accident Forecasting Framework
Zhengyang Zhou,1 Yang Wang,1,2∗ Xike Xie,1,2† Lianliang Chen,1 Hengchang Liu3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
School of Software Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{zzy0929, cll006}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {angyan,∗ xkxie,† }@ustc.edu.cn, liu.heng.chang@gmail.com

Tennessee model 2017) by modeling the spatiotemporal heterogeneous data take effects, and (Yuan, Zhou, and Yang
2018) reaches the state-of-the-art performance, it is less
meaningful for emergency conditions.
Mid-term accident forecasting on hour levels can be
further classiﬁed into classic learning- and deep learningbased methods. Classic learning models include clustering based (Anderson 2009), frequent tree based (Lin 2015)
and Nonnegative Matrix Factorization based (Chen et al.
2018c) methods. Unfortunately, this type of methods ignores the temporal relations and cannot model the complex nonlinear spatiotemporal interactions. Deep learningbased methods such as (Ren et al. 2018) utilize LSTM
layers to learn the temporal relations by feeding only historical trafﬁc accident records into the training network,
which lacks multi-source real-time trafﬁc inputs to support
the forecasting, leading to unsatisfactory prediction performance. There have been works (Chen et al. 2016; 2018a;
Bao 2019) on investigating accident patterns through existing deep learning frameworks SDAE, SDCAE and ConvLSTM, respectively, by incorporating real-time human mobilities. However, they all fail to extract the time-varying intersubregion and intra-subregion correlations in the whole city.
Although recent advances in deep learning models enable
promising results in hour-level accident forecasting, we argue that three important issues are largely overlooked, resulting in poor performance in prediction on minute levels.
Firstly, as mentioned in (Bao 2019), when the spatiotemporal resolution of the prediction tasks improves, zero-inﬂated
problems will occur, predicting all results as zeros. Without any strategy to deal with this issue, rare non-zero items
in training data disable models to take effects (Wang et
al. 2018a). Secondly, although degrees of static subregionwise correlations can be learned by Convolution Neural Network (CNN) (Chen et al. 2018a; Bao 2019), time-varying
subregion-wise correlations also play a vital role in citywide short-term accident prediction, i.e. two subregions tend
to be strongly correlated in the morning and less correlated in the afternoon due to the tidal ﬂows. Thirdly, abnormal changes in trafﬁc status within the same subregion during adjacent time intervals usually induce the occurrence of accidents or other events (Chen et al. 2018b;
Zheng, Zhang, and Yu 2015). Without considering aforementioned spatiotemporal issues, the ability of previous

Abstract
Real-time trafﬁc accident forecasting is increasingly important for public safety and urban management (e.g., real-time
safe route planning and emergency response deployment).
Previous works on accident forecasting are often performed
on hour levels, utilizing existed neural networks with static
region-wise correlations taken into account. However, it is
still challenging when the granularity of forecasting step improves as the highly dynamic nature of road network and
inherent rareness of accident records in one training sample, which leads to biased results and zero-inﬂated issue.
In this work, we propose a novel framework RiskOracle, to
improve the prediction granularity to minute levels. Specifically, we ﬁrst transform the zero-risk values in labels to ﬁt
the training network. Then, we propose the Differential Timevarying Graph neural network (DTGN) to capture the immediate changes of trafﬁc status and dynamic inter-subregion
correlations. Furthermore, we adopt multi-task and region selection schemes to highlight citywide most-likely accident
subregions, bridging the gap between biased risk values and
sporadic accident distribution. Extensive experiments on two
real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and scalability of our RiskOracle framework.

Introduction
Trafﬁc accident forecasting is of great signiﬁcance for urban safety. For example, with the deployment of Tennessee
accident prediction model, the fatality rate of Tennessee has
been reduced by 8.16% in 2016, according to statistics (Tennessee model 2017). There has been an increasing demand
to conduct the accident prediction in a ﬁner granularity, enabling more timely safe route recommendation for travelers
and accurate emergency response for emerging applications,
such as trafﬁc intelligence and automatic driving.
Regarding the length of accident prediction periods, existing tasks of trafﬁc accident forecasting are classiﬁed
into two parts, long-term (day-level prediction) and midterm (hour-level prediction). We summarize all these related
works in Table 1. Even though recent studies focus on daylevel forecasting (Chang 2005; Yuan, Zhou, and Yang 2018;
∗

Prof. Yang Wang is the corresponding author.
Prof. Xike Xie is the joint corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1258

