The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On the Convergence of Model Free Learning in Mean Field Games
Romuald Elie,1 Julien Pérolat,2 Mathieu Laurière,3 Matthieu Geist,4 Olivier Pietquin4
1

Université Paris-Est, 2 Deepmind
ORFE, Princeton University, 4 Google Research, Brain Team
romuald.elie@univ-mlv.fr, {perolat, mfgeist, pietquin}@google.com, lauriere@princeton.edu
3

the asymptotic limit where the number of agents is inﬁnite,
leading to the modeling intuition behind the theory of Mean
Field Games (MFG). This calls for an analysis of model free
learning scheme for MAS in terms of MFG.

Abstract
Learning by experience in Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) is
a difﬁcult and exciting task, due to the lack of stationarity
of the environment, whose dynamics evolves as the population learns. In order to design scalable algorithms for systems
with a large population of interacting agents (e.g., swarms),
this paper focuses on Mean Field MAS, where the number
of agents is asymptotically inﬁnite. Recently, a very active
burgeoning ﬁeld studies the effects of diverse reinforcement
learning algorithms for agents with no prior information on
a stationary Mean Field Game (MFG) and learn their policy
through repeated experience. We adopt a high perspective on
this problem and analyze in full generality the convergence of
a ﬁctitious iterative scheme using any single agent learning
algorithm at each step. We quantify the quality of the computed approximate Nash equilibrium, in terms of the accumulated errors arising at each learning iteration step. Notably,
we show for the ﬁrst time convergence of model free learning algorithms towards non-stationary MFG equilibria, relying only on classical assumptions on the MFG dynamics. We
illustrate our theoretical results with a numerical experiment
in a continuous action-space environment, where the approximate best response of the iterative ﬁctitious play scheme is
computed with a deep RL algorithm.

1

MFG were introduced by Lasry and Lions (2006a; 2006b)
and Huang, Malhamé, and Caines (2006) in order to model
the dynamic equilibrium between a large number of anonymous identical agents in interactions. Such systems encompass the modeling of numerous applications such as trafﬁc
jam dynamics, swarm systems, ﬁnancial market equilibrium,
crowd evacuation, smart grid control, web advertising auction, vaccination dynamics, rumor spreading on social media, among others. In a sequential game theory setting, each
player needs to take into account his impact on the strategies
of the other players. Studying games with an inﬁnite number of players is easier from this point of view, as the impact
of one single player on the others can be neglected. Hereby,
the asymptotic limit with inﬁnite population size considered
in MFG becomes highly relevant. A solution to a dynamic
MFG is determined via the optimal policy of a representative agent in response to the ﬂow of the entire population.
A mean ﬁeld (MF) Nash equilibrium arises when the distribution of the best response policies over the population
generates the exact same population ﬂow. In most cases, a
MF Nash equilibrium provides an approximate Nash equilibrium for an analogous game with a ﬁnite number of players (Cardaliaguet 2013; Bensoussan, Frehse, and Yam 2013;
Carmona and Delarue 2018).

Introduction

In Multi-agent systems (MAS), several autonomous robots
or agents interact and cooperate, compete or coordinate in
order to complete their task. The difﬁcult nature of the task
at hand combined with the large number of possible situations imply that the agents have to learn by experience. In
comparison to the single-agent case, the derivation of efﬁcient learning algorithms in this context is difﬁcult due to
the lack of stationarity of the environment, whose dynamics evolves as the population learns (Bu et al. 2008). This
gives rise to research topics lying at the intersection of game
theory and reinforcement learning. Nevertheless, in typical
examples, the number of interacting agents can be very large
(e.g., swarm systems) and deﬁes the scalability properties of
most learning algorithms. For anonymous identical agents,
a key simpliﬁcation in game theory is the introduction of

In the abundant literature on MFG, most papers consider planning problems with fully informed agents about
the game operation scheme, the reward function and the
MF population dynamics. Only a few contributions focus on learning problems in MFG, see e.g. (Yin et al.
2010; Cardaliaguet and Lehalle 2018; Hadikhanloo 2018;
Hadikhanloo and Silva 2019) for model based approaches.
Very recently, a rapidly growing literature intends to approximate the solution of stationary MFG in the realistic setting where agents with no prior information on the game
learn their best response policy through repeated experience.
These contributions restrict to a stationary setting and focus on speciﬁc Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms:
Q-learning (Guo et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2018b), ﬁctitious

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7143

