The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Integrating Deep Learning with Logic Fusion for Information Extraction
Wenya Wang, Sinno Jialin Pan
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{wangwy, sinnopan}@ntu.edu.sg

neural networks (Xu et al. 2018a; Adel and Schütze 2017)
and recurrent/recursive neural networks (Wang et al. 2016;
Miwa and Sasaki 2014) to learn context-aware and highlevel features to facilitate predictions. Pointer networks have
also been proposed for relation extraction (Katiyar and
Cardie 2017). Despite their advantage over low-level feature
engineering, the complex networks make learning harder
when the amount of training data is insufﬁcient, which is the
case for many IE tasks. Moreover, the automation in DNNs
makes it challenging to inject prior knowledge to guide the
training process. On the opposite, symbolic logic systems
provide an effective way to express complex domain knowledge in terms of logic rules and have proven to be advantageous when data is scarce. Inspired by the cognitive process
that learns from both experiences and background knowledge, recent years have witnessed a growing interest in combining deep learning with logic reasoning (Manhaeve et al.
2018; Dong et al. 2019) mostly for solving logical problems.

Abstract
Information extraction (IE) aims to produce structured information from an input text, e.g., Named Entity Recognition and
Relation Extraction. Various attempts have been proposed for
IE via feature engineering or deep learning. However, most
of them fail to associate the complex relationships inherent in
the task itself, which has proven to be especially crucial. For
example, the relation between 2 entities is highly dependent
on their entity types. These dependencies can be regarded as
complex constraints that can be efﬁciently expressed as logical rules. To combine such logic reasoning capabilities with
learning capabilities of deep neural networks, we propose to
integrate logical knowledge in the form of ﬁrst-order logic
into a deep learning system, which can be trained jointly in an
end-to-end manner. The integrated framework is able to enhance neural outputs with knowledge regularization via logic
rules, and at the same time update the weights of logic rules
to comply with the characteristics of the training data. We
demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization of the proposed model on multiple IE tasks.

To enhance the extraction performance in the NLP domain, we propose to incorporate domain knowledge as logic
rules that are integrated into the representation learning system through a uniﬁed framework. The proposed model consists of a deep learning module as well as a logic module, where the deep learning module contains a transformerstyle neural network to learn a rich feature representation
for each word. The transformer model computes complex
word-level correlations in multiple dimensions regardless
of context distance (Vaswani et al. 2017), and has shown
promising results in several NLP tasks, e.g., semantic role
labeling (Tan et al. 2018). We believe this mechanism could
be more beneﬁcial to propagate information between related
entities, compared to other deep models. The multi-head attention weight indicate the interactions between each pair of
words which can be further fed into a relation classiﬁer. The
logic module is composed of a set of logic rules represented
by First-order Logic (FOL). These rules explicitly specify
the complex relationships in the output label space, which
could not be handled using simple constraints. For example,
a FOL rule, Live In(Z, X) ∧ person(Z) ⇒ location(X),
speciﬁes that if the relation between two entities is Live In
and the ﬁrst entity is of type person, then the second entity
should have type location.

Introduction
Information extraction (IE) involves the identiﬁcation of important information from a piece of input text and is a fundamental step towards knowledge inference. Various problems can be categorized as IE tasks, e.g., Named Entity
Recognition (NER), Entity Linking, Opinion Target Extraction (OTE), Relation Extraction (RE), etc. In this work, we
target at 2 challenging IE tasks including OTE and end-toend RE. Given an input text, end-to-end RE aims to extract
target entities as well as entity relations (Li and Ji 2014). For
example, given the sentence “Rome is in Lazio province and
Naples in Campania”, the task requires the identiﬁcation of
Rome, Lazio, Naples and Campania as location entities, and
the relation between Rome and Lazio as Located In, same
for the relation between Naples and Campania. The task of
OTE aims to identify opinion targets within an opinionated
text (Hu and Liu 2004), e.g., service staff in “The service
staff in this restaurant is very kind”.
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely used
for various IE tasks. Existing works adopted convolutional
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9225

