The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DCR-Net: A Deep Co-Interactive Relation Network for
Joint Dialog Act Recognition and Sentiment Classiﬁcation
Libo Qin, Wanxiang Che,∗ Yangming Li, Mingheng Ni, Ting Liu
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{lbqin, car, yangmingli, mhni, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
In dialog system, dialog act recognition and sentiment classiﬁcation are two correlative tasks to capture speakers’ intentions, where dialog act and sentiment can indicate the explicit
and the implicit intentions separately (Kim and Kim 2018).
Most of the existing systems either treat them as separate
tasks or just jointly model the two tasks by sharing parameters in an implicit way without explicitly modeling mutual
interaction and relation. To address this problem, we propose
a Deep Co-Interactive Relation Network (DCR-Net) to explicitly consider the cross-impact and model the interaction
between the two tasks by introducing a co-interactive relation layer. In addition, the proposed relation layer can be
stacked to gradually capture mutual knowledge with multiple steps of interaction. Especially, we thoroughly study different relation layers and their effects. Experimental results
on two public datasets (Mastodon and Dailydialog) show that
our model outperforms the state-of-the-art joint model by
4.3% and 3.4% in terms of F1 score on dialog act recognition task, 5.7% and 12.4% on sentiment classiﬁcation respectively. Comprehensive analysis empirically veriﬁes the
effectiveness of explicitly modeling the relation between the
two tasks and the multi-steps interaction mechanism. Finally,
we employ the Bidirectional Encoder Representation from
Transformer (BERT) in our framework, which can further
boost our performance in both tasks.



 



 

User A

         



Statement

Negative

User B

 
     
        
  

Agreement

Negative



Figure 1: A snippet of a dialog sample from the Mastodon
Corpus and each utterance has a corresponding DA label and
a sentiment label. (DA represents Dialog Act)

B sentiment label, it’s more likely to be Negative in the
case of known Agreement DA label, since Agreement
means the current utterance agrees with previous User A
utterance and hence User B sentiment label tends to be
the same with the User A response sentiment Negative.
Similarly, knowing the sentiment information also contributes to the current DA prediction. Hence, it’s promising
to take the cross-impact between the two tasks into account.
In recent years, Cerisara et al., 2018 has explored the multitask framework to model the correlation between sentiment
classiﬁcation and dialog act recognition. Unfortunately, their
work does not achieve the promising performance, even underperforms some works which consider them as separate
tasks. In this paper, we argue that this modeling method with
no explicit interaction between the two tasks is not effective
enough for transferring knowledge across the two tasks and
has following weaknesses: (1) A simple multi-task learning framework just implicitly considers mutual connection
between two tasks by sharing latent representations, which
cannot achieve desirable results (Chen et al. 2019). (2) With
the shared latent representations, it is hard to explicitly control knowledge transfer for both tasks, resulting in lack of
interpretability.
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a Deep
Co-Interactive Relation Network (DCR-Net) for joint dialog act recognition and sentiment classiﬁcation, which can
explicitly model relation and interaction between two tasks
with a co-interactive relation layer. In practice, we ﬁrst
adopt a shared hierarchical encoder with utterance-level
self-attention mechanism to obtain the shared representations of dialog act and sentiment among utterances. The
shared representations are then fed into the co-interactive

Introduction
A dialog system should correctly understand speakers’ utterances and respond in natural language. Dialog act recognition (DAR) and sentiment classiﬁcation are two correlative tasks to realize the former. The goal of DAR is to attach semantic labels to each utterance in a dialog and identify the underlying intentions (Kim, Seon, and Seo 2011).
Meanwhile, sentiment classiﬁcation can detect the sentiments which are implicated in utterances and can help to
capture speakers’ intentions (Kim and Kim 2018).
Intuitively, the two tasks are closely related and the information of one task can be utilized in the other task. For
example, as illustrated in Figure 1, when predicting User
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8665

