The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Distilling Portable Generative Adversarial Networks for Image Translation

1

Hanting Chen,1∗ Yunhe Wang,2 Han Shu,2 Changyuan Wen,3
Chunjing Xu,2 Boxin Shi,4,5 Chao Xu,1 Chang Xu6

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), CMIC, School of EECS, Peking University, China, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
3
Huawei Consumer Business Group, 4 National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Peking University,
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, 6 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
{chenhanting, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au,
{yunhe.wang, han.shu, wenchangyuan, xuchunjing}@huawei.com
Tremendous efforts have been made recently to compress
and speed-up heavy deep models. For example, (Gong et
al. 2014) utilized vector quantization approach to represent
similar weights as cluster centers. (Wang et al. 2018a) introduced versatile ﬁlters to replace conventional ﬁlters and
achieve high speed-up ratio. (Denton et al. 2014) exploited
low-rank decomposition to process the weight matrices of
fully-connected layers. (Chen et al. 2015) proposed a hashing based method to encode parameters in CNNs. (Wang et
al. 2018c) proposed to packing neural networks in frequency
domain. (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015) employed pruning,
quantization and Huffman coding to obtain a compact deep
CNN with lower computational complexity. (Wang et al.
2017) introduced circulant matrix to learn compact feature
map of CNNs. (Courbariaux et al. 2016; Rastegari et al.
2016) explored neural networks with binary weights, which
drastically reduced the memory usage. Although these approaches can provide very high compression and speed-up
ratios with slight degradation on performance, most of them
are devoted to processing neural networks for image classiﬁcation and object detection tasks.

Abstract
Despite Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have been
widely used in various image-to-image translation tasks, they
can be hardly applied on mobile devices due to their heavy
computation and storage cost. Traditional network compression methods focus on visually recognition tasks, but never
deal with generation tasks. Inspired by knowledge distillation, a student generator of fewer parameters is trained by
inheriting the low-level and high-level information from the
original heavy teacher generator. To promote the capability of
student generator, we include a student discriminator to measure the distances between real images, and images generated
by student and teacher generators. An adversarial learning
process is therefore established to optimize student generator
and student discriminator. Qualitative and quantitative analysis by conducting experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed method can learn portable generative
models with strong performance.

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have been successfully applied to a number of image-to-image translation
tasks such as image synthesis (Karras et al. 2017), domain
translation (Zhu et al. 2017; Isola et al. 2017; Choi et al.
2018; Huang et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2018), image denoising (Chen et al. 2018a) and image super-resolution (Ledig
et al. 2017). The success of generative networks relies not
only on the careful design of adversarial strategies but also
on the growth of the computational capacities of neural networks. Executing most of the widely used GANs requires
enormous computational resources, which limits GANs on
PCs with modern GPUs. For example, (Zhu et al. 2017) uses
a heavy GANs model that needs about 47.19G FLOPs for
high ﬁdelity image synthesis. However, many fancy applications of GANs such as style transfer (Li and Wand 2016)
and image enhancement (Chen et al. 2018b) are urgently required by portable devices, e.g. mobile phones and cameras.
Considering the limited storage and CPU performance of
mainstream mobile devices, it is essential to compress and
accelerate generative networks.

Existing neural network compression methods cannot be
straightforwardly applied to compress GANs models, because of the following major reasons. First, compared with
classiﬁcation models, it is more challenging to identify redundant weights in generative networks, as the generator
requires a large number of parameters to establish a highdimensional mapping of extremely complex structures (e.g.
image-to-image translation (Zhu et al. 2017)). Second, different from visual recognition and detection tasks which
usually have ground-truth (e.g. labels and bounding boxes)
for the training data, GAN is a generative model that usually
does not have speciﬁc ground-truth for evaluating the output
images, e.g. super-resolution and style transfer. Thus, conventional methods cannot easily excavate redundant weights
or ﬁlters in GANs. Finally, GANs have a more complex
framework that consists of a generator and a discriminator
and the two networks are simultaneously trained following
a minimax two-player game, which is fundamentally different to the training procedure of ordinary deep neural networks for classiﬁcation. To this end, it is necessary to develop a speciﬁc framework for compressing and accelerat-

∗

Work was done while visiting Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3585

