The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Modeling Electrical Motor Dynamics Using
Encoder-Decoder with Recurrent Skip Connection
Sagar Verma,1,2 Nicolas Henwood,2 Marc Castella,3 Francois Malrait,2
Jean-Christophe Pesquet1
1

Université Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec, Inria, Centre de Vision Numérique
2
Schneider Toshiba Inverter Europe
3
Samovar, CNRS, Télécom SudParis, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
{sagar.verma, jean-christophe.pesquet}@centralesupelec.fr, marc.castella@telecom-sudparis.eu,
{sagar.verma, nicolas.henwood, francois.malrait}@se.com

Electrical motors are so much a part of everyday life that
we seldom give them a second thought. For example, when
we switch on an electrical vehicle, we conﬁdently expect
it to run rapidly up to the correct speed, provide acceleration, stop when brakes are applied, and casually predict
faults to avoid future mishaps. Electrical motors have very
complex dynamics and it is essential to have a controller
that can provide robust control based on these dynamics.
Electrical motor controllers also provide protection and supervision of the electro-mechanical system (Campbell 1987;
Sisking 1978). For these services, it is imperative to know the
dynamical physical model of electrical motors. Accurate dynamics is derived from the ﬁrst principles of physics. These

dynamical models are dependent on different electrical motor physical quantities like currents, voltages, speed, ﬂuxes,
inductances, and resistances, which are measured directly or
indirectly using sensors or estimators. Accurately measuring some of these quantities is hard due to the presence of
noise. Operating conditions also affect some of these quantities, one example being thermal evolution of resistances with
time. Therefore mathematical models cannot be fully trusted
in the design of controllers. A large number of simulations
and human expert knowledge is required to develop robust
controllers. The focus of this work is to model relationships
between different electrical quantities of an electrical motor.
We focus on deriving currents and electromagnetic torque
from voltages and speed recorded from electrical motors
using sensors.
Internet-of-Things (IoT) has made it possible to monitor
different electro-mechanical devices in real-time and also provides sensor data that can be used to learn the dynamics of the
system under consideration. End-to-end learning of temporal
dynamics from time-series data has been made easier due to
methods like Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), and Long-Short Term Memory
(LSTM) structures. By providing a large amount of multidimensional data, it has been shown that RNN and LSTM
approaches can model complex nonlinear feature interactions
which are crucial to model complex nonlinear dynamics.
In line with the current work of (Miller and Hardt 2019),
we found that one dimensional CNNs provide better results.
We modiﬁed CNNs into an encoder-decoder architecture and
incorporated recurrent skip connections between corresponding layers of the encoder-decoder architecture. In order to
reduce the number of parameters, we further modiﬁed the
recurrent architecture by diagonalizing its weights. We compared our proposed model with different benchmarks using
a novel metric which takes into account the complexity of
the predicted signals. We also proposed a novel loss function
that takes into account the complexity of the signal while
training the networks. We showed how using the proposed
loss function for training leads to better generalization.
This paper makes the following contributions:

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• This is one of the ﬁrst works addressing the problem of
learning nonlinear dynamics of electrical motors from

Abstract
Electrical motors are the most important source of mechanical
energy in the industrial world. Their modeling traditionally
relies on a physics-based approach, which aims at taking their
complex internal dynamics into account. In this paper, we explore the feasibility of modeling the dynamics of an electrical
motor by following a data-driven approach, which uses only
its inputs and outputs and does not make any assumption on
its internal behaviour. We propose a novel encoder-decoder architecture which beneﬁts from recurrent skip connections. We
also propose a novel loss function that takes into account the
complexity of electrical motor quantities and helps in avoiding model bias. We show that the proposed architecture can
achieve a good learning performance on our high-frequency
high-variance datasets. Two datasets are considered: the ﬁrst
one is generated using a simulator based on the physics of
an induction motor and the second one is recorded from an
industrial electrical motor. We benchmark our solution using
variants of traditional neural networks like feedforward, convolutional, and recurrent networks. We evaluate various design
choices of our architecture and compare it to the baselines. We
show the domain adaptation capability of our model to learn
dynamics just from simulated data by testing it on the raw
sensor data. We ﬁnally show the effect of signal complexity
on the proposed method ability to model temporal dynamics.

1

Introduction

1387

