The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Latent-Variable Non-Autoregressive Neural Machine
Translation with Deterministic Inference Using a Delta Posterior
Raphael Shu,1 Jason Lee,2 Hideki Nakayama,1 Kyunghyun Cho2,3,4
1

The University of Tokyo
2
New York University
3
Facebook AI Research
4
CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar

latent variable model by conjecturing that it is easier to reﬁne lower-dimensional continuous variables1 than to reﬁne
high-dimensional discrete variables, as done in Lee, Mansimov, and Cho (2018). Unlike Kaiser et al. (2018), the posterior and the prior can be jointly trained to maximize the
evidence lowerbound of the log-likelihood log p(y|x).
In this work, we propose a deterministic iterative algorithm to reﬁne the approximate posterior over the latent variables and obtain better target predictions. During inference,
we ﬁrst obtain the initial posterior from a prior distribution
p(z|x) and the initial guess of the target sentence from the
conditional distribution p(y|x, z). We then alternate between
updating the approximate posterior and target tokens with
the help of an approximate posterior q(z|x, y). We avoid
stochasticity at inference time by introducing a delta posterior over the latent variables. We empirically ﬁnd that this iterative algorithm signiﬁcantly improves the lowerbound and
results in better BLEU scores. By reﬁning the latent variables instead of tokens, the length of translation can dynamically adapt throughout this procedure, unlike previous approaches where the target length was ﬁxed throughout the
reﬁnement process. In other words, even if the initial length
prediction is incorrect, it can be corrected simultaneously
with the target tokens.
Our models2 outperform the autoregressive baseline on
ASPEC Ja-En dataset with 8.6x decoding speedup and bring
the performance gap down to 2.0 BLEU points on WMT’14
En-De with 12.5x decoding speedup. By decoding multiple
latent variables sampled from the prior and rescore using a
autoregressive teacher model, the proposed model is able to
further narrow the performance gap on WMT’14 En-De task
down to 1.0 BLEU point with 6.8x speedup. The contributions of this work can be summarize as follows:

Abstract
Although neural machine translation models reached high
translation quality, the autoregressive nature makes inference difﬁcult to parallelize and leads to high translation latency. Inspired by recent reﬁnement-based approaches, we
propose LaNMT, a latent-variable non-autoregressive model
with continuous latent variables and deterministic inference
procedure. In contrast to existing approaches, we use a deterministic inference algorithm to ﬁnd the target sequence that
maximizes the lowerbound to the log-probability. During inference, the length of translation automatically adapts itself.
Our experiments show that the lowerbound can be greatly increased by running the inference algorithm, resulting in signiﬁcantly improved translation quality. Our proposed model
closes the performance gap between non-autoregressive and
autoregressive approaches on ASPEC Ja-En dataset with 8.6x
faster decoding. On WMT’14 En-De dataset, our model narrows the gap with autoregressive baseline to 2.0 BLEU points
with 12.5x speedup. By decoding multiple initial latent variables in parallel and rescore using a teacher model, the proposed model further brings the gap down to 1.0 BLEU point
on WMT’14 En-De task with 6.8x speedup.

1

Introduction

The ﬁeld of Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has seen
signiﬁcant improvements in recent years (Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2015; Wu et al. 2016; Gehring et al. 2017;
Vaswani et al. 2017). Despite impressive improvements in
translation accuracy, the autoregressive nature of NMT models have made it difﬁcult to speed up decoding by utilizing parallel model architecture and hardware accelerators.
This has sparked interest in non-autoregressive NMT models, which predict every target tokens in parallel. In addition
to the obvious decoding efﬁciency, non-autoregressive text
generation is appealing as it does not suffer from exposure
bias and suboptimal inference.
Inspired by recent work in non-autoregressive NMT using discrete latent variables (Kaiser et al. 2018) and iterative reﬁnement (Lee, Mansimov, and Cho 2018), we introduce a sequence of continuous latent variables to capture
the uncertainty in the target sentence. We motivate such a

1. We propose a continuous latent-variable nonautoregressive NMT model for faster inference. The
model learns identical number of latent vectors as the
input tokens. A length transformation mechanism is
designed to adapt the number of latent vectors to match
the target length.
1

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

8846

We use 8-dimensional latent variables in our experiments.
Our code can be found in https://github.com/zomux/lanmt .

