The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Regional Tree Regularization for Interpretability in Deep Neural Networks
Mike Wu,1 Sonali Parbhoo,2,3 Michael C. Hughes,4
Ryan Kindle,5 Leo Celi,6 Maurizio Zazzi,7 Volker Roth,2 Finale Doshi-Velez3
1

Stanford University, wumike@stanford.edu
University of Basel, volker.roth@unibas.ch
3
Harvard University SEAS, {sparbhoo, ﬁnale}@seas.harvard.edu
4
Tufts University, michael.hughes@tufts.edu
5
Massachusetts General Hospital, rkindle@mgh.harvard.edu
6
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, lceli@mit.edu
7
University of Siena, maurizio.zazzi@unisi.it
2

Our work marks a major departure from this previous literature. We introduce a middle-ground between global and
local approaches: regional explanations. Given a predeﬁned
set of human-intuitive regions of input space, we require the
explanation for each region to be simple. This idea of regions is consistent with context-dependent human reasoning (Miller, 2018). For example, physicians in the intensive
care unit do not expect treatment rules to be the same across
patients of different risk levels. By requiring all regional explanations to be simple, we prevent the model from being
simple in one region to make up for complexity in another
(something global explanation methods cannot do).

Abstract
The lack of interpretability remains a barrier to adopting deep
neural networks across many safety-critical domains. Tree
regularization was recently proposed to encourage a deep
neural network’s decisions to resemble those of a globally
compact, axis-aligned decision tree. However, it is often unreasonable to expect a single tree to predict well across all
possible inputs. In practice, doing so could lead to neither interpretable nor performant optima. To address this issue, we
propose regional tree regularization – a method that encourages a deep model to be well-approximated by several separate decision trees speciﬁc to predeﬁned regions of the input
space. Across many datasets, including two healthcare applications, we show our approach delivers simpler explanations
than other regularization schemes without compromising accuracy. Speciﬁcally, our regional regularizer ﬁnds many more
“desirable” optima compared to global analogues.

Our operational deﬁnition of interpretability is to make
the explanation for each region easily human-simulable.
Simulable explanations allows humans to, “in reasonable
time, combine inputs and explanation to produce outputs,
forming a foundation for auditing and correcting predictions” (Lipton, 2016). Like Wu et al. (2018), we select decision trees as a simulable surrogate prediction model and develop a joint optimization objective that balances prediction
error with a penalty on the size of a deep model’s surrogate
tree. However, our training objective requires a separate tree
for each region, rather than the entire input space. Decomposing into regions provides for a more ﬂexible deep model
while still revealing prediction logic that can be understood
by humans. However, inference for regionally simulable explanations is more challenging than the global case.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have become state-of-the-art in many
applications, and are poised to advance prediction in realworld domains such as healthcare (Miotto et al., 2016; Gulshan et al., 2016). However, understanding when a model’s
outputs can be trusted and how the model might be improved remains a challenge in safety-critical domains. Chen,
Asch, and others (2017) discuss how these challenges inhibit
the adoption of deep models in clinical healthcare. Without
interpretability, humans are unable to incorporate domain
knowledge and effectively audit predictions.
Prior work for explaining deep models has focused on two
types of explanation: global and local. A global explanation
(e.g. Wu et al. (2018); Che et al. (2015)) returns a single
explanation for the entire model. However, if the explanation
is simple enough to understand, it is unlikely to be faithful
to the model across all inputs. In contrast, local explanation
(e.g. Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin (2016); Selvaraju et al.
(2016)) explain predictions for an isolated input, which may
miss larger patterns. Local approaches also leave ambiguous
whether the logic for an input x applies to a nearby input x ,
which can lead to poor assumptions about generalizability.

Our technical contributions are twofold. First, we introduce a new regularization penalty term that ensures simplicity across all regions while being tractable for gradientbased optimization. Second, we develop concrete innovations to improve the stability of optimization, which are essential to making our new regularization term effective in
practice. These last innovations would lead to improvements
to global tree regularization (e.g. Wu et al. (2018)) as well.
We achieve comparable performance to complex models
while learning a much simpler decision function. Through
exposition and careful experiments, we emphasize that our
regional penalization is distinct from and better than simply
using a global tree regularization constraint (Wu et al., 2018)
where the root of the tree divides examples by region.

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6413

