The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CASE: Context-Aware Semantic Expansion
Jialong Han,1∗ Aixin Sun,2 Haisong Zhang,3 Chenliang Li,4 Shuming Shi3
1

Amazon, USA, 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 3 Tencent AI Lab, China, 4 Wuhan University, China
1
jialonghan@gmail.com, 2 axsun@ntu.edu.sg, 3 {hansonzhang, shumingshi}@tencent.com, 4 cllee@whu.edu.cn

Seed in context: “Young barley grass is high in
amino acid.”
Expansion terms: vitamin, antioxidant, enzyme, mineral, chlorophyll, . . .

Abstract
In this paper, we deﬁne and study a new task called ContextAware Semantic Expansion (CASE). Given a seed term in a
sentential context, we aim to suggest other terms that well
ﬁt the context as the seed. CASE has many interesting applications such as query suggestion, computer-assisted writing, and word sense disambiguation, to name a few. Previous
explorations, if any, only involve some similar tasks, and all
require human annotations for evaluation. In this study, we
demonstrate that annotations for this task can be harvested
at scale from existing corpora, in a fully automatic manner.
On a dataset of 1.8 million sentences thus derived, we propose a network architecture that encodes the context and seed
term separately before suggesting alternative terms. The context encoder in this architecture can be easily extended by
incorporating seed-aware attention. Our experiments demonstrate that competitive results are achieved with appropriate
choices of context encoder and attention scoring function.

Figure 1: A seed term “amino acid” in context. Here, “fat” is
an invalid substitute. It is irrelevant to barley grass and tends
not to be supported by general corpora.
Ronaldo”, as expansion terms. Those terms may be used to
suggest queries like “Christiano Ronaldo championships”.
Computer-assisted writing (Liu et al. 2011). For casual or
academic writing, exempliﬁcations often help to explain and
convince. It is desirable to suggest contextually appropriate
alternative words when an author can think of only one.
Other NLP tasks. CASE can potentially enhance natural
language processing (NLP) tasks. For example, in word
sense disambiguation (Navigli 2009), an ambiguous word
like “apple” can be ﬁrst expanded w.r.t. its context. The suggested context-aware terms (e.g., fruits or companies) provide cues for the disambiguation task.

Introduction
Have you ever googled “Lionel Messi championships”,
browsed the results, and wanted more soccer stars with
comparable championships? Have you ever wanted to know
types of nutrients rich in barley grass, but were only able
to remember amino acid? In this paper, we study contextaware semantic expansion (or CASE for short). In CASE,
user provides a seed term wrapped in a sentential context as
in Figure 1. The system returns a list of expansion terms,
each of which is a valid substitute for the seed, i.e., the substitution is supported by some sentence in a (testing) corpus.
This task is not easy due to the large number of potential
expansions, as well as the necessity of modeling their interactions with both the context and the seed. Despite the challenge, the task is of practical importance and beneﬁts many
applications. We list a few examples here.
Query suggestion (Wen, Nie, and Zhang 2001). In the
aforementioned query “Lionel Messi championships”, keywords “Lionel Messi” can be a seed term to expand, and a
CASE system may suggest related entities, e.g., “Christiano

Comparison with Related Tasks
Despite its signiﬁcance, explorations on CASE remain limited. Lexical substitution (McCarthy and Navigli 2007) is
the most similar task to CASE. Given a word in a sentential
context, e.g., “the bright girl is reading a book”, lexical substitution predicts synonyms ﬁtting the context, e.g., “wise”
or “clever” rather than “shining”. The synonym candidates
generally come from high-quality but relatively small dictionaries like WordNet (Fellbaum 1998). Compared with lexical substitution, candidate expansion terms of CASE, e.g.,
entity names, are not required to be aliases of the seeds but
could be far more in number and less organized.
Besides lexical substitution, another task similar to CASE
is set expansion (Tong and Dean 2008; Wang and Cohen
2007; He and Xin 2011; Chen, Cafarella, and Jagadish 2016;
Shen et al. 2017; Shi et al. 2010). It is to expand a few seeds
(e.g., amino acid and vitamin) to more terms in the same semantic class (i.e., nutrition). However, set expansion does
not involve possible textual contexts with the seeds. This

∗

Work done when Jialong Han was with Tencent AI Lab.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7871

