The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Random Fourier Features via Fast Surrogate Leverage Weighted Sampling
Fanghui Liu,1,2 Xiaolin Huang,2,3 Yudong Chen,4 Jie Yang,2,3 Johan A.K. Suykens1
1

Department of Electrical Engineering (ESAT-STADIUS), KU Leuven, Belgium
Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
Institute of Medical Robotics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
4
School of Operations Research and Information Engineering, Cornell University, USA
fanghui.liu@kuleuven.be, {xiaolinhuang, jieyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, yudong.chen@cornell.edu, johan.suykens@esat.kuleuven.be
2

(Typically, the kernel is real-valued and thus the imaginary part in Eq. (1) can be discarded.) One can then use
Monte Carlo sampling to approximate k(x, x ) by the lowdimensional kernel k̃p (x, x ) = ϕp (x) ϕp (x ) with the explicit mapping
1 


(2)
ϕp (x) := √ exp(−iw
1 x), · · · , exp(−iws x)] ,
s

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a fast surrogate leverage weighted
sampling strategy to generate reﬁned random Fourier features
for kernel approximation. Compared to the current state-ofthe-art method that uses the leverage weighted scheme (Li et
al. 2019), our new strategy is simpler and more effective. It
uses kernel alignment to guide the sampling process and it
can avoid the matrix inversion operator when we compute the
leverage function. Given n observations and s random features,
our strategy can reduce the time complexity for sampling from
O(ns2 + s3 ) to O(ns2 ), while achieving comparable (or even
slightly better) prediction performance when applied to kernel
ridge regression (KRR). In addition, we provide theoretical
guarantees on the generalization performance of our approach,
and in particular characterize the number of random features
required to achieve statistical guarantees in KRR. Experiments
on several benchmark datasets demonstrate that our algorithm
achieves comparable prediction performance and takes less
time cost when compared to (Li et al. 2019).

1

where {wi }si=1 are sampled from p(w) independently
of the training set. For notational
simplicity, here we
√
write zp (wi , xj ) := 1/ s exp(−iw
i xj ) such that
ϕp (x) = [zp (w1 , x), · · · , zp (ws , x)] . Note that we




have
s k(x, x ) = Ew∼p[ϕp (x) ϕp (x )] ≈ k̃p (x, x ) =
i=1 zp (wi , x)zp (wi , x ). Consequently, the original kernel matrix K = [k(xi , xj )]n×n on the n observations
X = {xi }ni=1 can be approximated by K ≈ K̃p = Zp Z
p,
where Zp = [ϕp (x1 ), · · · , ϕp (xn )] ∈ Rn×s . With s random features, this approximation applied to KRR only requires O(ns2 ) time and O(ns) memory, hence achieving a
substantial computational saving when s  n.
Since RFF uses the Monte Carlo estimates that are independent of the training set, a large number of random
features are often required to achieve competitive approximation and generalization performance. To improve performance, recent works (Sun, Gilbert, and Tewari 2018; Li et al.
2019) consider using the ridge leverage function (Bach 2017;
Avron et al. 2017) deﬁned with respect to the training data.
For a given random feature wi , this function is deﬁned as

Introduction

Kernel methods (Schölkopf and Smola 2003) are one of
the most important and powerful tools in statistical learning. However, kernel methods often suffer from scalability
issues in large-scale problems due to high space and time
complexities. For example, given n observations in the original d-dimensional space X , kernel ridge regression (KRR)
requires O(n3 ) training time and O(n2 ) space to store the
kernel matrix, which becomes intractable when n is large.
One of the most popular approaches for scaling up kernel
methods is random Fourier features (RFF) (Rahimi and Recht
2007), which approximates the original kernel by mapping
input features into a new space spanned by a small number
of Fourier basis. Speciﬁcally, suppose a given kernel k(·, ·) :
X × X → R satisﬁes 1) positive deﬁniteness and 2) shiftinvariance, i.e., k(x, x ) = k(x−x ). By Bochner’s theorem
(Bochner 2005), there exists a ﬁnite Borel measure p(w) (the
Fourier transform associated with k) such that




k(x − x ) =
p(w) exp iw (x − x ) dw . (1)

−1
zp,wi (X) , (3)
lλ (wi ) = p(wi )z
p,wi (X)(K + nλI)

where λ is the regularization parameter in KRR and
zp,wi (X) ∈ Rn is the i-th column of Zp given by
(zp,wi (X))j := zp (wi , xj ). Observe that q ∗ (w) :=
 lλ (w)
can be viewed as a probability density function,
lλ (w)dw
and hence is referred to as the Empirical Ridge Leverage
Score (ERLS) distribution (Avron et al. 2017). Therefore, one
can sample the features {wi }si=1 according to q ∗ (w), which
is an importance weighted sampling strategy. Compared to
standard Monte Carlo sampling for RFF, q ∗ (w)-based sampling requires fewer Fourier features and enjoys theoretical
guarantees (Avron et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019).

Rd

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4844

