The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Zero-Shot Sketch-Based Image Retrieval via Graph Convolution Network
Zhaolong Zhang,1 Yuejie Zhang,1 Rui Feng,1 Tao Zhang,2 Weiguo Fan3
1

School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China 200433
{18210240044, yjzhang, fengrui}@fudan.edu.cn
2
School of Information Management and Engineering, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Financial Information Technology,
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, P.R. China 200433
taozhang@mail.shufe.edu.cn
3
Department of Business Analytics, Tippie College of Business, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA, 52242
weiguo-fan@uiowa.edu
in real life. The conventional SBIR methods can hardly handle this situation. Thus, researchers put the SIBR task under
the condition of zero-shot learning (Yelamarthi et al. 2018)
where the training and testing categories are disjoint, and
propose the Zero-Shot Sketch-based Image Retrieval (ZSSBIR) task. Compared with the traditional SBIR, ZS-SBIR
is more challenging for the model not only needs to deal with
the visual difference between sketches and images but also
needs to establish the relations between the seen categories
and the unseen categories. Therefore, the main challenges in
ZS-SBIR can be summarized as narrowing the domain gap
between the different modalities and transferring the knowledge from the seen categories to the unseen categories.

Abstract
Zero-Shot Sketch-based Image Retrieval (ZS-SBIR) has been
proposed recently, putting the traditional Sketch-based Image Retrieval (SBIR) under the setting of zero-shot learning.
Dealing with both the challenges in SBIR and zero-shot learning makes it become a more difﬁcult task. Previous works
mainly focus on utilizing one kind of information, i.e., the
visual information or the semantic information. In this paper, we propose a SketchGCN model utilizing the graph convolution network, which simultaneously considers both the
visual information and the semantic information. Thus, our
model can effectively narrow the domain gap and transfer the
knowledge. Furthermore, we generate the semantic information from the visual information using a Conditional Variational Autoencoder rather than only map them back from the
visual space to the semantic space, which enhances the generalization ability of our model. Besides, feature loss, classiﬁcation loss, and semantic loss are introduced to optimize our
proposed SketchGCN model. Our model gets a good performance on the challenging Sketchy and TU-Berlin datasets.

To handle these challenges, prior works mainly used generative models, Conditional Variational Autoencoders or
Generative Adversarial Networks, to generate the image
features corresponding to the given sketch features (Kumar Verma et al. 2019; Dutta and Akata 2019). Although
the generative methods outperform the conventional SBIR
methods, they still suffer from several problems. The crux of
the matter for zero-shot learning is to transform the knowledge from the seen categories to the unseen ones through the
side information which indicates their relations. However,
generating the possible image features to the given sketch
features does not make effective use of the side information.
Furthermore, due to its instability during the training phase,
it is hard to get the best performance for a generative model.

Introduction
Sketch-based Image Retrieval (SBIR), which aims at retrieving the relevant images by using the free-hand sketches,
has been studied for several years (Yu et al. 2016; Sangkloy et al. 2016; Song et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2018).
Compared with the traditional text-image cross-modal retrieval, it may become the ﬁrst choice for users when it
is hard to provide a textual description but easy to sketch
what they want. The difﬁculty for SBIR lies in the huge
differences between sketches and images, which is widely
known as the “domain gap”, for sketches are often abstract
and lose the texture information and they come from different modalities. In recent years, many researchers introduce deep neural networks into this ﬁeld (Yu et al. 2016;
Song et al. 2017). With the help of their strong representation ability, researchers can narrow the domain gap signiﬁcantly and achieve good performance.
However, the explosive growth of the amount of multimedia content on the internet makes it very possible that the category of a wanted image does not appear in the training set

In this paper, we propose a SketchGCN model to alleviate the above shortcomings. Our SketchGCN model contains
three sub-networks, i.e., an encoding network, a semantic
preserving network, and a semantic reconstruction network.
The encoding network tries to embed the sketches and images into a common semantic space, while the semantic preserving network takes the features as input and utilizes the
side information to force them to maintain their categorylevel relations. The use of side information is essential for
zero-shot tasks. With the help of graph convolution network,
we can effectively use the side information to build and handle the relations among the features. The semantic reconstruction network further forces the extracted features to preserve their semantic relations. Different from the previous
methods which adopt a Multilayer Perceptron to reconstruct

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12943

