The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Associative Variational Auto-Encoder
with Distributed Latent Spaces and Associators
Dae Ung Jo,1 ByeongJu Lee,1 Jongwon Choi,2 Haanju Yoo,3 Jin Young Choi1
{mardaewoon, adolys, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr, {jw17.choi, haanju.yoo}@samsung.com
1
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
2
Samsung SDS, Korea, 3 Samsung Research, Korea

Abstract
Encoder

In this paper, we propose a novel structure for a multimodal data association referred to as Associative Variational
Auto-Encoder (AVAE). In contrast to the existing models using a shared latent space among modalities, our structure
adopts distributed latent spaces for multi-modalities which
are connected through cross-modal associators. The proposed
structure successfully associates even heterogeneous modality data and easily incorporates the additional modality to
the entire network via the associator. Furthermore, in our
structure, only a small amount of supervised (paired) data is
enough to train associators after training auto-encoders in an
unsupervised manner. Through experiments, the effectiveness
of the proposed structure is validated on various datasets including visual and auditory data.

Decoder
Associator

‘ZERO’

‘ZERO’

Encoder

Decoder

‘GO’

‘GO’

Associator
Encoder
Sensory
Space

Introduction
The brain combines multisensory information to understand
the surrounding situation. Through various sensory experiences, humans learn the relationships between multisensory
data and understand the experienced situation. This mechanism to learn the relationship among multiple stimuli is
called associative learning (Bliss and Collingridge 1993;
Buonomano and Merzenich 1998; Van Praag et al. 1999).
Because of the associative learning mechanism, humans can
robustly understand and perceive their surrounding situations even when only some of the modalities are available.
In the ﬁeld of machine learning, utilizing multi-modality
is also important issues because of its usefulness in a wide
range of applications (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency
2018; Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). As a representative example, object recognition and scene understanding
methods based on multi-modal data outperform the methods using only single-modal data (Hu, Li, and others 2016;
Ngiam et al. 2011). Moreover, one can generate the synthesized data for a missing or desired modality (Cadena,
Dick, and Reid 2016; Lim et al. 2018; Senocak et al. 2018;
Spurr et al. 2018; Wang, van de Weijer, and Herranz 2018;
Yoo et al. 2017). The multi-modal data association is one
of the fundamental steps to understand the relationships

Decoder
Concept
Space

Imagination
Space

Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of the proposed AVAE.
AVAE has modality-speciﬁc encoders and decoders for each
modality (image, voice). Each modality has its own latent
space, which is painted with a different color (red, green,
blue). The latent spaces are connected via the proposed associator which associates two different modalities.

among multi-modal data. Recently, along with the advances
of deep learning, many studies have attempted to solve the
multi-modal data association problem by deep learning algorithms (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2018). The studies have adopted an approach that encodes multi-modal data
into a shared latent space to memorize common features
among multiple modalities (Cadena, Dick, and Reid 2016;
Hu, Li, and others 2016; Ngiam et al. 2011; Spurr et al.
2018; Wu and Goodman 2018).
However, as pointed out by Chaudhury et al. (2017), most
existing studies did not consider the case that the characteristic of each modality is very different from others. The
encoding in the shared latent space is hard to represent all
characteristics of the heterogeneous modalities or could be
biased to a dominant modality. Furthermore, the capacity of
the shared latent will be saturated as modalities increase and
so encounters a scalability problem. To mitigate the limita-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11197

