The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Agent Game Abstraction via Graph Attention Neural Network
Yong Liu,1∗ Weixun Wang,2∗ Yujing Hu,3 Jianye Hao,2,4† Xingguo Chen,5 Yang Gao1†
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Tianjin University, 3 NetEase Fuxi AI Lab, 4 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
5
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Big Data Security & Intelligent Processing,
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
lucasliunju@gmail.com, {wxwang, jianye.hao}@tju.edu.cn
huyujing@corp.netease.com, chenxg@njupt.edu.cn, gaoy@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Hard
Attention

In large-scale multi-agent systems, the large number of agents
and complex game relationship cause great difﬁculty for policy learning. Therefore, simplifying the learning process is
an important research issue. In many multi-agent systems,
the interactions between agents often happen locally, which
means that agents neither need to coordinate with all other
agents nor need to coordinate with others all the time. Traditional methods attempt to use pre-deﬁned rules to capture the
interaction relationship between agents. However, the methods cannot be directly used in a large-scale environment due
to the difﬁculty of transforming the complex interactions between agents into rules. In this paper, we model the relationship between agents by a complete graph and propose a
novel game abstraction mechanism based on two-stage attention network (G2ANet), which can indicate whether there is
an interaction between two agents and the importance of the
interaction. We integrate this detection mechanism into graph
neural network-based multi-agent reinforcement learning for
conducting game abstraction and propose two novel learning
algorithms GA-Comm and GA-AC. We conduct experiments
in Trafﬁc Junction and Predator-Prey. The results indicate that
the proposed methods can simplify the learning process and
meanwhile get better asymptotic performance compared with
state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Soft
Attention
0.5
GNN
0.2

‫ݔ‬௜

…
0.2
Game Abstraction Based on Two-Stage Attention

Graph Embedding

Game Abstraction Applications
Policy Network

Actor-Critic Network

Figure 1: Game Abstraction based on two-stage attention
mechanism and Graph Neural Network (GNN).

agents and the complexity of interactions pose a signiﬁcant challenge to the policy learning process. Therefore,
simplifying the learning process is a crucial research area.
Earlier work focuses on loosely coupled multi-agent systems, and adopt techniques such as game abstraction and
knowledge transfer to help with speeding up multi-agent reinforcement learning(Guestrin, Lagoudakis, and Parr 2002;
Kok and Vlassis 2004; De Hauwere, Vrancx, and Nowé
2010; Melo and Veloso 2011; Hu, Gao, and An 2015;
Yu et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2019). However, in a large multiagent environment, agents are often related to some other
agents rather than independent, which makes the previously
learnt single-agent knowledge has limited use. Recent work
focuses on achieving game abstraction through pre-deﬁned
rules (e.g., the distance between agents) (Yang et al. 2018;
Jiang, Dun, and Lu 2018). However, it is difﬁcult to deﬁne the interaction relationship between agents through predeﬁned rules in large-scale multi-agent systems. In this paper, we propose to automatically learn the interaction relationship between agents through end-to-end model design,
based on which game abstraction can be achieved.
The key to game abstraction is learning the relationship
between agents. Recent work uses soft-attention mechanism
to learn the importance distribution of the other agents for
each agent (Jiang and Lu 2018; Iqbal and Sha 2019). However, the ﬁnal output softmax function indicates that the importance weight of each agent still depends on the weight of

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has shown a
great success for solving sequential decision-making problems with multiple agents. Recently, with the advance of
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) (Mnih et al. 2016;
Schulman et al. 2017), the combination of deep learning and multi-agent reinforcement learning has also been
widely studied (Foerster et al. 2018; Sunehag et al. 2018;
Rashid et al. 2018).
Recent work has focused on multi-agent reinforcement
learning in large-scale multi-agent systems (Yang et al.
2018; Chen et al. 2018), in which the large number of
∗
Equal contribution, † corresponding author. This work is partially done when Weixun Wang was intern in NetEase Fuxi AI Lab.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7211

