The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improving the Robustness of Wasserstein
Embedding by Adversarial PAC-Bayesian Learning
Daizong Ding,1 Mi Zhang,∗1 Xudong Pan,1 Min Yang,1 Xiangnan He2
2

1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
{17110240010, mi zhang, 18110240010, m yang}@fudan.edu.cn, xiangnanhe@gmail.com

more information of the graph. For instance, the mean of
the distribution represents the position of the node and the
variance reﬂects the degree of the node (Bojchevski and
Günnemann 2018). Although empirical results prove that
these methods are more effective than the vector-based embedding model, there exist two open problems.
The ﬁrst problem is the certiﬁcation of robustness. According to previous researches (Zügner, Akbarnejad, and
Günnemann 2018), small perturbations can largely inﬂuence
the embedding model. For instance, the distance between
two nodes may change sharply when few random edges are
added to the graph. In order to restore robustness against
noises, some previous efforts have been made on the vectorbased embedding model. For example, Dai et al. (2018a)
propose to regularize the node embeddings with prior information. However, due to the complexity of how to impose
prior knowledge on distributions, the research to date has
not yet provided a robust model when embeddings of nodes
are distributions.
The second problem is, most existing distribution-based
embedding models simply used the Gaussian distribution
and little is known for the effectiveness of other distributions. Although there were several studies to extend the
vector-based embedding model to other vector space such
as hyperbolic space (Chamberlain, Clough, and Deisenroth
2017), there were rarely any attempts to examine the effectiveness of other distributions such as Dirichlet distribution
which is widely applied in graph analysis (Xie, Kelley, and
Szymanski 2013). One of the main obstacles is the technical difﬁculty on tackling distance between distributions. For
instance, although the KL divergence or Wasserstein distance between Gaussian distributions has a closed form, it
becomes intractable when other kinds of distributions are
considered.
In this paper, to address two open problems in the
distribution-based embedding, we focus on Wasserstein embedding and propose to minimize the expected loss rather
than the empirical loss to alleviate the inﬂuence of additional
noises. With the aid of the PAC-Bayesian theory, we ﬁrst
derive an upper bound for the expected loss. Then we propose an algorithm called Adversarial PAC-Bayesian Learning (APBL) for minimizing the upper bound. Moreover, we

Abstract
Node embedding is a crucial task in graph analysis. Recently,
several methods are proposed to embed a node as a distribution rather than a vector to capture more information.
Although these methods achieved noticeable improvements,
their extra complexity brings new challenges. For example,
the learned representations of nodes could be sensitive to
external noises on the graph and vulnerable to adversarial
behaviors. In this paper, we ﬁrst derive an upper bound on
generalization error for Wasserstein embedding via the PACBayesian theory. Based on this, we propose an algorithm
called Adversarial PAC-Bayesian Learning (APBL) in order to minimize the generalization error bound. Furthermore,
we provide a model called Regularized Adversarial Wasserstein Embedding Network (RAWEN) as an implementation
of APBL. Besides our comprehensive analysis of the robustness of RAWEN, our work for the ﬁrst time explores more
kinds of embedded distributions. For evaluations, we conduct
extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness and
robustness of our proposed embedding model compared with
the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Node embedding plays an increasingly signiﬁcant role in
modern graph analysis. The effectiveness of the embeddings
largely inﬂuence the results of downstream machine learning tasks, e.g. link prediction and node classiﬁcation. Traditionally, node embedding is modeled as low-dimensional
vector representations of nodes in a given graph (Goyal and
Ferrara 2018), where the similarity between nodes is represented as the distance between embedded vectors, e.g.
Euclidean distance (Tang et al. 2015; Wang, Cui, and Zhu
2016).
Recently, some methods have been proposed to embed
each node with a distribution e.g. multivariate Gaussian
distribution (He et al. 2015), rather than a real vector.
In distribution-based embedding models, the similarity between nodes is represented as the distance between embedded distributions such as Wasserstein distance (Zhu et
al. 2018). Compared with real vectors, distributions contain
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3791

