The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Enhancing Nearest Neighbor Based Entropy Estimator for
High Dimensional Distributions via Bootstrapping Local Ellipsoid
Chien Lu, Jaakko Peltonen
Tampere University
Kalevantie 4
33100 Tampere, Finland
{chien.lu, jaakko.peltonen}@tuni.ﬁ

the underlying PDF is not available but only a set of samples are observed. This raises the research problem of estimating the entropy from the observed data only; in particular, ﬂexible estimation approaches that do not assume the
distribution to lie in a particular parametric model family
are known as non-parametric entropy estimation. Estimators
such as the k-nearest neighbor estimator (kNN; Kozachenko
and Leonenko 1987 and Goria et al. 2005) and the kernel
density estimator (KDE; Silverman 2018) or hybrid methods
(Orava 2011) have been proposed. Note that there is another
important group of approaches, called ensemble estimators
(Sricharan, Wei, and Hero 2013; Moon, Sricharan, and Hero
2017; Moon et al. 2018), which use weighted combinations
of different estimators. This work focuses on the kNN estimator and approaches related to it.
Assume there are N i.i.d. D-dimensional samples
x1 , ..., xN ∼ P , where the probability density function p
is unknown. The classical kNN estimator is written as

Abstract
An ellipsoid-based, improved kNN entropy estimator based
on random samples of distribution for high dimensionality is
developed. We argue that the inaccuracy of the classical kNN
estimator in high dimensional spaces results from the local
uniformity assumption and the proposed method mitigates
the local uniformity assumption by two crucial extensions, a
local ellipsoid-based volume correction and a correction acceptance testing procedure. Relevant theoretical contributions
are provided and several experiments from simple to complicated cases have shown that the proposed estimator can effectively reduce the bias especially in high dimensionalities,
outperforming current state of the art alternative estimators.

Introduction
The differential entropy of a continuous-valued random variable X is deﬁned as

H(X) = − p(x) log p(x)dx.
(1)
where p(x) is the probability density function of X. Entropy has been an important numerical quantity in Statistics,
Machine Learning and other disciplines such as Physics. It
provides a summary measurement of the degree of uncertainty of a system. Entropy is also related to other important
information theoretic measures, including Kullback-Leibler
divergence (Kullback and Leibler 1951) and mutual information (Cover and Thomas 2006) , which is deﬁned for random variables X and Y as
 
I(X, Y ) =

log
Y

X

1 
log p(xi )
N i=1
N

H(X) ≈ −

D
log εi
N i=1
N

≈ ψ(N ) − ψ(k) + log(cD ) +

(3)

where ψ denotes the digamma function, εi denotes the
Euclidean distance from xi to its nearest neighbor, cD =
D

π2
, and ψ(N ) − ψ(k) is the correction term.
Γ(1+ D
2 )

The classical estimator has been widely applied in many
different research problems. It has been also adopted to nonparametrically estimate the mutual information (Kraskov,
Stögbauer, and Grassberger 2004) of Equation (2) and KL
divergence (Pérez-Cruz 2008; Wang, Kulkarni, and Verdú
2009).

p(x, y)
dxdy = −H(Y |X) + H(Y ) .
p(x)p(y)

(2)

Classical kNN Estimator
In theory, to obtain the entropy of a system, the underlying
probability distribution must be known, that is, the analytical
form of the probability density function (PDF) needs to be
available. However, in real-world cases, it is common that

Bias of the classical kNN
Although the classical kNN estimator has shown promising
applicability, it has been found biased especially in higher
dimensional cases (Noh et al. 2014; Chauveau and Vandekerkhove 2014). Theoretical bounds relating the convergence
to the data dimension include (Gao, Oh, and Viswanath

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5013

