The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

NeoNav: Improving the Generalization of
Visual Navigation via Generating Next Expected Observations
Qiaoyun Wu,1,2 Dinesh Manocha,2 Jun Wang,1 Kai Xu3 *
1

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2 The University of Maryland
3
National University of Defense Technology
(Project page: http://kevinkaixu.net/projects/neonav.html)
Model-based methods tackle this issue through modeling the
transition dynamics of agent-environment interaction. Such
model can be used to reason about the future, thus relieving
the trial-and-error learning endeavor. However, it is difﬁcult
to learn a powerful model that generalizes across different
scenes, which is known as the model imperfection issue.
We propose NeoNav, a model-based, supervised learning
approach to visual navigation with strong model generality.
In our method, the agent is guided by conceiving the next
observations it expects to see supposing the best action is
taken. This is realized by learning a generative model conditioned on the multi-view observations at the current location
as well as the target view, from which the next expected observation (NEO) can be generated. We predict the next best
action based on the generated NEO and the current (frontview) observation. We frame this problem as a variational
Bayesian inference where the variational lower-bound (objective) consists of three terms: reconstruction, regularization and classiﬁcation. The minimization of the reconstruction error maximizes the likelihood of the NEO given the
current observations and target view. The regularization term
drives the variational posterior to match a prior distribution.
The classiﬁcation term is devised for action prediction.
The key characteristic of our approach is the modeling
of the latent space. First, to enable target-driven navigation,
the latent distribution is conditioned on current observations
and target views. Second, we model the latent space with
a Mixture of Gaussians conditioned on current observations
and next best actions. Such a variational mixture of posteriors prior (Tomczak and Welling 2017) effectively alleviates over-regularization of the latent space, thus facilitating
cross-scene model generalization. Moreover, NEO generation via sampling over the latent space essentially models the
forward dynamics of the agent-environment interaction, i.e.
action-driven state transition. This improves the expressiveness of the approximation of variational inference (Cremer,
Li, and Duvenaud 2018), thereby greatly enhancing inference generalization and data efﬁciency.
Although our supervised setting requires denser training signals, the learned model shows signiﬁcantly better generality over unseen test scenes than RL-based approaches (even if enhanced by supervision such as in behavior cloning). Fortunately, target-driven navigation tasks
enjoy the easy acquisition of ground-truth paths as training data (e.g., using A∗ algorithm). We conducted extensive
evaluations on public datasets of both synthetic (AI2-THOR

Abstract
We propose improving the cross-target and cross-scene generalization of visual navigation through learning an agent
that is guided by conceiving the next observations it expects
to see. This is achieved by learning a variational Bayesian
model, called NeoNav, which generates the next expected observations (NEO) conditioned on the current observations of
the agent and the target view. Our generative model is learned
through optimizing a variational objective encompassing two
key designs. First, the latent distribution is conditioned on
current observations and the target view, leading to a modelbased, target-driven navigation. Second, the latent space is
modeled with a Mixture of Gaussians conditioned on the current observation and the next best action. Our use of mixtureof-posteriors prior effectively alleviates the issue of overregularized latent space, thus signiﬁcantly boosting the model
generalization for new targets and in novel scenes. Moreover,
the NEO generation models the forward dynamics of agentenvironment interaction, which improves the quality of approximate inference and hence beneﬁts data efﬁciency. We
have conducted extensive evaluations on both real-world and
synthetic benchmarks, and show that our model consistently
outperforms the state-of-the-art models in terms of success
rate, data efﬁciency, and generalization.

1

Introduction

Mapless visual navigation is an important skill for robots operating in unknown, unstructured environments. It is characterized as the ability of a robot to navigate itself from an arbitrary location in the environment to a goal position, based
solely on the visual inputs from its on-board sensors. The
main challenge of visual navigation lies in understanding the
scene layout based on the visual observations and reasoning
about the spatial relation between the current and the target
location. This is the main impediment hindering the generalization of navigation ability across different scenes due to
visual and structural discrepancy.
Recent years have witnessed fast advancement of visual
navigation thanks to deep learning, e.g., deep reinforcement
learning (RL) models (Zhang et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2017;
Gupta et al. 2017; Racanière et al. 2017). Model-free approaches learn to directly map raw observations to values
or actions, which usually suffers from low data efﬁciency.
* Corresponding author: Kai Xu (kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com)
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10001

