The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generalize Sentence Representation with Self-Inference
Kai-Chou Yang,1 Hung-Yu Kao2
National Cheng Kung University
Tainan, Taiwan
zake7749@gmail.com,1 hykao@mail.ncku.edu.tw2

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Self Inference Neural Network
(SINN), a simple yet efﬁcient sentence encoder which leverages knowledge from recurrent and convolutional neural networks. SINN gathers semantic evidence in an interaction
space which is subsequently fused by a shared vector gate to
determine the most relevant mixture of contextual information. We evaluate the proposed method on four benchmarks
among three NLP tasks. Experimental results demonstrate
that our model sets a new state-of-the-art on MultiNLI, Scitail and is competitive on the remaining two datasets over
all sentence encoding methods. The encoding and inference
process in our model is highly interpretable. Through visualizations of the fusion component, we open the black box of
our network and explore the applicability of the base encoding methods case by case.

Figure 1: The reading behavior of our model. The RNN encoder catches the topic words alone and cooperates with the
CNN encoder for the detailed description.

To this end, we introduce SINN, a novel neural architecture which leverages the information from various encoding methods through self-inference. Our model is composed
of an RNN and CNN as two base encoders which generate
contextual representations individually. Inspired by the common strategy for natural language inference (NLI), we propose a self-inference component based on heuristic interaction to learn the view of each base encoder and furthermore
to create more generalized sentence representations by striking a balance between them. Figure 1 illustrates the reading
behavior of our model. The RNN encoder would catch the
topic words alone while it tends to cooperate with the CNN
encoder when the semantic readings become more complicated.
To show the generalization ability, We evaluate the proposed method on four benchmarks among three different NLP tasks: natural language inference, text classiﬁcation and sentiment classiﬁcation. The experimental results
demonstrate that our model sets a new state-of-the-art on
two benchmarks while showing strong performance on the
others, which indicates that through self-inference, the shallow base encoders can still outperform many deep and complicated architectures.
In addition, the process of self-inference is highly interpretable. By visualizing the importance weight of each contextual representation, we found that in our model, the base
encoders adopt a collaborative strategy, each of which captures different and complementary semantic features. We
conduct extensive analysis on the fusion gate to explain the

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success in
sentence representation learning. Based on sequential models like recurrent neural networks (RNN), convolutional neural networks (CNN) or self-attention, we can build a sentence encoder that transforms a sentence into a meaningful
context vector for use in various downstream tasks.
Recently, the prevalent sentence encoders are usually
based on a single type of encoding method: either RNN,
CNN or self-attention. However, we argue that in order to
obtain general contextual representations, a sentence encoder should simultaneously use multiple encoding methods. Considering the nature of language, the meaning of a
word can depend on what has been stated as well as the
company it keeps. Similarly, given a variety of encoding hypotheses, a sentence can be interpreted with multiple semantic readings each of which is not contradictory but complementary to the others. Therefore, instead of using a single
encoding method arbitrarily, a better strategy would be to
integrate semantic evidence from different perspectives and
control the information ﬂow according to context dynamically.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9394

