The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Explanations for Inconsistency-Tolerant Query Answering under Existential Rules
Thomas Lukasiewicz,1 Enrico Malizia,2 Cristian Molinaro3
1

University of Oxford, UK, 2 University of Exeter, UK, 3 University of Calabria, Italy
thomas.lukasiewicz@cs.ox.ac.uk, e.malizia@exeter.ac.uk, cmolinaro@dimes.unical.it

come with additional advantages of practical relevance. For
instance, they are amenable to preprocessing, since the intersection of the (closed) repairs can be computed ofﬂine, and
then standard query answering algorithms can be employed
online. Indeed, the latter approach has been adopted in the
implementation of the IAR semantics (Lembo et al. 2015),
while for the ICR semantics, it has been already remarked
in (Bienvenu and Bourgaux 2016).
While the complexity of the above semantics is rather
well-understood (see, e.g., (Lembo et al. 2010; Bienvenu 2012; Bienvenu and Rosati 2013; Bienvenu, Bourgaux, and Goasdoué 2014; Lembo et al. 2015; Bienvenu and Bourgaux 2016) for inconsistency-tolerant query
answering in DLs, and, e.g., (Lukasiewicz, Martinez,
and Simari 2012; 2013; Lukasiewicz et al. 2015; Eiter,
Lukasiewicz, and Predoiu 2016; Lukasiewicz, Malizia,
and Molinaro 2018; Lukasiewicz, Malizia, and Vaicenavičius 2019) for inconsistency-tolerant query answering
under existential rules), less attention has been paid to the
problem of explaining query answers under such semantics.
Explainability has recently become a prominent problem in
different areas of AI. In our setting, explaining query answers
allows users to understand not only what is entailed by an
inconsistent knowledge base under a particular semantics,
but also why it is entailed.
In this paper, we study explanations of query entailment
under inconsistency-tolerant semantics in the presence of
existential rules. Although DLs are popular formalisms for
modeling ontologies, it is generally agreed that rule-based ontologies are well-suited for data intensive applications, since
they allow us to conveniently deal with higher-arity relations,
which naturally occur in standard relational databases.
Explaining query answers under inconsistency-tolerant semantics has been recently addressed in the literature (Arioua, Tamani, and Croitoru 2015; Hecham et al. 2017;
Bienvenu, Bourgaux, and Goasdoué 2015; 2016; 2019).
Speciﬁcally, Arioua, Tamani, and Croitoru (2015) addressed
the problem of explaining query entailment under the ICR
semantics in the presence of existential rules for which the
Skolemized chase is ﬁnite. Their deﬁnition of explanation
is based on abstract argumentation. Their approach along
with interactive explanation methods based on dialectical

Abstract
Querying inconsistent knowledge bases is a problem that has
attracted a great deal of interest over the last decades. While
several semantics of query answering have been proposed,
and their complexity is rather well-understood, little attention
has been paid to the problem of explaining query answers.
Explainability has recently become a prominent problem in
different areas of AI. In particular, explaining query answers
allows users to understand not only what is entailed by an
inconsistent knowledge base, but also why. In this paper, we
address the problem of explaining query answers for existential rules under three popular inconsistency-tolerant semantics,
namely, the ABox repair, the intersection of repairs, and the
intersection of closed repairs semantics. We provide a thorough complexity analysis for a wide range of existential rule
languages and for different complexity measures.

Introduction
Existential rules from the context of Datalog± and description logics (DLs) are popular ontology languages. In realworld ontology-based applications, it may very well be the
case that the data are inconsistent with the ontology. To provide meaningful answers to users’ queries in the presence of
inconsistency, different inconsistency-tolerant semantics of
query answering have been proposed over the years.
One of the most popular is the ABox repair (AR) semantics, ﬁrst developed for relational databases (Arenas,
Bertossi, and Chomicki 1999) and then generalized for several DLs (Lembo et al. 2010). Its basic idea is to consider
a query answer valid if it can be inferred from each of the
repairs of the knowledge base, that is, the inclusion-maximal
consistent subsets of the database.
The intersection of repairs (IAR) (Lembo et al. 2010) and
the intersection of closed repairs (ICR) (Bienvenu 2012)
semantics have been introduced as approximations of the
AR semantics. An answer is considered to be valid under
the IAR (resp., ICR) semantics if it can be inferred from
the intersection of the repairs (resp., the intersection of the
closure of the repairs), along with the ontology. Besides being natural under-approximations of the AR semantics, they
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2909

