The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FISR: Deep Joint Frame Interpolation and
Super-Resolution with a Multi-Scale Temporal Loss
Soo Ye Kim,∗ Jihyong Oh,∗ Munchurl Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Republic of Korea
{sooyekim, jhoh94, mkimee}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Super-resolution (SR) has been widely used to convert lowresolution legacy videos to high-resolution (HR) ones, to suit
the increasing resolution of displays (e.g. UHD TVs). However, it becomes easier for humans to notice motion artifacts
(e.g. motion judder) in HR videos being rendered on largersized display devices. Thus, broadcasting standards support
higher frame rates for UHD (Ultra High Deﬁnition) videos
(4K@60 fps, 8K@120 fps), meaning that applying SR only
is insufﬁcient to produce genuine high quality videos. Hence,
to up-convert legacy videos for realistic applications, not only
SR but also video frame interpolation (VFI) is necessitated. In
this paper, we ﬁrst propose a joint VFI-SR framework for upscaling the spatio-temporal resolution of videos from 2K 30
fps to 4K 60 fps. For this, we propose a novel training scheme
with a multi-scale temporal loss that imposes temporal regularization on the input video sequence, which can be applied
to any general video-related task. The proposed structure is
analyzed in depth with extensive experiments.

EDSRÆ
CyclicGen

CyclicGen
Æ EDSR

FISRnet
(Ours)

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison with the cascade of existing methods. The proposed FISRnet is able to reconstruct
the texture of moving waters and small letters on objects.

Introduction
With the prevalence of high resolution (HR) displays such as
UHD TVs or 4K monitors, the demand for higher resolution
visual contents (videos) is also increasing with YouTubeTM
already supporting 8K UHD video services (7680×4320).
Super-resolution (SR) technologies are closely related to this
trend, as they can enlarge the spatial resolution of legacy
low resolution (LR) videos to higher resolution ones. However, the increase in spatial resolution necessarily entails
the increase in temporal resolution, or the frame rate, for
videos to be properly rendered on larger-sized displays from
a perceptual quality perspective. The human visual system
(HVS) becomes more sensitive to the temporal distortion
of videos as the spatial resolution increases, and tends to
easily perceive motion judder (discontinuous motion) artifacts in HR videos, which deteriorates the perceptual quality
(Daly 2001). To this regard, the frame rate must be increased
from low frame rate (LFR) to high frame rate (HFR) for
HR videos to be visually pleasing. This is the reason behind

UHD (Ultra High Deﬁnition) broadcast standards specifying
60 fps and 120 fps (frames per second) for 4K (3840×2160)
and 8K (7680×4320) UHD videos (ETSI 2019), compared
to the 30 fps of conventional 2K (FHD, 1920×1080) videos.
Therefore, in order to convert legacy 2K 30 fps videos to
genuine 4K 60 fps videos that can be viewed on 4K UHD
displays, video frame interpolation (VFI) is essential along
with SR. Nevertheless, VFI and SR have been intensively
but separately studied in low level vision tasks. None of
the existing methods have jointly handled both VFI and SR
problems, which is a complex task where both the spatial
and temporal resolutions must be increased. In this paper,
we ﬁrst propose a joint VFI-SR method, called FISR, that
enables the direct conversion of 2K 30 fps videos to 4K 60
fps. We employ a novel training strategy that handles multiple consecutive samples of video frames per each iteration,
with a novel temporal loss that exerts temporal regularization across these consecutive samples. This scheme is gen-

∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11278

