The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

True Nonlinear Dynamics from Incomplete Networks
Chunheng Jiang, Jianxi Gao, Malik Magdon-Ismail
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th Street, Troy, NY 12180
{jiangc4, gaoj8}@rpi.edu, magdon@cs.rpi.edu

such dynamics with appropriate choices of f (·) and g(·, ·)
are shown in Table 1. From an initial state, one can step forward in time, simulating the dynamics in (1) until convergence to equilibrium states x∗i .
The complete information setting in (1) is unrealistic, and
we must accept that in practice, only part of a network can be
measured. Hence, we assume that a subgraph with m nodes
G(s) = (V (s) , E (s) ) is known, with corresponding m × m
adjacency matrix A(s) , where V (s) ⊆ V and E (s) ⊆ E
(s for sampled). This paradigm is unavoidable when the
full network is unmeasurable (for example, protein-protein
interactions, metabolic and terrorist networks (Stumpf and
Wiuf 2005)). The paradigm is also useful when the full network is too large to handle, where one can deliberately sample a much smaller subnetwork for the analysis. Analyzing
a full network from a sampled subnetwork has been studied in several contexts, e.g. to estimate average or total degree (Kurant, Markopoulou, and Thiran 2011); degree distributions and clustering coefﬁcients (Stumpf and Wiuf 2005;
Gjoka, Kurant, and Markopoulou 2013; Seshadhri, Pinar,
and Kolda 2014); shortest paths (Leskovec and Faloutsos 2006); motif counts (Klusowski and Wu 2018); vertex and edge counts (Katzir, Liberty, and Somekh 2011;
Kurant, Butts, and Markopoulou 2012).
Our task is to estimate true steady-states x∗ for vertices in
(s)
V , despite only seeing an incomplete network G(s) . The
state-of-the-art naive approach is to simulate (1) on the subgraph G(s) . For example, one may collect a social network
from Boston and run the epidemic model (Table 1) to obtain the probability of each person to be infected. The results
are a dramatic and universal disaster, because the sub-social
network of Boston is just a small part of a vast social network, and the people in Boston interact with people outside.
That the naive method is bad is not surprising because the
essence of the dynamics in (1) are the interactions, and the
subgraph is missing many of those interactions. Hence, not
observing a large part of the network appears to be an insurmountable hurdle to learning the true steady states on the
observed (small) part of the network.
We develop a methodology to accurately predict true
steady states using only information local to G(s) . We
demonstrate the power of our approach in Figure 1, for an

Abstract
We study nonlinear dynamics on complex networks. Each
vertex i has a state xi which evolves according to a networked
dynamics to a steady-state x∗i . We develop fundamental tools
to learn the true steady-state of a small part of the network,
without knowing the full network. A naive approach and the
current state-of-the-art is to follow the dynamics of the observed partial network to local equilibrium. This dramatically
fails to extract the true steady state. We use a mean-ﬁeld approach to map the dynamics of the unseen part of the network to a single node, which allows us to recover accurate
estimates of steady-state on as few as 5 observed vertices in
domains ranging from ecology to social networks to gene regulation. Incomplete networks are the norm in practice, and we
offer new ways to think about nonlinear dynamics when only
sparse information is available.

1

Dynamical Systems on Incomplete
Networks

The fundamental task in learning is to infer unknown quantities of interest from incomplete data. We study learning complex nonlinear dynamics on networks from incomplete data. Such problems are fundamental because complex
nonlinear dynamical systems are ubiquitous, often modeled as coupled nonlinear ordinary differential equations
(ODEs), for example epidemic spreading (Pastor-Satorras
and Vespignani 2001), Michaelis-Menten gene regulatory
dynamics (Alon 2006; Gao, Barzel, and Barabási 2016),
Lotka-Volterra ecological dynamics (Lotka 1910). A graph
G = (V, E) with n × n (weighted) adjacency matrix A is
the backbone on which the dynamical equations are coupled
together. We consider a general dynamics in which each vertex i of G has a state xi which evolves according to a selfdriving force and a sum of interaction forces over neighbors

ẋi = f (xi ) +
Aij g(xi , xj ).
(1)
j∈V

The functions f (·) and g(·, ·) are general and usually nonlinear, and the positive weighted connectivity matrix A modulates the interactions between vertices. Several instances of
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
131

