The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generative Adversarial Regularized Mutual
Information Policy Gradient Framework for Automatic Diagnosis
Yuan Xia,# Jingbo Zhou,†∗ Zhenhui Shi,# Chao Lu,# Haifeng Huang#
†

#
Baidu Inc, Beijing, China † Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Research
National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application, China
{xiayuan, zhoujingbo, shizhenhui, luchao, huanghaifeng}@baidu.com

considered as a sequence of inquiries from doctors and answers from patients. Meanwhile, a distinctive feature of RL
is to tackle with sequential decision making problems with
feedback. Therefore, RL is popularly considered as a suitable candidate for developing powerful solutions for automatic diagnosis (Yu, Liu, and Nemati 2019).
However, there are still several challenges for RL to solve
automatic diagnosis. First of all, with the limited size of
diagnosis data, the RL tends to generate randomized trials
without considering the correlations among symptoms and
diseases from the common diagnosis paradigm. In real-life
scenarios, the doctors always carefully choose relevant questions to asks the patients with a logic of medical diagnosis.
The RL requires a large amount of data to learn such latent knowledge, while the size of diagnosis data are much
small due to the cost to collect the data and the privacy concern of patients. Second, a sophisticated method to set the
reward function is necessary. Though existing works have
mentioned that rewards are crucial for policy learning in RL
(Xu et al. 2019), there still no good solution to set the reward
function. For example, in (Kao, Tang, and Chang 2018),
the positive reward is set as +1, and negative reward as 0,
whereas in (Xu et al. 2019), the positive reward is set as
+44 and the negative reward as −22. There is no insightful
intuition or solution for setting the reward values in different
application contexts.
In this paper, we introduce a dialogue system for automatic diagnosis, and propose a novel Generative Adversarial
regularized Mutual information Policy gradient framework
(named GAMP for short) for automatic diagnosis in our
system. Figure 1 illustrates our system architecture, which
contains Dialogue Agent (DA), User Simulator (US), Natural Language Understanding (NLU) and Natural Language
Generation (NLG). Additionally, we have a Dialogue State
Tracker (DST) to track the state of the user and agent. The
NLU extracts medical entities and key question from the input text, and NLG can generate the dialogue question to patients. The Dialogue Agent implements GAMP framework,
as shown in Figure 2.
The novelty of GAMP framework lays on the integration
of the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014) with the RL model. We propose to train an RL

Abstract
Automatic diagnosis systems have attracted increasing attention in recent years. The reinforcement learning (RL) is
an attractive technique for building an automatic diagnosis
system due to its advantages for handling sequential decision making problem. However, the RL method still cannot achieve good enough prediction accuracy. In this paper,
we propose a Generative Adversarial regularized Mutual information Policy gradient framework (GAMP) for automatic
diagnosis which aims to make a diagnosis rapidly and accurately. We ﬁrst propose a new policy gradient framework
based on the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) to optimize the RL model for automatic diagnosis. In our framework, we take the generator of GAN as a policy network,
and also use the discriminator of GAN as a part of the reward function. This generative adversarial regularized policy
gradient framework can try to avoid generating randomized
trials of symptom inquires deviated from the common diagnosis paradigm. In addition, we add mutual information to
enhance the reward function to encourage the model to select the most discriminative symptoms to make a diagnosis.
Experiment evaluations on two public datasets show that our
method beats the state-of-art methods, not only can achieve
higher diagnosis accuracy, but also can use a smaller number
of inquires to make diagnosis decision.

Introduction
Automatic diagnosis is one of the most important artiﬁcial intelligence applications in healthcare. An automatic diagnosis system usually converses with patients a series of
questions about their symptoms beyond their self-reports
and then attempts to predict potential diseases. The automatic diagnosis system has a great potential to simplify
the diagnostic procedure, reduce the cost of collecting patient information, and help make a better and more efﬁcient decision making (Tang et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2017;
Chen et al. 2019).
In recent years, researchers are increasingly interested in
modeling the automatic diagnosis problem by reinforcement
learning (RL). The process of automatic diagnosis can be
∗

Jingbo Zhou is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1062

