The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Robustness Certiﬁcates for Sparse Adversarial Attacks by Randomized Ablation
Alexander Levine, Soheil Feizi
University of Maryland, College Park
{alevine0, sfeizi}@cs.umd.edu

When designing or evaluating an adversarial attack, one
must choose an objective measure of ‘similarity’ between
two images: more precisely, the goal of the attacker is
to minimize d(x, x ), subject to f (x) = f (x ), where
d is a chosen distance metric. Most existing work in adversarial examples has used Lp norms as distance metrics, focusing in particular on L∞ and L2 norms (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Szegedy et al. 2013;
Madry et al. 2017; Dong et al. 2018; Kurakin, Goodfellow,
and Bengio 2018). The L0 metric, which is simply the number of pixels at which x differs from x, has also been the
target of adversarial attacks. This metric presents a distinct
challenge, because d(x, x ) is non-differentiable. However,
both gradient-based (white-box) attacks (Madry et al. 2017;
Papernot et al. 2016a) and zeroth-order (black-box) attacks
(Schott et al. 2019) have been proposed under the L0 attack
model. The L0 attack model is the focus of this paper.
Several practical defenses against adversarial attacks under the L0 attack model have been proposed in the last
couple of years. These methods include defensive distillation (Papernot et al. 2016b), as well as attempts to recover x from x using compressed sensing (Bafna, Murtagh,
and Vyas 2018) or generative models (Schott et al. 2019;
Meng and Chen 2017). However, as new defenses are proposed, new attacks are also developed for which these defenses are vulnerable (e.g. (Carlini and Wagner 2016)). Experimental demonstrations of a defense’s efﬁcacy based on
currently existing attacks do not provide a general proof of
security. In response, certiﬁably robust classiﬁers have been
developed for adversarial examples for a variety of attack
models (Wong and Kolter 2018; Gowal et al. 2018). For
these classiﬁers, given an image x, it is possible to compute a radius ρ such that it is guaranteed that no adversarial
example x exists within a distance ρ of x. One drawback
of many of these certiﬁable approaches is that they can be
computationally expensive since they attempt to minimize
d(x, x ) (or its lower bound) using formal methods.
Recently, a relatively computationally inexpensive family of
certiﬁably robust classiﬁers have been proposed which employ randomized smoothing (Lecuyer et al. 2019; Cohen,
Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019; Li et al. 2018; Salman et al.
2019). This development has mostly been focused on the L1

Abstract
Recently, techniques have been developed to provably guarantee the robustness of a classiﬁer to adversarial perturbations of bounded L1 and L2 magnitudes by using randomized smoothing: the robust classiﬁcation is a consensus of
base classiﬁcations on randomly noised samples where the
noise is additive. In this paper, we extend this technique to
the L0 threat model. We propose an efﬁcient and certiﬁably
robust defense against sparse adversarial attacks by randomly
ablating input features, rather than using additive noise. Experimentally, on MNIST, we can certify the classiﬁcations
of over 50% of images to be robust to any distortion of at
most 8 pixels. This is comparable to the observed empirical
robustness of unprotected classiﬁers on MNIST to modern
L0 attacks, demonstrating the tightness of the proposed robustness certiﬁcate. We also evaluate our certiﬁcate on ImageNet and CIFAR-10. Our certiﬁcates represent an improvement on those provided in a concurrent work (Lee et al. 2019)
which uses random noise rather than ablation (median certiﬁcates of 8 pixels versus 4 pixels on MNIST; 16 pixels versus
1 pixel on ImageNet.) Additionally, we empirically demonstrate that our classiﬁer is highly robust to modern sparse adversarial attacks on MNIST. Our classiﬁcations are robust, in
median, to adversarial perturbations of up to 31 pixels, compared to 22 pixels reported as the state-of-the-art defense, at
the cost of a slight decrease (around 2.3%) in the classiﬁcation accuracy. Code and supplementary material is available
at https://github.com/alevine0/randomizedAblation/.

Introduction
Adversarial attacks, and defenses against these attacks, have
been active topics of research in machine learning in recent years (Szegedy et al. 2013; Carlini and Wagner 2017;
Madry et al. 2017). In the case of image classiﬁcation, given
a classiﬁer f , the goal of an adversarial attack on an image
x is to produce an image x , such that x is visually similar to x, but f classiﬁes x differently than it classiﬁes x.
Assuming that x is a natural image that was classiﬁed correctly, this means that the attacker can produce an image x
which looks imperceptibly similar to this natural image, but
is misclassiﬁed by f .
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4585

