The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Developments in Multi-Agent Fair Allocation
Haris Aziz
UNSW Sydney and Data61
Sydney, Australia
haziz@cse.unsw.edu.au

2

Abstract

When indivisible items are allocated among agents, guaranteeing the existence of fair allocations is impossible for
many desirable notions of fairness. For example, if there are
two agents and one indivisible valued good, allocating the
good to either of the two agents will make the other agent envious. In other words, an envy-free allocation may not exist.
Another challenge is computational. Suppose agents have
positive additive utilities over the items. Then the problem
of checking whether there exists an envy-free allocation is
NP-complete even for 1-0 utilities (Aziz et al. 2015). Similarly the problems of computing allocations that maximize
the egalitarian welfare (utility of the worst off agent) or Nash
welfare (geometric mean of the utilities of agents) is NPhard (see, e.g. Nguyen et al. (2014)).
Given these challenges, a couple of inﬂuential fairness
concepts were proposed by Budish (2011). The ﬁrst one is
called maxmin share (MMS) fairness. The maxmin fair share
of an agent is the best she can guarantee for herself if she
is allowed to partition the items into bundles for the agents
but then receives her least preferred bundle. An allocation
satisﬁes MMS fairness if each agent’s allocation is at least
as preferred to her as her maxmin fair share. Although an
MMS fair allocation is not guaranteed to exist even for additive utilities, the concept gives rise to approximation versions in which each agent aspires to get a certain percentage
of her maxmin fair share (Procaccia and Wang 2014). This
has led to several results including new algorithms that are
faster, simpler, or provide better approximation guarantees,
or work for more general families of utilities (see e.g. Aziz
et al. (2017b), Amanatidis et al. (2015), Barman and Krishnamurthy (2017) and Huang and Lu (2019)).
The second solution concept that has been proposed is a
relaxation of envy-freeness called envy-free up to one item
(EF1). An allocation satisﬁes EF1 if it is envy-free or any
agent’s envy for another agent can be removed if some item
is ignored. Under additive utilities, EF1 can be achieved by
a simple algorithm called the round-robin sequential allocation algorithm. Agents take turn in a round-robin manner
and pick their most preferred unallocated item. The interest
in EF1 was especially piqued when Caragiannis et al. (2016)
proved that for positive additive utilities, a rule based on

Fairness is becoming an increasingly important concern when
designing markets, allocation procedures, and computer systems. I survey some recent developments in the ﬁeld of multiagent fair allocation.

1

Allocation of Indivisible Items

Introduction

Many important decisions in our lives are increasingly being made by computers. These decisions include whether
we get a certain job or loan. It becomes imperative then that
computer systems provide guarantees that the decision has
been made transparently and fairly. For many settings such
as two-sided matching, fairness considerations based on justiﬁed envy or diversity guarantees are enshrined in the letter of the law. Even for smaller day to day decisions, the
appetite for fairness guarantees is naturally present among
people.1 At a bigger scale, the Internet leads to peer to peer
interactions where fairness comes up as an important concern (see, e.g. Moulin (2019) and Kleinberg, Rabani, and
Tardos (2001)).
The issue of what is fair and how to achieve fairness has been studied in several disciplines including
economics (Moulin 2003; Thomson 2011), political science (Brams 2008; Balinski and Young 1982) and philosophy (Rescher 2002; Rawls 1971).2
I mention some recent developments in fair allocation in
multi-agent systems. In particular, I discuss allocation of
indivisible items (Section 2), allocation of divisible items
(Section 3), two-sided matching (Section 4), and fairness in
other social choice settings (Section 5). Finally, I wrap up
the discussion in Section 6.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See, for example, the interest in fair allocation portal www.
spliddit.org/).
2
Despite the richness of fairness concepts and principles in
these literatures, I will only focus on a handful of fairness concepts in this paper. Other fairness ideas include indices to measure
inequality (see, e.g. Atkinson (1970)) or market-based approaches
in which agents have equal budgets (see, e.g. Varian (1974)).
13563

