The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Plug-in, Trainable Gate for Streamlining Arbitrary Neural Networks
Jaedeok Kim,1∗ Chiyoun Park,1∗ Hyun-Joo Jung,1∗ Yoonsuck Choe1,2
1

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Center, Samsung Research, Samsung Electronics Co.
56 Seongchon-gil, Secho-gu, Seoul, Korea, 06765
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, 77843, USA
{jd05.kim, chiyoun.park, hj34.jung}@samsung.com, choe@tamu.edu

Gradient descent methods can solve a continuous optimization problem efﬁciently by minimizing the loss function, but such methods are not directly applicable to discrete
optimization problems because they are not differentiable.
While many alternative solutions such as simulated annealing (Kirkpatrick, Gelatt, and Vecchi 1983) have been proposed to handle discrete optimization problems, they are too
cost-inefﬁcient in deep learning because we need to train alternative choices to evaluate the sample’s accuracy.
In this paper, we introduce a novel concept of a trainable
gate function (TGF) that confers a differentiable property to
discrete-valued variables. It allows us to directly optimize,
through gradient descent, loss functions that include discrete
choices that are non-differentiable. By applying TGFs each
of which connects a continuous latent parameter to a discrete
choice, a discrete optimization problem can be relaxed to a
continuous optimization problem.
Pruning a neural network is a problem that decides which
channels (or weights) are to be retained. In order to obtain an
optimal pruning result for an individual model, one needs to
compare the performance of the model induced by all combinations of retained channels. While specialized structures
or searching algorithms have been proposed for pruning,
they have complex structures or their internal parameters
need to be set manually (He et al. 2018). The key problem
of channel pruning is that there are discrete choices in the
combination of channels, which makes the problem of channel selections non-differentiable. Using the proposed TGF
allows us to reformulate discrete choices as a simple differentiable learning problem, so that a general gradient descent
procedure can be applied, end-to-end.
Our main contributions in this paper are in three fold.
• We introduce the concept of a TGF which makes a
discrete selection problem solvable by a conventional
gradient-based learning procedure.
• We propose a pruning method with which a neural network can be directly optimized in terms of the number of
parameters or that of FLOPs. The proposed method can
prune and train a neural network simultaneously, so that
the further ﬁne-tuning step is not needed.
• Our proposed method is task-agnostic so that it can be
easily applied to many different tasks.

Abstract
Architecture optimization, which is a technique for ﬁnding
an efﬁcient neural network that meets certain requirements,
generally reduces to a set of multiple-choice selection problems among alternative sub-structures or parameters. The discrete nature of the selection problem, however, makes this
optimization difﬁcult. To tackle this problem we introduce a
novel concept of a trainable gate function. The trainable gate
function, which confers a differentiable property to discretevalued variables, allows us to directly optimize loss functions that include non-differentiable discrete values such as
0-1 selection. The proposed trainable gate can be applied
to pruning. Pruning can be carried out simply by appending the proposed trainable gate functions to each intermediate output tensor followed by ﬁne-tuning the overall model,
using any gradient-based training methods. So the proposed
method can jointly optimize the selection of the pruned channels while ﬁne-tuning the weights of the pruned model at the
same time. Our experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method efﬁciently optimizes arbitrary neural networks
in various tasks such as image classiﬁcation, style transfer,
optical ﬂow estimation, and neural machine translation.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have been widely used in many applications such as image classiﬁcation, image generation, and
machine translation. However, in order to increase accuracy
of the models, the neural networks have to be made larger
and require a huge amount of computation (He et al. 2016a;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). Because it is often not feasible to load and execute such a large model on an ondevice platform such as mobile phones or IoT devices, various architecture optimization methods have been proposed
for ﬁnding an efﬁcient neural network that meets certain
design requirements. In particular, pruning methods can reduce both model size and computational costs effectively,
but the discrete nature of the binary selection problems
makes such methods difﬁcult and inefﬁcient (He et al. 2018;
Luo and Wu 2018).
∗

Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4452

