The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Non-Local U-Nets for Biomedical Image Segmentation
Zhengyang Wang,1 Na Zou,1 Dinggang Shen,2 Shuiwang Ji1
1

Texas A&M University, 2 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{zhengyang.wang, nzou1, sji}@tamu.edu, dgshen@med.unc.edu

Navab, and Ahmadi 2016), and convolution-concatenate
3D-FCN (CC-3D-FCN) (Nie et al. 2018).

Abstract
Deep learning has shown its great promise in various biomedical image segmentation tasks. Existing models are typically
based on U-Net and rely on an encoder-decoder architecture
with stacked local operators to aggregate long-range information gradually. However, only using the local operators limits
the efﬁciency and effectiveness. In this work, we propose the
non-local U-Nets, which are equipped with ﬂexible global aggregation blocks, for biomedical image segmentation. These
blocks can be inserted into U-Net as size-preserving processes, as well as down-sampling and up-sampling layers.
We perform thorough experiments on the 3D multimodality
isointense infant brain MR image segmentation task to evaluate the non-local U-Nets. Results show that our proposed
models achieve top performances with fewer parameters and
faster computation.

Despite the success of these studies, we conduct an indepth study of U-Net based models and observe two limitations shared by them. First, the encoder usually stacks
size-preserving convolutional layers, interlaced with downsampling operators, to gradually reduce the spatial sizes of
feature maps. Both convolutions and down-sampling operators are typically local operators, which apply small kernels
to scan inputs and extract local information. Stacking them
in a cascade way results in large effective kernels and is able
to aggregate long-range information. As the biomedical image segmentation usually beneﬁts from a wide range of contextual information, most prior models have a deep encoder,
i.e., an encoder with many stacked local operators. It hurts
the efﬁciency of these models by introducing a considerably
large amount of training parameters, especially when more
down-sampling operators are employed, since the number of
feature maps usually gets doubled after each down-sampling
operation. In addition, more down-sampling operators cause
the loss of more spatial information during encoding, which
is crucial for biomedical image segmentation. Second, the
decoder is built in a similar way to the encoder, by replacing down-sampling operators with up-sampling operators.
Popular up-sampling operators, like deconvolutions and unpooling layers, are local operators as well (Gao et al. 2019).
However, the up-sampling process involves the recovery of
spatial information, which is hard without taking global information into consideration. To conclude, it will improve
both the effectiveness and efﬁciency of U-Net based models
to develop a new operator capable of performing non-local
information aggregation. As U-Net has size-preserving processes, as well as down-sampling and up-sampling layers,
the new operator is supposed to be ﬂexible to ﬁt these cases.

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning methods, such as fully convolutional networks (FCN) (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015),
Deeplab (Chen et al. 2018; Wang and Ji 2018), and ReﬁneNet (Lin et al. 2017a), have continuously set performance records on image segmentation tasks. In particular,
U-Net has served as the backbone network for biomedical image segmentation. Basically, U-Net is composed of a
down-sampling encoder and an up-sampling decoder, along
with skip connections between them. It incorporates both local and global contextual information through the encodingdecoding process.
Many variants of U-Net have been developed and they
achieved improved performance on biomedical image segmentation tasks. For example, residual deconvolutional network (Fakhry, Zeng, and Ji 2017) and residual symmetric UNet (Lee et al. 2017) addressed the 2D electron microscopy
image segmentation task by building a U-Net based network with additional short-range residual connections (He
et al. 2016a). In addition, U-Net was extended from 2D
to 3D cases for volumetric biomedical images, leading to
models like 3D U-Net (Çiçek et al. 2016), V-Net (Milletari,

In this work, we address the two limitations and propose
the non-local U-Nets for biomedical image segmentation. To
address the ﬁrst limitation above, we propose a global aggregation block based on the self-attention operator (Vaswani
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Yuan et al. 2019), which is
able to aggregate global information without a deep encoder.
This block is further extended to an up-sampling global aggregation block, which can alleviate the second problem. To

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6315

