The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Guiding CDCL SAT Search via Random Exploration amid Conﬂict Depression
Md Solimul Chowdhury, Martin Müller, Jia-Huai You
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
{mdsolimu, mmueller, jyou}@ualberta.ca

State-of-the-art branching heuristics, such as LRB, VSIDS
or CHB, have average GLR values of about 0.5, i.e., average
one conﬂict per two decisions (Liang et al. 2017).
In this work, we ﬁrst perform a study of conﬂict generation during CDCL search. We ﬁnd that there are clear nonrandom patterns of short bursts of conﬂicts, called conﬂict
burst (CB), followed by longer phases of what we call conﬂict depression (CD), in which the search fails to generate
any conﬂicts in a span of decisions. To correct the course
of such a search, we propose to use exploration to combat
conﬂict depression. We therefore design a new SAT solver
extension, called expSAT, which applies random walks in
the context of CDCL SAT solving. In a conﬂict depression phase, random walks help to identify more promising
variables for branching. Note that exploration visits possible future search states, while the standard CDCL branching
heuristics rely on conﬂicts generated from past search states.
The contributions of this paper are:
• An empirical study of the pathological state of conﬂict depression, using one of the strongest purely VSIDS-based
solvers, glucoseLCM1 (gLCM), on recent SAT competition benchmarks, shows that CD phases occur at a high
rate and often with long average duration.
• A formulation of expSAT for an exploration-driven extension of VSIDS-based SAT solvers. expSAT performs random exploration when a substantial CD phase is detected.
The goal is a swift escape from conﬂict depression.
• An empirical evaluation of expSAT implemented on top
of four state-of-the-art SAT solvers, gLCM, MapleCOMSPS (MplCOMSPS), Maple CM (MplCM) and MapleLCMDist ChronoBT (MplCBT). On the benchmarks of
main track of SAT Competitions 2017 and 2018 (SAT2017 and SAT-2018), all four expSAT extensions solve
more instances and achieve lower PAR-2 score2 than their
respective baselines. The best performing expSAT solver
solves 16 more instances than its baseline, which is a
strong performance gain. On 52 hard instances from SATCoin cryptographic benchmarks, most of our expSAT extensions show strong gains over their respective baselines.

Abstract
The efﬁciency of Conﬂict Driven Clause Learning (CDCL)
SAT solving depends crucially on ﬁnding conﬂicts at a
fast rate. State-of-the-art CDCL branching heuristics such
as VSIDS, CHB and LRB conform to this goal. We take a
closer look at the way in which conﬂicts are generated over
the course of a CDCL SAT search. Our study of the VSIDS
branching heuristic shows that conﬂicts are typically generated in short bursts, followed by what we call a conﬂict depression phase in which the search fails to generate any conﬂicts in a span of decisions. The lack of conﬂict indicates that
the variables that are currently ranked highest by the branching heuristic fail to generate conﬂicts. Based on this analysis, we propose an exploration strategy, called expSAT, which
randomly samples variable selection sequences in order to
learn an updated heuristic from the generated conﬂicts. The
goal is to escape from conﬂict depressions expeditiously. The
branching heuristic deployed in expSAT combines these updates with the standard VSIDS activity scores. An extensive
empirical evaluation with four state-of-the-art CDCL SAT
solvers demonstrates good-to-strong performance gains with
the expSAT approach.

Introduction
Modern CDCL SAT solvers have become the enabling technology for many real-world problems, such as hardware design veriﬁcation (Gupta, Ganai, and Wang 2006), classical planning (Rintanen 2012) and encryption (Massacci and
Marraro 2000). The key decision-making step in a CDCL
SAT solver is selecting a variable from the current set of
unassigned variables using a branching heuristic, before
making a boolean assignment to it. Variable selection has
a dramatic effect on search efﬁciency. Popular branching
heuristics include VSIDS (Moskewicz et al. 2001) and its
variants, LRB (Liang et al. 2016b) and CHB (Liang et al.
2016a). These heuristics reward variables involved in recent conﬂicts. The intuition is that assignments of these variables are likely to generate further conﬂicts, leading to useful learned clauses and thus pruning the search space.
Global Learning Rate (GLR) (Liang et al. 2017) measures
the number of conﬂicts obtained per branching decision. In
CDCL, a single decision may generate multiple conﬂicts.

1

glucose 4.2.1, which implements the Learned Clause Minimization (LCM) (Luo et al. 2017) technique on top of glucose 4.1.
2
Deﬁned as the sum of all run-times for solved instances + 2 ∗
timeout for unsolved instances; lowest score wins.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1428

