The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Differentially Private Learning with Small Public Data∗
Jun Wang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{wangj, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

2017; Zhang et al. 2017; Lee and Kifer
√ 2018). However, unlike the usual result about O (1/ m) excess risk bounds
for non-private ERM where m is the size of the training
set (Zinkevich 2003), differentially private ERM approaches
usually have additional polynomial dependences on dimension p and privacy parameter  (Bassily, Smith, and Thakurta
2014). These extra costs of privacy sometimes make the private ERM become a formidable job for high dimensional
datasets or strict privacy requirements.
In many real-world applications, when we perform learning jobs on a private database, we can also get access to a
public database about the task. For example, if a headmaster
wants to evaluate teaching quality according to private questionnaires from students, some reports from his teaching supervision group which are publicity could be used as well.
Besides, a doctor can study typical cases published by the
centers for disease control when he analyses the epidemic
trend from private medical records in his hospital, a lawyer
can search non-private judgments from case information disclosure online when he looks for the patterns of judgments
from his customers’ information. Thus, a natural problem
is, how can we utilize these public data to help differentially
private learning.
Some straightforward solutions may immediately come to
mind, such as:

Abstract
Differentially private learning tackles tasks where the data are
private and the learning process is subject to differential privacy requirements. In real applications, however, some public
data are generally available in addition to private data, and it
is interesting to consider how to exploit them. In this paper,
we study a common situation where a small amount of public data can be used when solving the Empirical Risk Minimization problem over a private database. Speciﬁcally, we
propose Private-Public Stochastic Gradient Descent, which
utilizes such public information to adjust parameters in differentially private stochastic gradient descent and ﬁne-tunes
the ﬁnal result with model reuse. Our method keeps differential privacy for the private database, and empirical study
validates its superiority compared with existing approaches.

Introduction
With the gradual popularization of artiﬁcial intelligence and
machine learning, privacy is becoming a control concern
when mining sensitive data. To gain statistical knowledge
while avoiding leakage of personal information, Dwork et
al. (2006) presented differential privacy, which gives a mathematically rigorous deﬁnition of privacy protection and becomes a standard guarantee nowadays. Many classic learning algorithms have been modiﬁed to satisfy its requirements, such as least squares (Wang 2018), SVM (Rubinstein
et al. 2009), LASSO (Talwar, Thakurta, and Zhang 2015)
and neural networks (Abadi et al. 2016).
Among these algorithms, Empirical Risk Minimization
(ERM) is a general framework that minimizes a given
loss function over a training set. Combining with different
types of regularizers, it covers a lot of speciﬁc learning approaches. Many algorithms for the ERM task with a differential privacy guarantee have been developed (Chaudhuri,
Monteleoni, and Sarwate 2011; Kifer, Smith, and Thakurta
2012; Bassily, Smith, and Thakurta 2014; Wang, Ye, and Xu

• Train a model on the public database at ﬁrst, and replace
it with the model of private data if it is incompetent.
• Train two models on the public and private database respectively, and use their ensemble as the ﬁnal result.
• Add those public data into the private database and train
a model together.
However, in practice, utilizing public data is non-trivial. Because on one hand, the public data usually is not sufﬁcient to
train a well-performing model solely; actually, if some domain has a sufﬁcient amount of public data, then private data
in such domain would not be highly-valued. This makes the
ﬁrst two solutions impractical. On the other hand, merging
public data into the private database may be illegal in cases,
and will cause nonnegligible communication costs; needless
to say, such a process cannot handle cases where the public
data is in accumulating. Thus, the third straightforward way

∗
This research was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB1004300), NSFC (61921006), and the
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology
and Industrialization.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6219

