The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarial Disentanglement with Grouped Observations
Jozsef Nemeth
Ultinous, Hungary
jnemeth@ultinous.com

At the same time, it has been observed that using increased
regularization weight, the VAE model learns disentangled
latent spaces (Higgins et al. 2017).

Abstract
We consider the disentanglement of the representations of the
relevant attributes of the data (content) from all other factors
of variations (style) using Variational Autoencoders. Some
recent works addressed this problem by utilizing grouped observations, where the content attributes are assumed to be
common within each group, while there is no any supervised
information on the style factors. In many cases, however, these
methods fail to prevent the models from using the style variables to encode content related features as well. This work
supplements these algorithms with a method that eliminates
the content information in the style representations. For that
purpose the training objective is augmented to minimize an appropriately deﬁned mutual information term in an adversarial
way. Experimental results and comparisons on image datasets
show that the resulting method can efﬁciently separate the
content and style related attributes and generalizes to unseen
data.

1

In this work, we consider the problem of learning a disentangled representation in which the relevant attributes of
the observations (which determine some kind of identity or
class of a given sample) and the other irrelevant factors (like
pose, lighting conditions, etc.) are separated. Following the
notations of (Bouchacourt, Tomioka, and Nowozin 2018),
we refer to the relevant attributes and the other factors as
content and style, respectively. Recently, grouped observations based methods have been proposed for content-style
disentanglement (Bouchacourt, Tomioka, and Nowozin 2018;
Hosoya 2019). Grouping data elements that represent the
same content is a way to induce weak supervision, and the
main motivation behind this approach is that collecting and
cleaning such datasets is less expensive. For example, in
case of classiﬁcation based methods it is expected that different classes represent different identities. At the same time,
in case of learning from grouped data, we only expect that
members of a given group share the same content, whereas
different groups are not required to represent different classes.
These methods (Bouchacourt, Tomioka, and Nowozin 2018;
Hosoya 2019) share the idea of accumulating the content
representation of the individual group members into a single
common group-level content representation, while they learn
individual style representations for each of the group members. However, these methods have no explicit mechanism to
prevent the model from using the style variable to represent
not only style attributes but also certain amount of content
information. For example, the number of dimensions for the
style variable had to be adjusted for the style variability, otherwise the model used the style variable to learn content
related aspects of the data (Hosoya 2019). Our experiments
also conﬁrm this observation.

Introduction

In the ﬁeld of representation learning (Bengio, Courville, and
Vincent 2013), autoencoder based approaches (Tschannen,
Bachem, and Lucic 2018) are among the most effective methods to learn compact and meaningful representations even
without any supervision. Such representations then can be
used to solve downstream tasks like classiﬁcation or clustering efﬁciently. Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma
and Welling 2014) attracted probably the most attention
in recent years. By employing stochastic variational inference (Zhang et al. 2019), VAEs can learn intractable posterior
distributions of the latent variables.
Disentangled representation learning (Desjardins,
Courville, and Bengio 2012; Kumar, Sattigeri, and Balakrishnan 2018; Achille and Soatto 2018; Esmaeili et al. 2019;
Xiang and Li 2019) aims to assign the different factors
of variations to different dimensions of the representation
vectors. This problem has been heavily studied in recent
years, for example, it has been proved that learning
disentangled representations without any inductive bias or
supervision is theoretically impossible (Locatello et al. 2019).

We show that the results of these methods can be signiﬁcantly improved by suppressing the content information in the
style variable. More speciﬁcally, the proposed method trains
a neural network to estimate the mutual information (Belghazi et al. 2018) between the style representations and the
observations corresponding to the same groups whereas the
encoder network is trained in an adversarial manner. Exper-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10243

