The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relatedness and TBox-Driven Rule Learning in Large Knowledge Bases
Giuseppe Pirrò1
1

Department of Computer Science, Sapienza University of Rome
Via Salaria 113, 00198, Rome, Italy
pirro@di.uniroma1.it

and are useful in a variety of tasks including KB completion (Chen et al. 2016), ontology enrichment (d’Amato et al.
2016), fact -checking (Shi and Weninger 2016; Fionda and
Pirrò 2018), and storage optimization (Gayathri and Kumar
2015). Rules can be used to construct relatedness explanations (Pirrò 2019) that allow to (visually) understand data
correlations; as an example, one may infer that a profession
typically involves a specialization in a particular ﬁeld.
We present RARL (Relatedness-Aware Rule Learning), a
rule learning approach, which combines a relatedness-driven
TBox traversal algorithm for candidate rule generation (§
3.1) with an algorithm for candidate veriﬁcation and rule
conﬁdence assessment in the ABox (§ 3.2, § 3.3). Given a
rule head pred(D, R), candidate rule bodies (§ 2.1) are generated as TBox paths that start from one of the domains
D of pred and end into one of its ranges R. An example of candidate rule body for spouse(Person, Person) is
parent
child
the TBox path Person−−→ Person−−−→ Person (Fig. 1
(b)). To prune the candidate search space, RARL considers bounded-length bodies only including the top-k semantically related predicates to pred (§ 2.2). However, not all candidate bodies are veriﬁed, that is, have bindings in the ABox
and not all of them offer the same conﬁdence. RARL leverages an algorithm based on positive/negative examples for
candidate veriﬁcation and conﬁdence assessment (§ 2.3). We
show (§ 4) that RARL is scalable and ﬁnds good rules, especially on schema-rich KBs like DBpedia, Yago, and Freebase.
RARL has been inspired by Ontological Path Finding
(OPF) (Chen et al. 2016) for candidate generation. However, OPF generates an enormous amount of candidates, especially in schema-rich KBs like DBpedia. As an example, on the TBox in Fig. 1 (b) and for the input predicate
spouse, OPF would not be able to distinguish between
the candidates child(x, y) ∧ parent(y, z) and lyrics(x, y) ∧
deathPlace(y, z), while our approach, which is driven by a
relatedness criterion, will discard the second candidate since
lyrics and deathPlace have a much lower degree of relatedness to the predicate spouse than child or parent. We
were inspired by RuDiK (Ortona, Meduri, and Papotti 2018)
for the usage of examples. However, while RuDiK focuses
on learning the smallest number of rules satisfying the ex-

Abstract
We present RARL, an approach to discover rules of the
form body ⇒ head in large knowledge bases (KBs) that typically include a set of terminological facts (TBox) and a set
of TBox-compliant assertional facts (ABox). RARL’s main
intuition is to learn rules by leveraging TBox-information
and the semantic relatedness between the predicate(s) in the
atoms of the body and the predicate in the head. RARL
uses an efﬁcient relatedness-driven TBox traversal algorithm,
which given an input rule head, generates the set of most
semantically related candidate rule bodies. Then, rule conﬁdence is computed in the ABox based on a set of positive
and negative examples. Decoupling candidate generation and
rule quality assessment offers greater ﬂexibility than previous
work.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Bases (KBs) like Yago, Wikidata, and DBpedia
contain millions of facts (ABox) structured with the help of
an underlying schema (TBox), which in its essential form
allows to deﬁne entity types and their hierarchy along with
the domain and range of properties. Fig. 1 (a) shows part of
the DBpedia T-Box, where the class Artist is a subClassOf
Person and the predicate director has as a domain Film and
as a range Person. Fig. 1 (c) shows an excerpt of A-Box
conforming to the TBox. KBs are automatically populated
thus being inherently incomplete (Darari et al. 2018) and
prone to errors. As an example, the fact (Virginia Kelley,
spouse, Roger Clinton) is missing in DBpedia. One way
to overcome these issues is to deﬁne declarative logical rules
like:
child(x, y) ∧ parent(y, z) ⇒ spouse(x, z)

(1)

where spouse(X, Z) is the rule head (a single atom) and
child(X, Y)∧parent(Y, Z) is the rule body (a conjunction
of atoms). The rule states that some X is the spouse of
some Z if some child Y of X has as a parent Z and allows to infer, among the others, the above mentioned missing fact. Rules capture common correlations in the data
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2975

