The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Estimating Stochastic Linear Combination of Non-Linear Regressions
Di Wang,∗ Xiangyu Guo, Chaowen Guan, Shi Li, Jinhui Xu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260

functions, and  is some random noise (from an unknown
distribution) satisfying E[] = 0 and is independent of x and
zi ’s.
The goal is to estimate the parameters βj∗ for
all j ∈ [k] from n observations (x1 , y1 , {z1,i }ki=1 ),
(x2 , y2 , {z2,i }ki=1 ), · · · , (xn , yn , {zn,i }ki=1 ).

Abstract
In this paper we study the problem of estimating stochastic linear combination of non-linear regressions, which has a close
connection with many machine learning and statistical models
such as non-linear regressions, the Single Index, Multi-index,
Varying Coefﬁcient Index Models and Two-layer Neural Networks. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst show that with some mild assumptions, if the variate vector x is multivariate Gaussian, then
there is an algorithm 
whose output vectors have 2 -norm estimation errors of O( np ) with high probability, where p is
the dimension of x and n is the number of samples. Then we
extend our result to the case where x is sub-Gaussian using the
zero-bias transformation, which could be seen as a generalization of the classic Stein’s lemma. We also show that with some
additional assumptions there is an algorithm whose 
output vectors have ∞ -norm estimation errors of O( √1p + np ) with
high probability. Finally, for both Gaussian and sub-Gaussian
cases we propose a faster sub-sampling based algorithm and
show that when the sub-sample sizes are large enough then
the estimation errors will not be sacriﬁced by too much. Experiments for both cases support our theoretical results. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that studies
and provides theoretical guarantees for the stochastic linear
combination of non-linear regressions model.

This model has a close connection with many models in
Statistics, Machine Learning, Signal Processing and Information Theory: (1) when k = 1, the model is reduced to the nonlinear regression estimation problem which has been studied
in (Zhang, Yang, and Wang 2018; Beck and Eldar 2013;
Yang et al. 2016; Cook and Lee 1999) and is related to compressed sensing and image recovery as well; (2) when k = 1
but the link function f1 is unknown, it becomes the Single Index Model, which is one of the most fundamental models in
statistics and has been studied for many years (Ichimura 1993;
Horowitz 2009; Kakade et al. 2011; Yang, Balasubramanian, and Liu 2017; Radchenko 2015); (3) when k ≥ 1,
zi ’s are deterministic but fi ’s are unknown, this model will
be a special case of the Multi-index Model which has
been studied in (Li 1991; 1992; Li, Duan, and others 1989;
Yang et al. 2017); (4) when k ≥ 1, zi ’s are stochastic but
fi ’s are unknown, it will be the Varying Coefﬁcient Index
Model which was introduced by (Ma and Song 2015) and has
wide applications in economics and medical science (Fan and
Zhang 2008); (5) when all fi ’s are the same, the model can
be viewed as a Two-layer Neural Network with k hidden
nodes and random hidden-output layer weights.
To estimate the parameters in Model (1), the main challenge is that without the assumption that fi ’s are convex
or similarities between them, it is hard to establish an objective function that can be efﬁciently optimized using optimization methods such as (Stochastic) Gradient Descent.
Recently, some works including (Yang, Balasubramanian,
and Liu 2017; Na et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2017) studied and
proposed efﬁcient algorithms for the Single Index, Multiindex and Varying Coefﬁcient Index models using Stein’s
Lemma. Their theoretical guarantees are measured in terms
of βj − cβj∗ 2 , j ∈ [k], where βj is the estimator for βj∗ and
c is a constant depending on many parameters in the models (such as fi ’s, βj∗ ’s and the distribution for x). However
there is a common issue related to the constant c in these

Introduction
We study the problem of estimating stochastic linear combination of non-linear regressions. The model can be formally
deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 (Stochastic Linear Combination of Non-linear
Regressions). Given variates x ∈ Rp and z1 , · · · , zk ∈ R
such that E[x] = 0 and zi ’s for all i ∈ [k] are i.i.d random
variables independent of x with E[zi ] = 0 and Var(zi ) = 1,
the response y is given by
y=

k


zi fi (βi∗ , x) + ,

(1)

i=1

where β1∗ , β2∗ , · · · , βk∗ ∈ Rp are unknown parameters, fi ’s
for all i ∈ [k] are known (but could be non-convex) link
∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6137

