The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Online Hashing with Efﬁcient Updating of Binary Codes
Zhenyu Weng, Yuesheng Zhu
Communication and Information Security Laboratory, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
{wzytumbler, zhuys}@pku.edu.cn

et al. 2018) adopt minibatch-based stochastic optimization
which requires multiple passes over a given database to learn
the hash functions. However, they still have poor scalability
for the large-scale application. Since the image data keep
growing in the real application, to adapt to the change of the
data, the hash functions need to be re-trained by accumulating the whole database when new data appear, which is
time-consuming.

Abstract
Online hashing methods are efﬁcient in learning the hash
functions from the streaming data. However, when the hash
functions change, the binary codes for the database have to
be recomputed to guarantee the retrieval accuracy. Recomputing the binary codes by accumulating the whole database
brings a timeliness challenge to the online retrieval process.
In this paper, we propose a novel online hashing framework
to update the binary codes efﬁciently without accumulating
the whole database. In our framework, the hash functions are
ﬁxed and the projection functions are introduced to learn online from the streaming data. Therefore, inefﬁcient updating
of the binary codes by accumulating the whole database can
be transformed to efﬁcient updating of the binary codes by
projecting the binary codes into another binary space. The
queries and the binary code database are projected asymmetrically to further improve the retrieval accuracy. The experiments on two multi-label image databases demonstrate the
effectiveness and the efﬁciency of our method for multi-label
image retrieval.

Online hashing methods (Cakir and Sclaroff 2015; Cakir,
Bargal, and Sclaroff 2017; Cakir et al. 2017; Huang, Yang,
and Zheng 2018; Lin et al. 2018; 2019; Xie, Shen, and Zhu
2016; Xie et al. 2017) are recently proposed to employ online learning techniques on the streaming data. By learning
the hash functions from the streaming data, online hashing
methods can adapt to the data variations with low computational complexity. According to their application scenarios, the online hashing methods can be categorized as single
image modality retrieval (Cakir, Bargal, and Sclaroff 2017;
Cakir et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2019) and cross-modal retrieval (Xie, Shen, and Zhu 2016). In this paper, we focus
on the single image modality retrieval.

Introduction
With the explosive growth of the image data, ﬁnding the
nearest neighbors to a query becomes a fundamental research problem in many computer vision applications (Wang
et al. 2018). Due to the efﬁciency in terms of space and
time, hashing methods are widely used for nearest neighbor search, where the high-dimensional data are mapped to
the binary codes (Lu, Liong, and Zhou 2017; Wang, Kumar,
and Chang 2012; Liu et al. 2017).
The hashing methods (Ghasedi Dizaji et al. 2018; Wang
et al. 2018; He, Wang, and Cheng 2019) have achieved the
promising performance. By learning the hash functions according to the data distribution and the label information, the
hashing methods can map the high-dimensional data to the
compact binary codes, and the similarity between the data
can be preserved by the Hamming distance between the binary codes. However, these methods are batch-based hashing methods, which need to load the whole database into
RAM to learn the hash functions. Due to the limited memory space, the deep hashing methods (Li et al. 2019; Song

Online Sketch Hashing (OSH) (Leng et al. 2015) maintains a data sketch to preserve the properties of the streaming
data and learns the hash functions from the data sketch. But
it is an online unsupervised hashing method which cannot
use the label information to improve the retrieval accuracy.
To take advantage of the label information, following the
Passive-Aggressive algorithm (Crammer et al. 2006), Online Kernel-based Hashing (OKH) (Huang, Yang, and Zheng
2018) deﬁnes a structured similarity loss function and updates the hash functions according to the loss function when
receiving a new pair of the data and their similarity label.
Mutual Information Hashing (MIH) (Cakir et al. 2017) uses
the mutual information as the objective function and updates the hash functions according to the objective function
with each incoming data point and its corresponding class
label. Online Supervised Hashing (OSupH) (Cakir, Bargal,
and Sclaroff 2017) generates error correcting output codes
according to the label information and uses these codes
to guide the learning process of the hash functions from
the streaming data. Balanced Similarity for Online Discrete
Hashing (BSODH) (Lin et al. 2019) preserves the correla-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12354

