The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Variational Inference for Sparse Gaussian Process Modulated Hawkes Process
Rui Zhang,1,2 Christian Walder,1,2 Marian-Andrei Rizoiu3
1

The Australian National University, 2 Data61 CSIRO, 3 University of Technology Sydney
Rui.Zhang@anu.edu.au, Christian.Walder@data61.csiro.au, Marian-Andrei.Rizoiu@uts.edu.au

Abstract
The Hawkes process (HP) has been widely applied to modeling self-exciting events including neuron spikes, earthquakes
and tweets. To avoid designing parametric triggering kernel
and to be able to quantify the prediction conﬁdence, the nonparametric Bayesian HP has been proposed. However, the
inference of such models suffers from unscalability or slow
convergence. In this paper, we aim to solve both problems.
Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst, we propose a new non-parametric Bayesian
HP in which the triggering kernel is modeled as a squared
sparse Gaussian process. Then, we propose a novel variational inference schema for model optimization. We employ
the branching structure of the HP so that maximization of
evidence lower bound (ELBO) is tractable by the expectationmaximization algorithm. We propose a tighter ELBO which
improves the ﬁtting performance. Further, we accelerate the
novel variational inference schema to linear time complexity
by leveraging the stationarity of the triggering kernel. Different
from prior acceleration methods, ours enjoys higher efﬁciency.
Finally, we exploit synthetic data and two large social media
datasets to evaluate our method. We show that our approach
outperforms state-of-the-art non-parametric frequentist and
Bayesian methods. We validate the efﬁciency of our accelerated variational inference schema and practical utility of our
tighter ELBO for model selection. We observe that the tighter
ELBO exceeds the common one in model selection.

1

(a) Poisson Cluster Process

(b) Branching Structure

Figure 1: The Cluster Representation of a HP. (a) A HP with
a decaying triggering kernel φ(·) has intensity λ(x) which
increases after each new point (dash line) is generated. It can
be represented as a cluster of PPes: PP(μ) and PP(φ(x −
xi )) associated with each xi . (b) The branching structure
corresponding to the triggering relationships shown in (a),
where an edge xi → xj means that xi triggers xj , and its
probability is denoted as pji .
a tree structure, which is called the branching structure (an
example is shown in Fig. 1b corresponding to Fig.1a). With
the branching structure, we can decompose the HP into a
cluster of PPes. The triggering kernel φ is shared among all
cluster Poisson processes relating to a HP, and it determines
the overall behavior of the process. Consequently, designing
the kernel functions is of utmost importance for employing
the HP to a new application, and its study has attracted much
attention.
Prior non-parametric frequentist solutions. In the case
in which the optimal triggering kernel for a particular application is unknown, a typical solution is to express it using a non-parametric form, such as the work of Lewis and
Mohler (2011); Zhou, Zha, and Song (2013); Bacry and
Muzy (2014); Eichler, Dahlhaus, and Dueck (2017). These
are all frequentist methods and among them, the WienerHoef equation based method (Bacry and Muzy 2014) enjoys linear time complexity. Our method has a similar advantage of linear time complexity per iteration. The EulerLagrange equation based solutions (Lewis and Mohler 2011;
Zhou, Zha, and Song 2013) require discretizing the input

Introduction

The Hawkes process (HP) (Hawkes 1971) is particularly
useful to model self-exciting point data – i.e., when the occurrence of a point increases the likelihood of occurrence of new
points. The process is parameterized using a background intensity μ, and a triggering kernel φ. The Hawkes process can
be alternatively represented as a cluster of Poisson processes
(PPes) (Hawkes and Oakes 1974). In the cluster, a PP with
an intensity μ (denoted as PP(μ)) generates immigrant points
which are considered to arrive in the system from the outside,
and every existing point triggers offspring points, which are
generated internally through the self-excitement, following a
PP(φ). Points can therefore be structured into clusters where
each cluster contains either a point and its direct offspring
or the background process (an example is shown in Fig. 1a).
Connecting all points using the triggering relations yields
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6803

