The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Using Small Business Banking Data for Explainable Credit Risk Scoring
Wei Wang, Christopher Lesner, Alexander Ran, Marko Rukonic, Jason Xue, Eric Shiu
Intuit Inc., Mountain View, CA

regulations that require lenders to clearly explain their decisions. These regulations are motivated by ﬁndings that errors
in the information collected by credit reporting agencies adversely impacts millions. For example, America’s Federal
Trade Commission (FTC 2013; 2015) found that: “One in
four consumers identiﬁed errors on their credit reports that
might affect their credit scores;one in ﬁve consumers had an
error that was corrected by a credit reporting agency after
it was disputed, on at least one of their three credit reports;
Four out of ﬁve consumers who ﬁled disputes experienced
some modiﬁcation to their credit report.”
Almost all lenders use ﬁnancial information about the
borrower to assess their ﬁnancial health. For business borrowers, underwriters want to know the type of business,
the purpose of the loan and liquidity/solvency/proﬁtability
of the business as assessed using ﬁnancial health ratios
such as: Debt Ratio, Debt-to-Income Ratio, Debt-to-Equity
Ratio, Loan-to-Value Ratio, Debt Service Coverage Ratio,
Current Ratio, Inventory Ratio, etc. When a loan application is rejected using these eligibility rules and ratios, it
is relatively straightforward to explain the reason for rejection by listing the set of failed criteria. However modern statistical and machine learning techniques (Perlis 2011;
Dufﬁe 2003; Chen and Guestrin 2016) can model credit risk
using much richer information extracted from transactions
directly downloaded from borrowers’ ﬁnancial accounts.
When loan decisions are the results of machine learning
models tracking thousands of relationships across hundreds
of interdependent factors, explaining credit decision requires
a more sophisticated approach.

Abstract
Machine learning applied to ﬁnancial transaction records
can predict how likely a small business is to repay a loan.
For this purpose we compared a traditional scorecard credit
risk model against various machine learning models and
found that XGBoost with monotonic constraints outperformed scorecard model by 7% in K-S statistic. To deploy
such a machine learning model in production for loan application risk scoring it must comply with lending industry regulations that require lenders to provide understandable and
speciﬁc reasons for credit decisions. Thus we also developed
a loan decision explanation technique based on the ideas of
WoE and SHAP. Our research was carried out using a historical dataset of tens of thousands of loans and millions
of associated ﬁnancial transactions. The credit risk scoring
model based on XGBoost with monotonic constraints and
SHAP explanations described in this paper have been deployed by QuickBooks Capital to assess incoming loan applications since July 2019.

1

Introduction

Intuit QuickBooks Online (QBO) offers software solutions
for millions of small businesses in US for accounting,
recording sales and bill payments, running payroll, etc. Our
research shows that the ﬁnancial records generated by these
activities can predict how likely a small business is to repay a loan. This is economically important because accurate
loan outcome predictions, by reducing information asymmetry (Akerlof 1970), beneﬁt both lenders and borrowers.
Lenders beneﬁt because when loan outcome predictions are
more accurate, losses due to loan defaults are reduced and
with lower losses lenders can offer more competitive loan
interest rates and expand their business to borrowers who
would otherwise be denied loans. Small businesses beneﬁt because good loan candidates can now access loans that
were unavailable before and/or at better interest rates, while
poor loan candidates are prevented from taking loans that
are likely to harm both them and their lenders.
A unique challenge of using machine learning for credit
risk decisions is that many countries (including USA) have

2

Outline

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: First, we discuss our loan outcomes dataset and how credit risk models are evaluated. Traditional scorecard risk models are described followed by risk models that use machine learning
algorithms such as XGBoost (Chen and Guestrin 2016). Second, we discuss the generation of decision explanations and
compare results from two different approaches. Next, we
discuss some practical aspects of explaining credit risk decisions. Then we describe the impact of our research on how
QuickBooks Capital issues loans. Finally, we conclude the

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13396

