The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

PsyNet: Self-Supervised Approach to Object
Localization Using Point Symmetric Transformation
Kyungjune Baek,∗ Minhyun Lee,∗ Hyunjung Shim
School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University, Incheon, South Korea
{bkjbkj12, lmh315, kateshim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Existing co-localization techniques signiﬁcantly lose performance over weakly or fully supervised methods in accuracy and inference time. In this paper, we overcome common drawbacks of co-localization techniques by utilizing
self-supervised learning approach. The major technical contributions of the proposed method are two-fold. 1) We devise a new geometric transformation, namely point symmetric transformation and utilize its parameters as an artiﬁcial label for self-supervised learning. This new transformation can
also play the role of region-drop based regularization. 2) We
suggest a heat map extraction method for computing the heat
map from the network trained by self-supervision, namely
class-agnostic activation mapping. It is done by computing
the spatial attention map. Based on extensive evaluations, we
observe that the proposed method records new state-of-theart performance in three ﬁne-grained datasets for unsupervised object localization. Moreover, we show that the idea
of the proposed method can be adopted in a modiﬁed manner
to solve the weakly supervised object localization task. As a
result, we outperform the current state-of-the-art technique in
weakly supervised object localization by a signiﬁcant gap.

1

Figure 1: Demonstrating our point symmetric transformation (PST). Left: original input image, middle: result of applying large translation (i.e. the half of image resolution) to
the direction A as depicted in Figure 3 with zero padding,
right: result of PST (i.e. applying large translation with reﬂection padding).

only has an image collection of a single class object without
any assumptions. Existing co-localization techniques extract
hand-crafted features or learned features, obtain many object
proposals from the features, and then reﬁne them for localization (Tang et al. 2014; Joulin, Tang, and Fei-Fei 2014;
Wei et al. 2019). However, these techniques commonly
have signiﬁcant drawbacks in accuracy compared to fully or
weakly supervised techniques. Also, they are computationally very expensive because of generating region proposals.
In this paper, we focus on tackling unsupervised object localization through co-localization. The goal of our method is
1) to improve the co-localization accuracy and 2) to achieve
the computational efﬁciency for real-time performance. To
this end, we utilize the CNN classiﬁer trained with selfsupervised learning approach. The proposed technique is
inspired by the fact that existing WSOL techniques signiﬁcantly improve the localization accuracy and inference
speed by analyzing the discriminative features extracted
from CNN classiﬁers. As a natural extension, we follow the
design principle of Class Activation Mapping (CAM) (Zhou
et al. 2016), one of the pioneer WSOL techniques, which
mines and tracks the interesting object from the feature of input images. Whereas WSOL techniques utilize image-level
labels to train the CNN classiﬁer, our method uses no prior
knowledge (e.g. labels) to train the CNN. Instead, we employ the self-supervised learning paradigm, one of the most

Introduction

Object localization and detection aim to identify and locate
the object of interest within an image. Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained with the large scale
annotated datasets achieve remarkable performance in object localization and detection task (Redmon et al. 2016; Liu
et al. 2016). These models adopt fully supervised learning,
thus require pixel-level annotations such as bounding box or
segmentation mask. Unfortunately, pixel-level annotations
are quite expensive and time-consuming to acquire, thereby
often unavailable in practice. To relax the need for pixellevel annotations, several recent works (Zhou et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2018; Choe and Shim 2019) have developed
weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) techniques,
which only utilize image-level labels.
Moving toward much weaker supervision, several recent
studies suggest solving a co-localization problem, which
∗

indicates equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10451

