The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generalizable Resource Allocation in
Stream Processing via Deep Reinforcement Learning
Xiang Ni,♣∗ Jing Li,♥ Mo Yu,♠ Wang Zhou,♠ Kun-Lung Wu♠

♣
Citadel, ♠ IBM Research, ♥ New Jersey Institute of Technology
xiang.ni@citadel.com, jingli@njit.edu, {yum, klwu}@us.ibm.com, wang.zhou@ibm.com

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of resource allocation in
stream processing, where continuous data ﬂows must be processed in real time in a large distributed system. To maximize
system throughput, the resource allocation strategy that partitions the computation tasks of a stream processing graph onto
computing devices must simultaneously balance workload
distribution and minimize communication. Since this problem of graph partitioning is known to be NP-complete yet
crucial to practical streaming systems, many heuristic-based
algorithms have been developed to ﬁnd reasonably good solutions. In this paper, we present a graph-aware encoderdecoder framework to learn a generalizable resource allocation strategy that can properly distribute computation tasks
of stream processing graphs unobserved from training data.
We, for the ﬁrst time, propose to leverage graph embedding
to learn the structural information of the stream processing
graphs. Jointly trained with the graph-aware decoder using
deep reinforcement learning, our approach can effectively
ﬁnd optimized solutions for unseen graphs. Our experiments
show that the proposed model outperforms both METIS, a
state-of-the-art graph partitioning algorithm, and an LSTMbased encoder-decoder model, in about 70% of the test cases.

Src

OP
1

OP
4

OP
2

OP
5

OP
3

OP
6

OP
7

OP
9

OP
11

OP
13

OP
15

OP
10

OP
12

OP
14

OP
16

OP
8

Sink

Figure 1: An example stream processing graph. The nodes
of the graph represent operators labeled with the amount
of computation work. The darker color of an operator illustrates higher CPU utilization. The directed edges depict
data ﬂowing from the source to destination operators. The
edge width represents the amount of data ﬂowing through
that connection.
To exploit the abundant parallelism in stream graphs, operators are distributed to computing devices (resources, e.g.,
CPUs or GPUs) for execution. One objective in a stream processing system is to maximize the throughput — the number of tuples processed per second. If two connected operators are distributed to the same device, they can communicate via a simple function call (IBM Streams 2019). If they
are distributed to different devices, however, they need to
communicate over a network. As function calls are more efﬁcient than network communications, it is important to properly distribute operators to computing devices. A good resource allocation strategy should well balance the trade-offs
between distributing computation evenly across devices and
minimizing communication cost between devices.
The distribution of operators to resources can be formulated as a two-step graph partitioning problem: ﬁrst determining the right number of partitions k and then performing
k-way partitioning to divide operators into k sets2 . Finding
the optimal graph partition is known to be NP-complete. In
practice, only approximate solutions are possible with the
adoption of heuristic rules (Karypis and Kumar 1998). Generally, existing graph partitioning libraries share a common
drawback: they usually fail to give a good approximation
of the minimum number of partitions k and may not consistently generate high-quality partitions, since k is usually

Introduction
In various industrial domains, such as aviation, medicine,
transportation, telecommunication, and banking, online
stream processing has been widely used to analyze highrate data with high throughput and generate live results
in a timely manner (IBM Streams 2019; Flink 2019). The
computation in stream processing is driven by incoming
data ﬂowing through a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)1 .
A stream graph is comprised of operators, which conduct
computation on the incoming tuples, and directed edges,
each of which connects two operators and transmits tuples between them. Tuples are structured data items with
strongly-typed attributes. Operators are event-driven and execute only when there is a tuple received. Figure 1 shows an
example of a stream graph.
∗
This work was done when the author was at IBM.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Some systems, e.g., (IBM Streams 2019), allow cycles.

2
This is referred to as the fusion of operators into Processing
Elements (PEs) in (IBM Streams 2019), where each set is a PE.

857

