The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CORE: Automatic Molecule Optimization Using Copy & Reﬁne Strategy
Tianfan Fu,1 Cao Xiao,2 Jimeng Sun1
1

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
2
Analytics Center of Excellence, IQVIA, Cambridge, USA
tfu42@gatech.edu, cao.xiao@iqvia.com, jsun@cc.gatech.edu

of deep generative models (Jin, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2018;
Liu et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2019; Jin et al. 2019). Early
ones cast the molecular generation as a sequence generation
problem since a molecule can be represented by a SMILES
string1 (Kusner, Paige, and Hernández-Lobato 2017; Dai et
al. 2018; Gómez-Bombarelli et al. 2018). However, many
of those algorithms generate many invalid SMILES strings
which do not correspond to any valid molecules.
Progress: Recent years graph generation methods have been
proposed to bypass the need to produce a valid SMILES
string by directly generating molecular graphs(Jin, Barzilay,
and Jaakkola 2018; Jin et al. 2019; Ma, Chen, and Xiao 2018).
These graph based approaches reformulate the molecular generation task as a graph-to-graph translation problem, which
avoid the need of generating SMILES strings. Their key strategy is to partition the input molecule graph into a scaffolding
tree of substructures (e.g., rings, atoms, and bonds), and to
learn to generate such a tree. All possible tree nodes lead to a
large set of substructures, e.g., around 800 unique substructures in the ZINC database (Sterling and Irwin 2015).
Challenge: However, the graph generation methods still
exhibit undesirable behaviors such as generating inaccurate
substructures because the set of all possible substructures is
large, especially for infrequent substructures. In each generating step, the model has to decide which substructure to add
from a large set of possible substructures. On the other hand,
from real data we observe

Abstract
Molecule optimization is about generating molecule Y with
more desirable properties based on an input molecule X. The
state-of-the-art approaches partition the molecules into a large
set of substructures S and grow the new molecule structure by
iteratively predicting which substructure from S to add. However, since the set of available substructures S is large, such an
iterative prediction task is often inaccurate especially for substructures that are infrequent in the training data. To address
this challenge, we propose a new generating strategy called
“Copy&Reﬁne” (CORE), where at each step the generator ﬁrst
decides whether to copy an existing substructure from input
X or to generate a new substructure, then the most promising
substructure will be added to the new molecule. Combining
together with scaffolding tree generation and adversarial training, CORE can signiﬁcantly improve several latest molecule
optimization methods in various measures including drug likeness (QED), dopamine receptor (DRD2) and penalized LogP.
We tested CORE and baselines using the ZINC database and
CORE obtained up to 11% and 21% relatively improvement
over the baselines on success rate on the complete test set and
the subset with infrequent substructures, respectively.

Introduction
Designing molecules or chemical compounds with desired
properties is a fundamental task in drug discovery. Since the
number of drug-like molecule is large as estimated between
1023 and 1060 (Polishchuk, Madzhidov, and Varnek 2013),
traditional methods such high throughput screening (HTS) is
not scalable. One particular task in drug discovery is called
lead optimization, where after a drug candidate (a hit) is identiﬁed via HTS, enhanced similar candidates are created and
tested in order to ﬁnd a lead compound with better properties
than the original hit. To model lead optimization as a machine
learning problem, the training data involves a set of paired
molecules that map input molecule X to target molecule Y
with more desirable properties. The goal is to learn a generating model that can produce target molecules with better
properties from an input molecule.
Automatic molecular generation algorithms have made
great progress in recent years thanks to the successful use

• Stable principle: Vast majority of substructures in target
molecules are from the input molecule. The ﬁrst row of
Table 1 shows about and over 80% substructures are from
the input molecule in four datasets/tasks.
• Novelty principle: New substructures are present in most
target molecules. The second row of Table 1 shows that for
80% target molecules have new substructures compared
with their corresponding input molecules.
Based on these observations, we propose a new strategy for
molecular optimization called Copy & Reﬁne (CORE). The
key idea is at each generating step, CORE will decide whether
1

The Simpliﬁed Molecular-Input Line-Entry System (SMILES)
is a speciﬁcation in the form of a line notation for describing the
structure of chemical species using short ASCII strings.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
638

