The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

EFANet: Exchangeable Feature Alignment Network for Arbitrary Style Transfer
Zhijie Wu,1∗ Chunjin Song,1∗ Yang Zhou,1† Minglun Gong,2 Hui Huang1†
1
Shenzhen University, 2 University of Guelph
{wzj.micker, songchunjin1990, zhouyangvcc, hhzhiyan}@gmail.com, minglun@uoguelph.ca

process, they are generally constrained to a predeﬁned set of
styles and cannot adapt to an arbitrary style speciﬁed by a
single exemplar image.
Notable efforts (Chen and Schmidt 2016; Huang and Belongie 2017; Li et al. 2017b; Shen, Yan, and Zeng 2017;
Sheng et al. 2018) have been devoted to solving this ﬂexibility v.s. speed dilemma. A successful direction is to apply statistical transformation, which aligns feature statistics of the
input content image to that of the style image (Huang and
Belongie 2017; Li et al. 2017b; Sheng et al. 2018). However, as shown in Figure 1, the style images can be dramatically different from each other and from the content
image, both in terms of semantic structures and style features. Performing style transfer through statistically matching different content images to the same set of features extracted from the style image often introduces unexpected
or distorted patterns (Huang and Belongie 2017; Li et al.
2017b). Several methods (Sheng et al. 2018; Yao et al. 2019;
Park and Lee 2019) conquer these disadvantages through
patch swap with a multi-scale feature fusion, but may contain spatially distorting semantic structures when the local
patterns from input images differ a lot.
To address the aforementioned problems, in this paper,
we jointly consider both content and style images and extract a common style feature which is customized for this
pair of images only. By maximizing the common information, our goal is to align the style features of both content and
style images as much as possible. This follows the intuition
that when the target style feature is compatible with the content image, a good style transfer can be probably guaranteed.
Since the style feature of an image is computed from its own
content information, which means they are compatible with
each other within the same image, we argue that aligning the
style features of the two input images could help to improve
the ﬁnal stylization; see the comparison of our method with
& without common feature in Figure 1.
Intuitively, the common style feature we extracted bridges
the gap between the input content and style images, making our method outperform existing methods in many challenging scenarios. We call the aligned style features upon
the common feature as exchangeable style features. Experiments demonstrate that performing style transfer based

Abstract
Style transfer has been an important topic both in computer
vision and graphics. Since the seminal work of Gatys et al.
ﬁrst demonstrates the power of stylization through optimization in the deep feature space, quite a few approaches have
achieved real-time arbitrary style transfer with straightforward statistic matching techniques. In this work, our key observation is that only considering features in the input style
image for the global deep feature statistic matching or local
patch swap may not always ensure a satisfactory style transfer; see e.g., Figure 1. Instead, we propose a novel transfer
framework, EFANet, that aims to jointly analyze and better
align exchangeable features extracted from the content and
style image pair. In this way, the style feature from the style
image seeks for the best compatibility with the content information in the content image, leading to more structured stylization results. In addition, a new whitening loss is developed
for purifying the computed content features and better fusion
with styles in feature space. Qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate the advantages of our approach.

Introduction
A style transfer method takes a pair of images as input and
synthesize an output image that preserves the content of the
ﬁrst image while mimicking the style of the second image.
The study on this topic has drawn much attention in recent years due to its scientiﬁc and artistic values. Recently,
the seminal work (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016) found
that multi-level feature statistics extracted from a pre-trained
CNN model can be used to separate content and style information, making it possible to combine content and style of
arbitrary images. This method, however, depends on a slow
iterative optimization, which limits its range of application.
Since then, many attempts have been made to accelerate the above approach through replacing the optimization
process with a feed-forward neural networks (Dumoulin,
Shlens, and Kudlur 2016; Johnson, Alahi, and Fei-Fei 2016;
Li et al. 2017a; Ulyanov et al. 2016; Zhang and Dana 2017).
While these methods can effectively speed up the stylization
∗

Equal contribution. Order determined by coin toss.
Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12305

