The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

M ANY M ODAL QA: Modality
Disambiguation and QA over Diverse Inputs
Darryl Hannan, Akshay Jain, Mohit Bansal
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{dhannan, akshayj, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

ternatively, the question “When was the Declaration of Independence signed?” is unlikely to be answered by an image or
table; users will naturally look at the text to answer this question. Amazon product pages are another real-world manymodal information source. When consumers have inquiries
about a given product, they look at the provided images and
videos, the textual description of the product, data tables
containing the speciﬁcations, and reviews left by previous
buyers (which can contain images or text), to locate the answer. In contrast to this manymodal1 reality, the research
community has been primarily operating in a unimodal QA
setting, with some approaches involving two modalities such
as VQA (Antol et al. 2015). By moving towards manymodal
QA, models acquire access to different kinds of information
that is not easily expressed in text, such as spatial and temporal information in images and videos. In this work, we
take steps towards bridging the gap between real-world QA
and the community’s QA efforts by introducing a new manymodal QA challenge2 , M ANY M ODAL QA, that spans text,
images, and tables, and explores the interaction between natural language and these other modalities. Our challenge set
contains 2036 ﬁne-tuning, 3055 dev, and 5099 test examples, providing enough examples for ﬁne-tuning and a large
test set to accurately measure performance. Each example
contains textual information along with a table, an image, or
both. Examples span a wide variety of knowledge domains,
including politics, science, sports, and more.
In moving to this new manymodal setting, we prioritize maximizing the utility of prior unimodal and bimodal
datasets and approaches, as opposed to producing a large
standalone dataset, which often leads to overﬁtting and overtuning. Our challenge speciﬁcally encourages the development of low-resource generalization learning techniques that
utilize several large unimodal/bimodal tasks to complete
a joint manymodal task with only enough data for ﬁnetuning. We consider manymodal QA to consist of two subproblems. First, the modality that is best used to answer the

Abstract
We present a new multimodal question answering challenge,
M ANY M ODAL QA, in which an agent must answer a question by considering three distinct modalities: text, images,
and tables. We collect our data by scraping Wikipedia and
then utilize crowdsourcing to collect question-answer pairs.
Our questions are ambiguous, in that the modality that contains the answer is not easily determined based solely upon
the question. To demonstrate this ambiguity, we construct a
modality selector (or disambiguator) network, and this model
gets substantially lower accuracy on our challenge set, compared to existing datasets, indicating that our questions are
more ambiguous. By analyzing this model, we investigate
which words in the question are indicative of the modality. Next, we construct a simple baseline M ANY M ODAL QA
model, which, based on the prediction from the modality selector, ﬁres a corresponding pre-trained state-of-the-art unimodal QA model. We focus on providing the community
with a new manymodal evaluation set and only provide a
ﬁne-tuning set, with the expectation that existing datasets and
approaches will be transferred for most of the training, to
encourage low-resource generalization without large, monolithic training sets for each new task. There is a signiﬁcant
gap between our baseline models and human performance;
therefore, we hope that this challenge encourages research
in end-to-end modality disambiguation and multimodal QA
models, as well as transfer learning.

1

Introduction

In real-world QA scenarios, questions might be answerable via a diverse set of resources such as documents, images, instructional videos, online reviews, data tables, diagrams, etc., any number of which could contain the answer.
Wikipedia is an example of one such information source.
Users turn to Wikipedia to answer many different inquiries
and depending on the nature of the question, one modality
may be better suited for answering the question than another.
For example, consider the English Wikipedia page for the
United States, which contains text, tables, and images. If a
user has a question about the US census, numerical inquiries
such as this are frequently answered by tables, and census
information is in fact contained in a table on the page. Al-

1
We use the term “manymodal” in contrast to “multimodal” to
emphasize that there are more than 2 modalities, contrasting what
has typically been done by the community. In future work, this term
may encompass more than the modalities that we consider here,
potentially including video, audio, and more.
2
We will include some data samples in our arXiv supplementary
and will release the full challenge set on our public website.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7879

