The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Modeling Fluency and Faithfulness for Diverse Neural Machine Translation
Yang Feng,1,2 Wanying Xie,1,3 Shuhao Gu,1,2 Chenze Shao,1,2
Wen Zhang,4 Zhengxin Yang,1,2 Dong Yu3∗
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICT/CAS)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Language and Culture University, China
4
Smart Platform Product Department of Tencent Inc., China
{fengyang, gushuhao19b, shaochenze18z, yangzhengxin17z}@ict.ac.cn
xiewanying07@gmail.com, kevinwzhang@tencent.com, yudong@blcu.edu.cn
However, in practice the translation model cannot always
generate the ground truth translation even with teacher forcing during training. One reason is that a source sentence
can have multiple gold translations and hence in the training data there may be several different expressions for the
same meaning segment. Another reason is that the model
cannot ﬁt to the training data perfectly due to noise and the
expression ability of the model. But unfortunately teacher
forcing ignores unreachable optimization situations where
the ground truth word can only struggle to account for a
small portion of the whole distribution, but still propagates
the supervision only through the path from the ground truth
word, having the major portion of the distribution excluded.
In this sense, it is beneﬁcial to introduce an evaluation
mechanism to guide the distribution when the prediction
cannot converge to the ground truth word. If the prediction
gives an alternative gold expression, the evaluation mechanism can give a proper evaluation to this word, otherwise,
it can offer another distribution, rather than the 0-1 distribution, which can be seen as a lower optimization bound, to
guide the training of the model. For evaluation, a translation
is a good translation only when it can form a ﬂuent sentence
in the target and as well express the meaning of the source
faithfully. Therefore, in the scenario of teacher forcing, each
prediction should be evaluated from the perspectives of ﬂuency and faithfulness. For the ﬂuency, the predicted word
should be estimated whether to form a ﬂuent sentence together with its past and future translation. For the faithfulness, the predicted word should be accessed whether to
translate proper source information so that the whole source
and target sequences have equivalent meanings.
In this paper, we follow the above analysis to solve the
problem of teacher forcing. Whenever generating a target
word, we evaluate the ﬂuency by connecting it with the selfgenerated past translation and the future ground truth translation and calculating the co-occurrence probability of the
three parts. And we meanwhile estimate the faithfulness by
ﬁrst ﬁguring out the cross-attention over the source sentence
with the past and future translation and then computing the
probability of translating the attention into the target word.
Furthermore, to trade off the ﬂuency against the faithfulness, we integrate the two evaluation metrics together into

Abstract
Neural machine translation models usually adopt the teacher
forcing strategy for training which requires the predicted sequence matches ground truth word by word and forces the
probability of each prediction to approach a 0-1 distribution.
However, the strategy casts all the portion of the distribution
to the ground truth word and ignores other words in the target
vocabulary even when the ground truth word cannot dominate the distribution. To address the problem of teacher forcing, we propose a method to introduce an evaluation module to guide the distribution of the prediction. The evaluation
module accesses each prediction from the perspectives of ﬂuency and faithfulness to encourage the model to generate the
word which has a ﬂuent connection with its past and future
translation and meanwhile tends to form a translation equivalent in meaning to the source. The experiments on multiple
translation tasks show that our method can achieve signiﬁcant
improvements over strong baselines.

Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom 2013; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2014; Gehring et al. 2017; Vaswani et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2019b) has shown its superiority and drawn
much attention recently. Most NMT models can ﬁt in the
attention-based encoder-decoder framework where the encoder projects the source sentence into representations in a
common concept space and the decoder ﬁrst retrieves related
information from these representations and then decodes it
into target translation word by word. The training scenario is
that each sentence is provided with a ground truth sequence
and the teacher forcing strategy (Williams and Zipser 1989)
is employed to force the generated translation to approach
ground truth word by word via a cross-entropy loss. In this
way, the probability distribution of each prediction is expected to reach a 0-1 distribution with the ground truth word
approaching to 1 and other words in the target vocabulary
close to 0.
∗

Corresponding author: Dong Yu.
Our code can be got at https://github.com/ictnlp/DiverseNMT
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
59

