The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ML-LOO: Detecting Adversarial Examples with Feature Attribution
Puyudi Yang,1 Jianbo Chen,2 Cho-Jui Hsieh,3 Jane-Ling Wang,1 Michael I. Jordan2
1

University of California, Davis
University of California, Berkeley
3
University of California, Los Angeles
2

While a line of work tries to explain why adversarial
examples exist (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015;
Tanay and Grifﬁn 2016; Fawzi, Fawzi, and Frossard 2018),
a comprehensive analysis of underlying reasons has not yet
been attained, largely because deep neural networks have
complex functional forms such that mathematical characterizations are difﬁcult to obtain. On the other hand, there has
been a growing interest in developing tools for tackling the
black-box nature of neural networks, among which feature attribution is a widely studied approach (Shrikumar, Greenside,
and Kundaje 2017; Bach et al. 2015; Simonyan, Vedaldi,
and Zisserman 2013; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016;
Li, Monroe, and Jurafsky 2016; Lundberg and Lee 2017;
Datta, Sen, and Zick 2016; Chen et al. 2019). Given a predictive model, such a method outputs, for each instance to
which the model is applied, a vector of importance scores
associated with the underlying features. Feature attribution
has been used to improve transparency and fairness of machine learning models (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016;
Datta, Sen, and Zick 2016).
In this paper, we investigate the application of feature attribution to detecting adversarial examples. In particular, we
observe that the feature attribution map of an adversarial
example near the boundary always differs from that of the
corresponding original example. A motivating example is
shown in Figure 1, which demonstrates images in CIFAR-10
to be fed into a residual neural network and the corresponding
feature attribution from Leave-One-Out (LOO) (Li, Monroe,
and Jurafsky 2016). The latter interprets decisions from a neural model by observing the effects on the model of erasing
each pixel of input before and after the worst-case perturbation by a C&W attack. While the perturbation on the original
image is visually imperceptible, the feature attribution is altered drastically. We further observe that the difference can
be summarized by simple statistics that characterize feature
disagreement, which are capable of distinguishing adversarial examples from natural images. We conjecture that this is
because adversarial attacks tend to perturb samples into an
unstable region on the decision surface.
The above observation led to an effective method for detecting adversarial examples near the decision boundary. On
the other hand, there also exist adversarial examples in which
the model has high conﬁdence (Carlini and Wagner 2017b).
Previous work has observed that several state-of-the-art de-

Abstract
Deep neural networks obtain state-of-the-art performance on
a series of tasks. However, they are easily fooled by adding a
small adversarial perturbation to the input. The perturbation
is often imperceptible to humans on image data. We observe
a signiﬁcant difference in feature attributions between adversarially crafted examples and original examples. Based on
this observation, we introduce a new framework to detect adversarial examples through thresholding a scale estimate of
feature attribution scores. Furthermore, we extend our method
to include multi-layer feature attributions in order to tackle
attacks that have mixed conﬁdence levels. As demonstrated in
extensive experiments, our method achieves superior performances in distinguishing adversarial examples from popular
attack methods on a variety of real data sets compared to stateof-the-art detection methods. In particular, our method is able
to detect adversarial examples of mixed conﬁdence levels, and
transfer between different attacking methods. We also show
that our method achieves competitive performance even when
the attacker has complete access to the detector.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance on a variety of tasks, including image classiﬁcation, object detection, speech recognition and machine
translation. However, they have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples. This incurs a security risk
when DNNs are applied to sensitive areas such as ﬁnance,
medicine, criminal justice and transportation. Adversarial
examples are inputs to machine learning models that an attacker constructs intentionally to fool the model (Goodfellow
et al. 2017). Szegedy et al. observed that a visually indistinguishable perturbation in pixel space to the original image can alter the prediction of a neural network. Later, a
series of papers (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015;
Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017; Moosavi-Dezfooli,
Fawzi, and Frossard 2016; Carlini and Wagner 2017b;
Madry et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2017; Ilyas et al. 2018;
Brendel, Rauber, and Bethge 2018) designed more sophisticated methods for the worst-case perturbation within a restricted set, often a small Lp ball with p = 0, 2, ∞.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6639

