The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neuron Interaction Based Representation
Composition for Neural Machine Translation
Jian Li,1,2 Xing Wang,3 Baosong Yang,4 Shuming Shi,3 Michael R. Lyu,1,2 Zhaopeng Tu3∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{jianli, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
3
4
Tencent AI Lab
University of Macau
{brightxwang, shumingshi,zptu}@tencent.com
nlp2ct.baosong@gmail.com
simple properties such as coordinating conjunction (e.g.,
“but/and”) or determiner (e.g., “the”) can be attributed to individual neurons, while complex linguistic phenomena such
as syntax (e.g., part-of-speech tag) and semantics (e.g., semantic entity type) are distributed across neurons (Dalvi et
al. 2019). These observations are consistent with recent ﬁndings in neuroscience, which show that task-relevant information can be decoded from a group of neurons interacting
with each other (Morcos and Harvey 2016). One question
naturally arises: can we better capture complex linguistic
phenomena by composing/grouping the linguistic properties
embedded in individual neurons?
The starting point of our approach is an observation in
neuroscience: stronger neuron interactions – directly exchanging signals between neurons, enable more information
processing in the nervous system (Koch, Poggio, and Torre
1983). We believe that simulating the neuron interactions in
nervous system would be an appealing alternative to representation composition, which can potentially better learn
the compositionality of natural language with subtle operations at a smaller granularity. Concretely, we employ bilinear
pooling (Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji 2015), which executes pairwise multiplicative interactions among individual
representation elements, to achieve strong neuron interactions. We also introduce a low-rank approximation to make
the original bilinear models computationally feasible (Kim
et al. 2017). Furthermore, as bilinear pooling only encodes
multiplicative second-order features, we propose extended
bilinear pooling to incorporate ﬁrst-order representations,
which can capture more comprehensive information of the
input sentences.
We validate the proposed neuron interaction based (NIbased) representation composition on top of multi-layer
multi-head self-attention networks (M L M H S ANs). The reason is two-fold. First, M L M H S ANs are critical components of various SOTA D NNs models, such as T RANS FORMER (Vaswani et al. 2017), B ERT (Devlin et al. 2019),
and L ISA (Strubell et al. 2018). Second, M L M H S ANs involve in compositions of both multi-layer representations
and multi-head representations, which can investigate the
universality of NI-based composition. Speciﬁcally,

Abstract
Recent NLP studies reveal that substantial linguistic information can be attributed to single neurons, i.e., individual
dimensions of the representation vectors. We hypothesize
that modeling strong interactions among neurons helps to
better capture complex information by composing the linguistic properties embedded in individual neurons. Starting
from this intuition, we propose a novel approach to compose representations learned by different components in neural machine translation (e.g., multi-layer networks or multihead attention), based on modeling strong interactions among
neurons in the representation vectors. Speciﬁcally, we leverage bilinear pooling to model pairwise multiplicative interactions among individual neurons, and a low-rank approximation to make the model computationally feasible. We further
propose extended bilinear pooling to incorporate ﬁrst-order
representations. Experiments on WMT14 English⇒German
and English⇒French translation tasks show that our model
consistently improves performances over the SOTA T RANS FORMER baseline. Further analyses demonstrate that our approach indeed captures more syntactic and semantic information as expected.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (D NNs) have advanced the state of
the art in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks,
such as machine translation (Vaswani et al. 2017), semantic role labeling (Strubell et al. 2018), and language representations (Devlin et al. 2019). The strength of D NNs lies
in their ability to capture different linguistic properties of
the input by different layers (Shi, Padhi, and Knight 2016;
Raganato and Tiedemann 2018), and composing (i.e. aggregating) these layer representations can further improve performances by providing more comprehensive linguistic information of the input (Peters et al. 2018; Dou et al. 2018).
Recent NLP studies show that single neurons in neural models which are deﬁned as individual dimensions of
the representation vectors, carry distinct linguistic information (Bau et al. 2019). A follow-up work further reveals that
∗
Corresponding author: Zhaopeng Tu. Work was partially done
when Jian Li and Baosong Yang were interning at Tencent AI Lab.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• First, we conduct experiments on the machine translation
8204

