The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Defending with Shared Resources on a Network∗
Minming Li,1 Long Tran-Thanh,2 Xiaowei Wu3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
Department of Economics and Computer Science, University of Southampton
3
Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna
minming.li@cityu.edu.hk, l.tran-thanh@soton.ac.uk, wxw0711@gmail.com

only; (ii) the resource allocation happens in a binary manner, i.e., a target is either protected or not; and (iii) an attack on a single target does not have effect to other (possibly
neighbouring) targets.
However, in many real-world scenarios security resources
often effectively protect multiple targets simultaneously.
Furthermore, multiple resources can be allocated to the same
target to strengthen the target’s defence.

Abstract
In this paper we consider a defending problem on a network.
In the model, the defender holds a total defending resource
of R, which can be distributed to the nodes of the network.
The defending resource allocated to a node can be shared by
its neighbors. There is a weight associated with every edge
that represents the efﬁciency defending resources are shared
between neighboring nodes. We consider the setting when
each attack can affect not only the target node, but its neighbors as well. Assuming that nodes in the network have different treasures to defend and different defending requirements,
the defender aims at allocating the defending resource to the
nodes to minimize the loss due to attack. We give polynomial time exact algorithms for two important special cases of
the network defending problem. For the case when an attack
can only affect the target node, we present an LP-based exact algorithm. For the case when defending resources cannot
be shared, we present a max-ﬂow-based exact algorithm. We
show that the general problem is NP-hard, and we give a 2approximation algorithm based on LP-rounding. Moreover,
by giving a matching lower bound of 2 on the integrality gap
on the LP relaxation, we show that our rounding is tight.

1

Example 1.1 Consider a police patrolling problem in which
law enforcement forces are allocated to different districts of
a city for patrolling. The more resources are allocated to
a certain district, the more successful crime prevention can
be achieved. In addition, in case of an urban crime event
(e.g., bank robbery), patrolling forces from neighboring areas (i.e., nodes with edge connections to the target) can also
provide help to the resources already at the target node.
On the other hand, successful attacks can also produce
certain damages to neighboring targets.
Example 1.2 Consider the scenario when a chemical terrorist attack in which a toxic chemical weapon (e.g., sarin
gas, or nerve agents) is used in a certain area. As the wind
can blow the gas away from the original target area, the
weapon can also generate damage in surrounding areas (although this damage is typically weakened, compared to the
damage the attack would achieve at the original target).

Introduction

In the recent years, security games have gained an increasing popularity within the artiﬁcial intelligence research
community, and have been widely used in many areas of
the ﬁeld (Letchford, Conitzer, and Munagala 2009; Tambe
2011; Yin and Tambe 2012). Many of these games are
played within a network structure (i.e., network security
games), where a defender protects a set of targets from
an attacker by allocating defensive resources to nodes (or
edges) of a network. Such problems include, but are not
limited to, the following: designing network interdiction
strategies for infectious disease control (Assimakopoulos
1987), cybersecurity mechanisms for defending computer
networks (Schlenker et al. 2018), or police patrolling plans
in urban security domains (Zhang et al. 2017). Existing network security models typically assume that: (i) one single
security resource can be used to protect one single target

Put differently, in many real-world applications, the damage depends not only on how well the node under attack
is defended, but also on the defence of its neighbors. As
these examples demonstrate, it is essential to take into account both the ability of sharing defending resources between nodes of the network, and the wide coverage of the
attacks. In this paper, we consider a general defending problem on a network where
• the defending resource allocated to a node can be shared
by its neighbors;
• the damage due to attack at a target node depends not only
on the defending power of the target node, but also on that
of its neighboring nodes.

∗

The authors are ordered alphabetically.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2111

