The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TrueLearn: A Family of Bayesian Algorithms to
Match Lifelong Learners to Open Educational Resources
Sahan Bulathwela, Marı́a Pérez-Ortiz, Emine Yilmaz, John Shawe-Taylor
Department of Computer Science, University College London
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
{m.bulathwela, maria.perez, emine.yilmaz, j.shawe-taylor}@ucl.ac.uk

educational materials, assisting learners on their personal
learning pathway to achieve impactful learning outcomes.
Personalised learning systems usually consist of two components (Lan, Studer, and Baraniuk 2014): (i) learning analytics, that capture the dynamic learner’s knowledge state
and (ii) content analytics, that extract characteristics of the
learning resource, such as knowledge components covered
and resource quality/difﬁculty. In the context of learning analytics, the assessment and learning science communities
aim to assess learner’s knowledge at a speciﬁc time point
(e.g. during a test). Historically, content analytics have been
provided by human experts. Although expert labelling appears to be sensible, the rapid growth of educational resources demands for scalable and automatic annotation.
While excelling on the personalisation front, there are
other features that the ideal educational recommendation
system should have. We design our system with these features in mind: (i) Cross-Modality and (ii) Cross-linguality
are vital to identifying and recommending educational resources across different modalities and languages. (iii)
Transparency empowers the learners by building trust while
supporting the learner’s metacognition processes such as
planning, monitoring and reﬂection (e.g. Open Learner
Models (Bull and Kay 2016)). (iv) Scalability ensures that
a high quality learning experience can be provided to large
masses of learners over long periods of time. (v) Data efﬁciency enables the system to use all available data efﬁciently
(e.g. learning from implicit engagement rather than sourcing
explicit feedback).
This paper proposes a family of Bayesian strategies aimed
at providing educational recommendations to learners using
learner’s implicit engagement with OERs. To do so, we use
an ontology based on Wikipedia to extract content analytics
from the text representation of educational resources. Our
objective is to develop an adaptive and scalable system that
can recommend suitably complex material and is transparent
to learners. Our approach differs from previous work in several ways: (i) It can be applied in situations where explicit
feedback about the learner’s knowledge is unavailable, as
tends to be the case in informal lifelong learning; and (ii) we
focus on recovering learner’s knowledge, as opposed to previous work on recommender systems which mostly focuses

Abstract
The recent advances in computer-assisted learning systems
and the availability of open educational resources today
promise a pathway to providing cost-efﬁcient high-quality
education to large masses of learners. One of the most ambitious use cases of computer-assisted learning is to build a
lifelong learning recommendation system. Unlike short-term
courses, lifelong learning presents unique challenges, requiring sophisticated recommendation models that account for
a wide range of factors such as background knowledge of
learners or novelty of the material while effectively maintaining knowledge states of masses of learners for signiﬁcantly longer periods of time (ideally, a lifetime). This work
presents the foundations towards building a dynamic, scalable
and transparent recommendation system for education, modelling learner’s knowledge from implicit data in the form of
engagement with open educational resources. We i) use a text
ontology based on Wikipedia to automatically extract knowledge components of educational resources and, ii) propose a
set of online Bayesian strategies inspired by the well-known
areas of item response theory and knowledge tracing. Our
proposal, TrueLearn, focuses on recommendations for which
the learner has enough background knowledge (so they are
able to understand and learn from the material), and the material has enough novelty that would help the learner improve
their knowledge about the subject and keep them engaged.
We further construct a large open educational video lectures
dataset and test the performance of the proposed algorithms,
which show clear promise towards building an effective educational recommendation system.

Introduction
One-on-one tutoring has shown learning gains of the order
of two standard deviations (Corbett 2001). Machine learning now promises to provide such beneﬁts of high quality
personalised teaching to anyone in the world in a cost effective manner (Piech et al. 2015). Meanwhile, Open Educational Resources (OERs), deﬁned as teaching, learning
and research material available in the public domain or published under an open license (UNESCO 2019), are growing
at a very fast pace. This work is scoped at creating a personalisation model to identify and recommend the most suitable
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
565

