The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

3D Human Pose Estimation via Explicit Compositional Depth Maps
Haiping Wu,1∗ Bin Xiao2
1

McGill University, 2 BydeDance AI Lab
haiping.wu2@mail.mcgill.ca, xiaobin.ailab@bytedance.com

Abstract



In this work, we tackle the problem of estimating 3D human
pose in camera space from a monocular image. First, we propose to use densely-generated limb depth maps to ease the
learning of body joints depth, which are well aligned with image cues. Then, we design a lifting module from 2D pixel coordinates to 3D camera coordinates which explicitly takes the
depth values as inputs, and is aligned with camera perspective
projection model. We show our method achieves superior performance on large-scale 3D pose datasets Human3.6M and
MPI-INF-3DHP, and sets the new state-of-the-art.



 




 

 

  
  

Introduction

    
   

Figure 1: Joint Depth Maps and Limb Depth Maps representation for depth values. Both aligned with image locations. Depth values of points on limbs are interpolated from
joints of the limbs by assuming limbs are rigid parts. For
simplicity, only Joint Depth Maps of left knee and left hip
are shown, and the Limb Depth Map of the limb connecting
left knee and left hip are shown.

In this work, we aim to tackle the problem of estimating 3D
human pose from a monocular RGB image. The problem is
inherently ambiguous, since there could be as many 3D human poses that have the same projected 2D pose. While being hard, this task serves as foundation of many applications,
such as surveillance, human action/activity recognition, human computer/robot interaction, etc.
Existing methods typically fall into two categories. The
ﬁrst one (Pavlakos et al. 2017) directly estimates 3D coordinates (X, Y, Z) from images, without any intermediate 2D pose information supervision. The second one estimates 2D pixel coordinates (x, y) in the images ﬁrst, then
lifts to 3D pose using either learned transformation (Martinez et al. 2017), ground truth camera parameters (Sun et
al. 2018) or re-scaling (Zhou et al. 2017) by weak perspective projection assumption. Decoupling the learning process
of 3D pose coordinates (X, Y, Z) into learning the pixel coordinates (x, y) ﬁrst, then lifting to 3D pose shows better
generalization power. This is due to the relatively maturity
of 2D human pose estimation methods and easily annotated
large-scale 2D human pose datasets (e.g. COCO, MPII). In
contrast, 3D human pose datasets are hard to capture, often
limited in studio environment (Ionescu et al. 2014).
3D coordinates of (X, Y, Z) are not equally observed in
the sense that monocular images only have the projected

(X, Y ) captured. For the depth representation of joints, a
single scalar value is the common learning target among existing methods (Martinez et al. 2017). However, this representation does not explicitly link the depth values to the image locations, which indicates the learning process needs localizing the joints and estimating the depth values of them
concurrently. Nevertheless, state-of-the-art 2D human pose
estimation methods typically obtain 2D joints locations via
estimating generated heatmaps, which are well aligned with
images. Inspired by this, we choose to predict depth values
in the form of depth value maps which are aligned with images.
Naively, depth maps could be generated by assigning the
depth values of joints to the corresponding pixel locations,
leaving the value of other non-joint locations zero. We refer this method as Joint Depth Maps. Joint Depth Maps
representation manages to associate depth values with image cues, however it gives too sparse supervision signal
for learning. Further, we propose to composite dense-valued
depth maps by assuming the limbs are rigid and thus inter-

∗
The work was done when Haiping Wu was an intern at
ByteDance AI Lab.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12378

