The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Joint Entity and Relation Extraction with
a Hybrid Transformer and Reinforcement Learning Based Model
Ya Xiao,1 Chengxiang Tan,1∗ Zhijie Fan,2 Qian Xu,1 Wenye Zhu1
2

1
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
The Third Research Institute of the Ministry of Public Security, Shanghai, China
{1710053, jerrytan, 1310512, 1310513}@tongji.edu.cn, aaronzfan@126.com

contrary, the joint framework extracts the entities and relations with one single model; it can take advantage of the
relationships between two subtasks, and thus achieves better results. The joint framework falls into one of two categories, feature-based statistical methods (Li and Ji 2014;
Miwa and Sasaki 2014; Ren et al. 2017) and neural network
based methods (Miwa and Bansal 2016; Zheng et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2018). The statistical methods need to extract
various features which are time consuming; some global features, such as the part-of-speech tags, are usually tagged by
the third-party toolkits, which may cause error propagation
problems. The neural network based methods usually realize
joint learning by parameter sharing to interconnect two subtasks. Particularly, Zheng et al. (2017) proposed a novel tagging schema to convert joint extraction into a tagging problem. This end-to-end neural network model can directly output the triplets with entities and relations.

Abstract
Joint extraction of entities and relations is a task that extracts
the entity mentions and semantic relations between entities
from the unstructured texts with one single model. Existing
entity and relation extraction datasets usually rely on distant
supervision methods which cannot identify the corresponding relations between a relation and the sentence, thus suffers
from noisy labeling problem. We propose a hybrid deep neural network model to jointly extract the entities and relations,
and the model is also capable of ﬁltering noisy data. The hybrid model contains a transformer-based encoding layer, an
LSTM entity detection module and a reinforcement learningbased relation classiﬁcation module. The output of the transformer encoder and the entity embedding generated from the
entity detection module are combined as the input state of the
reinforcement learning module to improve the relation classiﬁcation and noisy data ﬁltering. We conduct experiments on
the public dataset produced by the distant supervision method
to verify the effectiveness of our proposed model. Different
experimental results show that our model gains better performance on entity and relation extraction than the compared
methods and also has the ability to ﬁlter noisy sentences.

However, to our best knowledge, none of the joint extraction methods with neural networks considered the problem
of noisy data. The distant supervision has become a standard method for relation extraction and dataset generation.
This method assumes that the sentences containing an entity
pair must describe a relation of two entities. This assumption cannot identify the corresponding interrelationship between a relation and the sentence, thus many noisy data will
be generated. The noisy data will cause error propagation
problem, so it is an important task to ﬁlter the wrong labelled data during the extraction of entities and relations.
Many existing work use multi-instance learning to track label ambiguity and ﬁlter noisy sentences (Wu et al. 2018;
Zeng et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2016). Ren et al. (2017) ﬁrstly
proposed a feature-based joint method of relation and entity extraction and coped with the noisy data problem simultaneously. They mainly concentrated on the noisy associations between relation mention and its candidate entity type. Feng et al. (2018) introduced the reinforcement
learning(RL) method to help with the relation classiﬁcation
and instance selection, and proved the efﬁciency of using
RL to select instances. Similar to the instance selection proposed by Feng et al., our joint extraction and noisy ﬁltration
tasks also has the trial-and-error-search and delayed features, which exactly ﬁt the RL process.

Introduction
Extraction of entities and relations from the massive unstructured texts has been a signiﬁcant task in information extraction. The inputs are the unstructured texts, while the outputs
are the triplets with pairs of entity mentions and the semantic
relations between them. The extraction methods are mainly
divided into two categories, the pipelined methods and joint
extraction methods.
Pipelined methods treat the extraction as two separate subtasks: recognizing the entities ﬁrst (Nadeau and
Sekine 2007) and then extracting the relations between them
(Hasegawa, Sekine, and Grishman 2004). This framework
is ﬂexible and simple but has several problems. The errors
from entity recognition may delivery to the relation extraction part (Li and Ji 2014), and this separated framework also
ignore the interrelationships between two subtasks. On the
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9314

