The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Self-Attention ConvLSTM for Spatiotemporal Prediction
Zhihui Lin,1,2 Maomao Li,2 Zhuobin Zheng,1,2 Yangyang Cheng,1,2 Chun Yuan2,3 *
1

Department of Computer Science and Technologies, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{lin-zh14, mm-li17, zhengzb16, cheng-yy13}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

casting (Shi et al. 2015; 2017b; Wang et al. 2017b) and physical interactions simulation (Lerer, Gross, and Fergus 2016;
Finn, Goodfellow, and Levine 2016). Spatiotemporal prediction is challenging due to the complex dynamics and appearance changes, which requires dependencies on both temporal and spatial domains.

Abstract
Spatiotemporal prediction is challenging due to the complex dynamic motion and appearance changes. Existing work
concentrates on embedding additional cells into the standard
ConvLSTM to memorize spatial appearances during the prediction. These models always rely on the convolution layers
to capture the spatial dependence, which are local and inefﬁcient. However, long-range spatial dependencies are significant for spatial applications. To extract spatial features with
both global and local dependencies, we introduce the selfattention mechanism into ConvLSTM. Speciﬁcally, a novel
self-attention memory (SAM) is proposed to memorize features with long-range dependencies in terms of spatial and
temporal domains. Based on the self-attention, SAM can produce features by aggregating features across all positions of
both the input itself and memory features with pair-wise similarity scores. Moreover, the additional memory is updated
by a gating mechanism on aggregated features and an established highway with the memory of the previous time step.
Therefore, through SAM, we can extract features with longrange spatiotemporal dependencies. Furthermore, we embed
the SAM into a standard ConvLSTM to construct a selfattention ConvLSTM (SA-ConvLSTM) for the spatiotemporal prediction. In experiments, we apply the SA-ConvLSTM
to perform frame prediction on the MovingMNIST and KTH
datasets and trafﬁc ﬂow prediction on the TexiBJ dataset.
Our SA-ConvLSTM achieves state-of-the-art results on both
datasets with fewer parameters and higher time efﬁciency
than previous state-of-the-art method.

1

ConvLSTM (Shi et al. 2015) replaces all the linear operations in it with convolution layers to capture spatial dependencies besides the long-short term modeling, and many of
its variants (Wang et al. 2017a; 2018b; 2019) have achieved
impressive results on spatiotemporal prediction. However,
although long-range spatial dependencies can be captured
by stacked convolution layers, the effective receptive ﬁeld
is much smaller than the theoretical receptive ﬁeld (Luo et
al. 2016). Besides, features far away from a speciﬁc location
have to pass through a stack of layers before affecting the
location for both forward propagation and backward propagation, which would add the optimization difﬁculties during the training (Chen et al. 2018). Therefore, ConvLSTM
and its previous variants tend to suffer from the limited ability to capture long-range spatial dependencies. To ameliorate this, TrajGRU (Shi et al. 2017b) adopts a convolution
layer to learn offsets of each position in the hidden state of
a GRU block. It works in a similar way to the deformable
convolution (Dai et al. 2017), which enhances it in modeling complex object deformations. Nevertheless, these offsets
only provide sparse spatial dependencies and are estimated
with the local receptive ﬁeld. Here comes to a question that
how to make the ConvLSTM capture effective long-range
dependencies.

Introduction

Spatiotemporal predictive learning has emerged as an important and foundational research problem for a wide range
of computer vision and artiﬁcial intelligence and received
growing interests in the research communities (Shi et al.
2015; Zhang et al. 2017; Shi et al. 2017a; Kalchbrenner
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2017a; 2018b; Xu et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2019). It deserves to be studied in depth to
serve the practical applications, such as trafﬁc ﬂows prediction (Zhang et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018), precipitation fore-

Compared to the convolution operation, the self-attention
module (Vaswani et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018a) is capable
of obtaining the global spatial context with a single layer,
which is more efﬁcient. Besides, we argue that features at
the current time step can beneﬁt from aggregating relevant
features in the past. Therefore, we propose the self-attention
memory module for ConvLSTM, or SAM in short. SAM utilizes the feature aggregation mechanism of the self-attention
to fuse both the current and memorized features through calculating pair-wise similarity scores. Here, we use an additional memory cell M to memorize previous features which
contains global spatial receptive ﬁeld. Besides in the spa-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Corresponding Author: Chun Yuan
11531

