The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hashing Based Answer Selection
Dong Xu, Wu-Jun Li∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
dc.swind@gmail.com, liwujun@nju.edu.cn

This phenomenon limits the performance of answer selection models. Deep neural networks (DNN) based models,
also simply called deep models, can partly tackle this problem by using pre-trained word embeddings. Word embeddings pre-trained on language corpus contain some common
knowledge and linguistic phenomena, which are helpful for
selecting answers. Deep models have achieved promising
performance for answer selection in recent years (Tan et
al. 2016b; Santos et al. 2016; Tay, Tuan, and Hui 2018a;
Tran and Niederée 2018; Deng et al. 2018).

Abstract
Answer selection is an important subtask of question answering (QA), in which deep models usually achieve better performance than non-deep models. Most deep models adopt
question-answer interaction mechanisms, such as attention,
to get vector representations for answers. When these interaction based deep models are deployed for online prediction,
the representations of all answers need to be recalculated for
each question. This procedure is time-consuming for deep
models with complex encoders like BERT which usually have
better accuracy than simple encoders. One possible solution
is to store the matrix representation (encoder output) of each
answer in memory to avoid recalculation. But this will bring
large memory cost. In this paper, we propose a novel method,
called hashing based answer selection (HAS), to tackle this
problem. HAS adopts a hashing strategy to learn a binary matrix representation for each answer, which can dramatically
reduce the memory cost for storing the matrix representations of answers. Hence, HAS can adopt complex encoders
like BERT in the model, but the online prediction of HAS
is still fast with a low memory cost. Experimental results on
three popular answer selection datasets show that HAS can
outperform existing models to achieve state-of-the-art performance.

Most deep models for answer selection are constructed
with similar frameworks which contain an encoding
layer (also called encoder) and a composition layer (also
called composition module). Traditional models usually
adopt convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Feng et al.
2015) or recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Tan et al. 2016b;
Tran and Niederée 2018) as encoders. Recently, complex
pre-trained models such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) and
GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019), are proposed for NLP tasks.
BERT and GPT-2 adopt Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017)
as the key building block, which discards CNN and RNN entirely. BERT and GPT-2 are typically pre-trained on a largescale language corpus, which can encode abundant common
knowledge into model parameters. This common knowledge
is helpful when BERT or GPT-2 is ﬁne-tuned on other tasks.

Introduction
Question answering (QA) is an important but challenging
task in natural language processing (NLP) area. Answer
selection (answer ranking), which aims to select the corresponding answer from a pool of candidate answers for
a given question, is one of the key components in many
kinds of QA applications. For example, in community-based
question answering (CQA) tasks, all answers need to be
ranked according to the quality. In frequently asked questions (FAQ) tasks, the most related answers need to be returned back for answering the users’ questions.
One main challenge of answer selection is that both questions and answers are not long enough in most cases. As a
result, questions and answers usually lack background information and knowledge about the context (Deng et al. 2018).

The output of the encoder for each sentence of either
question or answer is usually represented as a matrix and
each column or row of the matrix corresponds to a vector representation for a word in the sentence. Composition
modules are used to generate vector representations for sentences from the corresponding matrices. Composition modules mainly include pooling and question-answer interaction
mechanisms. Question-answer interaction mechanisms include attention (Tan et al. 2016b), attentive pooling (Santos
et al. 2016), multihop-attention (Tran and Niederée 2018)
and so on. In general, question-answer interaction mechanisms have better performance than pooling. However, interaction mechanisms bring a problem that the vector representations of an answer are different with respect to different
questions. When deep models with interaction mechanisms
are deployed for online prediction, the representations of all
answers need to be recalculated for each question. This pro-

∗

Wu-Jun Li is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9330

