The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Memory Augmented Graph Neural Networks for Sequential Recommendation
Chen Ma,∗1 Liheng Ma,∗1,3 Yingxue Zhang,2 Jianing Sun,2 Xue Liu,1 Mark Coates1
1

McGill University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab in Montreal, 3 Mila
{chen.ma2, liheng.ma}@mail.mcgill.ca, {yingxue.zhang, jianing.sun}@huawei.com,
xueliu@cs.mcgill.ca, mark.coates@mcgill.ca

model: user short-term interests, user long-term interests,
and item co-occurrence patterns. The user short-term interest describes the user preference given several recently accessed items in a short-term period. The user long-term interest captures the long-range dependency between earlier
accessed items and the items users will access in the future.
The item co-occurrence pattern illustrates the joint occurrences of commonly related items, such as a mobile phone
and a screen protector.
Although many existing methods have proposed effective models, we argue that they do not fully capture the
aforementioned factors. First, methods like Caser (Tang and
Wang 2018), MARank (Yu et al. 2019), and Fossil (He and
McAuley 2016a) only model the short-term user interest and
ignore the long-term dependencies of items in the item sequence. The importance of capturing the long-range dependency has been conﬁrmed by (Belletti, Chen, and Chi 2019).
Second, methods like SARSRec (Kang and McAuley 2018)
do not explicitly model the user short-term interest. Neglecting the user short-term interest prevents the recommender
system from understanding the time-varying user intention
over a short-term period. Third, methods like GC-SAN (Xu
et al. 2019) and GRU4Rec+ (Hidasi and Karatzoglou 2018)
do not explicitly capture the item co-occurrence patterns in
the item sequences. Closely related item pairs often appear
one after the other and a recommender system should take
this into account.
To incorporate the factors mentioned above, we propose
a memory augmented graph neural network (MA-GNN) to
tackle the sequential recommendation task. This consists of
a general interest module, a short-term interest module, a
long-term interest module, and an item co-occurrence module. In the general interest module, we adopt a matrix factorization term to model the general user interest without
considering the item sequential dynamics. In the short-term
interest module, we aggregate the neighbors of items using
a GNN to form the user intentions over a short period. These
can capture the local contextual information and structure (Battaglia et al. 2018) within this short-term period.
To model the long-term interest of users, we use a shared
key-value memory network to generate the interest representations based on users’ long-term item sequences. By doing this, other users with similar preferences will be taken
into consideration when recommending an item. To combine

Abstract
The chronological order of user-item interactions can reveal
time-evolving and sequential user behaviors in many recommender systems. The items that users will interact with may
depend on the items accessed in the past. However, the substantial increase of users and items makes sequential recommender systems still face non-trivial challenges: (1) the hardness of modeling the short-term user interests; (2) the difﬁculty of capturing the long-term user interests; (3) the effective modeling of item co-occurrence patterns. To tackle these
challenges, we propose a memory augmented graph neural
network (MA-GNN) to capture both the long- and short-term
user interests. Speciﬁcally, we apply a graph neural network
to model the item contextual information within a short-term
period and utilize a shared memory network to capture the
long-range dependencies between items. In addition to the
modeling of user interests, we employ a bilinear function to
capture the co-occurrence patterns of related items. We extensively evaluate our model on ﬁve real-world datasets, comparing with several state-of-the-art methods and using a variety of performance metrics. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our model for the task of Top-K
sequential recommendation.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of Internet services and mobile devices, personalized recommender systems play an increasingly important role in modern society. They can reduce
information overload and help satisfy diverse service demands. Such systems bring signiﬁcant beneﬁts to at least
two parties. They can: (i) help users easily discover products
from millions of candidates, and (ii) create opportunities for
product providers to increase revenue.
On the Internet, users access online products or items in
a chronological order. The items a user will interact with
in the future may depend strongly on the items he/she has
accessed in the past. This property facilitates a practical application scenario—sequential recommendation. In the sequential recommendation task, in addition to the general
user interest captured by all general recommendation models, we argue that there are three extra important factors to
∗

Work done as interns at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab in Montreal.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5045

