The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Projective Quadratic Regression for Online Learning
Wenye Ma
Tencent
wenyema@tencent.com

Gradient Decent (OGD) (Zinkevich 2003) or Follow-TheRegularized Leader (FTRL) (McMahan et al. 2013). It is
worth to note that the study of OCO and theoretical analysis
about above algorithms are based on convex requirement of
OCO. The convexity is two folds. First, the loss function is
convex. Second, the feasible set of learning variables is also
convex.

Abstract
This paper considers online convex optimization (OCO)
problems - the paramount framework for online learning algorithm design. The loss function of learning task in OCO
setting is based on streaming data so that OCO is a powerful tool to model large scale applications such as online
recommender systems. Meanwhile, real-world data are usually of extreme high-dimensional due to modern feature engineering techniques so that the quadratic regression is impractical. Factorization Machine as well as its variants are
efﬁcient models for capturing feature interactions with lowrank matrix model but they can’t fulﬁll the OCO setting due
to their non-convexity. In this paper, We propose a projective quadratic regression (PQR) model. First, it can capture
the import second-order feature information. Second, it is a
convex model, so the requirements of OCO are fulﬁlled and
the global optimal solution can be achieved. Moreover, existing modern online optimization methods such as Online
Gradient Descent (OGD) or Follow-The-Regularized-Leader
(FTRL) can be applied directly. In addition, by choosing a
proper hyper-parameter, we show that it has the same order of
space and time complexity as the linear model and thus can
handle high-dimensional data. Experimental results demonstrate the performance of the proposed PQR model in terms
of accuracy and efﬁciency by comparing with the state-ofthe-art methods.

1

Meanwhile, in real-world applications, the feature dimension could be extremely high. Therefore, traditional linear
models are still the most popular model in such scenario.
However, linear models fail to utilize the interaction between features so that lots of artiﬁcial feature engineering
work is needed. Quadratic regression captures ﬁrst-order
information of each input feature as well as second-order
pairwise feature interactions. However, it is usually unacceptable in terms of space complexity when dealing with
high-dimensional data because the model size is of order
O(d2 ) with d-dim features. Factorization Machine (FM)
(Rendle 2010) is an efﬁcient mechanism for capturing up
to second-order feature information with a low-rank matrix
in factorized form. It only needs O(md) space with rank m.
FM achieves state-of-the-art performance in various applications (Juan, Lefortier, and Chapelle 2017; Li et al. 2016;
Lu et al. 2017; Nguyen, Karatzoglou, and Baltrunas 2014;
Rendle et al. 2011; Zhong et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2019b;
2019a) and has recently regained signiﬁcant attention from
researchers (Blondel et al. 2016a; 2016b; He et al. 2017;
Xu et al. 2016). Unfortunately, the vanilla FM (Rendle 2010)
and its variants (Blondel et al. 2016a; Cheng et al. 2014;
Juan, Lefortier, and Chapelle 2017; Lu et al. 2017) are nonconvex formulations and unable to fulﬁll the fundamental requirements demanded in OCO. Several convexiﬁed FM formulations (Blondel, Fujino, and Ueda 2015; Lin et al. 2018;
Yamada et al. 2017) are proposed to address this weakness
but the computation cost is high and thus impractical in highdimensional problems.

Introduction

In the setting of online learning, the training data arrive in a
streaming fashion and the system should provide a response
immediately. Speciﬁcally, online learning is performed in
a sequence of consecutive rounds indexed by time t. At
round t, the learner updates a learning variable using simple calculations that are usually based on a single sample
only. Online learning is a powerful tool for a wide range
of applications such as online rating, news feeding, and
ad-click prediction. The paramount framework for online
learning is online convex optimization (OCO) (Hazan 2016;
Shalev-Shwartz 2012) which can be solved by many stateof-the-art online optimization algorithms such as Online

The above formulations are all based on the low-rank assumption of the feature-interaction matrix and thus to reduce
the number of learning variables. However, the question is
whether we really need the low-rank assumption? Is there
any other way to save parameters? Our answer is that we
don’t need the low-rank assumption and we can save param-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5093

