The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

The Surprising Power of Hiding Information in Facility Location
Safwan Hossain

Evi Micha

Nisarg Shah

Vector Institute, University of Toronto
safwan.hossain@mail.utoronto.ca

University of Toronto
emicha@cs.toronto.edu

University of Toronto
nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

many variants have been studied such as: locating multiple
facilities (Escofﬁer et al. 2011), locating a facility in multiple dimensions (Sui, Boutilier, and Sandholm 2013), exploring different types of agent preferences (Filos-Ratsikas et al.
2017) and objectives (Feldman and Wilf 2013), and strategic
opening of facilities (Chen et al. 2019).
However, this literature has mainly focused on a single
type of manipulation: agents misreporting their location. In
certain contexts however, agents may not be able to lie about
their location, but can still manipulate by hiding their location. For example, to decide where the facility should be
built, a survey may request residents to provide their home
address, or school boards to provide the school address.
Such reports can often be easily veriﬁed, either through external methods or by requiring participants to upload proof.
In such cases, agents cannot lie about their location, as it
may be tantamount to fraud; however, they can choose to
not participate, thus hiding their location. Furthermore, even
if the principal can detect agents hiding data, such detection
might be very time-consuming or violate privacy concerns.
When each agent holds a single location, the hiding manipulation is very restrictive: an agent can either participate (and reveal the correct location) or not participate (and
hide the location). The desideratum of incentivizing agents
to participate is known as individual rationality, and is already widely studied (Nisan et al. 2007). However, when
each agent holds multiple locations, she may choose to reveal any subset of these locations, making the hiding manipulation much more complex.
In facility location, agents holding multiple locations arise
naturally. In the aforementioned example, residents may report both their home and work address, or a school district may report the addresses of multiple schools under its
purview. This has been somewhat explored in facility location (Dekel, Fischer, and Procaccia 2010; Filos-Ratsikas et
al. 2017). We also note additional motivation from a different line of literature. Recent explorations of strategic interactions in machine learning have revealed that research on
facility location provides great insight into designing strategyproof algorithms for tasks such as linear regression (Chen
et al. 2018; Hossain and Shah 2019), where the training data
may come from strategic sources and assuming that each

Abstract
Facility location is the problem of locating a public facility
based on the preferences of multiple agents. In the classic
framework, where each agent holds a single location on a line
and can misreport it, strategyproof mechanisms for choosing
the location of the facility are well-understood.
We revisit this problem in a more general framework. We assume that each agent may hold several locations on the line
with different degrees of importance to the agent. We study
mechanisms which elicit the locations of the agents and different levels of information about their importance. Further,
in addition to the classic manipulation of misreporting locations, we introduce and study a new manipulation, whereby
agents may hide some of their locations. We argue for its novelty in facility location and applicability in practice. Our results provide a complete picture of the power of strategyproof
mechanisms eliciting different levels of information and with
respect to each type of manipulation. Surprisingly, we show
that in some cases hiding locations can be a strictly more
powerful manipulation than misreporting locations.

1

Introduction

Approximate mechanism design without money is a
paradigm introduced by Procaccia and Tennenholtz (2009),
which sits at the intersection of computer science and economics, and reasons about ways to prevent strategic manipulations by agents without monetary transfers. They illustrate
this through the canonical facility location problem, where
n agents are located on the real line, and a mechanism elicits their locations to decide where to build a public facility. However, the agents are strategic, and may manipulate
their reports to bring the facility closer to their location. To
prevent such manipulations, one may seek a strategyproof
mechanism under which no agent can beneﬁt by manipulating, regardless of what the others do. However, imposing
this constraint comes at a price. Given an objective the designer wants to minimize (such as the maximum distance
of the facility to any agent), she may only be able to approximately minimize it subject to strategyproofness. In the
last decade, research on facility location has exploded, and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2168

