The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Proposal-Based Approach for Activity Image-to-Video Retrieval
Ruicong Xu, Li Niu,∗ Jianfu Zhang, Liqing Zhang∗
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
{ranranxu, utscnewly, c.sis}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Xu et al. 2017) are proposed for image-video retrieval. However, these methods are not speciﬁcally designed for AIVR
task. AIVR task is in high demand of meaningful video representations, because a video may contain background segments irrelevant to the activity and poor video representations without considering noisy background segments will
lead to inferior performance of AIVR task.
Recently, RNN (Ng et al. 2015; Srivastava, Mansimov,
and Salakhutdinov 2015) and 3D CNN (Ji et al. 2013;
Tran et al. 2015; Qiu, Yao, and Mei 2017) are used to extract deep learning-based video representations. As an extension of 3D CNN, R-C3D (Xu, Das, and Saenko 2017)
can generate candidate temporal regions containing activities and ﬁlter out noisy background segments to obtain the
superior activity video representations. Therefore, we take
advantage of R-C3D model to generate temporal proposals
that are most likely to contain activities and extract one feature vector for each proposal, leading to a bag of proposal
features for each video. This paper is the ﬁrst to target at
AIVR task by utilizing activity proposals for videos.
In this paper, we propose an Activity Proposal-based
Image-to-Video Retrieval (APIVR) approach for AIVR task.
The major innovation in our paper is incorporating Graph
Multi-Instance Learning (GMIL) module into cross-modal
retrieval framework to address the proposal noise issue. As
illustrated in Figure 1, our cross-modal retrieval framework
is based on Adversarial Cross-Modal Retrieval (ACMR)
proposed in (Wang et al. 2017), in which image features and
activity proposal-based video features are projected into a
common feature space steered by triplet loss, classiﬁcation
loss, and adversarial loss. To address the proposal noise issue, we treat each video as a bag and the activity proposals in each bag as multiple instances, which coincides with
multi-instance learning (MIL) paradigm (Ilse, Tomczak, and
Welling 2018). We assume that there is at least one clean instance in each bag, and employ self-attention mechanism to
learn different weights for multiple instances, with higher
weights indicating clean activity proposals. To further consider the relation among multiple instances in each bag, we
insert graph convolutional layer into MIL module, yielding
a novel Graph MIL (GMIL) module.
After learning weights based on our GMIL module, we

Abstract
Activity image-to-video retrieval task aims to retrieve videos
containing the similar activity as the query image, which is a
challenging task because videos generally have many background segments irrelevant to the activity. In this paper, we
utilize R-C3D model to represent a video by a bag of activity proposals, which can ﬁlter out background segments to
some extent. However, there are still noisy proposals in each
bag. Thus, we propose an Activity Proposal-based Imageto-Video Retrieval (APIVR) approach, which incorporates
multi-instance learning into cross-modal retrieval framework
to address the proposal noise issue. Speciﬁcally, we propose
a Graph Multi-Instance Learning (GMIL) module with graph
convolutional layer, and integrate this module with classiﬁcation loss, adversarial loss, and triplet loss in our cross-modal
retrieval framework. Moreover, we propose geometry-aware
triplet loss based on point-to-subspace distance to preserve
the structural information of activity proposals. Extensive experiments on three widely-used datasets verify the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Cross-modal retrieval task has attracted considerable research attention in the ﬁeld of retrieval task. With the
rapid development of video applications, a speciﬁc type of
retrieval task, Activity Image-to-Video Retrieval (AIVR),
comes into our sight. The goal of AIVR task is to retrieve
the videos containing the similar activity as the image query,
which expands its value in widespread applications. One
daily-life example is news videos searching with a provided
photo containing a particular activity. Another example is
ﬁtness videos recommendation based on a sports picture.
The key idea of cross-modal retrieval is to learn a common feature space, where cross-modal data of relevant semantic can be close to each other. Although there are abundant methods for cross-modal retrieval like text-image retrieval (Feng, Wang, and Li 2014; Hardoon, Szedmák, and
Shawe-Taylor 2004; Peng, Huang, and Qi 2016; Wang et
al. 2016; 2013), few methods (de Araújo and Girod 2018;
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12524

