The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ACTIVE T HIEF: Model Extraction Using
Active Learning and Unannotated Public Data
Soham Pal,1∗ Yash Gupta,1∗ Aditya Shukla,1∗ Aditya Kanade,1,2†
Shirish Shevade,1† Vinod Ganapathy1†
1

Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
2
Google Brain, USA
{sohampal, yashgupta, adityashukla, kanade, shirish, vg}@iisc.ac.in
ML AA S P ROVIDER

Abstract

Secret dataset

Machine learning models are increasingly being deployed in
practice. Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) providers
expose such models to queries by third-party developers
through application programming interfaces (APIs). Prior
work has developed model extraction attacks, in which an
attacker extracts an approximation of an MLaaS model by
making black-box queries to it. We design ACTIVE T HIEF –
a model extraction framework for deep neural networks that
makes use of active learning techniques and unannotated public datasets to perform model extraction. It does not expect
strong domain knowledge or access to annotated data on the
part of the attacker. We demonstrate that (1) it is possible to
use ACTIVE T HIEF to extract deep classiﬁers trained on a variety of datasets from image and text domains, while querying the model with as few as 10-30% of samples from public
datasets, (2) the resulting model exhibits a higher transferability success rate of adversarial examples than prior work, and
(3) the attack evades detection by the state-of-the-art model
extraction detection method, PRADA.

Secret model



Train

Query

ATTACKER

Prediction

Thief dataset
Choose

Substitute model

x

y

Train



Figure 1: Overview of model extraction

generate adversarial examples against production software
that depends on the provider’s model.
Since the input-output format of the API is public, it is fair
to assume that the attacker knows how to present data to the
secret model and how to interpret its output. However, the
attacker cannot access the secret dataset on which the secret
model is trained (see Figure 1). In lieu of this, the attacker
must obtain some alternative dataset, which we refer to as a
thief dataset, using which the secret model can be queried.
The problem of obtaining thief datasets remains a challenge in making model extraction attacks more practical.
Prior work has considered access to limited Problem Domain (PD) data (Papernot et al. 2017), which is drawn from
a distribution that closely resembles the secret dataset, e.g.,
medical image data to extract models trained on medical images. However, getting such data even in small quantities
could be difﬁcult and expensive. Alternatively, researchers
have used Synthetic Non-Problem Domain (SNPD) (Tramèr
et al. 2016) and Natural Non-Problem Domain (NNPD)
data (Correia-Silva et al. 2018; Orekondy, Schiele, and Fritz
2019). SNPD is sampled from standard probability distributions (such as uniform distributions) that do not necessarily
model the problem domain distributions and hence, do not
aid the attacker much. NNPD, on the other hand, is sampled
from publicly available data of the same type of content as
the secret model’s input, e.g., image data for image models
and text data for text models. NNPD has been shown to be
more effective than SNPD in model extraction since it provides more natural samples to query the secret model with.

Introduction
In recent years, machine learning (ML) models are being
increasingly deployed in production software. Deep neural
networks (DNNs) are a particularly successful and popular
class of ML models. However, training DNNs is an expensive activity requiring access to data, compute and human
expertise. Many companies provide paid access to models
that are trained and hosted by them on the cloud, commonly
referred to as Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) platforms. Third-party developers access these models through
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs).
Even though this setup has the potential to democratize
access to machine learning, it has been shown to be vulnerable to model extraction attacks (Tramèr et al. 2016). An
attacker extracts a model by training a substitute model
on labeled data obtained by repeatedly querying the service
provider’s secret model. The attacker can then freely use the
substitute model, offer it as a competing service, or use it to
∗

All three authors contributed equally.
All three authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

865

