The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Channel Interaction Networks for Fine-Grained Image Categorization
Yu Gao, Xintong Han, Xun Wang, Weilin Huang,∗ Matthew R. Scott
Malong Technologies, Shenzhen, China
Shenzhen Malong Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Center, Shenzhen, China
{chrgao, xinhan, xunwang, whuang, mscott}@malong.com

original image

Abstract
Fine-grained image categorization is challenging due to the
subtle inter-class differences. We posit that exploiting the rich
relationships between channels can help capture such differences since different channels correspond to different semantics. In this paper, we propose a channel interaction network (CIN), which models the channel-wise interplay both
within an image and across images. For a single image, a
self-channel interaction (SCI) module is proposed to explore
channel-wise correlation within the image. This allows the
model to learn the complementary features from the correlated channels, yielding stronger ﬁne-grained features. Furthermore, given an image pair, we introduce a contrastive
channel interaction (CCI) module to model the cross-sample
channel interaction with a metric learning framework, allowing the CIN to distinguish the subtle visual differences between images. Our model can be trained efﬁciently in an
end-to-end fashion without the need of multi-stage training and testing. Finally, comprehensive experiments are conducted on three publicly available benchmarks, where the
proposed method consistently outperforms the state-of-theart approaches, such as DFL-CNN(Wang, Morariu, and Davis
2018) and NTS(Yang et al. 2018).

channel 1

channel 2

channel 3

channel 4

A

B

C

Figure 1: Channel activations computed by our method
(from the conv5 3 layer of ResNet50 trained on CUB-2002011 dataset).
2016; Kong and Fowlkes 2017; Yu et al. 2018), which have
been proven to be effective for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation. In this paper, we rethink the way of learning discriminative features with convolutional networks, and propose a
new channel interaction network (CIN).
First, different channels often correspond to different visual patterns (Yosinski et al. 2015). As shown in Figure 1,
most of the channels are semantically complementary to
each other. Motivated by this observation, we aim to discover the complementary channel information for each individual channel, and then aggregate the complementary channels with the original ones. Such complementary information can cooperatively contribute to the referred channel,
making the channel more discriminative. Consequently, we
propose a self-channel interaction (SCI) network that explicitly models the relationships between various channels
to discover such channel-wise complementary clues. Existing methods usually apply the channel/part interplay for
direct classiﬁcation (Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji 2015;
Yu et al. 2018) or attempt to mine the closely related
cues (Wang et al. 2017; Yue et al. 2018), where the channelwise complementary clues are not fully explored.
Second, people tend to distinguish two images by focusing on their speciﬁc distinctions. For instance, when we

Introduction
Fine-grained image categorization has become an important
topic in computer vision community with broad application
prospects such as new retail (Karlinsky et al. 2017), automatic driving (Sochor, Herout, and Havel 2016), etc. Going
beyond classical image classiﬁcation that recognizes basiclevel categories, ﬁne-grained categories are much more challenging to be identiﬁed due to the subtle inter-class differences, many of which can only be effectively distinguished
by concentrating on discriminative local parts. For instance,
to distinguish three bird species in Figure 1, a neural network
usually focuses on their wings and heads.
Previous work tends to learn discriminative features by
locating distinct parts (Jaderberg et al. 2015; Fu, Zheng, and
Mei 2017; Yang et al. 2018) or modeling higher order information (Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji 2015; Gao et al.
∗

Weilin Huang is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10818

