The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁcient Facial Feature Learning with Wide
Ensemble-Based Convolutional Neural Networks
Henrique Siqueira, Sven Magg, Stefan Wermter
Knowledge Technology
Department of Informatics, University of Hamburg
Vogt-Koelln-Str. 30, 22527 Hamburg, Germany
{siqueira, magg, wermter}@informatik.uni-hamburg.de

ensembling. Meshgi, Oba, and Ishii (2018) have exploited
concepts from active learning to reduce training time and redundancy. Rather than using the whole dataset for training,
their ensemble method is trained on the most informative
samples that maximize learning based on the query by committee algorithm (Seung, Opper, and Sompolinsky 1992).
Another approach adopted a divide-and-conquer strategy (Li et al. 2019) where the input space is decomposed
into multiple regions, and each region is used to train
one convolutional neural network of the ensemble. Despite
their progress on reducing redundancy, their approaches fall
within the “explicit” ensemble methods, i.e., consist of independent models. Therefore, redundancy of low-level visual features is still high, and unnecessary computational resources have to be allocated for processing such features.
In the so-called “implicit” ensemble methods, a single
network may generalize as well as an ensemble by distilling
its knowledge (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015). By training
a convolutional neural network (CNN) with the outputs of an
ensemble of CNNs, Shen, He, and Xue (2019) have reduced
inference time and redundancy while maintaining generalization power and similar intermediate representations under an adversarial training strategy. However, training time
is greatly increased with their approach since a trained traditional ensemble is a fundamental pre-requisite.
Ensemble with Shared Representations (ESR), proposed
in our previous work (Siqueira et al. 2018), offers the best
of the two worlds. It is neither a fully implicit nor a fully explicit ensemble method. As depicted in Figure 1, the shared
layers represent the implicit part. They are responsible for
the reduction of redundancy, training, and inference time.
The low-level features learned by them are shared with the
ensemble of convolutional branches. The latter characterizes
the explicit part and carries the diversity of the ensemble.
The level to start the ensemble of branches plays an important role in the computational load and generalization power
as well as for redundancy and diversity. However, the effect
of the branching level is still an open question that needs
careful analysis. In the context of facial expression recognition, for instance, starting branching too early (level 1) may
result in high redundancy of low-level facial features where
all branches have to learn skin textures and so forth. On the

Abstract
Ensemble methods, traditionally built with independently
trained de-correlated models, have proven to be efﬁcient
methods for reducing the remaining residual generalization
error, which results in robust and accurate methods for realworld applications. In the context of deep learning, however,
training an ensemble of deep networks is costly and generates high redundancy which is inefﬁcient. In this paper, we
present experiments on Ensembles with Shared Representations (ESRs) based on convolutional networks to demonstrate, quantitatively and qualitatively, their data processing
efﬁciency and scalability to large-scale datasets of facial expressions. We show that redundancy and computational load
can be dramatically reduced by varying the branching level of
the ESR without loss of diversity and generalization power,
which are both important for ensemble performance. Experiments on large-scale datasets suggest that ESRs reduce the
remaining residual generalization error on the AffectNet and
FER+ datasets, reach human-level performance, and outperform state-of-the-art methods on facial expression recognition in the wild using emotion and affect concepts.

Introduction
“We get resourcefulness from having many resources; not
from having one very smart one” (Minsky 2014). In machine
learning, ensemble methods refer to a set of models where
an inference is made collectively based on individual predictions (Dietterich 2000). A well-trained ensemble can reduce
the remaining residual generalization error, which results in
predictions being more accurate than any single model in
the ensemble. Traditional ensemble (TE) methods are built
by independently training several models on the same or different data. They can be composed of a single type of machine learning method such as an ensemble of neural networks (Hansen and Salamon 1990), but the diversity is often
higher when an ensemble is built from a library of different
methods (Caruana et al. 2004).
At present, ensembling of deep networks is an important
resource but requires high computational power. To make
this training-intensive technology accessible to everyone, recent studies have explored ways to reduce redundancy in
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5800

