The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Importance-Aware Semantic Segmentation in
Self-Driving with Discrete Wasserstein Training
Xiaofeng Liu,1,4† Yuzhuo Han,1,2† Song Bai,3 Yi Ge,4 Tianxing Wang,5 Xu Han,6
Site Li,4 Jane You,7 Jun Lu1∗
1

Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Harvard University;
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Dalian University of Technology;
3
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley;
4
Carnegie Mellon University; 5 Fudan University; 6 Johns Hopkins University
7
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
†
Contribute equally ∗ Corresponding Author: jlu@bidmc.harvard.edu
Abstract

Segment 1

Semantic segmentation (SS) is an important perception manner for self-driving cars and robotics, which classiﬁes each
pixel into a pre-determined class. The widely-used cross entropy (CE) loss-based deep networks has achieved signiﬁcant progress w.r.t. the mean Intersection-over Union (mIoU).
However, the cross entropy loss can not take the different importance of each class in an self-driving system into account.
For example, pedestrians in the image should be much more
important than the surrounding buildings when make a decisions in the driving, so their segmentation results are expected to be as accurate as possible. In this paper, we propose to incorporate the importance-aware inter-class correlation in a Wasserstein training framework by conﬁguring its
ground distance matrix. The ground distance matrix can be
pre-deﬁned following a priori in a speciﬁc task, and the previous importance-ignored methods can be the particular cases.
From an optimization perspective, we also extend our ground
metric to a linear, convex or concave increasing function
w.r.t. pre-deﬁned ground distance. We evaluate our method
on CamVid and Cityscapes datasets with different backbones
(SegNet, ENet, FCN and Deeplab) in a plug and play fashion.
In our extenssive experiments, Wasserstein loss demonstrates
superior segmentation performance on the predeﬁned critical
classes for safe-driving.

Better than

Segment 2

Car
Bus
Person
Road
Sidewalk
Sky
[The same CE loss]
Car
Bus
Person
Road
Sidewalk
Sky

Figure 1: The limitation of CE loss for real-world selfdriving system. The ground truth class of the pixel is car
i∗ . Two possible softmax predictions of the segmenters have
the same probability at i∗ position. Therefore, both predicted
distributions have the same CE loss. However, the top prediction is preferable to the bottom, since the two predictions
may result in different severity consequences.
have made considerable success on major open benchmark
datasets (Cordts et al. 2016; Brostow, Fauqueur, and Cipolla
2009). For each pixel in the input image, the CE loss compares the prediction with one-hot encoded ground-truth label without considering any connections to other pixels.
The ﬁnal loss is usually calculated as the average of the
cumulative CE loss across the entire image, making each
pixel contribute equally to the ﬁnal loss (Liu et al. 2019e;
2019b). This would lead to a problem for different classes
with unbalanced representation in the image, due to training
probably dominated by the most prevalent class.
Even for the case that the pixels contribute unequally to
the ﬁnal loss, such as assigning large weights to the border
of segmented objects (Li et al. 2017), the associated models
still encounter challenges in practical applications. Most existing semantic segmentation methods neglect the severity
of diverse misclassiﬁcations, which may cause unexpected
accidents. For example, an accident of Tesla is caused by
recognising a white truck as sky, arousing intense discussion
of self-vehicle safety 1 . Supposing that the white truck is rec-

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is an importance task in many
vision-based applications or systems, such as self-driving,
robotics, augmented reality and automatic surgery system
(Yang et al. 2018). The goal is to densely assign class label
to each pixel in the input image for precisely understanding the scene. Consequently, semantic segmentation can be
treated as an image classiﬁcation task at pixel level. In the
past decades, signiﬁcant amounts of research effort has been
spent on this issue (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015;
Paszke et al. 2017; Badrinarayanan, Kendall, and Cipolla
2017).
The recent semantic segmentation method based on
deep representation learning with cross-entropy (CE) loss
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11629

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/19/business/tesla-model-

