The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cakewalk Sampling
Uri Patish, Shimon Ullman
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

cases, the quality of the ﬁnal solution is determined by how
the search is initialized. One common heuristic around this
is to sample few initial solutions, and to apply the search
multiple times. However, the success of this heuristic mostly
depends on the sampling distribution that produces these initial solutions. Thus, if we can have an algorithm that adapts
a sampling distribution towards solutions that are associated
with good objective values, then we might be able to use it
to ﬁnd good local optima. Such a method could potentially
sample locally optimal solutions on its own, or be used as
an algorithm that learns how to initialize a particular local
search.

Abstract
We study the task of ﬁnding good local optima in combinatorial optimization problems. Although combinatorial optimization is NP-hard in general, locally optimal solutions are
frequently used in practice. Local search methods however
typically converge to a limited set of optima that depend on
their initialization. Sampling methods on the other hand can
access any valid solution, and thus can be used either directly
or alongside methods of the former type as a way for ﬁnding
good local optima. Since the effectiveness of this strategy depends on the sampling distribution, we derive a robust learning algorithm that adapts sampling distributions towards good
local optima of arbitrary objective functions. As a ﬁrst use
case, we empirically study the efﬁciency in which sampling
methods can recover locally maximal cliques in undirected
graphs. Not only do we show how our adaptive sampler outperforms related methods, we also show how it can even approach the performance of established clique algorithms. As
a second use case, we consider how greedy algorithms can
be combined with our adaptive sampler, and we demonstrate
how this leads to superior performance in k-medoid clustering. Together, these ﬁndings suggest that our adaptive sampler can provide an effective strategy to combinatorial optimization problems that arise in practice.

1

One type of algorithms which seem suitable for the task,
and which have drawn considerable interest in the last few
years are policy gradient methods (Sutton and Barto 2017).
Such methods construct a parametric sampling distribution
over the search space, and optimize the expected value of
some objective function by applying gradient updates in the
parameters’ space. On the surface, when provided with the
right sampling distribution, such methods can access any
valid solution, and can therefore provide a strategy that is
suitable to our setting. Nonetheless, a closer inspection reveals these methods are highly sensitive to perturbations of
the objective function. In particular, the objective values directly affect the sign and the magnitude of the gradient, making these methods notoriously hard to tune. Since the objective in this construction is essentially a random variable
whose distribution changes from problem to problem, ﬁnding a general rule for tuning them seems impractical. Following this understanding, we propose to circumvent this
sensitivity by utilizing a generic surrogate objective function
that has the following two properties. First, the surrogate
should preserve the set of locally optimal solutions. Second,
the surrogate should have a predetermined distribution for
every possible objective. Once in this form, such constructions can provide us with a generic adaptive sampler. With
this idea in mind, we show how the empirical cumulative
distribution function (CDF henceforth) of the original objective can be used to construct such surrogate objectives, and
we present a version which makes the basis of our method.
Since the crux of our method is based on capitalizing on
the CDF of the original objective, we refer to our method
as CAkEWaLK which stands for CumulAtivEly Weighted
LiKelihood.

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization is one of the foundational problems of computer science. Though in general such problems
are NP-hard (Papadimitriou 2003), it is often the case that
locally optimal solutions can be useful in practice. In clustering for example, a common objective is to divide a given set
of examples into a ﬁxed number of groups so as to minimize
the distances between group members. Since enumerating
all the possible groupings is usually intractable, local search
methods such as k-means (MacQueen and others 1967) are
frequently used to approach such problems. In many problems however, methods that transform one solution to another can be highly sensitive to their initialization. In some
cases this is a result of applying a local search to a problem
which has multiple local optima. In others, the search space
is simply disconnected, and transforming one valid solution
to another is only possible within a small sub-space. In such
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2400

