The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Collaborative Graph Convolutional Networks:
Unsupervised Learning Meets Semi-Supervised Learning
Binyuan Hui, Pengfei Zhu,∗ Qinghua Hu
College of Intelligence and Computing
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{huibinyuan, zhupengfei, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

e.g. , attributed graph clustering and semi-supervised node
classiﬁcation (Kipf and Welling 2017).
Despite the success of GCN in graph data, there are
still great challenges for GCN in attributed graph clustering and semi-supervised node classiﬁcation. Firstly, variational graph auto-encoder (VGAE) (Kipf and Welling 2016)
based attributed graph clustering approaches impose a single Gaussian prior on the learned latent embedding. However, the complex data distributions cannot be well modeled under the assumption of a single Gaussian prior. Additionally, many works conduct graph embedding and get
clustering assignments by k-means separately, which does
not utilize the end to end learning manner of deep learning. Secondly, semi-supervised learning directly uses unlabeled samples to enhance models by graph convolutions, but
the supervised information is still not increased. Although
a pseudo-labeling strategy is designed to exploit unlabeled
samples with the most conﬁdence scores (Li, Han, and Wu
2018), the accumulative error of pseudo-labels will gradually increase and degrade the model. Thirdly, pseudo-labels
can be assigned to unlabeled samples by clustering. The potential of the pseudo-labels is not well investigated for graph
convolutional networks.
Unsupervised learning can effectively boost the performance of deep models in many approaches. (Caron et al.
2018) used pseudo-labels generated by deep clustering to
guide learning of visual features, which signiﬁcantly improves the discrimination ability of the learned features. (Xie
et al. 2019) proposed an unsupervised data augmentation
strategy, which leads to substantial improvements when the
labeled set is extremely small. Motivated by the success of
unsupervised learning in visual feature learning and data
augmentation, we investigate to use graph-based unsupervised learning, i.e. , attributed graph clustering, to enhance
semi-supervised node classiﬁcation performance. Speciﬁcally, our contributions are summarized as follows:

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCN) have achieved promising performance in attributed graph clustering and semisupervised node classiﬁcation because it is capable of modeling complex graphical structure, and jointly learning both
features and relations of nodes. Inspired by the success of unsupervised learning in the training of deep models, we wonder whether graph-based unsupervised learning can collaboratively boost the performance of semi-supervised learning.
In this paper, we propose a multi-task graph learning model,
called collaborative graph convolutional networks (CGCN).
CGCN is composed of an attributed graph clustering network
and a semi-supervised node classiﬁcation network. As Gaussian mixture models can effectively discover the inherent
complex data distributions, a new end to end attributed graph
clustering network is designed by combining variational
graph auto-encoder with Gaussian mixture models (GMMVGAE) rather than the classic k-means. If the pseudo-label
of an unlabeled sample assigned by GMM-VGAE is consistent with the prediction of the semi-supervised GCN, it is selected to further boost the performance of semi-supervised
learning with the help of the pseudo-labels. Extensive experiments on benchmark graph datasets validate the superiority of our proposed GMM-VGAE compared with the stateof-the-art attributed graph clustering networks. The performance of node classiﬁcation is greatly improved by our proposed CGCN, which veriﬁes graph-based unsupervised learning can be well exploited to enhance the performance of semisupervised learning.

1

Introduction

The explosive growth of graph data in real-world applications, such as knowledge graph (Hamaguchi et al. 2017),
social networks (Tang et al. 2008), and computer vision
(Wang, Ye, and Gupta 2018), badly needs graph learning
models with strong representation and reasoning abilities.
In recent years, graph neural networks (Bruna et al. 2014;
Henaff, Bruna, and LeCun 2015; Defferrard, Bresson, and
Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and Welling 2017) have shown
surprising performance. Especially, graph convolutional networks (GCN) have been applied to a large variety of tasks,

• We propose a multi-task graph learning model, i.e. , collaborative graph convolutional networks (CGCN). CGCN
uses the samples whose clustering assignments and semisupervised predictions are consistent to further boost the
learning performance of semi-supervised node classiﬁcation. CGCN effectively alleviates the accumulative error

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4215

