The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

All-Pay Bidding Games on Graphs
Guy Avni,1 Rasmus Ibsen-Jensen,2 Josef Tkadlec1
1

2

IST Austria
Liverpool University

which we call the leaves, each of which is associated with a
weight. The game is a zero-sum game; it ends once a leaf is
reached and the weight of the leaf is Player 1’s reward and
Player 2’s cost, thus Player 1 aims at maximizing the weight
while Player 2 aims at minimizing it. A special case is qualitative reachability games in which each Player i has a target
ti and Player i wins iff the game ends in ti .
A graph game is equipped with a mechanism that determines how the token is moved; e.g., in turn-based games
the players alternate turns in moving the token. Bidding is
a mode of moving in which in each turn, we hold an auction to determine which player moves the token. Bidding
qualitative-reachability games where studied in (Lazarus et
al. 1996; 1999) largely with variants of ﬁrst-price auctions:
in each turn both players simultaneously submit bids, where
a bid is legal if it does not exceed the available budget, the
higher bidder moves the token, and pays his bid to the lower
bidder in Richman bidding (named after David Richman),
and to the bank in poorman bidding. The central quantity in
these games is the ratio between the players’ budgets. Each
vertex is shown to have a threshold ratio, which is a necessary and sufﬁcient initial ratio that guarantees winning the
game. Moreover, optimal strategies are deterministic.
We study, for the ﬁrst time, quantitative-reachability allpay bidding games, which are similar to the bidding rules
above except that both players pay their bid to the bank.
Formally, for i ∈ {1, 2}, suppose that Player i’s budget is
Bi ∈ Q>0 and that his bid is bi ∈ [0, Bi ], then the higher
bidder moves the token and Player i’s budget is updated to
Bi − bi . Note that in variants of ﬁrst-price auctions, assuming the winner bids b, the loser’s budget is the same for any
bid in [0, b). In an all-pay auction, however, the higher the
losing bid, the lower the loser’s available budget is in the
next round. Thus, intuitively, the loser would prefer to bid as
close as possible to 0.

Abstract
In this paper we introduce and study all-pay bidding games,
a class of two player, zero-sum games on graphs. The game
proceeds as follows. We place a token on some vertex in
the graph and assign budgets to the two players. Each turn,
each player submits a sealed legal bid (non-negative and below their remaining budget), which is deducted from their
budget and the highest bidder moves the token onto an adjacent vertex. The game ends once a sink is reached, and
Player 1 pays Player 2 the outcome that is associated with
the sink. The players attempt to maximize their expected outcome. Our games model settings where effort (of no inherent
value) needs to be invested in an ongoing and stateful manner.
On the negative side, we show that even in simple games on
DAGs, optimal strategies may require a distribution over bids
with inﬁnite support. A central quantity in bidding games is
the ratio of the players budgets. On the positive side, we show
a simple FPTAS for DAGs, that, for each budget ratio, outputs an approximation for the optimal strategy for that ratio.
We also implement it, show that it performs well, and suggests interesting properties of these games. Then, given an
outcome c, we show an algorithm for ﬁnding the necessary
and sufﬁcient initial ratio for guaranteeing outcome c with
probability 1 and a strategy ensuring such. Finally, while the
general case has not previously been studied, solving the speciﬁc game in which Player 1 wins iff he wins the ﬁrst two
auctions, has been long stated as an open question, which we
solve.

1

Introduction

Two-player graph games naturally model settings in which
decision making is carried out dynamically. Vertices model
the possible conﬁgurations and edges model actions. The
game proceeds by placing a token on one of the vertices and
allowing the players to repeatedly move it. One player models the protagonist for which we are interested in ﬁnding an
optimal decision-making strategy, and the other player, the
antagonist, models, in an adversarial manner, the other elements of the systems on which we have no control.
We focus on quantitative reachability games (Everett
1955) in which the graph has a collection of sink vertices,

Example 1.1. Consider the qualitative reachability game
that is depicted in Fig. 1, which we call win twice in a row
or WnR(2), for short. For convenience, ﬁx Player 2’s initial
budget to be 1. The solution to the game using a ﬁrst-price
auction is trivial: for example, with poorman bidding (in
which the winner pays the bank), Player 1 wins iff his budget exceeds 2. Indeed, if his budget is 2 + , he bids 1 + /2

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1798

