The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Keywords-Guided Abstractive Sentence Summarization
Haoran Li,1 Junnan Zhu,2,3 Jiajun Zhang,2,3 Chengqing Zong,2,3,4 Xiaodong He1
1

JD AI Research
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{lihaoran24, xiaodong.he}@jd.com
{junnan.zhu, jjzhang, cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

2

Observation:

Abstract

Input sentence: France and Germany called on world leaders
Monday to take rapid action to press for the closure of Ukraine 's
Chernobyl nuclear plant , site of the world 's worst ever nuclear
disaster .
Reference summary: World leaders urged to back Chernobyl
closure plan .

We study the problem of generating a summary for a given
sentence. Existing researches on abstractive sentence summarization ignore that keywords in the input sentence provide signiﬁcant clues for valuable content, and humans tend
to write summaries covering these keywords. In this paper,
we propose an abstractive sentence summarization method
by applying guidance signals of keywords to both the encoder and the decoder in the sequence-to-sequence model. A
multi-task learning framework is adopted to jointly learn to
extract keywords and generate a summary for the input sentence. We apply keywords-guided selective encoding strategies to ﬁlter source information by investigating the interactions between the input sentence and the keywords. We
extend pointer-generator network by a dual-attention and a
dual-copy mechanism, which can integrate the semantics of
the input sentence and the keywords, and copy words from
both the input sentence and the keywords. We demonstrate
that multi-task learning and keywords-oriented guidance facilitate sentence summarization task, achieving better performance than the competitive models on the English Gigaword
sentence summarization dataset.

Solution:
Step1. Extracting keywords: world leaders closure Chernobyl
Step2. Generating summary guided by the keywords: World
leaders called for action on Chernobyl closure .

Figure 1: The overlapping keywords (marked in red) between the input sentence and the reference summary cover
the main ideas of the input sentence. Our motivation is to
generate summary guided by the keywords extracted from
the input sentence.
vide signiﬁcant clues for the main points about the sentence.
Humans tend to write summaries containing these keywords
and then perform necessary modiﬁcations to ensure the ﬂuency and grammatically correctness. Thus, we believe that it
will be easier for a machine to generate a summary with the
help of keywords. Existing work has not explored the effectiveness of keywords for sentence summarization task, and
our work focuses on it.
Given a pair of input sentence and reference summary,
we can roughly take the overlapping words (except for stopwords) as the keywords. As shown in Figure 1, the overlapping words cover the gist of the input. For example, the keywords “closure” and “Chernobyl” can guide us to focus on
the part “closure of Ukraine ’s Chernobyl nuclear plant” of
the original sentence, which is highly related to “Chernobyl
closure plan” in the summary. This phenomenon is common
for sentence summarization. In the Gigaword sentence summarization dataset (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015), over
half of the words in the summary are presented in the source
sentence.
Existing researches show that keywords are beneﬁcial
for extractive summarization (Saggion and Lapalme 2002;
Zhang, Zincir-Heywood, and Milios 2004; Wang and Cardie

Introduction
Sentence summarization is a task that creates a condensed
version of a long sentence1 . Different from extractive methods (Cheng and Lapata 2016; Jadhav and Rajan 2018;
Dong et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018), which select a subset
of text units in the original text to form the summary, abstractive methods (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015; Takase
et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2016; See, Liu, and Manning 2017;
Tan, Wan, and Xiao 2017; Zhou et al. 2017; Narayan,
Cohen, and Lapata 2018; Lebanoff, Song, and Liu 2018;
Zhu et al. 2019) can generate novel words not present in the
input. Compared with extractive methods, abstractive summarization is much closer to the way human make a summary, while it is more challenging. Intuitively, some important words (a.k.a. keywords) in the original sentence proc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For sentence compression task (Clarke 2008), the word of the
output must be in the input, while the vocabulary for sentence summarization is not constrained.
8196

