The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Objective for Hierarchical Clustering in
Euclidean Space and Its Connection to Bisecting K-means∗
Yuyan Wang,1 Benjamin Moseley1
1

Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213
{yuyanw, moseleyb}@andrew.cmu.edu

painted in the same colors with the clusters they represent in
the picture on the left.
The mainstream algorithms used to do hierarchical clustering can be classiﬁed roughly into two categories: agglomerative and divisive. Agglomerative algorithms initialize every
point to be in their own individual cluster. They iteratively
pick the two clusters that are the most similar to each other to
merge into a bigger cluster. Meanwhile, the algorithms create
a parent in the hierarchical tree produced that is connected to
the two nodes corresponding to the two clusters before merging. The merging terminates when only one cluster remains.

Abstract
This paper explores hierarchical clustering in the case where
pairs of points have dissimilarity scores (e.g. distances) as a
part of the input. The recently introduced objective for points
with dissimilarity scores results in every tree being a 12 approximation if the distances form a metric. This shows the
objective does not make a signiﬁcant distinction between a
good and poor hierarchical clustering in metric spaces.
Motivated by this, the paper develops a new global objective
for hierarchical clustering in Euclidean space. The objective
captures the criterion that has motivated the use of divisive
clustering algorithms: that when a split happens, points in the
same cluster should be more similar than points in different
clusters. Moreover, this objective gives reasonable results on
ground-truth inputs for hierarchical clustering.
The paper builds a theoretical connection between this objective and the bisecting k-means algorithm. This paper proves
that the optimal 2-means solution results in a constant approximation for the objective. This is the ﬁrst paper to show
the bisecting k-means algorithm optimizes a natural global
objective over the entire tree.

1

Figure 1: A hierarchical clustering tree. The green leaves are
the input data points. Internal nodes represent a cluster of the
leaves in their subtree.

Introduction

In hierarchical clustering, the input is a set of points, with a
score that represents the pairwise similarity or dissimilarity
of the points. The goal is to output a tree, often binary, whose
leaves represent data points, and internal nodes represent
clusters. Each internal node is a cluster of the leaves in the
subtree rooted at it. When a node gets closer towards the
leaves, the cluster it represents should become more reﬁned,
and the points in this cluster should become more similar.
The nodes of the same level in this tree represent a partition
of the given data set into clusters. Note that each data point
(leaf) belongs to many clusters, one for each ancestor.
Figure 1 shows a sample hierarchical clustering tree for
biological species. All the nodes in the tree on the right are

It is necessary for an agglomerative algorithm to quantify the similarity between clusters, which can be deﬁned in
several ways. For example, average-linkage is a popular agglomerative algorithm, which measures the similarity of two
clusters by calculating the average pairwise inter-cluster similarity score. Steinbach et al. (2000), Murtagh (1983), Murtagh
and Contreras (2012) and Zhao, Karypis, and Fayyad (2005)
discussed about common agglomerative algorithms and compared the performance of different agglomerative algorithms
in a variety of backgrounds. Ackerman and Ben-David (2016)
identiﬁed properties of trees produced by linkage-based agglomerative algorithms.
Divisive algorithms initialize the whole point set as one
single cluster, and create a root node corresponding to this
cluster in the hierarchical tree. They iteratively split a cluster into smaller clusters. Then the algorithms create nodes
representing the separated clusters in the tree and make them
the children of the parent node. During the split, we want the
points in different clusters to be less similar than the points

∗
Y. Wang and B. Moseley were supported in part by a NSF
Grants CCF-1830711, CCF-1733873, CCF-1733873 and CCF1845146, a Google Research Award, a Bosch junior faculty chair
and an Infor faculty award.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6307

