The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generalized and Sub-Optimal Bipartite Constraints for Conﬂict-Based Search
Thayne T. Walker,1 Nathan R. Sturtevant,2 Ariel Felner3
1

University of Denver, Denver, USA
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
3
Ben-Gurion University, Be’er-Sheva, Israel
thayne.walker@du.edu, nathanst@ualberta.ca, felner@bgu.ac.il
2

of CBS to a surrogate bipartite graph problem. BR only requires a low-level (single-agent) successor generation routine and a conﬂict detection routine and can return constraints with both spatial and temporal extents. Second, a
method of introducing conditional constraints for suboptimal search which exploits constraint relaxations to quickly
ﬁnd suboptimal solutions fast while maintaining completeness. Finally, empirical analysis showing signiﬁcant improvement over the previous state-of-the-art for both optimal
and sub-optimal variants in 2k -connected grids.

Abstract
The main idea of conﬂict-based search (CBS), a popular,
state-of-the-art algorithm for multi-agent pathﬁnding is to resolve conﬂicts between agents by systematically adding constraints to agents. Recently, CBS has been adapted for new
domains and variants, including non-unit costs and continuous time settings. These adaptations require new types of
constraints. This paper introduces a new automatic constraint
generation technique called bipartite reduction (BR). BR converts the constraint generation step of CBS to a surrogate bipartite graph problem. The properties of BR guarantee completeness and optimality for CBS. Also, BR’s properties may
be relaxed to obtain suboptimal solutions. Empirical results
show that BR yields signiﬁcant speedups in 2k connected
grids over the previous state-of-the-art for both optimal and
suboptimal search.

1

2

Problem Deﬁnition

MAPF was originally deﬁned for agents that occupy a single
vertex and move on unit-cost edges. This paper demonstrates
the new automation technique (BR) on MAPFR (Walker,
Sturtevant, and Felner 2018) a variant of MAPF for realvalued weighted graphs. A MAPFR problem instance is deﬁned by a tuple (G, A, Vs , Vg ). G = (V, E) is a positiveweighted graph, ∀e ∈ E, w(e) ∈ R+ . Each v ∈ V is associated
with unique coordinates in a metric space. A = {1, ..., k}
is a set of k agents. Vs ⊆ V = {start1 , ..., startk } and
Vg ⊆ V = {goal1 , ..., goalk } are sets of unique start and
goals for each agent where starti = startj , goali = goalj
for all i = j.
A solution to MAPF is Π = {π1 , ..., πk }, a set of singleagent paths composed of states. A state s = (v, t) is a pair
composed of a vertex v ∈ V and time t ∈ R+ . We denote the vertex and time of a state as v(s) and t(s) respectively. A path for agent i is a sequence of d states πi =
[s0i , ..., sdi ] where s0i = (starti , 0) and sdi = (goali , t). Each
(v(sni ), v(sn+1
)) ∈ E and each t(sn+1
) = t(sni ) + w(eni ).
i
i
That is, states on the path are connected by edges, and the
weight of an edge is the time it takes to traverse it.
Agents have a physical shape such as spheres, polygons
or polygonal meshes which are situated relative to their reference point (Li et al. 2019b). Agents move along edges
(v(sn ), v(sn+1 )) ∈ E — an agent begins with its reference
point at v(sn ) at time t(sn ) and its reference point follows
a straight, constant velocity motion vector in metric space,
ending at v(sn+1 ) at time t(sn+1 ). For simplicity, we assume that the time it takes to traverse an edge is identical to
the weight of the edge (more complicated assumptions can
be made). The act of traversing an edge is an action, and a
path is a sequence of actions πi = [a0i , ..., adi ] where each

Introduction

The goal of multi-agent pathﬁnding (MAPF) is to move
multiple agents to their respective goal states while
avoiding conﬂicts between agents. Conﬂict-based search
(CBS) (Sharon et al. 2015), a state-of-the-art algorithm for
MAPF, is designed around detecting and resolving conﬂicts between agents by systematically adding constraints
to agents and has been used for many variants of the MAPF
problem (Atzmon et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019b; Ma et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2019a; Thomas, Deodhare, and Murty 2015; Hönig
et al. 2018). Most notably, CBS has been adapted for nonunit cost and continuous time domains (Andreychuk et al.
2019; Cohen et al. 2019). Many of these adaptations introduced new types of constraints or new ways to manage constraints. In each case, rigorous proofs are required to guarantee that the new enhancements preserve completeness and
optimality. There is a need for a generalized technique that
can automate this process, simplifying the application of
CBS to new domains.
This paper has three main contributions. First, a new technique called bipartite reduction (BR). This is a general constraint generation technique for CBS that can be applied to
new domains and variants which guarantees completeness
and optimality. BR converts the constraint generation step
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7277

