The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SemSUM: Semantic Dependency Guided Neural Abstractive Summarization
Hanqi Jin,1,2,3∗ Tianming Wang,1,3∗ Xiaojun Wan1,2,3
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
{jinhanqi, wangtm, wanxiaojun}@pku.edu.cn

Source

Abstract
In neural abstractive summarization, the generated summaries often face semantic irrelevance and content deviation
from the input sentences. In this work, we incorporate semantic dependency graphs about predicate-argument structure of
input sentences into neural abstractive summarization for the
problem. We propose a novel semantics dependency guided
summarization model (SemSUM), which can leverage the information of original input texts and the corresponding semantic dependency graphs in a complementary way to guide
summarization process. We evaluate our model on the English Gigaword, DUC 2004 and MSR abstractive sentence
summarization datasets. Experiments show that the proposed
model improves semantic relevance and reduces content deviation, and also brings signiﬁcant improvements on automatic
evaluation ROUGE metrics.

Target
Seq2seq
SemSUM

even some of his rivals in the roland garros
locker-room are hoping that roger federer can
create a bit of tennis history by winning all four
grand slams .
even fellow players keen for federer grand slam
dream picture
federer hoping to win at roland garros
even some rivals hope federer to make grand
slam history

Table 1: Example summaries of a sentence with and without
semantics guidance.

syntactic structures into neural sentence summarization to
help the model identify summary-worthy content and avoid
content deviation. Li et al. (2018) incorporated entailment
knowledge into abstractive summarization models under a
multi-task framework.
In this paper, we aim to guide the neural summarization
system with the semantic dependency graph of the source
sentence. Semantic dependency graphs represent predicateargument relations between content words in a sentence and
have various semantic representation schemes (e.g., DM,
PAS, PSD and CCD) based on different annotation systems
(Oepen et al. 2016). Among these semantic representation
schemes, DM has higher consistency and accuracy, so we
leverage it as an additional input to guide summary generation. Its nodes are words and edges are labeled to encode
semantic relations between the words. Non-content words,
such as punctuation, are left out of the analysis. Figure 1
shows the corresponding semantic dependency graph (DM)
of the source sentence in Table 1, which includes most semantically relevant local (e.g., from “some” to “rivals”) and
long-distance (e.g., from “hoping” to “some”) dependencies.
With the above semantic dependency graph incorporated,
we can generate a semantically consistent summary, where
“hope” ﬁnds the true subject “some rivals”.
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) has advanced the
state-of-the-art on various translation and generation tasks.
We propose a semantic dependency guided summarization
model based on the Transformer, which can incorporate the
semantic dependency graph and the input text by stacking

Introduction
Abstractive summarization aims to compress an input text
into a concise, ﬂuent summary while retaining its main idea.
In this paper, we focus on abstractive sentence summarization, which involves retelling, pruning, and generation at
the sentence level (Jing and McKeown 1999). Sequenceto-sequence (Seq2seq) learning has been widely used in
summarization task and produced promising results (Rush,
Chopra, and Weston 2015; Nallapati et al. 2016).
However, in many cases, the generated summaries still
face the problem of semantic irrelevance and deviation from
the input sentence, thus cannot reﬂect the main meaning of
the original text accurately and faithfully. For example, in
the summary generated by the seq2seq model in Table1, the
actual subject of the verb “hoping” is “his rivals”. Nevertheless, probably because the entity “federer” seems more
important in the source sentence, the summarization system regards “federer” as the subject and forges the wrong
match “federer hoping”. Several studies have explored various ways to address the problem. Cao et al. (2018b) extracted facts from the source sentence as an auxiliary input to
correct semantic errors and false facts generated by the neural network. Song, Zhao, and Liu (2018) combined source
∗

Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8026

