The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Factorized Inference in Deep Markov
Models for Incomplete Multimodal Time Series
Tan Zhi-Xuan,1,2 Harold Soh,3 Desmond C. Ong1,4
1

A*STAR Artiﬁcial Intelligence Initiative, A*STAR, Singapore
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT
3
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
4
Department of Information Systems and Analytics, National University of Singapore
xuan@mit.edu, {harold, dco}@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

There has been a proliferation of attempts to learn these
nonlinear dynamics by integrating deep learning with traditional probabilistic approaches, such as Hidden Markov
Models (HMMs) and latent dynamical systems. Most approaches do this by adding random latent variables to each
time step in an RNN (Chung et al. 2015; Bayer and Osendorfer 2014; Fabius and van Amersfoort 2014; Fraccaro et al.
2016). Other authors begin with latent sequence models as
a basis, then develop deep parameterizations and inference
techniques for these models (Krishnan, Shalit, and Sontag
2017; Archer et al. 2015; Johnson et al. 2016; Karl et al.
2016; Doerr et al. 2018; Lin, Khan, and Hubacher 2018;
Chen et al. 2018). Most relevant to our work are the Deep
Markov Models (DMMs) proposed by Krishnan, Shalit, and
Sontag (2017), a generalization of HMMs and Gaussian
State Space Models where the transition and emission distributions are parameterized by deep networks.

Abstract
Integrating deep learning with latent state space models has
the potential to yield temporal models that are powerful, yet
tractable and interpretable. Unfortunately, current models are
not designed to handle missing data or multiple data modalities, which are both prevalent in real-world data. In this work,
we introduce a factorized inference method for Multimodal
Deep Markov Models (MDMMs), allowing us to ﬁlter and
smooth in the presence of missing data, while also performing
uncertainty-aware multimodal fusion. We derive this method
by factorizing the posterior p(z|x) for non-linear state space
models, and develop a variational backward-forward algorithm for inference. Because our method handles incompleteness over both time and modalities, it is capable of interpolation, extrapolation, conditional generation, label prediction,
and weakly supervised learning of multimodal time series.
We demonstrate these capabilities on both synthetic and realworld multimodal data under high levels of data deletion. Our
method performs well even with more than 50% missing data,
and outperforms existing deep approaches to inference in latent time series.

Unfortunately, none of the approaches thus far are designed to handle inference with both missing data and multiple modalities. Instead, most approaches rely upon RNN
inference networks (Krishnan, Shalit, and Sontag 2017;
Karl et al. 2016; Che et al. 2018), which can only handle
missing data using ad-hoc approaches such as zero-masking
(Lipton, Kale, and Wetzel 2016), update-skipping (Krishnan, Shalit, and Sontag 2017), temporal gating mechanisms
(Neil, Pfeiffer, and Liu 2016; Che et al. 2018), or providing
time stamps as inputs (Chen et al. 2018), none of which have
intuitive probabilistic interpretations. Of the approaches that
do not rely on RNNs, Fraccaro et al. handle missing data
by assuming linear latent dynamics (Fraccaro et al. 2017),
while Johnson et al. (Johnson et al. 2016) and Lin et al.
(Lin, Khan, and Hubacher 2018) use hybrid message passing
inference that is theoretically capable of marginalizing out
missing data. However, these methods are unable to learn
nonlinear transition dynamics, nor do they handle multiple
modalities.

Introduction
Virtually all sensory data that humans and autonomous systems receive can be thought of as multimodal time series—
multiple sensors each provide streams of information about
the surrounding environment, and intelligent systems have
to integrate these information streams to form a coherent
yet dynamic model of the world. These time series are often asynchronously or irregularly sampled, with many timepoints having missing or incomplete data. Classical time series algorithms, such as the Kalman ﬁlter, are robust to such
incompleteness: they are able to infer the state of the world,
but only in linear regimes (Kalman 1960). On the other hand,
human intelligence is robust and complex: we infer complex quantities with nonlinear dynamics, even from incomplete temporal observations of multiple modalities—for example, intended motion from both eye gaze and arm movements (Dragan, Lee, and Srinivasa 2013), or desires and
emotions from actions, facial expressions, speech, and language (Baker et al. 2017; Ong, Zaki, and Goodman 2015).

We address these limitations—the inability to handle
missing data, over multiple modalities, and with nonlinear dynamics—by introducing a multimodal generalization
of Deep Markov Models, as well as a factorized inference
method for such models that handles missing time points
and modalities by design. Our method allows for both ﬁl-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10334

