The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Spectral Salient Object Detection by Adversarial Domain Adaptation
Shaoyue Song,1∗ Hongkai Yu,2* Zhenjiang Miao,1* Jianwu Fang,3
Kang Zheng,4 Cong Ma,1 Song Wang4,5
1

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas-Rio Grande Valley, Edinburg, TX, USA
3
School of Electronic and Control Engineering, Chang’an University, Xi’an, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2

Abstract
Although there are many existing research works about the
salient object detection (SOD) in RGB images, there are
still many complex situations that regular RGB images cannot provide enough cues for the accurate SOD, such as the
shadow effect, similar appearance between background and
foreground, strong or insufﬁcient illumination, etc. Because
of the success of near-infrared spectrum in many computer vision tasks, we explore the multi-spectral SOD in the synchronized RGB images and near-infrared (NIR) images for the
both simple and complex situations. We assume that the RGB
SOD in the existing RGB image datasets could provide references for the multi-spectral SOD problem. In this paper, we
ﬁrst collect and will publicize a large multi-spectral dataset
including 780 synchronized RGB and NIR image pairs for
the multi-spectral SOD problem in the simple and complex
situations. We model this research problem as an adversarial domain adaptation from the existing RGB image dataset
(source domain) to the collected multi-spectral dataset (target
domain). Experimental results show the effectiveness and accuracy of the proposed adversarial domain adaptation for the
multi-spectral SOD.

Figure 1: Sample images from the collected multi-spectral
dataset in simple and complex situations: (a) simple/normal
situation, (b) shadow effect, (c) similar appearance between
background and foreground, (d) strong illumination, and (e)
insufﬁcient illumination. From top to the bottom: RGB image, synchronized NIR image, annotated ground truth for the
SOD.
Recently, the near-infrared spectrum has shown successes
in many computer vision tasks. Near-infrared (NIR) image
is one of the image modalities often used to help the RGB
image tasks such as the low-light image enhancement, image
restoration, image dehazing, robust scene category recognition (Brown and Süsstrunk 2011), face recognition robust to
illumination variations (He et al. 2018), image quality and
context improvement to the changeable weather (Jiang et
al. 2019), etc. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the RGB
images might show low discriminative contrast in complex
situations, while the synchronized NIR images might display a better contrast to human beings. In many real-world
applications like robotics, autonomous vehicles, and video
surveillance, the multi-spectral images including RGB and
NIR images are available, so it is highly desired to systematically study the multi-spectral SOD problem. Therefore, in
this paper, we explore the multi-spectral SOD problem in the
synchronized RGB and NIR images for the both simple and
complex situations.
Different from many SOD methods extracting effective
feature representations for saliency detection, we assume
that the RGB SOD in the existing public RGB image

Introduction
In computer vision, salient object detection (SOD) that aims
at ﬁnding out the salient objects in a given image is helpful to discover the objects and well understand the image
scene, so the SOD techniques could beneﬁt many applications, such as image scene understanding (Zhang, Du, and
Zhang 2014), image segmentation (Wang et al. 2018), object
tracking (Zhang et al. 2018), common object discovery (Yu
et al. 2018), etc. There are many existing research works
about the SOD in RGB images such as (Cheng et al. 2015;
Chen et al. 2018), which have achieved advanced performance in regular simple situations. However, there are still
many complex situations that regular RGB images cannot
provide enough cues for the accurate SOD, such as the
shadow effect, similar appearance between background and
foreground, strong or insufﬁcient illumination, as shown in
Fig. 1.
∗

Co-corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12023

