The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MixPoet: Diverse Poetry Generation
via Learning Controllable Mixed Latent Space
Xiaoyuan Yi,1 Ruoyu Li,3 Cheng Yang,2 Wenhao Li,1 Maosong Sun1∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Tsinghua University
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems, Tsinghua University
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
6ESTATES PTE LTD, Singapore
{yi-xy16, liwh16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, sms@tsinghua.edu.cn
yangcheng@bupt.edu.cn, ruoyuli1995@gmail.com
Abstract
As an essential step towards computer creativity, automatic
poetry generation has gained increasing attention these years.
Though recent neural models make prominent progress in
some criteria of poetry quality, generated poems still suffer from the problem of poor diversity. Related literature
researches show that different factors, such as life experience, historical background, etc., would inﬂuence composition styles of poets, which considerably contributes to the
high diversity of human-authored poetry. Inspired by this, we
propose MixPoet, a novel model that absorbs multiple factors to create various styles and promote diversity. Based on
a semi-supervised variational autoencoder, our model disentangles the latent space into some subspaces, with each conditioned on one inﬂuence factor by adversarial training. In this
way, the model learns a controllable latent variable to capture and mix generalized factor-related properties. Different
factor mixtures lead to diverse styles and hence further differentiate generated poems from each other. Experiment results
on Chinese poetry demonstrate that MixPoet improves both
diversity and quality against three state-of-the-art models.

1

Figure 1: Left: an illustration of the poetry spaces on different inﬂuence factors. Right: two human-authored sentences
(each with two lines) absorbing two factors.

with different topic words should be distinguishable from
each other (inter-topic diversity) and (2) with the same topic
word, the model should be able to generate distinct poems
(intra-topic diversity). Nevertheless, most existing models
fail to meet such requirements since they tend to remember
some common patterns in the corpus and produce repetitive
and generic contents, even with different topic words as input (Zhang et al. 2017; Yi et al. 2018a).
To address this problem, we must ﬁgure out what contributes to diversity. Related literature theories demonstrate
that different factors would inﬂuence writing manners of
human poets, such as their life experience (Dilthey 1985),
historical background (Owen 1990), school of literary, etc.
These factors lead to differences in thoughts, feelings, and
expressions in poetry composition, which underlie the diverse styles of poets and make human-authored poems
highly distinguishable, as observed in (Zhang et al. 2017).
Figure 1 gives an example: under the same topic (the war),
the poem created by a poet who lived in a powerful and
prosperous dynasty tends to express strong conﬁdence and
aspiration; by contrast, the other created by a poet living in
troubled times shows the sorrow and worry of being invaded.

Introduction

Poetry is one of the most valuable cultural heritages for human beings. Characterized by its elegant expressions, colorful contents and diverse styles, this literary genre appeals
to people across different ages and nationalities. Automatic
poetry generation has attracted growing attention in the past
several years because of its considerable research value in
exploring computer creativity and building humanizing AI,
which could also beneﬁt the construction of intelligent assistants for entertainment and education.
Recent models mainly make efforts and achieve signiﬁcant progress in improving some primary criteria of poetry
quality, such as context coherence (Yan 2016) and topic relevance (Ghazvininejad et al. 2016; Li et al. 2018). However,
beyond these criteria, generated poems still suffer from the
problem of poor diversity.
Intuitively, the fundamental requirements of diversity in
poetry generation could be two-fold: (1) poems generated
∗

Corresponding author: M.Sun (sms@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9450

