The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Geometry-Constrained Car Recognition Using a 3D Perspective Network
Rui Zeng,1,2 Zongyuan Ge,2∗ Simon Denman,1 Sridha Sridharan,1 Clinton Fookes1
1
Queensland University of Technology 2 Monash University
r3.zeng@hdr.qut.edu.au; zongyuan.ge@monash.edu; {s.denman, s.sridharan, c.fookes}@qut.edu.au

Target Image

Abstract

Classier

We present a novel learning framework for vehicle recognition
from a single RGB image. Unlike existing methods which
only use attention mechanisms to locate 2D discriminative
information, our work learns a novel 3D perspective feature
representation of a vehicle, which is then fused with 2D appearance feature to predict the category. The framework is
composed of a global network (GN), a 3D perspective network (3DPN), and a fusion network. The GN is used to locate
the region of interest (RoI) and generate the 2D global feature.
With the assistance of the RoI, the 3DPN estimates the 3D
bounding box under the guidance of the proposed vanishing
point loss, which provides a perspective geometry constraint.
Then the proposed 3D representation is generated by eliminating the viewpoint variance of the 3D bounding box using
perspective transformation. Finally, the 3D and 2D feature are
fused to predict the category of the vehicle. We present qualitative and quantitative results on the vehicle classiﬁcation and
veriﬁcation tasks in the BoxCars dataset. The results demonstrate that, by learning such a concise 3D representation, we
can achieve superior performance to methods that only use 2D
information while retain 3D meaningful information without
the challenge of requiring a 3D CAD model.

Volvo XC80
Dodge Ram
Audi Q5
Toyota RAV4
Volvo XC60

Fusion

2D Global Network

3D Perspective Network Front View
Side View
Homography
Roof View

Figure 1: Consider the image of the car shown above. Even
though the vehicle is shown on a ﬂat 2D image, our model
can estimate and leverage knowledge from 2D appearance
as well as the rigid 3D bounding box of the vehicle to produce a viewpoint-normalized representation, which is able to
improve vehicle recognition performance.

Introduction
Trafﬁc surveillance systems are an important part of intelligent transportation, which is the core of artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) in smart cities. A holy grail for trafﬁc surveillance is
the ability to automatically recognize and identify vehicles
from visual information alone. Vehicle recognition enables
automated car model analysis, which is helpful for innumerable purposes including regulation, description, and indexing
vehicles.
One key idea shared by recent vehicle recognition algorithms is to use an ensemble of local features extracted
from discriminative parts of the vehicle, which can be located using either part annotations or attention mechanisms.
These approaches, given part annotations, (Krause et al. 2014;
He, Shao, and Tan 2015) learn the corresponding part detectors and then assemble these to obtain a uniform repre-

sentation of the vehicle, which is used for category classiﬁcation. To overcome the need for part annotations, recent advances (Jaderberg et al. 2015; Yang et al. 2018;
Wang, Morariu, and Davis 2018; Fu, Zheng, and Mei 2017)
make use of attention mechanisms to identify salient spatial
regions automatically. Despite these part-aware methods successfully leveraging spatial information, they are still ‘ﬂat’,
i.e., built on independent and 2D views.
3D-aware methods have been shown to be promising alternatives to part-aware approaches. For instance, (Krause et
al. 2013; Lin et al. 2014) exploit the fact that aligning a 3D
CAD model or shape to 2D images signiﬁcantly eliminates
the variation caused by viewpoint changes, which is shown as
the main obstacle for vehicle categorization. However, these
methods have limited generality as they require 3D CAD
models for vehicles.
To address these issues, we instead propose a concise 3D

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗ indicates the corresponding author.
1161

