The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Tensor FISTA-Net for Real-Time Snapshot Compressive Imaging
∗

Xiaochen Han,1 Bo Wu,2 Zheng Shou,2 Xiao-Yang Liu,2 Yimeng Zhang,2 Linghe Kong1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Columbia University, USA
{guillermo han97, linghe.kong}@sjtu.edu.cn, {bo.wu, zs2262, xl2427, yz3397}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) cameras capture highspeed videos by compressing multiple video frames into a
measurement frame. However, reconstructing video frames
from the compressed measurement frame is challenging. The
existing state-of-the-art reconstruction algorithms suffer from
low reconstruction quality or heavy time consumption, making them not suitable for real-time applications. In this paper, exploiting the powerful learning ability of deep neural
networks (DNN), we propose a novel Tensor Fast Iterative
Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm Net (Tensor FISTA-Net)
as a decoder for SCI video cameras. Tensor FISTA-Net not
only learns the sparsest representation of the video frames
through convolution layers, but also reduces the reconstruction time signiﬁcantly through tensor calculations. Experimental results on synthetic datasets show that the proposed
Tensor FISTA-Net achieves average PSNR improvement of
1.63∼3.89dB over the state-of-the-art algorithms. Moreover,
Tensor FISTA-Net takes less than 2 seconds running time and
12MB memory footprint, making it practical for real-time
IoT applications.

Figure 1: Overview of the Tensor FISTA-Net.

Introduction

state-of-the-art algorithm but suffers from extremely long
running time due to the non-local patch searching and rank
minimization processes. GAP-TV (Yuan 2016) is fast while
presents low reconstruction quality due to the low Total Variation (TV) regularizer. Consequently, it is important to design a new method for SCI reconstruction problems with
high speed and reconstruction quality.
The FISTA algorithm (Beck and Teboulle 2009) potentially can be used to improve the SCI reconstruction because
it can speed up convergence signiﬁcantly. However, directly
using the FISTA algorithm faces the problems of exhaustive parameters tuning and time-consuming large-scale matrix multiplication. Considering the great learning capability
of deep neural networks (DNN) and the reduction of calculations in tensor form, in this paper, we propose a novel approach called Tensor FISTA-Net for the SCI reconstruction
problems. We unfold the FISTA algorithm into a deep neural
network inspired by ISTA-Net (Zhang and Ghanem 2018),
(Wang, Fidler, and Urtasun 2016), (Frerix et al. 2018), (Jiang
et al. 2018) and convert the vector calculations into tensor
calculations. Fig. 1 illustrates the overview of the proposed

High-speed cameras are important for sports events, aerial
photography and car crashing tests, etc, because slowmotion video recording is needed for several scenarios
(Vollmer and Möllmann 2011). Different from conventional
high-speed cameras that suffer from limited memory and
bandwidth (Saha et al. 2015), the snapshot compressive
imaging (SCI) video cameras (Llull et al. 2013), (Gehm et
al. 2007), (Wagadarikar et al. 2008) exploit the compressive
sensing (CS) theory (Donoho 2006), (Candes, Romberg, and
Tao 2006), (Candes and Tao 2006). SCI video cameras adopt
sampling on a set of video frames and compress them into a
single measurement, which reduces memory and bandwidth
cost and enables slow-motion videos and long-time video
recording.
Existing algorithms for SCI reconstruction problems are
not satisfactory due to exhaustive parameters tuning and
heavy time consumption. DeSCI (Liu et al. 2018) is the
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10933

