The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Diachronic Embedding for Temporal Knowledge Graph Completion
Rishab Goel,∗ Seyed Mehran Kazemi,* Marcus Brubaker, Pascal Poupart
Borealis AI
{rishab.goal, mehran.kazemi, marcus.brubaker, pascal.poupart}@borealisai.com

To capture the temporal aspect of the facts, KG edges
are typically associated with a timestamp or time interval;
e.g., (Mary, Liked, God Father, 1995). However, KG embedding approaches have been mostly designed for static
KGs ignoring the temporal aspect. Recent work has shown
a substantial boost in performance by extending these approaches to utilize time (Dasgupta, Ray, and Talukdar 2018;
Ma, Tresp, and Daxberger 2018; Garcı́a-Durán, Dumančić,
and Niepert 2018). The proposed extensions are mainly
through computing a hidden representation for each timestamp and extending the score functions to utilize timestamp
representations as well as entity and relation representations.
In this paper, we develop models for temporal KG completion (TKGC) based on an intuitive assumption: to provide
a score for, e.g., (Mary, Liked, God Father, 1995), one needs
to know Mary’s and God Father’s features on 1995; providing a score based on their current features may be misleading. That is because Mary’s personality and the sentiment
towards God Father may have been quite different on 1995
as compared to now. Consequently, learning a static representation for each entity – as is done by existing approaches
– may be sub-optimal as such a representation only captures
the entity features at the current time, or an aggregation of
entity features during time.
To provide entity features at any given time, we deﬁne
entity embedding as a function which takes an entity and a
timestamp as input and provides a hidden representation for
the entity at that time. Inspired by diachronic word embeddings, we call our proposed embedding diachronic embedding (DE). DE is model-agnostic: any static KG embedding
model can be potentially extended to TKGC by leveraging
DE. We prove that combining DE with SimplE (Kazemi and
Poole 2018b) results in a fully expressive model for TKGC.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst TKGC model
with a proof of fully expressiveness. We show the merit of
our model on subsets of ICEWS (Boschee et al. 2015) and
GDELT (Leetaru and Schrodt 2013) datasets.

Abstract
Knowledge graphs (KGs) typically contain temporal facts indicating relationships among entities at different times. Due
to their incompleteness, several approaches have been proposed to infer new facts for a KG based on the existing ones–
a problem known as KG completion. KG embedding approaches have proved effective for KG completion, however,
they have been developed mostly for static KGs. Developing
temporal KG embedding models is an increasingly important
problem. In this paper, we build novel models for temporal
KG completion through equipping static models with a diachronic entity embedding function which provides the characteristics of entities at any point in time. This is in contrast to
the existing temporal KG embedding approaches where only
static entity features are provided. The proposed embedding
function is model-agnostic and can be potentially combined
with any static model. We prove that combining it with SimplE, a recent model for static KG embedding, results in a fully
expressive model for temporal KG completion. Our experiments indicate the superiority of our proposal compared to
existing baselines.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are directed graphs where nodes
represent entities and (labeled) edges represent the types
of relationships among entities. Each edge in a KG corresponds to a fact and can be represented as a tuple such as
(Mary, Liked, God Father) where Mary and God Father are
called the head and tail entities respectively and Liked is a
relation. An important problem, known as KG completion,
is to infer new facts from a KG based on the existing ones.
This problem has been extensively studied for static KGs
(see (Nickel et al. 2016) for a summary). KG embedding approaches have offered state-of-the-art results for KG completion on several benchmarks. These approaches map each
entity and each relation type to a hidden representation and
compute a score for each tuple by applying a score function
to these representations. Different approaches differ in how
they map the entities and relation types to hidden representations and in their score functions.

Background and Notation
Notation: Lower-case letters denote scalars, bold lowercase letters denote vectors, and bold upper-case letters denote matrices. z [n] represents the nth element of a vec-

∗

Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3988

