The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Revisiting Probability Distribution
Assumptions for Information Theoretic Feature Selection
Yuan Sun,1 * Wei Wang,2 Michael Kirley,2 Xiaodong Li,1 Jeffrey Chan1
1

RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia
1
{yuan.sun, xiaodong.li, jeffrey.chan}@rmit.edu.au,
2
weiw8@student.unimelb.edu.au, mkirley@unimelb.edu.au
2

In the era of big data, we are often confronted with machine learning tasks involving a large number of features (Li
et al. 2017; Bolón-Canedo, Sánchez-Maroño, and AlonsoBetanzos 2015). In many real-world applications, it is possible to improve the predictability, interpretability and training
efﬁciency of speciﬁc machine learning models, including
deep learning models (Gao, Ver Steeg, and Galstyan 2016;
Cai et al. 2018), by selecting a subset of features for processing and/or by removing the irrelevant or redundant features
(Bagherzadeh-Khiabani et al. 2016; Pascoal et al. 2012;
Saeys, Inza, and Larrañaga 2007).
Feature selection methods can be divided into three categories: wrapper, embedded and ﬁlter (Guyon and Elisseeff
2003; Xue et al. 2016; Vergara and Estévez 2014). Wrapper

and embedded methods rely on a classiﬁer, using classiﬁcation accuracy as an indication of feature quality. In contrast,
ﬁlter methods employ an objective function, which measures
the relevance between features and class labels. Perhaps the
most widely used information-theoretic measure for objective function design is based on Mutual Information (MI)
(see (Vergara and Estévez 2014; Li et al. 2017) for a comprehensive review and (Brown et al. 2012) for a unifying framework). However, it is a signiﬁcant challenge to estimate
high-dimensional MI from a limited number of samples
(Wolpert and Wolf 1995; Brown et al. 2012). Consequently,
many information-theoretic methods use low-dimensional
MI approximations which necessitates speciﬁc assumptions
to be made on the probability distribution of features (Balagani and Phoha 2010; Brown et al. 2012; Vinh et al. 2016;
Gao, Ver Steeg, and Galstyan 2016). An alternative way to
design objective function for feature selection is based on
a lower bound on MI called Variational Information (VI)
(Gao, Ver Steeg, and Galstyan 2016). This lower bound is
tractable to compute if a variational probability distribution
of features is carefully chosen, and it becomes exact when
the variational distribution matches the real distribution of
features. Thus the assumption on variational probability distribution of features also has a key role in VI based methods.
In this paper, we re-examine the assumptions on the probability distributions of features used in typical informationtheoretic feature selection methods. Our overarching research goal is to answer the following questions: “Which
distribution of features in a given information-theoretic feature selection method is both realistic and tractable to compute?” and “How do particular assumptions related to
the probability distribution of features impact on classiﬁcation accuracy?” Importantly, we will show that many
information-theoretic feature selection methods in literature
differ only in their underlying assumptions on feature distributions. Speciﬁcally, we systematically analyze three sets of
assumptions on feature distributions: Feature Independence
Distribution (FID), Geometric Mean Distribution (GMD)
and Arithmetic Mean Distribution (AMD).

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• The FID assumption has been widely accepted in literature. However we show that the probability density estimation under the FID assumption has certain bias.

Abstract
Feature selection has been shown to be beneﬁcial for many
data mining and machine learning tasks, especially for big
data analytics. Mutual Information (MI) is a well-known
information-theoretic approach used to evaluate the relevance
of feature subsets and class labels. However, estimating highdimensional MI poses signiﬁcant challenges. Consequently, a
great deal of research has focused on using low-order MI approximations or computing a lower bound on MI called Variational Information (VI). These methods often require certain
assumptions made on the probability distributions of features
such that these distributions are realistic yet tractable to compute. In this paper, we reveal two sets of distribution assumptions underlying many MI and VI based methods: Feature Independence Distribution and Geometric Mean Distribution.
We systematically analyze their strengths and weaknesses
and propose a logical extension called Arithmetic Mean Distribution, which leads to an unbiased and normalised estimation of probability densities. We conduct detailed empirical
studies across a suite of 29 real-world classiﬁcation problems
and illustrate improved prediction accuracy of our methods
based on the identiﬁcation of more informative features, thus
providing support for our theoretical ﬁndings.

1

Introduction

5908

