The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Patchy Image Structure Classiﬁcation Using Multi-Orientation Region Transform
∗

Xiaohan Yu,1,2 Yang Zhao,1,2 Yongsheng Gao,1, Shengwu Xiong,2,* Xiaohui Yuan2
1

School of Engineering and Built Environment, Grifﬁth University, Australia
School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Technology, China
{xiaohan.yu2, yang.zhao4}@grifﬁthuni.edu.au, yongsheng.gao@grifﬁth.edu.au, {xiongsw, yuanxiaohui}@whut.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Exterior contour and interior structure are both vital features
for classifying objects. However, most of the existing methods consider exterior contour feature and internal structure
feature separately, and thus fail to function when classifying
patchy image structures that have similar contours and ﬂexible structures. To address above limitations, this paper proposes a novel Multi-Orientation Region Transform (MORT),
which can effectively characterize both contour and structure features simultaneously, for patchy image structure classiﬁcation. MORT is performed over multiple orientation regions at multiple scales to effectively integrate patchy features, and thus enables a better description of the shape in
a coarse-to-ﬁne manner. Moreover, the proposed MORT can
be extended to combine with the deep convolutional neural
network techniques, for further enhancement of classiﬁcation accuracy. Very encouraging experimental results on the
challenging ultra-ﬁne-grained cultivar recognition task, insect
wing recognition task, and large variation butterﬂy recognition task are obtained, which demonstrate the effectiveness
and superiority of the proposed MORT over the state-of-theart methods in classifying patchy image structures. Our code
and three patchy image structure datasets are available at:
https://github.com/XiaohanYu-GU/MReT2019.

Soybean Cultivar # 72

Soybean Cultivar # 80

Soybean Cultivar # 82

Butterfly Species # 1

Butterfly Species # 2

Butterfly Species # 3

Insect Species # 6

Insect Species # 7

Insect Species # 25

Figure 1: An example of illustrating the small inter-class differences (compare horizontally) in comparison to their intraclass variations (compare vertically) in patchy image structure classiﬁcation.
due to the fact that target shapes from various categories may
have highly similar contours and ﬂexible interior structures.
In the past decades, many researchers have devoted their
efforts to addressing this challenging problem. Existing approaches can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories: (1)
handcrafted feature based methods and (2) deep convolutional neural network (ConvNets) techniques. Most approaches in the ﬁrst category focus on developing effective
feature representations of the shape contour (Ling and Jacobs 2007; Srivastava et al. 2011; Hu et al. 2012; Wang et
al. 2012; Wang and Gao 2014; Demisse, Aouada, and Ottersten 2018). Although these methods achieved promising
performance in general shape classiﬁcation tasks, they may
fail to function when the contour of objects among different
classes are highly similar, such as the patchy image structures shown in Fig. 1.
Alternatively, one may consider applying ConvNets techniques, which are currently driving advances in image classiﬁcation tasks, to the patchy image structure classiﬁcation.

Introduction
Patchy image structure classiﬁcation is a fundamental yet
signiﬁcant research topic in computer vision and artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) research communities. Recent years have
witnessed great progress of patchy image structure classiﬁcation in applications highly related to AI agriculture and
smart farming, such as plant branch structure classiﬁcation
(Isokane et al. 2018), leaf vein classiﬁcation (Larese et al.
2014), and insect wing vein classiﬁcation (Martineau et al.
2017). Patchy image structures characterize topological information of both exterior contours and interior structures
from a target shape, which are important for shape modeling
and classiﬁcation. An example of illustrating the patchy image structures is shown in Fig. 1. Unfortunately, classifying
such patchy image structures remains as an open problem,
∗

Corresponding authors
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12741

