The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Do Subsampled Newton Methods Work for High-Dimensional Data?
Xiang Li,1 Shusen Wang,2 Zhihua Zhang1,3
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology, USA
3
National Engineering Lab for Big Data Analysis and Applications, Peking University, China
smslixiang@pku.edu.cn, shusen.wang@stevens.edu, zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn
2

the objective function and its gradient. Accelerated gradient descent (Golub and Van Loan 2012; Nesterov 2013;
Bubeck 2014), stochastic gradient descent (Robbins and
Monro 1985), and their variants (Lin, Mairal, and Harchaoui
2015; Johnson and Zhang 2013; Schmidt, LeRoux, and Bach
2017) are the most popular approaches in practice due to
their simplicity and low per-iteration time complexity. As
pointed out by (Xu, Roosta Khorasan, and Mahoney 2017),
the downsides of ﬁrst-order methods are the slow convergence to high-precision and the sensitivity to condition number and hyper-parameters.
Second-order methods use not only the gradient but also
information in the Hessian matrix in their update. In particular, the Newton’s method, a canonical second-order method,
has the following update rule:

Abstract
Subsampled Newton methods approximate Hessian matrices
through subsampling techniques to alleviate the per-iteration
cost. Previous results require Ω(d) samples to approximate
Hessians, where d is the dimension of data points, making
it less practical for high-dimensional data. The situation is
deteriorated when d is comparably as large as the number
of data points n, which requires to take the whole dataset
into account, making subsampling not useful. This paper
theoretically justiﬁes the effectiveness of subsampled Newton methods on strongly convex empirical risk minimization
with high dimensional data. Speciﬁcally, we provably require
 γ ) samples for approximating the Hessian matrices,
only Θ(d
eff
where dγeff is the γ-ridge leverage and can be much smaller
than d as long as nγ  1. Our theories work for three types
of Newton methods: subsampled Netwon, distributed Newton, and proximal Newton.

wt+1 = wt − αt H−1
t gt ,

where the gradient gt = ∇F (wt ) is the ﬁrst derivative of
the objective function at wt , the Hessian Ht = ∇2 F (wt )
is the second derivative at wt , and αt is the step size and
can be safely set as one under certain conditions. In comparison to the ﬁrst-order methods, Newton’s method requires
fewer iterations, is more robust to hyper-parameter settings,
and is guaranteed super-linear local convergence to highprecision. However, Newton’s method is slow in practice,
as in each iteration many Hessian-vector products are required to solve the inverse problem Ht p = gt . QuasiNewton methods use information from the history of updates
to construct Hessian (Dennis and Moré 1977). Well-known
works include Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS)
(Wright and Nocedal 1999) and its limited memory version
(L-BFGS) (Liu and Nocedal 1989), but their convergence
rates are not comparable to Newton’s method.
Recent works proposed the Sub-Sampled Newton (SSN)
methods for reducing the per-iteration complexity of the
Newton’s method (Byrd et al. 2011; Pilanci and Wainwright 2015; Roosta-Khorasani and Mahoney 2016; Pilanci and Wainwright 2017; Xu, Roosta Khorasan, and Mahoney 2017; Berahas, Bollapragada, and Nocedal 2017;
Ye, Luo, and Zhang 2017). For the particular problem (2),
the Hessian matrix can be written in the form

Introduction
Let x1 , ..., xn ∈ Rd be the feature vectors, li (·) is a convex,
smooth, and twice differentiable loss function; the response
yi is captured by li . In this paper, we study the following
optimization problem:
1
γ
lj (xTj w) + w22 + r(w)
n j=1
2
n

min G(w) :=

w∈Rd

(1)

where r(·) is a non-smooth convex function. We ﬁrst consider the simple case where r(·) is zero, i.e.,
1
γ
lj (xTj w) + w22 .
n j=1
2
n

min F (w) :=

w∈Rd

(3)

(2)

Problem (2) arises frequently in machining learning (Shalev
Shwartz and Ben David 2014). For example, in logistic regression, lj (xTj w) = log(1 + exp(−yj xTj w)), and in linear
regression, lj (xTj w) = 12 (xTj w−yj )2 . Then we consider the
more general case where r is non-zero, e.g., LASSO (Tibshirani 1996) and elastic net (Zou and Hastie 2005).
To solve (2), many ﬁrst order methods have been proposed. First-order methods solely exploit information in
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Ht =
4723

1 T
At At + γId ,
n

(4)

