The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Three-Level Optimization Model for Nonlinearly Separable Clustering
Liang Bai, Jiye Liang∗
Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education,
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, China
{bailiang, ljy}@sxu.edu.cn

arbitrary shapes. Therefore, nonlinearly separable clustering
is one of most popular and widely studied clustering problems.

Abstract
Due to the complex structure of the real-world data, nonlinearly separable clustering is one of popular and widely
studied clustering problems. Currently, various types of algorithms, such as kernel k-means, spectral clustering and density clustering, have been developed to solve this problem.
However, it is difﬁcult for them to balance the efﬁciency and
effectiveness of clustering, which limits their real applications. To get rid of the deﬁciency, we propose a three-level optimization model for nonlinearly separable clustering which
divides the clustering problem into three sub-problems: a linearly separable clustering on the object set, a nonlinearly separable clustering on the cluster set and an ensemble clustering on the partition set. An iterative algorithm is proposed to
solve the optimization problem. The proposed algorithm can
use low computational cost to effectively recognize nonlinearly separable clusters. The performance of this algorithm
has been studied on synthetical and real data sets. Comparisons with other nonlinearly separable clustering algorithms
illustrate the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

Currently, several types of nonlinearly separable clustering approaches have been developed, such as connectivitybased, density-based, kernel-based, and multi-centers approaches. Connectivity-based approaches connect some
nearby objects to form clusters based on their distance.
The representative methods include different linkage algorithms (Witten and Frank 2005). Density-based approaches
mainly use the density-connectivity between objects to recognize different shaped clusters. The representative methods
include DBSCAN (Ester et al. 1996) and DP (Rodriguez
and Laio 2014). Compared to the connectivity-based approaches, the density-based approaches fully consider noise
and border points. The kernel-based approaches use a kernel
function, which is an appropriate nonlinear mapping from
the original (input) space to a higher dimensional feature
space, to extract non-linearly separable clusters. The representative methods include kernel k-means (Scholkopf et al.
1998), spectral clustering (Shi and Malik 2000; Ng, Jordan,
and Weiss 2001) and mean-shift (Cheng 1995). Unlike the
k-means algorithm, the above approaches need use pairwise
similarities of objects to determine the membership of each
object to clusters. Since they do not select a center but use all
the objects to represent a cluster, they can recognize nonlinearly separable clusters. However, they need expensive time
or space costs, e.g., computing and operating the similarity matrix, which are not suitable for large-scale data sets.
The multi-centers approaches (Liu, Jiang, and Kot 2009;
Liang et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2013) use multiple centers
to represent a nonlinearly separable cluster. They are in between cluster representations of single center and all the objects. The advantage of replacing data objects with multiple
centers to describe a cluster is to avoid the over ﬁtting of the
clustering result. The disadvantage is that the performance
of their clustering is very sensitive to the center selection.
However, obtaining high-quality centers usually needs highcomputational cost.

Introduction
Clustering is an important problem in statistical multivariate analysis, data mining and machine learning (Jain 2008).
The goal of clustering is to group a set of objects into clusters so that the objects in the same cluster are highly similar
but remarkably dissimilar with objects in other clusters. To
tackle this problem, various types of clustering algorithms
have been developed in the literature (e.g., (Aggarwal and
Reddy 2014) and references therein). According to the data
distribution of clusters, data clustering problem can be categorized into two types: linearly separable clustering and
nonlinearly separable clustering (Wang and Lai 2016). The
k-means (MacQueen 1967) algorithm is a representative of
linearly separable clustering algorithms. It is well-known for
its low computational cost. However, it can not recognize
nonlinearly separable clusters. Due to the complex structure
of the real-world data, the data set to be partitioned may contain at least one cluster with concave boundaries or even of

Currently, various types of accelerating approaches have
been proposed to enhance the scalability of nonlinearlyseparable clustering algorithms, such as index-based clus-

∗

Jiye Liang is the corresponding author: ljy@sxu.edu.cn
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3211

