The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On Identifying Hashtags in Disaster Twitter Data
Jishnu Ray Chowdhury,1 Cornelia Caragea,1 Doina Caragea2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
2
Department of Computer Science, Kansas State University
{jraych2, cornelia}@uic.edu, dcaragea@ksu.edu

what’s relevant and what’s not and what’s actionable is very,
very difﬁcult” (Silverman 2017).
Examples of tweets that illustrate the diverse ways in
which people use hashtags to highlight information during disasters are shown in Figure 1. Speciﬁcally, the userprovided hashtags, when available, are shown in blue color
in the ﬁgure. As can be seen, the ﬁrst two tweets do not have
any user-provided hashtags. The third tweet has a general
disaster-name hashtag, #HurricaneIrma. While this hashtag
is useful in recognizing that the tweet was posted during
Hurricane Irma, it is not useful in identifying situational
awareness (e.g., damage, power loss, blocked street) or the
type of disaster response requests. The fourth tweet, which
explicitly reports damage, has disaster-name, location, and
weather as hashtags, but no speciﬁc hashtag about damage.
Finally, the ﬁfth tweet is at the other extreme, in that it has
a large number of hashtags (speciﬁcally, 11), some of them
representing lexical variations of the same base word.
These examples show not only that people use a variety of
ways to hashtag tweets or that they may not understand or
know how to hashtag tweets, but also that the user-provided
hashtags tend to be either too general or too speciﬁc. Moreover, these examples are not exceptions, but rather they are
representatives for a disaster-related tweet dataset. An analysis of a large corpus of tweets that was used in this work
revealed that most of the hashtags in a disaster-related tweet
corpus simply represent disaster names and locations, and
that approximately half of the tweets do not have any hashtags at all. Thus, ﬁltering based on user-provided hashtags is
not helpful for disaster response or people on the ground to
quickly ﬁnd relevant information. Similarly, ﬁltering tweets
during disasters based on keyword match is not expected to
work well since keywords can be ambiguous and can lead to
noisy results, e.g., a search for the keyword “Harvey” will
retrieve tweets about the hurricane, but also about people
whose name is “Harvey.”
To address these limitations of tweet retrieval based on
user-provided hashtags or keywords, we envision a system
that learns to identify relevant and topically informative
hashtags and extract them directly from the content of the
disaster tweets, capturing three main elements in a tweet:
1) disaster name; 2) location; and 3) situational awareness

Abstract
Tweet hashtags have the potential to improve the search
for information during disaster events. However, there is a
large number of disaster-related tweets that do not have any
user-provided hashtags. Moreover, only a small number of
tweets that contain actionable hashtags are useful for disaster response. To facilitate progress on automatic identiﬁcation (or extraction) of disaster hashtags for Twitter data,
we construct a unique dataset of disaster-related tweets annotated with hashtags useful for ﬁltering actionable information. Using this dataset, we further investigate Long ShortTerm Memory-based models within a Multi-Task Learning
framework. The best performing model achieves an F1-score
as high as 92.22%. The dataset, code, and other resources are
available on Github.1

Introduction
During disasters, affected individuals often turn to social
media platforms, such as Twitter and Facebook, to ﬁnd
the latest updates from government and response organizations, to request help or to post information that can
be used to enhance situational awareness (Rhodan 2017;
MacMillan 2017; Frej 2018; Lapin 2018). Nonetheless, the
value of the information posted on social media platforms
during disasters is highly unexploited, in part due to the lack
of tools that can help ﬁlter relevant, informative, and actionable messages (Villegas, Martinez, and Krause 2018).
According to Villegas, Martinez, and Krause (2018), more
than 5, 200 rescue requests made on social media were
missed by the ﬁrst responders, while about 46% of the
critical damage information posted on social media during
Harvey Hurricane was missed by FEMA in their original
damage estimates (that is almost half of the total costs of
$125 billion estimated for this hurricane).2 As an ofﬁcial
explained: “It’s very labor intensive to watch [social media] and because of the thousand different ways people can
hashtag something or keyword something, trying to sort out
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/JRC1995/Tweet-Disaster-Keyphrase
2
https://coast.noaa.gov/states/fast-facts/hurricane-costs.html
498

