The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multimodal Interaction-Aware Trajectory Prediction in Crowded Space
Xiaodan Shi,1 Xiaowei Shao,1,2 Zipei Fan,1 Renhe Jiang,1,3 Haoran Zhang,1
Zhiling Guo,1 Guangming Wu,1 Wei Yuan,1 Ryosuke Shibasaki1
1

2

Center for Spatial Information Science, the University of Tokyo
Earth Observation Data Integration and Fusion Research Initiative, the University of Tokyo
3
Information Technology Center, the University of Tokyo
{shixiaodan, jiangrh, zhang ronan, guozhilingcc, huster-wgm, shiba}@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp,
{shaoxw, fanzipei, miloyw}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract

Accurate human path forecasting in complex and crowded
scenarios is critical for collision avoidance of autonomous
driving and social robots navigation. It still remains as a challenging problem because of dynamic human interaction and
intrinsic multimodality of human motion. Given the observation, there is a rich set of plausible ways for an agent to
walk through the circumstance. To address those issues, we
propose a spatio-temporal model that can aggregate the information from socially interacting agents and capture the multimodality of the motion patterns. We use mixture density functions to describe the human path and predict the distribution
of future paths with explicit density. To integrate more factors
to model interacting people, we further introduce a coordinate
transformation to represent the relative motion between people. Extensive experiments over several trajectory prediction
benchmarks demonstrate that our method is able to forecast
various plausible futures in complex scenarios and achieves
state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1: Our goal is to forecast human paths in complex
and crowded scenarios. It is not suitable to predict a single path in complex scenes. To this end, we jointly model
past trajectories and spatially interacting people, and map
the distribution of possible futures which can generate multiple plausible trajectories.
1. Personal planning. People always plan the route with a
goal in mind. In most cases, people walk smoothly, and we
can gain insights into their possible destinations given a sequence of observations of their past trajectories. Sometimes,
pedestrians suddenly change their walking directions. These
cases are unpredictable based on ”normal” past trajectories.
2. Dynamic social interactions. People walking through
crowds obey rules of social etiquette (Robicquet et al. 2016),
such as keeping a safe distance from others, which can not
be quantiﬁed. The rules of social manners vary based on the
number of people involved. Human can efﬁciently integrate
all their interactions and adjust their path accordingly. But it
is not easy for machines. Moreover, individual preferences
also effect how people react to others.
3. Multimodality of human motion forecasting. It is not
rational to forecast a single path in complex circumstances.
Given the observation of past trajectories, multiple plausible
future trajectories can be forecasted. But most research only
have one feasible prediction result output.
The existing works are designed to address one or more
of the above challenges. They focus mainly on modeling
social interactions (Pellegrini et al. 2009; Yamaguchi et al.
2011; Alahi et al. 2016; Vemula, Muelling, and Oh 2018;
Fernando et al. 2018b). The ﬁrst attempt to model social interactions can be traced back to the handcrafted featuresbased traditional method (Helbing and Molnar 1995). The

Introduction
Forecasting the future trajectories of dynamic pedestrians through crowded scenarios is highly valuable for autonomous driving and social robots navigation (Kitani et al.
2012; Karasev et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2017;
Su et al. 2017). This prediction problem is about generating
a sequence of future locations based on observations of past
trajectories of certain length. Pedestrian trajectory prediction has beneﬁted from the introduction of Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), by
which long-term time dependencies can be captured, which
has renewed interest in trajectory prediction in recent years.
Although there are many promising publications on the subject, problems related to trajectory prediction are far from
being solved due to the complexities and uncertainties of
human crowds.
When human navigate though crowded scenarios, they
negotiate all interactions with others in their own style and
yield right of way towards the destination. Trajectory prediction has never been an easy task due to the properties of
human motion:
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11982

