The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

OOGAN: Disentangling GAN with
One-Hot Sampling and Orthogonal Regularization
Bingchen Liu, Yizhe Zhu, Zuohui Fu, Gerard de Melo, Ahmed Elgammal
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
{bingchen.liu, yizhe.zhu, zuohui.fu, gerard.demelo}@rutgers.edu, elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu

Recent popular methods to tackle the unsupervised disentangling problem are based on GANs (Goodfellow et al.
2014) or VAEs (Kingma and Welling 2014), and many instantiations of these (Saxe et al. 2018; Gabrié et al. 2018;
Alemi et al. 2018; Louizos, Ullrich, and Welling 2017) draw
on information-theoretical concepts (Shannon 1948). InfoGAN (Chen et al. 2016) seeks to maximize a Mutual Information (MI) lower bound between a sampled conditional
vector and the generated data, with the expectation that the
generator and discriminator will disentangle the vector with
respect to the true underlying factors. InfoGAN-CR (Lin et
al. 2019) introduces a contrastive regularizer focusing on
forming more desirable latent traversals. In contrast, VAEbased approaches (Esmaeili et al. 2019) attempt to optimize
a Total Correlation (TC) (Watanabe 1960) objective imposed on the inferred latent vector, which achieves disentanglement by encouraging inter-dimensional independence in
the latent vector.

Abstract
Exploring the potential of GANs for unsupervised disentanglement learning, this paper proposes a novel GAN-based
disentanglement framework with One-Hot Sampling and Orthogonal Regularization (OOGAN). While previous works
mostly attempt to tackle disentanglement learning through
VAE and seek to implicitly minimize the Total Correlation
(TC) objective with various sorts of approximation methods, we show that GANs have a natural advantage in disentangling with an alternating latent variable (noise) sampling
method that is straightforward and robust. Furthermore, we
provide a brand-new perspective on designing the structure of
the generator and discriminator, demonstrating that a minor
structural change and an orthogonal regularization on model
weights entails an improved disentanglement. Instead of experimenting on simple toy datasets, we conduct experiments
on higher-resolution images and show that OOGAN greatly
pushes the boundary of unsupervised disentanglement.

1

Introduction

TC-based VAE models have proven fruitful in disentangling. However, there is usually a trade-off between the degree of achievable disentanglement and the data-generating
ability of VAE (Kim and Mnih 2018). In practice, VAE
struggles signiﬁcantly when trained on higher-resolution images due to its restricted generative power. Furthermore, it
only approximates the TC. Since both the marginal distribution of the learned latent representation and the product
of its marginals are intractable in VAE, optimization process is usually implicit and complicated. In contrast, with
rapid advances (Zhang et al. 2019; Miyato et al. 2018;
Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019), GANs have become more stable to train, and their generative power has become unparalleled on high-resolution images. Nonetheless, less attention
has been paid to GANs in unsupervised disentanglement
learning. Accordingly, we propose OOGAN, a novel framework based on GANs that can explicitly disentangle while
generating high-quality images. The framework’s components can readily be adopted to other GAN models.

A disentangled representation is one that separates the underlying factors of variation such that each dimension exclusively encodes one semantic feature (Bengio, Courville,
and Vincent 2013; Kim and Mnih 2018). While the beneﬁts
of the learned representation for downstream tasks is questioned by Locatello et al. (2019), disentangling a Deep Neural Network (DNN) is still of great value in terms of humancontrollable data generation, data manipulation and postprocessing, and increasing the model interpretability. Moreover, disentanglement learning in an unsupervised manner
can effectively highlight the biased generative factors from
a given dataset, and yield appealing data-analytic properties. In this work, we focus on unsupervised disentanglement learning using GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014) on
images, which brings substantial advances in tasks such
as semantic image understanding and generation, and potentially aids research on zero-shot learning and reinforcement learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013; Higgins et al. 2017; Lample et al. 2017; Elgammal et al. 2018;
Elhoseiny et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2018; 2019a; 2019b;
Kim et al. 2018).

Unlike in VAEs, where a latent vector has to be inferred,
in GANs, noise is actively sampled as the latent vector during training. We exploit this property to enable OOGAN to
directly learn a disentangled latent vector, by means of onehot vectors as latent representations to enforce exclusivity

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4836

