The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Model and Reinforcement Learning for Markov Games with Risk Preferences
Wenjie Huang,1,2 Pham Viet Hai,3 William B. Haskell4
1

Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data (SRIBD)
Institute for Data and Decision Analysis, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Department of Computer Science, School of Computing, National University of Singapore (NUS)
4
Supply Chain and Operations Management Area, Krannert School of Management, Purdue University
wenjiehuang@cuhk.edu.cn, dcspvh@nus.edu.sg, whaskell@purdue.edu
2

risk measures (Ruszczyński 2010; Shen, Stannat, and Obermayer 2013) to the multi-agent setting. Our model speciﬁcally addresses the risk from the stochastic state transitions
as well as the risk from the randomized strategies of the
other players. The traditional multilinear formulation approach (Kardes, Ordonez, and Hall 2011; Aghassi and Bertsimas 2006) for computing equilibria in robust games fails in
our settings, because our model has an intrinsic bilinear term
due to the product of probabilities (the state transitions and
mixed strategies) which leads to computational intractability. Thus, it is necessary to develop an alternative algorithm
to compute equilibria.

Abstract
We motivate and propose a new model for non-cooperative
Markov game which considers the interactions of risk-aware
players. This model characterizes the time-consistent dynamic “risk” from both stochastic state transitions (inherent to the game) and randomized mixed strategies (due to
all other players). An appropriate risk-aware equilibrium
concept is proposed and the existence of such equilibria
is demonstrated in stationary strategies by an application
of Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem. We further propose a
simulation-based Q-learning type algorithm for risk-aware
equilibrium computation. This algorithm works with a special form of minimax risk measures which can naturally be
written as saddle-point stochastic optimization problems, and
covers many widely investigated risk measures. Finally, the
almost sure convergence of this simulation-based algorithm
to an equilibrium is demonstrated under some mild conditions. Our numerical experiments on a two player queuing
game validate the properties of our model and algorithm, and
demonstrate their worth and applicability in real life competitive decision-making.

Risk Preferences Expected utility theory (von Neumann
and Morgenstern 1944; Engelmann and Steiner 2007;
Thomas 2016) is a highly developed framework for modeling risk preferences. Yet, some experiments (Levin 2006)
show that real human behavior may violate the independence axiom of expected utility theory. Risk measures (as
developed in (Artzner et al. 1999; Ruszczynski and Shapiro
2006)) do not require the independence axiom and have favorable properties for optimization.
In the dynamic setting, (Ruszczyński 2010; Shen, Stannat, and Obermayer 2013) develop the class of Markov
(a.k.a. dynamic/nested/iterated) risk measures and establish
their connection to time-consistency. This class of risk measures is notable for its recursive formulation, which leads
to dynamic programming equations. Practical computational
schemes for solving large-scale risk-aware MDPs have been
proposed, for instance, Q-learning type algorithms (Jiang
and Powell 2017; Huang and Haskell 2017; 2018) and
simulation-based ﬁtted value iteration (Yu, Haskell, and Xu
2018).

Introduction
Markov games (a.k.a stochastic games) generalize Markov
decision processes (MDPs) to the multi-player setting. In
the classical case, each player seeks to minimize his expected costs. In a corresponding equilibrium, no player can
decrease his expected costs by changing his strategy. We often want to compute equilibria to predict the outcome of the
game and understand the behavior of the players.
In this paper, we directly account for the risk preferences
of the players in a Markov game. Informally, risk aversion
is at least weakly preferring a gamble with smaller variance when payoffs are the same. Risk-averse players give
more attention to low probability but high cost events compared to risk-neutral players. Models for the risk preferences
of a single agent are well established (Artzner et al. 1999;
Ruszczynski and Shapiro 2006) for the static problems and
(Ruszczyński 2010; Shen, Stannat, and Obermayer 2013)
for the dynamic case. We extend these ideas to general
sum Markov games and extend the framework of Markov

Risk-sensitive/Robust Games Risk-sensitive games have
already been considered in (Klompstra 2000; Ghosh, Kumar,
and Pal 2016; Basu and Ghosh 2017; Bäuerle and Rieder
2017; Jose and Zhuang 2018). Risk-sensitivity refers to the
speciﬁc certainty equivalent (1/θ) ln (E [exp (θ X)]) where
θ > 0 is the risk sensitivity parameter. (Ghosh, Kumar, and
Pal 2016; Basu and Ghosh 2017) focus on zero-sum risksensitive games under continuous time setting.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2022

