The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Match on Graph for Fashion Compatibility Modeling
Xun Yang,1∗ Xiaoyu Du,1,2* Meng Wang3
1

2

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
School of Information and Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology
3
Department of Computer Science, Hefei University of Technology
xunyang@nus.edu.sg, duxy.me@gmail.com, wangmeng@hfut.edu.cn

cially the young women/girls spend much time every day to
think about the question of “What to wear” or “how to match
the clothes for a good outﬁt”. If there is an application that
could help people to choose the suitable clothes, it would be
very popular. That is the importance of this fashion matching
task. The keys to solving the fashion matching problem are
1) how to represent fashion items, and 2) how to effectively
model the item-item compatibility relationship.
Mainstream methods have primarily leveraged the visual
appearance and side information of fashion items to learn visual compatibility in a pairwise learning manner (Veit et al.
2015; McAuley et al. 2015; He, Packer, and McAuley 2016;
Chen and He 2018; Song et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2019a).
A common assumption behind them is that a pair of compatible items should stay close with each other in a latent space. Then, the matching problem is solved under
a similarity learning paradigm: ﬁrst collect a corpus of
matched/unmatched item pairs, and then train a parameterized similarity function that enforces matched pairs have a
higher similarity score than unmatched pairs.
Despite promising progress, existing solutions mainly exploit dyadic co-occurrence (Song et al. 2017; Han et al.
2017) or co-purchase (Veit et al. 2015; He, Packer, and
McAuley 2016) information of fashion items to model the
item-item matching interaction. They forgo utilizing rich
extra-connectivity information between compatible items,
such as historical user-item interactions (e.g., rating) and
item-item substitutable relationships (e.g. also-viewed information), thus being insufﬁcient to capture the rich yet
complicated matching patterns. We argue that the extraconnectivity information afﬁliated with items, which characterizes the structural properties of items in a real-world
e-commerce environment, should be carefully taken into
account to enhance the compatibility relationship modeling and item representation learning. For example, if users
frequently co-purchase two fashion items from two complementary categories (e.g., dresses and sandals), the two
items may have strong compatibility. If users view a fashion item and ﬁnally buy another one, the two substitutable
items may be compatible to the same fashion items. Such
extra-connectivities can effectively complement to the compatibility relationships.
Recent efforts have tried to alleviate the above-mentioned
limitations by reﬁning pairwise compatibility with category-

Abstract
Understanding the mix-and-match relationships between
items receives increasing attention in the fashion industry.
Existing methods have primarily learned visual compatibility from dyadic co-occurrence or co-purchase information of
items to model the item-item matching interaction. Despite
effectiveness, rich extra-connectivities between compatible
items, e.g., user-item interactions and item-item substitutable
relationships, which characterize the structural properties of
items, have been largely ignored. This paper presents a graphbased fashion matching framework named Deep Relational
Embedding Propagation (DREP), aiming to inject the extraconnectivities between items into the pairwise compatibility
modeling. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst build a multi-relational itemitem-user graph which encodes diverse item-item and useritem relationships. Then we compute structured representations of items by an attentive relational embedding propagation rule that performs messages propagation along edges
of the relational graph. This leads to expressive modeling
of higher-order connectivity between items and also better
representation of fashion items. Finally, we predict pairwise
compatibility based on a compatibility metric learning module. Extensive experiments show that DREP can signiﬁcantly
improve the performance of state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Fashion has been an integral part of our everyday life. It is
about not only what people wear, but also a mirror of people’s attitude toward life, reﬂections of culture, arts, and even
economics. It is a rapidly growing industry and has motivated various research topics in the fashion domain, such
as recommendation (Yu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2017),
search (Liu et al. 2016), and dialogue systems (Liao et al.
2018), etc.
In this paper, we focus on a newly-emerged topic of Mixand-match-based fashion recommendation (Han et al. 2017;
Vasileva et al. 2018; Song et al. 2017), for which the goal is
to predict the matching score between fashion items from
different categories. For example, when a user views/buys
an item (e.g., a red ﬂoral maxi dress), the system matches
it with the compatible fashion items from a complementary category (e.g., high-heel sandals). Most people, espe∗

Co-ﬁrst author. These authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
287

