The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reliable Multilabel Classiﬁcation: Prediction with Partial Abstention
Vu-Linh Nguyen, Eyke Hüllermeier
Heinz Nixdorf Institute and Department of Computer Science, Paderborn University, Germany
vu.linh.nguyen@uni-paderborn.de, eyke@upb.de

set of class labels (Dembczyński et al. 2012; Tsoumakas,
Katakis, and Vlahavas 2009; Zhang and Zhou 2014). In this
paper, we study an extension of the setting of MLC, in which
the learner is allowed to partially abstain from a prediction,
that is, to deliver predictions on some but not necessarily all
class labels (or, more generally, to refuse committing to a
single complete prediction). Although MLC has been studied extensively in the machine learning literature in the recent past, there is surprisingly little work on MLC with abstention so far—a notable exception is (Pillai, Fumera, and
Roli 2013), to which we will return in the Section 7.
Prediction with abstention is typically realized as a twostage approach. First, the learner delivers a prediction that
provides information about its uncertainty. Then, taking this
uncertainty into account, a decision is made about whether
or not to predict, or on which parts. In binary classiﬁcation,
for example, a typical approach is to produce probabilistic
predictions and to abstain whenever the probability is close
to 1/2. We adopt a similar approach, in which we rely on probabilistic MLC, i.e., probabilistic predictions of labelings.
In the next section, we brieﬂy recall the setting of multilabel classiﬁcation. The generalization toward MLC with
(partial) abstention is then introduced and formalized in Section 3. Instantiations of the setting of MLC with abstention
for the speciﬁc cases of the Hamming loss, rank loss, and
F-measure are studied in Sections 4–6, respectively. Related
work is discussed in Section 7. Finally, experimental results
are presented in Section 8, prior to concluding the paper in
Section 9. All formal results in this paper (propositions, remarks, corollaries) are stated without proofs, which are deferred to the supplementary material.

Abstract
In contrast to conventional (single-label) classiﬁcation, the
setting of multilabel classiﬁcation (MLC) allows an instance
to belong to several classes simultaneously. Thus, instead of
selecting a single class label, predictions take the form of a
subset of all labels. In this paper, we study an extension of
the setting of MLC, in which the learner is allowed to partially abstain from a prediction, that is, to deliver predictions
on some but not necessarily all class labels. We propose a
formalization of MLC with abstention in terms of a generalized loss minimization problem and present ﬁrst results for
the case of the Hamming loss, rank loss, and F-measure, both
theoretical and experimental.

1

Introduction

In statistics and machine learning, classiﬁcation with abstention, also known as classiﬁcation with a reject option, is an extension of the standard setting of classiﬁcation, in which the learner is allowed to refuse a prediction
for a given query instance; research on this setting dates
back to early work by Chow (1970) and Hellman (1970)
and remains to be an important topic till today, most notably for binary classiﬁcation (Bartlett and Wegkamp 2008;
Cortes, DeSalvo, and Mohri 2016; Franc and Prusa 2019;
Grandvalet et al. 2008). For the learner, the main reason
to abstain is a lack of certainty about the corresponding
outcome—refusing or at least deferring a decision might
then be better than taking a high risk of a wrong decision.
Nowadays, there are many machine learning problems in
which complex, structured predictions are sought (instead
of scalar values, like in classiﬁcation and regression). For
such problems, the idea of abstaining from a prediction can
be generalized toward partial abstention: Instead of predicting the entire structure, the learner predicts only parts of it,
namely those for which it is certain enough. This idea has already been realized, e.g., for the case where predictions are
rankings (Cheng et al. 2010; 2012).
Another important example is multilabel classiﬁcation
(MLC), in which an outcome associated with an instance is
a labeling in the form of a subset of an underlying reference

2

Multilabel Classiﬁcation

In this section, we describe the MLC problem in more detail and formalize it within a probabilistic setting. Along the
way, we introduce the notation used throughout the paper.
Let X denote an instance space, and let L = {λ1 , . . . , λm }
be a ﬁnite set of class labels. We assume that an instance
x ∈ X is (probabilistically) associated with a subset of labels Λ = Λ(x) ∈ 2L ; this subset is often called the set of
relevant labels, while the complement L \ Λ is considered as
irrelevant for x. We identify a set Λ of relevant labels with a

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5264

