The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Differentiable Meta-Learning Model for Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Pinzhuo Tian,1 Zhangkai Wu,1 Lei Qi,1 Lei Wang,2 Yinghuan Shi,1∗ Yang Gao1
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong, Australia
{tianpinzhuo, qilei.cs}@gmail.com wuzhangkai@smail.nju.edu.cn leiw@uow.edu.au {syh, gaoy}@nju.edu.cn
2

7UDGLWLRQDO0HWKRG

Abstract

7UDLQLQJ
LPDJH

To address the annotation scarcity issue in some cases of
semantic segmentation, there have been a few attempts to
develop the segmentation model in the few-shot learning
paradigm. However, most existing methods only focus on the
traditional 1-way segmentation setting (i.e., one image only
contains a single object). This is far away from practical semantic segmentation tasks where the K-way setting (K > 1)
is usually required by performing the accurate multi-object
segmentation. To deal with this issue, we formulate the fewshot semantic segmentation task as a learning-based pixel
classiﬁcation problem, and propose a novel framework called
MetaSegNet based on meta-learning. In MetaSegNet, an architecture of embedding module consisting of the global and
local feature branches is developed to extract the appropriate
meta-knowledge for the few-shot segmentation. Moreover,
we incorporate a linear model into MetaSegNet as a base
learner to directly predict the label of each pixel for the multiobject segmentation. Furthermore, our MetaSegNet can be
trained by the episodic training mechanism in an end-to-end
manner from scratch. Experiments on two popular semantic
segmentation datasets, i.e., PASCAL VOC and COCO, reveal
the effectiveness of the proposed MetaSegNet in the K-way
few-shot semantic segmentation task.

ZD\
VHJPHQWDWLRQ

7UDLQLQJ
+DUGWR LPDJH
$GDSW

&RPSDULVRQRU
0DWFKLQJ
0RGHO

.ZD\
VHPDQWLF
VHJPHQWDWLRQ
0XOWLREMHFW
PDWFKLQJRU
FRPSDULVRQ
SUREOHP

"

7HVW
LPDJH

7HVW
LPDJH

2XU0HWKRG
7UDLQLQJ
LPDJH

7HVW
LPDJH

&ODVVLILFDWLRQ
0RGHO

ZD\
VHJPHQWDWLRQ

7UDLQLQJ
(DV\WR LPDJH
$GDSW

7HVW
LPDJH

&ODVVLILFDWLRQ
0RGHO

.ZD\
VHPDQWLF
VHJPHQWDWLRQ

Figure 1: Comparison between our framework and traditional methods. The traditional methods use comparison or
matching model in the 1-way segmentation task to measure
the similarity between training and test image, which is hard
to extend to K-way semantic segmentation task. Differently,
our method leverages learning-based model to classify the
pixels in the test image for K-way semantic segmentation.
Levine 2017), and obtain incredible success in the classiﬁcation task. However, there are only a few methods that
attempt to develop few-shot learning algorithms for a more
difﬁcult task (e.g., semantic segmentation).
Most existing methods for few-shot semantic segmentation usually introduce the extra knowledge to acquire abundant prior knowledge to help the few-shot learning. However, they still suffer from several limitations as:

Introduction
Recently, deep learning has made signiﬁcant breakthroughs
in many applications (e.g., image classiﬁcation (He et al.
2016), object detection (Girshick 2015) and semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015)). However,
its main challenge is that a large amount of labeled data is
usually required to train deep models, which is impractical
in real-world applications. Meanwhile, the accurate labeling
is extremely laborious and expensive, particularly for pixelwise annotation (e.g., semantic segmentation) and 3-D delineation (e.g., medical tissue labeling). Therefore, few-shot
learning has recently drawn an increasing interest in the machine learning community, which can aid deep models to
effectively learn knowledge from a few samples.
Formally, few-shot learning aims to achieve good performance on the new classes with only a few labeled training data. Recently, most existing methods employ the metalearning algorithm to deal with the few-shot learning problem (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Finn, Abbeel, and

1. Distribution divergence. Most existing methods require
their model to be pre-trained on ImageNet (Deng et al.
2009) as a prerequisite. However, the distribution of these
images in the few-shot segmentation task might be very
different from ImageNet.
2. Hard to extend. The existing methods usually solve the
few-shot segmentation by utilizing metric-learning methods to measure the one-to-one similarity between training and test images in the 1-way setting. However, these
methods cannot be directly adapted to measure multiobject similarity in the K-way setting.
3. Difﬁcult to train. These existing methods usually employ complex embedding models to learn feature representation for image comparison, which are hard to optimize. Thus, if we directly train them from scratch, they

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12087

