The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Incentive-Compatible Classiﬁcation∗
Yakov Babichenko, Oren Dean, Moshe Tennenholtz
Technion — Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

it is a dominant strategy in these situations to give a harsh
critique to all interactions. In this paper, we model the agents
and their interactions as a directed network and ask whether
it is possible to offer an incentive-compatible (IC) mechanism to select a subset which represents the top-rated (“worthy”) agents. We measure the quality of a mechanism as the
resemblance between the selected set of the mechanism and
the set of top-rated agents, in the worst case. We investigate
the relation between the quality of the best possible mechanism to two parameters: (i) the maximal number of reviews
a single agent can issue (the maximal out-degree in the network, denoted Δ), and (ii) the fastidiousness of the system
(the relative size of the selected set, denoted α).

Abstract
We investigate the possibility of an incentive-compatible
(IC, a.k.a. strategy-proof) mechanism for the classiﬁcation of
agents in a network according to their reviews of each other.
In the α-classiﬁcation problem we are interested in selecting
the top α fraction of users. We give upper bounds (impossibilities) and lower bounds (mechanisms) on the worst-case
coincidence between the classiﬁcation of an IC mechanism
and the ideal α-classiﬁcation.
We prove bounds which depend on α and on the maximal
number of reviews given by a single agent, Δ. Our results
show that it is harder to ﬁnd a good mechanism when α is
smaller and Δ is larger. In particular, if Δ is unbounded, then
the best mechanism is trivial (that is, it does not take into account the reviews). On the other hand, when Δ is sublinear in
the number of agents, we give a simple, natural mechanism,
with a coincidence ratio of α.

1

Our contribution
In this paper we investigate the existence of an αclassiﬁcation IC mechanism in weighted networks.
Weighted networks without any limitation were not considered before as a framework for selection mechanisms
((Kurokawa et al. 2015) considered only Δ-regular weighted
networks; the assumption of Δ-regularity somewhat simpliﬁes the optimisation criterion since in this case the
optimisation for average in-weights is equivalent to the optimisation for the sum of in-weights.). The most signiﬁcant
novelty of our model is the consideration of mechanisms
which classify the agents to “worthy” and “unworthy”, in
contrast to previous works which only considered k-subset
selection (k-selection) mechanisms. Our optimisation
criterion is the coincidence between the mechanism’s
classiﬁcation and the ideal classiﬁcation. The difference
from k-selection is two-fold. First, we do not know the exact
size of the set which we need to select. Second, we try to
select as many of the right (truly worthy) agents and not
the wrong agents regardless of how high their in-degree is;
this is very different from k-selection, which just looks for a
subset with high in-degree (even if it is completely disjoint
to the optimal subset).
We prove upper and lower bounds on the quality of the
best possible IC classiﬁcation mechanism. We chart the behaviour of these bounds as a function of Δ and α. We show
that as Δ grows (agents are allowed to review many others),
the possibility of an IC classiﬁcation mechanism narrows
down until for large values of Δ the best mechanism is one
of the two trivial mechanisms: select all the agents as wor-

Introduction

There are many situations in which peer agents have binary,
directed interactions with each other, and in which one side
can rate his experience from the interaction, or rather rate
the other agent. The following are just a few examples:
1. E-commerce sites in which buyers might also be sellers
(e.g., ebay.com, amazon.com).
2. Academic paper reviewers for a conference might themselves be authors of papers submitted to the same conference.
3. Employees in an organisation are sometime asked to ﬁll
out a sociometric overview of their fellow friends.
In all of the above examples, a coordinator/manager is classifying the agents in the system according to the reviews
they received. In the e-commerce example, the top-rated
sellers will appear higher and more frequently in search results; the academic conference will only accept a certain toprated portion of the papers. Employees with higher sociometric results have better chances at a promotion. A natural
problem arises—in order to maximize one’s relative rating,
∗

This project has received funding from the European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (grant agreement no 740435).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7055

