The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Beyond Digital Domain: Fooling Deep
Learning Based Recognition System in Physical World
Kaichen Yang,1 Tzungyu Tsai,2 Honggang Yu,1 Tsung-Yi Ho,2 Yier Jin1∗
1

University of Florida, USA
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
{bojanykc, honggang.yu}@uﬂ.edu, s107062519@m107.nthu.edu.tw, tyho@cs.nthu.edu.tw, yier.jin@ece.uﬂ.edu
2

2016a), DeepFool (Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard
2016) and C&W attack (Carlini and Wagner 2017) are representative algorithms to generate adversarial examples.
Current studies of generating adversarial examples in
computer vision ﬁeld mainly focus on directly manipulating
the pixels of the input images or videos in the digital domain.
This type of adversarial attack assumes that the adversary
has the ability to directly access and modify the input data
of the target model (e.g., video streaming). However, in more
realistic situations the DNN model is just one component of
the entire system, and the input data of the DNN model is in
charge by other components such as video surveillance system. In these cases the adversary may not access the digital
inputs. Instead, a more realistic way for the adversary to generate adversarial examples is altering the objects physically
outside the system.
Many challenges emerge when the adversary tries to
generate physical adversarial examples against object detection models. First, current attacking algorithms (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Papernot et al. 2016a;
Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016; Carlini and
Wagner 2017) are effective in fooling image classiﬁer with
single digital frame, but they may not deceive object detectors within the entire video frames where angles, distances
and backgrounds keep on changing. In fact, it has already
been shown that physical adversarial examples designed to
fool an image classiﬁer do not continuously fool a standard
object detector (Lu et al. 2017), which suggests that constructing an physical adversarial example physically that can
fool a detector under different environments might be hard.
Second, the adversary can not directly add perturbations to
anywhere in the streaming images, instead the adversary can
only affect a small portion of the images by placing the adversarial object in the environment. When the adversarial
objects are re-taken by the cameras, camera lens are also
unable to capture full colors of the adversarial examples due
to the various illumination conditions and the limitations of
the lens itself.
Recently some works (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2018; Eykholt et al. 2018; Athalye et al. 2018; Sharif
et al. 2016) tried to extend adversarial attacks to physical
domain by generating adversarial examples that survive in
various physical conditions. In the domain of object detection, some prior works (Song et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018;

Abstract
Adversarial examples that can fool deep neural network
(DNN) models in computer vision present a growing threat.
The current methods of launching adversarial attacks concentrate on attacking image classiﬁers by adding noise to digital inputs. The problem of attacking object detection models
and adversarial attacks in physical world are rarely touched.
Some prior works are proposed to launch physical adversarial
attack against object detection models, but limited by certain
aspects. In this paper, we propose a novel physical adversarial attack targeting object detection models. Instead of simply printing images, we manufacture real metal objects that
could achieve the adversarial effect. In both indoor and outdoor experiments we show our physical adversarial objects
can fool widely applied object detection models including
SSD, YOLO and Faster R-CNN in various environments. We
also test our attack in a variety of commercial platforms for
object detection and demonstrate that our attack is still valid
on these platforms. Consider the potential defense mechanisms our adversarial objects may encounter, we conduct a
series of experiments to evaluate the effect of existing defense
methods on our physical attack.

1

Introdection

Though deep learning is recognized as a promising way
in processing a wide range of computer vision tasks, recent works (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014; Papernot et al. 2016a; Moosavi-Dezfooli,
Fawzi, and Frossard 2016; Carlini and Wagner 2017) have
showed that deep learning models are vulnerable to deliberately crafted inputs known as adversarial examples. Researchers revealed the fact that adding small but intentionally selected perturbations to the original inputs can lead
the target deep learning models to wrong decisions. Beyond the existence in image classiﬁcation area (Szegedy
et al. 2013), adversarial examples are also found in DNN
models applied for other applications such as object detection (Xie et al. 2017), intrusion detection (Yang et al. 2018)
and voice recognition (Yuan et al. 2018). Fast gradient sign
method (FGSM) (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014),
Jacobian-based saliency map attack (JSMA) (Papernot et al.
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1088

