The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Importance-Aware Learning for Neural Headline Editing
Qingyang Wu,1 Lei Li,2 Hao Zhou,2 Ying Zeng,2 Zhou Yu,1
1

University of California, Davis, 2 ByteDance,
{wilwu, joyu}@ucdavis.edu, {lileilab,zhouhao.nlp,zengying.ss}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Many social media news writers are not professionally
trained. Therefore, social media platforms have to hire professional editors to adjust amateur headlines to attract more
readers. We propose to automate this headline editing process
through neural network models to provide more immediate
writing support for these social media news writers. To train
such a neural headline editing model, we collected a dataset
which contains articles with original headlines and professionally edited headlines. However, it is expensive to collect a
large number of professionally edited headlines. To solve this
low-resource problem, we design an encoder-decoder model
which leverages large scale pre-trained language models. We
further improve the pre-trained model’s quality by introducing a headline generation task as an intermediate task before
the headline editing task. Also, we propose Self ImportanceAware (SIA) loss to address the different levels of editing
in the dataset by down-weighting the importance of easily
classiﬁed tokens and sentences. With the help of Pre-training,
Adaptation, and SIA, the model learns to generate headlines
in the professional editor’s style. Experimental results show
that our method signiﬁcantly improves the quality of headline
editing comparing against previous methods.

Figure 1: An example from a professional editor. The editor rewrites the original headline. A standard sequence-tosequence model cannot produce a satisfactory result.

read them. For those writers, an automatic headline editing
tool can be handy. But the task of headline editing is different from existing headline generation approaches. Headline generation only requires an article body to generate a
headline, whereas headline editing requires an original headline as an additional input. Because no existing dataset contains both original headlines and professionally edited headlines, we construct a dataset for the headline editing task. We
did not crowd-source the data collection since the headlines
have to be written by professional editors to ensure quality. Therefore, we collaborate with several professional editors to create the headline editing dataset. Due to the limited
number of professional editors, we only manage to collect
20,994 news articles with professionally edited headlines.
We will elaborate on details of this dataset in the Dataset
section.
However, such a carefully-collected dataset does not have
enough training data to build a competent neural headline editing model. Low-resource is a common challenge in
training deep neural networks. In most cases, we can never
have enough training data. Many existing studies on headline generation (Murao et al. 2019; Ayana et al. 2017) are
data-hungry and cannot generate satisfactory results in real
applications. Low resource also leads to text degeneration,
such as repetition. Table 1 shows an example in the dataset
and the headline generated from the standard sequence-tosequence (Seq2seq) model. The generated headline here has
very poor quality and contains a repetition. Also, notice that
neural editor models (Guu et al. 2018) that only need a small

Introduction
For most social media, headlines are often the ﬁrst and only
impression to attract readers, and people determine whether
to read the article or not based on an instant scan of it. In
other words, a good headline will result in many more views.
With more views, the writer also receives more commission
of advertising revenue from the social media platform. To
catch the eyes of readers, the headlines have to be as intriguing as possible. Sometimes, a headline has no choice but to
be a “click-bait.” Large media operations usually hire professional editors to edit headlines. These professional editors ﬁx different types of problems that may happen in a
headline, including grammatical errors, vague topics, lousy
sentence structure, or just simply unattractive headlines. After editing, those well-polished headlines typically receive
more attention from social network readers.
However, individual writers cannot afford to hire professional editors. Even if their articles contain exciting content, if their headlines are not attractive, people will not
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9282

