The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Data Programming Using Continuous and Quality-Guided Labeling Functions
Oishik Chatterjee

Ganesh Ramakrishnan

Sunita Sarawagi

Department of CSE
IIT Bombay, India
oishik@cse.iitb.ac.in

Department of CSE
IIT Bombay, India
ganesh@cse.iitb.ac.in

Department of CSE
IIT Bombay, India
sunita@iitb.ac.in

(E1 , E2 ). A LF can assign +1 to indicate that the spouse relation is true for the candidate pair (E1 ,E2 ), -1 to mean that
no spouse relation, and 0 to mean that the LF in unable to
assert anything for this example. Speciﬁcally for the spouse
relation extraction task, Table 1 lists six LFs.
In isolation, each LF may neither be always correct nor
complete. LFs may also produce conﬂicting labels. For the
purpose of illustration, consider a text snippet ‘Michelle
Obama is the mother of Malia and Sasha and the wife of
Barack Obama’. For the candidate pair (‘Michelle Obama’,
’Barack Obama’), LF1 and LF4 in Table 1 assign a label 1
whereas LF2 assigns the label -1.
Ratner et al. (2016) presented a generative model for consensus on the noisy and conﬂicting labels assigned by the
discrete LFs to determine probability of the correct labels.
Labels thus obtained could be used for training any supervised model/classiﬁer and evaluated on a test set. In this paper, we present two signiﬁcant extensions of the above data
programming paradigm.
First, the user provided set of LFs might not be complete
in their discrete forms. LF1 through LF3 in Table 1 that look
for words in various hand-crafted dictionaries, may have
incomplete dictionaries. A more comprehensive alternative
could be to design continuous valued LFs that return scores
derived from soft match between words in the sentence and
the dictionary. As an example, for LF1 through LF3, the
soft match could be obtained based on cosine similarity of
pre-trained word embedding vectors (Mikolov et al. 2013)
of a word in the dictionary with a word in the sentence. This
could enable an LF to provide a continuous class-speciﬁc
score to the model, instead of a hard class label (when
triggered). In Table 2, we list a continuous LF corresponding to each LF from Table 1. Such continuous LFs
can expand the scope of matching to semantically similar
words beyond the pre-speciﬁed words in the dictionary. For
example: in the sentence 1) <Allison>, 27, and
<Ricky>, 34, wed on Saturday surrounded
by friends., the word ’wed’ is semantically similar to
’married’ and would be detected by our continuous LF but
missed by the discrete ones in Table 1.
More generally across applications, human experts are
very often able to identify real-valued scores that correlate
strongly with the label but ﬁnd it difﬁcult to discretize that
score into a hard label. More examples of such scores in-

Abstract
Scarcity of labeled data is a bottleneck for supervised learning models. A paradigm that has evolved for dealing with this
problem is data programming. An existing data programming
paradigm allows human supervision to be provided as a set of
discrete labeling functions (LF) that output possibly noisy labels to input instances and a generative model for consolidating the weak labels. We enhance and generalize this paradigm
by supporting functions that output a continuous score (instead of a hard label) that noisily correlates with labels. We
show across ﬁve applications that continuous LFs are more
natural to program and lead to improved recall. We also show
that accuracy of existing generative models is unstable with
respect to initialization, training epochs, and learning rates.
We give control to the data programmer to guide the training
process by providing intuitive quality guides with each LF.
We propose an elegant method of incorporating these guides
into the generative model. Our overall method, called CAGE,
makes the data programming paradigm more reliable than
other tricks based on initialization, sign-penalties, or softaccuracy constraints.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning systems require large amounts of
labelled data. For many applications, such labelled data is
created by getting humans to explicitly label each training
example. A problem of perpetual interest in machine learning is reducing the tedium of such human supervision via
techniques like active learning, crowd-labeling, distant supervision, and semi-supervised learning. A limitation of all
these methods is that supervision is restricted to the level of
individual examples.
A recently proposed (Ratner et al. 2016) paradigm is that
of Data Programming. In this paradigm, humans provide
several labeling functions written in any high-level programming language. Each labeling function (LF) takes as input,
an example and either attaches a label to it or backs off. We
illustrate such LFs on one of the ﬁve tasks that we experimented with, viz., that of labeling mention of a pair of people names in a sentence as deﬁning the spouse relation or
not. The users construct heuristic patterns as LFs for identifying spouse relation in a sentence containing an entity pair
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3397

