The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AUC Optimization with a Reject Option
Song-Qing Shen, Bin-Bin Yang, Wei Gao∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
{shensq, yangbb, gaow}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Englehart, and Scheme 2018; Marinho et al. 2018). The basic idea is to abstain an uncertain instance with a lower cost
so as to avoid mis-classiﬁcation, and the cost is often more
acceptable in practice. Relevant research could be traced
back to Chow’s rule (Chow 1970), where the Bayes decision is provided to tradeoff the optimal error versus reject
rate. Most previous studies concern the reduction of classiﬁcation error, which is equivalent to the improvement of
predictive accuracy of classiﬁers.
Many mission-critical tasks are always accompanied with
class imbalance and cost sensitivity, where the number of
one class may overwhelm the others, and the minor class
receives primary interest with higher cost. For example, in
medical diagnosis, the number of healthy persons is much
larger than that of patients, whereas the cost of erroneously
diagnosing a patient as healthy may be much higher than
that of diagnosing a healthy person as a patient. The Area
Under the ROC Curve (or short for AUC) is preferable to
accuracy as an evaluation measure in diverse tasks such as
class-imbalance learning and cost-sensitive learning (Cortes
and Mohri 2004; Gao et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2018), and
various algorithm have been developed for AUC optimization (Freund et al. 2003; Zhao et al. 2011; Gao et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2018). However, it remains open for missioncritical tasks to take AUC into consideration.
This work tries to study AUC as an evaluation measure for
mission-critical tasks, and the main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose the framework of AUC optimization with a
reject option for mission-critical tasks, and present the
Bayes optimal solution. The optimal score function for
ranking and the reject function are also provided based on
the conditional probability of data distribution.
• From the Bayes optimal solution, we develop an online
algorithm for AUC optimization with a reject option by
using plug-in rule and convex surrogate loss, and learn the
score function and the reject function simultaneously. Our
algorithm is guaranteed theoretically with regret bounds.
• We ﬁnally present extensive empirical studies to verify
the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm by comparing
with state-of-the-art algorithm on AUC optimization and
classiﬁcation with a reject option.

Abstract
Making an erroneous decision may cause serious results in
diverse mission-critical tasks such as medical diagnosis and
bioinformatics. Previous work focuses on classiﬁcation with
a reject option, i.e., abstain rather than classify an instance
of low conﬁdence. Most mission-critical tasks are always accompanied with class imbalance and cost sensitivity, where
AUC has been shown a preferable measure than accuracy
in classiﬁcation. In this work, we propose the framework of
AUC optimization with a reject option, and the basic idea
is to withhold the decision of ranking a pair of positive and
negative instances with a lower cost, rather than mis-ranking.
We obtain the Bayes optimal solution for ranking, and learn
the reject function and score function for ranking, simultaneously. An online algorithm has been developed for AUC
optimization with a reject option, by considering the convex
relaxation and plug-in rule. We verify, both theoretically and
empirically, the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

Introduction
Making an erroneous decision may cause serious results
in many mission-critical tasks such as medical diagnostic
(Hamid et al. 2017), biometric veriﬁcation (Golfarelli, Maio,
and Malton 1997), myoelectric pattern-recognition control
(Robertson, Englehart, and Scheme 2018), and so on. For
example, in an electronic nose system, researchers may be
totally exposed to toxic or dangerous chemicals when the
system makes an incorrect prediction (Hatami and Chira
2013), and for a mobile robot, an imprecise localization may
bring about large deviation of navigation route (Marinho et
al. 2018). The mission-critical studies have received much
attention as machine learning techniques go to more real
applications (Hatami and Chira 2013; Hamid et al. 2017;
Robertson, Englehart, and Scheme 2018).
A classical solution for mission-critical tasks is to consider the classiﬁcation with a reject option, also known as
selective classiﬁcation (Golfarelli, Maio, and Malton 1997;
Bounsiar, Grall, and Beauseroy 2006; Bartlett and Wegkamp
2008; Grandvalet et al. 2009; Hamid et al. 2017; Robertson,
∗

This research is supported by NSFC(61921006, 61876078).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5684

