The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Crisis-DIAS: Towards Multimodal Damage
Analysis - Deployment, Challenges and Assessment
Mansi Agarwal,1∗ Maitree Leekha,1∗ Ramit Sawhney,2 Rajiv Ratn Shah3
1
Delhi Technological University, New Delhi, India
Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology, New Delhi, India
3
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, New Delhi, India
{mansiagarwal bt2k16, maitreeleekha bt2k16}@dtu.ac.in, ramits.co@nsit.net.in, rajivratn@iiitd.ac.in
2

pact of the disaster. This data is voluminous, and therefore,
there is a need of systems which can automatically identify
and highlight a social media post if it indicates severe damage, by analyzing the information present in different media
forms.
Challenges. One of the major challenges associated with
isolating the media content useful for crisis management
(Imran et al. 2015) is the sheer quantity of the social media posts which makes it difﬁcult to identify useful and actionable content in real-time. Therefore, there is a need for
automatic systems to identify the presence of damage and
analyze it, which could beneﬁt the emergency management
process.
While unimodal damage analysis frameworks are efﬁcient, they are not able to assess damage as effectively for
social media posts. Text and images are very likely interrelated (Vempala and Preoţiuc-Pietro 2019). Therefore, to
develop an effective system we must employ an interdisciplinary approach which can leverage data from different
media forms.
Another challenge to the design of emergency assessment
systems is how their complexity correlates with their ease
of deployment and scalability. A system should be able to
perform well in real-time and possess the responsiveness
needed to provide aid.
Contributions. Motivated by the cause of humanitarian aid
in times of disasters, we propose Crisis-DIAS, a novel endto-end gated multimodal framework that leverages textual
and visual cues from user-uploaded information on social
media. The system performs a twofold task of ﬁrst identifying whether a social media post indicates the presence of infrastructural damage, and further assesses the severity level.
It does so by extracting cues from text and image modalities, and then intelligently merging them by using attention
mechanism along with a gated framework to stitch the individual tasks together to serve as an end-to-end service.
Crisis-DIAS is responsive and simple, yet efﬁcient and
performs well in real-time multi task damage assessment.
Furthermore, we report an extensive comparative quantitative, quantitative and error analysis on a real-world dataset.
Our results show how Crisis-DIAS, by learning to combine
the best features of different modalities, improves over uni-

Abstract
In times of a disaster, the information available on social media can be useful for several humanitarian tasks as disseminating messages on social media is quick and easily accessible. Disaster damage assessment is inherently multi-modal,
yet most existing work on damage identiﬁcation has focused
solely on building generic classiﬁcation models that rely exclusively on text or image analysis of online social media
sessions (e.g., posts). Despite their empirical success, these
efforts ignore the multi-modal information manifested in social media data. Conventionally, when information from various modalities is presented together, it often exhibits complementary insights about the application domain and facilitates better learning performance. In this work, we present
Crisis-DIAS, a multi-modal sequential damage identiﬁcation,
and severity detection system. We aim to support disaster
management and aid in planning by analyzing and exploiting
the impact of linguistic cues on a unimodal visual system.
Through extensive qualitative, quantitative and theoretical
analysis on a real-world multi-modal social media dataset, we
show that the Crisis-DIAS framework is superior to the stateof-the-art damage assessment models in terms of bias, responsiveness, computational efﬁciency, and assessment performance.

1

Introduction

Context & Scope. Social media’s rapidly increasing ubiquity (Global-Digital-Report 2019) has made it one of the primary sources for a large multitude of users to engage in mass
discussions about disasters and the damage caused by crises
(Ahmad et al. 2019). A large number of domains, including
public health, economy, and politics (Chew and Eysenbach
2010) (Llorente et al. 2015) (Conover et al. 2013), utilize
this gold-mine of data to foster social media research. This
helps in analyzing the user’s perspective and understanding
how user-generated content enhances the user-authority relationship (Reuter and Kaufhold 2018). In times of crisis,
users upload a large amount of data in the form of text, images, video, audio, etc. which indicate the severity of the im∗
Both the authors contributed equally, and wish that they be
regarded as joint First Authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

346

