The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Open-World Learning for Radically Autonomous Agents
Pat Langley
Information Technology and Systems Division
Institute for Defense Analyses
4850 Mark Center Drive
Alexandria, VA 22311

volcanic vent, the agent may ﬁnd unexpected upward currents and new chemical reactions that degrade its batteries.
A fully autonomous system would realize these fall outside
its expertise and adapt rapidly enough to prevent disaster and
continue its mission. Such agents must respond to environments that change in ways unforseen by their designers.
In the next section, I deﬁne the task of open-world learning for radical autonomy and analyze some component abilities that would support it. After this, I propose a framework
for characterizing both environments and transformations of
them that can make agent expertise inadequate. Next, I discuss experimental studies of open-world learning, including promising testbeds, relevant variables, and candidate
hypotheses. The analysis draws ideas from the description
of DARPA’s SAIL-ON program (Senator, 2019), but it approaches the challenge from a complementary perspective.

Abstract
In this paper, I pose a new research challenge – to develop intelligent agents that exhibit radical autonomy by responding
to sudden, long-term changes in their environments. I illustrate this idea with examples, identify abilities that support
it, and argue that, although each ability has been studied in
isolation, they have not been combined into integrated systems. In addition, I propose a framework for characterizing
environments in which goal-directed physical agents operate,
along with specifying the ways in which those environments
can change over time. In closing, I outline some approaches
to the empirical study of such open-world learning.

1

Background and Motivation

Our society is increasingly reliant on autonomous physical
agents, from self-driving vehicles to planetary robots to military drones. These entities are capable of a broad range
of behaviors, from low-level perception and action to highlevel reasoning and planning. Despite many differences,
these autonomous systems share a dependence on accurate
models of the environment in which they operate. The AI
community has championed two paradigms for generating
such expertise – manual creation of knowledge bases (e.g.,
Waterman, 1986; Giarratano and Riley, 2018) and learning
from large training sets (e.g., Clark and Storkey, 2015). Both
approaches have been successful for certain classes of problems, but neither handles an inevitable hurdle for any ﬁelded
system: encountering situations where available expertise is
incomplete or incorrect. The solution is to develop radically
autonomous systems that can revise their expertise in such
novel cases. In this paper, I describe this challenge of openworld learning more fully and outline ways to address it.
Consider an unmanned underwater vehicle designed for
near-surface use in a coastal area. The autonomous agent
that controls the platform has reliable expertise for missions in this setting, but suppose it enters a new region with
different physical characteristics. Here, it may encounter
new types of rock formations, unfamiliar kelp that can foul
its propellers, and aggressive predators that may attack it.
The vehicle may enter an area where visibility is low and
where sonar reﬂections are distorted or where strong currents threaten to drag it off course. When it approaches a

2

Elements of Open-World Learning

The ﬁrst step in any computational research effort is to deﬁne the problem in terms of inputs and outputs. We can specify the task of open-world learning as:
• Given: An agent architecture that uses expertise to operate in a class of environmental situations;
• Given: Expertise that supports acceptable agent performance in this class of environments;
• Given: Limited experience with an environment in which
sudden, unannounced changes degrade performance;
• Find: When environmental changes occurred and what
revised expertise will support acceptable performance.
This formulation is abstract so it can apply to a wide range
of agents and situations; it does not commit to any particular performance task, but does assume that this involves
achieving goals or carrying out missions. Neither does the
statement indicate whether initial expertise is handcrafted or
learned, but does require that updates be more rapid than environmental change, and thus rely on limited observations.
If we assume that the environmental changes are reasonably stable, then they require some form of long-term learning rather than short-term adaptation. Because only some aspects of the environment will change and because expertise
is modular, induction from scratch would be inefﬁcient and
would slow the process unacceptably. Moreover, changes
may occur repeatedly and relearning from the ground up

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13539

