The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Instance Enhancement Batch
Normalization: An Adaptive Regulator of Batch Noise
Senwei Liang,1∗ Zhongzhan Huang,2∗ Mingfu Liang,3 Haizhao Yang1,4†

1

Purdue University, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Northwestern University, 4 National University of Singapore‡
{liang339, haizhao}@purdue.edu, hzz dedekinds@foxmail.com,
mingfuliang2020@u.northwestern.edu

Cai, Li, and Shen 2019) for faster convergence. Further, the
cause of noise and the usage of both SGD and BN are inseparable. Two kinds of noise effected in SGD and BN are
concerned,
Estimation Noise. In BN, the mean and variance of a
batch are used to estimate those of the whole dataset; in
SGD, the gradient of loss over a batch is applied to approximate that of the whole dataset. These estimation errors are
called estimation noise.
Batch Noise. In the forward pass, the features of an instance are incorporated with batch information via the normalization with batch statistics. The gradient of the loss of
an instance is disturbed by the batch information due to the
forward pass. These disturbances to an instance caused by
the batch information are referred to as batch noise.
The randomness of BN and SGD has been well-known
to improve the performance of deep networks. BN with the
estimation noise can work as an adaptive regularizer of parameters (Luo et al. 2019; Shekhovtsov and Flach 2019) and
the moderate noise can help escape bad local minima and
saddle points (Jin et al. 2017; Ge et al. 2015). There exists
extensive study on optimizing effectiveness via tuning batch
size. On the one hand, a small batch size will lead to a high
variance of statistics and weaken the training stability (Wu
and He 2018; Huang et al. 2019a). On the other hand, a large
batch size can reduce the estimation noise but it will incur a
sharp landscape of loss (Keskar et al. 2016) making the optimization problem more challenging. Therefore, appropriate
batch size is required to make a good balance. In practice, we
choose a relatively large batch size and the estimation noise
becomes moderate when the batch size is not small (Luo et
al. 2019). At that time, the batch noise turns into the primary
noise and our paper mainly discusses the batch noise.
The appropriate batch noise is necessary for a model. In
fact, too much noise may harm the performance of the network. In our paper, we design two kinds of additional noise
injected into the network to heighten the batch noise. Table 2, Table 3 and Fig. 4 show the performance of the BN
networks under the noise attack. The instability of training
and degradation of performance indicate that the BN networks can not resist augmented batch noise.
It remains a problem on how to infuse a model with the

Abstract
Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015) normalizes the features of an input image via statistics of a batch
of images and hence BN will bring the noise to the gradient of training loss. Previous works indicate that the noise
is important for the optimization and generalization of deep
neural networks, but too much noise will harm the performance of networks. In our paper, we offer a new point of
view that the self-attention mechanism can help to regulate
the noise by enhancing instance-speciﬁc information to obtain a better regularization effect. Therefore, we propose an
attention-based BN called Instance Enhancement Batch Normalization (IEBN) that recalibrates the information of each
channel by a simple linear transformation. IEBN has a good
capacity of regulating the batch noise and stabilizing network training to improve generalization even in the presence
of two kinds of noise attacks during training. Finally, IEBN
outperforms BN with only a light parameter increment in image classiﬁcation tasks under different network structures and
benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Mini-batch Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is an effective method in large-scale optimization by aggregating multiple samples at each iteration to reduce operation and memory costs. However, SGD is sensitive to the choice of hyperparameters and it may cause training instability (Luo,
Xiong, and Liu 2019). Normalization is one possible choice
to remedy SGD methods for better stability and generalization. Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015) is
a frequently-used method that normalizes the features of an
image using the mean and variance of the features of a batch
of images during training. Meanwhile, the tracked mean and
variance that estimate statistics of the whole dataset are used
for normalization during testing. It has been shown that BN
is an effective module to regularize parameters (Luo et al.
2019), stabilize training, smooth gradients (Santurkar et al.
2018), and enable a larger learning rate (Bjorck et al. 2018;
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
‡
Part of the work was done in Singapore
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4819

