The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Robust Adversarial Training Approach to Machine Reading Comprehension
Kai Liu,1∗ Xin Liu,2∗† An Yang,3† Jing Liu,1 Jinsong Su,2 Sujian Li,3 Qiaoqiao She1
1

Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
3
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, MOE, China
{liukai20, liujing46, sheqiaoqiao}@baidu.com, liuxin@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
{yangan, lisujian}@pku.edu.cn, jssu@xmu.edu.cn
2

been observed in (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014;
Zhang et al. 2017). As shown in Table 1, different types of
adversarial examples are all able to distract the MRC model.
Therefore, it is a critical problem to improve the robustness
of the existing MRC models.
To deal with the robustness issue mentioned above, researchers have made several attempts. Currently, the most
straightforward and effective approach is to augment the
training dataset with adversarial examples. (Wang and
Bansal 2018) augmented the training datasets by incorporating adversarial examples that ﬁt a certain type of attacks, and
trained an MRC model on the augmented dataset. This signiﬁcantly improves the model robustness under the known
certain types of attacks. However, such augmented datasets
are more capable of simulating the known types of adversarial examples, while ignoring other unobserved types. According to our observation, the augmented training dataset
of (Wang and Bansal 2018) helps defense adversarial attacks
proposed in (Jia and Liang 2017) well, but still fails on other
types of adversarial attacks (shown in the experiment section). Hence, we render that rule-based data augmentation
approach is not adequate since the types of adversarial examples are innumerable.
To deal with the above challenge, we propose a modeldriven approach to generate adversarial examples that can
attack given MRC model. Then, we retrain and strengthen
the MRC model by using the generated adversarial examples. The major beneﬁt of our approach is that it does not
require any speciﬁcation of adversarial attack types, and we
expect our model is more robust under general adversarial
attacks.
Speciﬁcally, our approach can be divided into three steps:
(1) We take an MRC model as a black-box and obtains a perturbation word embedding sequence for each instance sampled from the original dataset. The perturbation word embedding sequences are likely to cause the MRC model give
wrong predictions. (2) From each perturbation embedding
sequence, We sample a word sequence. Then, we take the
sampled sequence as a misleading text, and insert it into the
original instance to create an adversarial example. (3) We
retrain the MRC model on the original datasets with the adversarial examples generated from step 2. Then, repeat step

Abstract
Lacking robustness is a serious problem for Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) models. To alleviate this problem, one of the most promising ways is to augment the training dataset with sophisticated designed adversarial examples.
Generally, those examples are created by rules according to
the observed patterns of successful adversarial attacks. Since
the types of adversarial examples are innumerable, it is not
adequate to manually design and enrich training data to defend against all types of adversarial attacks. In this paper, we
propose a novel robust adversarial training approach to improve the robustness of MRC models in a more generic way.
Given an MRC model well-trained on the original dataset, our
approach dynamically generates adversarial examples based
on the parameters of current model and further trains the
model by using the generated examples in an iterative schedule. When applied to the state-of-the-art MRC models, including QANET, BERT and ERNIE2.0, our approach obtains
signiﬁcant and comprehensive improvements on 5 adversarial
datasets constructed in different ways, without sacriﬁcing the
performance on the original SQuAD development set. Moreover, when coupled with other data augmentation strategy,
our approach further boosts the overall performance on adversarial datasets and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) has become a
popular research topic in recent years. A lot of efforts have
been devoted to create better MRC models (Seo et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2018). Specifically, recent advances suggest that several MRC models
can achieve human parity on several datasets. However, (Jia
and Liang 2017) revealed that, these advanced models are
vulnerable to specially designed adversarial attacks. The
model performance signiﬁcantly decreases on the adversarial examples which consist of the original answer passages
and the generated misleading texts. Similar problems have
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
These authors contributed equally to this work.
†
This work was done while the author was doing internship at
Baidu Inc.
8392

