The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generative Continual Concept Learning
Mohammad Rostami

Soheil Kolouri

James McClelland

Praveen Pilly

University of Pennsylvania
mrostami@seas.upenn.edu

HRL Laboratories, LLC
skolouri@hrl.com

Stanford University
jlmcc@stanford.edu

HRL Laboratories, LLC
pkpilly@hrl.com

reason and despite emergence of behaviors similar to the nervous system in deep nets (Morgenstern, Rostami, and Purves
2014), adapting a deep neural network to learn a concept in a
new domain usually requires model retraining from scratch
which is conditioned on the availability of a large number
of labeled samples in the new domain. Moreover, training
deep networks in a continual learning setting is challenging
due to the phenomenon of “catastrophic forgetting” (French
1999). When a network is trained on sequential tasks, the
new learned knowledge usually interferes with past learned
knowledge, causing forgetting what has been learned before.
In this paper, we develop a computational model that is
able to expand and generalize learned concepts efﬁciently
to new domains using a few labeled data from the new domains. We rely on Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP)
paradigm (McClelland et al. 1986) for this purpose. Work on
semantic cognition within the PDP framework hypothesizes
that abstract semantic concepts are formed in higher level
layers of the nervous system (McClelland and Rogers 2003;
Saxe, McClelland, and Ganguli 2019). We model this hypothesis by assuming that the data points are mapped into an
embedding space, which captures existing concepts. To prevent catastrophic forgetting, we rely on the Complementary
Learning Systems (CLS) theory (McClelland, McNaughton,
and O’Reilly 1995). CLS theory hypothesizes that continual
lifelong learning ability of the nervous system is a result of a
dual long- and short-term memory system. The hippocampus
acts as short-term memory and encodes recent experiences
that are used to consolidate the knowledge in the neocortex as
long-term memory through ofﬂine experience replays during
sleep (Diekelmann and Born 2010). This suggests that if we
store suitable samples from past domains in a memory buffer,
like in the neocortex, these samples can be replayed along
with current task samples from recent-memory hippocampal
storage to train the base model jointly on the past and the
current experiences to tackle catastrophic forgetting.
More speciﬁcally, we model the latent embedding space
via responses of a hidden layer in a deep neural network. Our
idea is to stabilize and consolidate the data distribution in
this space, where domain-independent abstract concepts are
encoded. Doing so, new forms of concepts can be learned
efﬁciently by coupling them to their past learned forms in

Abstract
After learning a concept, humans are also able to continually
generalize their learned concepts to new domains by observing only a few labeled instances without any interference with
the past learned knowledge. In contrast, learning concepts
efﬁciently in a continual learning setting remains an open
challenge for current Artiﬁcial Intelligence algorithms as persistent model retraining is necessary. Inspired by the Parallel
Distributed Processing learning and the Complementary Learning Systems theories, we develop a computational model that
is able to expand its previously learned concepts efﬁciently to
new domains using a few labeled samples. We couple the new
form of a concept to its past learned forms in an embedding
space for effective continual learning. Doing so, a generative
distribution is learned such that it is shared across the tasks in
the embedding space and models the abstract concepts. This
procedure enables the model to generate pseudo-data points
to replay the past experience to tackle catastrophic forgetting.

Introduction
An important ability of humans is to continually build and
update abstract concepts. Humans develop and learn abstract concepts to characterize and communicate their perception and ideas (Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015).
These concepts often are evolved and expanded efﬁciently
as more experience about new domains is gained. Consider
for example, the concept of the printed character “4”. This
concept is often taught to represent the “natural number four”
in the mother tongue of elementary school students, e.g.,
English. Upon learning this concept, humans can efﬁciently
expand it by observing only a few samples from other related
domains, e.g., variety of hand written digits or printed digits
in other secondary languages. Despite remarkable progress
in Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) over the past decade, learning concepts efﬁciently in a way similar to humans remains
an unsolved challenge for AI. This is because the exceptional progress of AI is mostly driven by re-emergence of
deep neural networks. Since deep networks are trained in
an end-to-end supervised learning setting, access to labeled
data is necessary for learning any new distribution. For this
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5545

