The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Outlier Detection Ensemble with Embedded Feature Selection
Li Cheng,1 Yijie Wang,1 * Xinwang Liu, Bin Li1
1

Science and Technology on Parallel and Distributed Processing Laboratory
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, China
{chengli09, wangyijie, liuxinwang, libin16a}@nudt.edu.cn

method, with the aim to alleviate the negative effect brought
by noisy features. Many works on this regard have been developed. Early attempts often separate the feature searching
from the subsequent outlier scoring methods (Dang et al.
2014; Keller, Muller, and Bohm 2012; Noto, Brodley, and
Slonim 2012; Lazarevic and Kumar 2005). Consequently,
they may retain features that do not optimally serve for the
outlier scoring method and the performance of the subsequent outlier detection may be sufﬁciently biased. The recent work in (Pang et al. 2018a) involves the outlier scoring
methods when searching the relevant feature subset. It builds
the sequential ensembles to reﬁne feature selection and outlier scoring by iterative sparse modeling with outlier scores
as the pseudo target feature. Though demonstrating promising performance, we observe that the used outlier detector
and feature selection method are still performed in an iterative manner, which may lead to a suboptimal solution. A
question naturally raised is that can we take a step forward
to integrate outlier detection and feature selection into a joint
framework?
To address the aforementioned issue, this paper introduces a novel outlier detection ensemble framework with
embedded feature selection, termed ODEFS. Speciﬁcally,
ODEFS uses a given outlier scoring method to compute initial outlier scores of data objects, and then deﬁnes an outlier thresholding function to identify a set of outlier candidates. Considering that diverse outliers may have different discriminative feature subsets (Wang et al. 2019b;
Wang and Li 2006), ODEFS builds an ensemble framework
to obtain multiple feature subsets by bagging. It randomly
chooses examples from both outlier candidates and the unlabeled objects. They are fed into the objective function which
embeds feature selection into outlier detection to learn customized feature subsets for such outlier scoring methods.
The pairwise ranking loss is adopted in the objective to encourage outliers having higher ranks than the inliers.
Notice that outlier thresholding function may produce unreliable outlier candidates since the initial outlier scores are
computed using all the original features. To improve the reliability of the training set, we propose to adopt thresholded
self-paced learning to simultaneously implement example
selection and feature weighting. It selects ”easy” examples,
i.e., the ones with small loss values which are more likely
to be outliers, as the training set. After that, we design an

Abstract
Feature selection places an important role in improving the
performance of outlier detection, especially for noisy data.
Existing methods usually perform feature selection and outlier scoring separately, which would select feature subsets
that may not optimally serve for outlier detection, leading
to unsatisfying performance. In this paper, we propose an
outlier detection ensemble framework with embedded feature selection (ODEFS), to address this issue. Speciﬁcally,
for each random sub-sampling based learning component,
ODEFS uniﬁes feature selection and outlier detection into a
pairwise ranking formulation to learn feature subsets that are
tailored for the outlier detection method. Moreover, we adopt
the thresholded self-paced learning to simultaneously optimize feature selection and example selection, which is helpful
to improve the reliability of the training set. After that, we design an alternate algorithm with proved convergence to solve
the resultant optimization problem. In addition, we analyze
the generalization error bound of the proposed framework,
which provides theoretical guarantee on the method and insightful practical guidance. Comprehensive experimental results on 12 real-world datasets from diverse domains validate
the superiority of the proposed ODEFS.

Introduction
Outlier detection has been intensively studied and widely
used in various applications, such as medical diagnosis
(Wang et al. 2019a), fraud detection (Wang et al. 2018;
2013), and information security (Kang et al. 2019a), to name
just a few. In such real-world applications, it is not uncommon to see that there are many irrelevant or redundant features among data when performing outlier detection (Kang
et al. 2019b; Liu and Motoda 2007). It has been shown that
the performance of outlier detection can be signiﬁcantly improved by only using the informative feature subsets (Pang
et al. 2018a; Keller, Muller, and Bohm 2012). Therefore,
feature/subspace selection, which can help to remove noisy
features, places an important role in improving the performance of outlier detection, especially for noisy data.
Feature selection based outlier detection methods select
relevant feature subsets for the subsequent outlier detection
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3503

