The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Morphism-Based Learning for Structured Data
Kilho Shin,1 David Lawrence Shepard2
1

Gakushuin University, Japan, 2 UCLA Scholarly Innovation Lab., USA
yoshihiro.shin@gakushuin.ac.jp, shepard.david@gmail.com

that is, the greater, the more similar (e.g., (Lodhi et al. 2001;
Collins and Duffy 2001)), while an edit distance is a dissimilarity measure, that is, the smaller, the more similar (e.g.,
(Levenshtein 1966; Taı̈ 1979)).

Abstract
In mathematics, morphism is a term that indicates structurepreserving mappings between mathematical structures of the
same type. Linear transformations for linear spaces, homomorphisms for algebraic structures and continuous functions
for topological spaces are examples. Many data researched in
machine learning, on the other hand, can include mathematical structures in them. Strings are totally ordered sets, and
trees can be understood not only as graphs but also as partially ordered sets with respect to an ancestor-to-descendent
order and semigroups with respect to the binary operation to
determine nearest common ancestor. In this paper, we propose a generic and theoretic framework to investigate similarity of structured data through structure-preserving one-to-one
partial mappings, which we call morphisms. Through morphisms, useful and important methods studied in the literature can be abstracted into common concepts, although they
have been studied separately. When we study new structures
of data, we will be able to extend the legacy methods for the
purpose of studying the new structure, if we can deﬁne morphisms properly. Also, this view reveals hidden relations between methods known in the literature and can let us understand them more clearly. For example, we see that the center
star algorithm, which was originally developed to compute
sequential multiple alignments, can be abstracted so that it not
only applies to data structures other than strings but also can
be used to solve problems of pattern extraction. The methods that we study in this paper include edit distance, multiple
alignment, pattern extraction and kernel, but it is sure that
there exist much more methods that can be abstracted within
our framework.

1

In this paper, we will propose a novel abstract approach to
quantify the similarity of discrete and structured data. The
key ﬁnding that drove us was the fact that plural methods
of machine learning developed for data with different structures can be sometimes redeﬁned in a common manner using the concept of morphisms, which abstracts differences
in structures. In mathematics, morphism is a term that indicates structure-preserving mappings between mathematical
structures of the same type. Linear transformation for linear
spaces is a good example. In our approach, we view a datum
as a set of elements that is equipped with some structure (relation) among the elements, and deﬁne morphisms as one-toone partial set mappings that preserve the structure. On top
of the concept of morphisms, we deﬁne methods to investigate similarity of data in an abstract manner. The methods
in the literature that we study in this paper encompass edit
distances (Levenshtein 1966; Taı̈ 1979), sequential multiple
alignments (Gusﬁeld 1993), pattern extraction (Kao et al.
2007)) and kernels (Haussler 1999; Collins and Duffy 2001;
Lodhi et al. 2001; Kashima and Koyanagi 2002; Leslie et al.
2004), but the range where our framework is effective should
not be limited to them in principle.
The advantages of our theory include: (1) it bridges gaps
among important methodologies of machine learning, which
exist due to differences in data structures to study, and as a
consequence, a method that has proven effective for a type
of structures can be converted into a new method for other
types of structures; For example, we unify many different
deﬁnitions of edit distances for strings, trees and graphs into
a single common deﬁnition; (2) Abstraction by morphisms
can make a methodology developed to solve a particular
problem applicable to problems of different types; For example, we show that the center star algorithm, which was
developed to study sequential multiple alignments, can be
used to extract structural patterns of data with various structures; (3) It provides a generic framework to engineer novel
methods in a uniform manner; If we can mathematically deﬁne structures of data in the form of morphisms, abstract

Introduction

Similarity of data is the most fundamental concept of machine learning. For example, clustering is to make groups
of data so that members of each group are similar to one
another, and classiﬁcation is to predict unknown classes of
data based on their similarity to known data. Thus, quantitative evaluation of similarity of data by some means is an
imperative step of machine learning algorithms. In fact, various methods have been proposed in the literature to quantify similarity. For example, a kernel is a similarity measure,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5767

