The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Knowledge Distillation from Internal Representations
Gustavo Aguilar,1 Yuan Ling,2 Yu Zhang,2 Benjamin Yao,2 Xing Fan,2 Chenlei Guo2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Houston, Houston, USA
2
Alexa AI, Amazon, Seattle, USA
gaguilaralas@uh.edu, {yualing, yzzhan, banjamy, fanxing, guochenl}@amazon.com

(Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015), where a cumbersome
already-optimized model (i.e., the teacher) produces output
probabilities that are used to train a simpliﬁed model (i.e.,
the student). Unlike training with one-hot labels where the
classes are mutually exclusive, using a probability distribution provides more information about the similarities of the
samples, which is the key part of the teacher-student distillation.
Even though the student requires fewer parameters while
still performing similar to the teacher, recent work shows
the difﬁculty of distilling information from a huge model.
Mirzadeh et al. (2019) state that, when the gap in between
the teacher and the student is large (e.g., shallow vs. deep
neural networks), the student struggles to approximate the
teacher. They propose to use an intermediate teaching assistant (TA) model to distill the information from the teacher
and then use the TA model to distill information towards the
student. However, we argue that the abstraction captured by
a large teacher is only exposed through the output probabilities, which makes the internal knowledge from the teacher
(or the TA model) hard to infer by the student. This can potentially take the student to very different internal representations undermining the generalization capabilities initially
intended to be transferred from the teacher.
In this paper, we propose to apply KD to internal representations. Our approach allows the student to internally behave as the teacher by effectively transferring its linguistic
properties. We perform the distillation at different internal
points across the teacher, which allows the student to learn
and compress the abstraction in the hidden layers of the large
model systematically. By including internal representations,
we show that our student outperforms its homologous models trained on ground-truth labels, soft-labels, or both.

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is typically conducted by training a
small model (the student) to mimic a large and cumbersome
model (the teacher). The idea is to compress the knowledge
from the teacher by using its output probabilities as softlabels to optimize the student. However, when the teacher
is considerably large, there is no guarantee that the internal
knowledge of the teacher will be transferred into the student;
even if the student closely matches the soft-labels, its internal representations may be considerably different. This internal mismatch can undermine the generalization capabilities
originally intended to be transferred from the teacher to the
student. In this paper, we propose to distill the internal representations of a large model such as BERT into a simpliﬁed
version of it. We formulate two ways to distill such representations and various algorithms to conduct the distillation.
We experiment with datasets from the GLUE benchmark and
consistently show that adding knowledge distillation from internal representations is a more powerful method than only
using soft-label distillation.

Introduction
Transformer-based models have signiﬁcantly advanced the
ﬁeld of natural language processing by establishing new
state-of-the-art results in a large variety of tasks. Speciﬁcally, BERT (Devlin et al. 2018), GPT (Radford et al. 2018),
GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019), XLM (Lample and Conneau
2019), XLNet (Yang et al. 2019), and RoBERTa (Liu et al.
2019c) lead tasks such as text classiﬁcation, sentiment analysis, semantic role labeling, question answering, among others. However, most of the models have hundreds of millions
of parameters, which signiﬁcantly slows down the training
process and inference time. Besides, the large number of
parameters demands a lot of memory consumption, making such models hard to adopt in production environments
where computational resources are strictly limited.
Due to these limitations, many approaches have been proposed to reduce the size of the models while still providing
similar performance. One of the most effective techniques
is knowledge distillation (KD) in a teacher-student setting

Related Work
Knowledge distillation has become one of the most effective
and simple techniques to compress huge models into simpler
and faster models. The versatility of this framework has allowed the extension of KD to scenarios where a set of expert
models in different tasks distill their knowledge into a uniﬁed multi-task learning network (Clark et al. 2019b), as well
as the opposite scenario where an ensemble of multi-task

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7350

