The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarial Domain Adaptation with Domain Mixup
Minghao Xu,1 Jian Zhang,1 Bingbing Ni,1,2∗ Teng Li,3
Chengjie Wang,4 Qi Tian,5 Wenjun Zhang1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, 2 Huawei Hisilicon,
Anhui University, 4 Youtu Lab, Tencent, 5 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{xuminghao118, stevenash0822, nibingbing, zhangwenjun}@sjtu.edu.cn, nibingbing@hisilicon.com,
tenglwy@gmail.com, jasoncjwang@tencent.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com
3

Abstract
ࡹ૚

Recent works on domain adaptation reveal the effectiveness of adversarial learning on ﬁlling the discrepancy between source and target domains. However, two common limitations exist in current adversarial-learning-based methods.
First, samples from two domains alone are not sufﬁcient to
ensure domain-invariance at most part of latent space. Second, the domain discriminator involved in these methods can
only judge real or fake with the guidance of hard label, while
it is more reasonable to use soft scores to evaluate the generated images or features, i.e., to fully utilize the inter-domain
information. In this paper, we present adversarial domain
adaptation with domain mixup (DM-ADA), which guarantees domain-invariance in a more continuous latent space and
guides the domain discriminator in judging samples’ difference relative to source and target domains. Domain mixup is
jointly conducted on pixel and feature level to improve the robustness of models. Extensive experiments prove that the proposed approach can achieve superior performance on tasks
with various degrees of domain shift and data complexity.

Ͳ (target)

ࡹ૛

ɉൌͲǤͶ

Target
Domain

ɉൌͲǤ͸

 ǣ Flexible Margin

ͳ (source)

ɉ ǣ Mixup Ratio
Source
Domain

Figure 1: The mixup samples are obtained by linearly interpolating between source and target domain images with
mixup ratio λ. The domain discriminator learns how to output soft scores for generated images with the guidance of
mixup images and soft labels (mixup ratios). Also, a ﬂexible margin is learned through comparing mixup samples’
difference relative to two domains. (Best viewed in color.)

Introduction
In recent years, with the appearance of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), many classiﬁcation-based challenges
have been tackled with an extremely high accuracy. These
powerful CNN architectures, like AlexNet (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) and ResNet (He et al. 2016),
are capable of efﬁciently extracting low-level and high-level
features with the guidance of labeled data. However, because
of the existence of domain shift, models trained on a speciﬁc
domain suffer from poorer performance when transferred to
another domain. This problem is of vital signiﬁcance in the
case where labeled data are unavailable on target domain.
Thus how to use these unlabeled data from target domain to
ﬁll the domain discrepancy is the main issue in the ﬁeld of
domain adaptation (Pan and Yang 2010).
Beginning with the work of gradient reverse (Ganin and
Lempitsky 2015), a group of domain adaptation methods
based on adversarial learning were proposed. In the research
of this subﬁeld, a domain discriminator is introduced to
judge the domain attribute on feature or image level. In order to fool this domain discriminator, the extracted features

should be domain-invariant, which is the basic motivation of
adversarial domain adaptation. However, just like most variants of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), the domain discriminator is only guided by
the hard label information and rarely explores the intrinsic
structure of data distribution. Namely, each data point that
shifts from both domains should be judged by a latent soft label, i.e., a probability value, instead of a hard assignment of
“1” or “0”. In addition, the distribution of domain-invariant
latent vectors is ﬁtted using limited patterns of source and
target features, i.e., the interaction of features from two domains has not been considered to enrich feature patterns.
In this paper, inspired by VAE-GAN (Larsen et al. 2016),
we develop a generative-adversarial-based framework to simultaneously train the classiﬁcation network and generate
auxiliary source-like images from learned embeddings of
both domains. On the basis of this framework, domain
mixup on pixel and feature level is proposed to alleviate two
existing drawbacks. (1) Just as shown in Figure 1, we would
like to instruct the domain discriminator to explore the in-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*The corresponding author is Bingbing Ni.
6502

