The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MetaLight: Value-Based Meta-Reinforcement Learning for Trafﬁc Signal Control
Xinshi Zang,1 Huaxiu Yao,2 Guanjie Zheng,2 Nan Xu,1 Kai Xu,3 Zhenhui Li2
1

1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Pennsylvania State University, 3 Shanghai Tianrang Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd
zang-xs@foxmail.com, 2 {huaxiuyao, gjz5038, jessieli}@ist.psu.edu, 1 xunannancy@sjtu.edu.cn, 3 kai.xu@tianrang-inc.com

The training mechanism of DRL follows a trial-and-error
manner and thus the superior performance is conditioned on
a large number of training episodes. The cost of computational resources and learning time is unacceptable in realworld trafﬁc signal control. For example, if the trafﬁc condition is complicated, traditional DRL models need long time
to generate enough samples and to have models well-trained.
Even worse, some successive bad trials may result in severe
trafﬁc congestion, which may break down the transportation
system. Thus, the agent for trafﬁc signal control should be
able to learn quickly with a few samples.
Recently, meta-reinforcement learning has been widely
studied to improve the efﬁciency of deep reinforcement
learning by transferring previous learned knowledge and integrating this knowledge with the new information. There
are mainly two lines of meta-reinforcement learning algorithms: (1) recurrent-based meta-reinforcement learning (Duan et al. 2016; Mishra et al. 2018). In this case,
the parameters of the prediction model are controlled by
a learnable recurrent meta-optimizer and its corresponding
hidden state. (2) Gradient-based meta-reinforcement learning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Nagabandi, Finn, and
Levine 2019; Nagabandi et al. 2019). These methods learn
a well-generalized initialization that can be quickly adapted
to a new scenario with a few gradient steps. However, simply applying either gradient-based or recurrent-based metareinforcement learning methods on trafﬁc signal control
faces two key challenges:

Abstract
Using reinforcement learning for trafﬁc signal control has attracted increasing interests recently. Various value-based reinforcement learning methods have been proposed to deal
with this classical transportation problem and achieved better
performances compared with traditional transportation methods. However, current reinforcement learning models rely on
tremendous training data and computational resources, which
may have bad consequences (e.g., trafﬁc jams or accidents) in
the real world. In trafﬁc signal control, some algorithms have
been proposed to empower quick learning from scratch, but
little attention is paid to learning by transferring and reusing
learned experience. In this paper, we propose a novel framework, named as MetaLight, to speed up the learning process in new scenarios by leveraging the knowledge learned
from existing scenarios. MetaLight is a value-based metareinforcement learning workﬂow based on the representative
gradient-based meta-learning algorithm (MAML), which includes periodically alternate individual-level adaptation and
global-level adaptation. Moreover, MetaLight improves thestate-of-the-art reinforcement learning model FRAP in trafﬁc
signal control by optimizing its model structure and updating
paradigm. The experiments on four real-world datasets show
that our proposed MetaLight not only adapts more quickly
and stably in new trafﬁc scenarios, but also achieves better
performance.

1

Introduction

Inefﬁcient trafﬁc signal plans waste people’s time on roads.
Current trafﬁc signal control systems are not optimized according to the dynamic trafﬁc data. For example, widelyadapted trafﬁc control systems, such as SCATS (Lowrie
1992), rely on manually designed trafﬁc signal plans. With
the development of AI technology and the growth of available trafﬁc data (e.g., surveillance camera data), recent studies apply deep reinforcement learning (DRL) on trafﬁc signal control problems (Wei et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2019a;
Van der Pol and Oliehoek 2016). DRL methods can learn
and adjust trafﬁc signal policies based on the feedback from
the environment and have shown better performance than
traditional transportation methods.

• How to learn and adapt to the complicated and heterogeneous scenarios in trafﬁc signal control? Compared with previous meta-reinforcement learning applications that mainly focus on homogeneous tasks, the scenarios of trafﬁc signal control are more complicated and
heterogeneous. For example, the number of signal phases
in different intersections varies from two to eight and one
intersection may contain different numbers of lanes and
roads. Since the DRL models in different scenarios are
different, a sufﬁciently ﬂexible meta-reinforcement learning model is required to handle various scenarios.
• How to apply meta-learning on value-based reinforcement learning? The action space for the trafﬁc signal agent is discrete and small. For example, according

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1153

