The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Teaching Undergraduate Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Classes: An Experiment with an Attendance Requirement
Sven Koenig,∗ Tansel Uras, Liron Cohen
Computer Science Department
University of Southern California
941 Bloom Walk
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0781, USA
{skoenig, turas, lironcoh}@usc.edu
ated the advantages and disadvantages of imposing an attendance requirement. The approval was necessary since the attendance requirement was imposed selectively on students,
thus treating some students differently than others, which
could potentially affect their grades. We were not sure about
the impact of the attendance requirement. An attendance requirement limits the freedom of the students and might be
inconvenient for them. Students that comprehend the material without attending the lectures or, perhaps more likely,
exercises might not improve their performance with the attendance requirement and feel that they waste their time.
Students that struggle with the material might or might not
improve their performance with the attendance requirement
and, depending on the results, might or might not feel that
they waste their time.
In the following, ﬁrst, we describe CS360 in more detail to
provide the readers with the necessary context. Second, we
describe how we imposed the attendance requirement to provide the readers with information on the methodology of our
experiment. Third, we discuss some issues that arose during
our experiment and how we resolved them, thus showcasing
both some unforeseen problems caused by the attendance requirement and some non-ideal experimental conditions with
this ﬁrst experiment in a real-world education setting. Finally, we discuss our experimental results about the attendance of the students and how it affected their performance
and course ratings. We conclude by discussing the similarities and differences of our ﬁndings and the ﬁndings of others
as well as future work that could address some of the shortcomings of our experiment.

Abstract
We report on an experiment that we performed when we
taught the undergraduate artiﬁcial intelligence class at the
University of Southern California. We taught it – under very
similar conditions – once with and once without an attendance requirement. The attendance requirement substantially
increased the attendance of the students. It did not substantially affect their performance but decreased their course ratings across all categories in the ofﬁcial course evaluation,
whose results happened to be biased toward the opinions of
the students attending the lectures. For example, the overall
rating of the instructor was 0.89 lower (on a 1-5 scale) with
the attendance requirement and the overall rating of the class
was 0.85 lower. Thus, the attendance requirement, combined
with the policy for administering the course evaluation, had a
large impact on the course ratings, which is a problem if the
course ratings inﬂuence decisions on promotions, tenure, and
salary increments for the instructors but also demonstrates the
potential for the manipulation of course ratings.

We performed an experiment with the undergraduate “Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)” class (CS360) at
the University of Southern California (USC) in Fall 2018
since class attendance had quickly decreased during the
semester in the past (to an average of about 50-60 percent
in the lectures, as our experimental results show) despite the
instructor receiving good course ratings, which is consistent
with reports for other classes (Romer 1993; Marburger 2001;
Friedman, Rodriguez, and McComb 2001). CS360 is required for a B.S. degree in computer science and taken by
some other undergraduate students as well, resulting in a
high enrollment. The university therefore often offers more
than one section of CS360 per semester. The ﬁrst author was
the instructor of both sections of CS360 in Fall 2018. The
other two authors were the two teaching assistants. With
permission of the computer science department, we evalu-

Context: The Class
CS360 is a standard undergraduate “Introduction to AI”
class that uses the popular textbook “AI: A Modern Approach” (third edition) by Russell and Norvig (Russell
and Norvig 2009). It is centered around knowledge in AI,
namely how to represent it, how to reason with it, how to
learn it, and how to use it to achieve given objectives. The
ﬁrst part of the class discusses these issues in the given order
in a deterministic setting, and the second part discusses them
in a probabilistic setting. Successes of AI in computer games
and ethical issues are also discussed. Figure 1 shows the

∗
This study was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grant numbers 1724392, 1409987, 1817189 and
1837779. Swantje Willms compiled the statistics based on the
questionnaires, and Tansel Uras compiled the statistics based on all
other data. The USC Institutional Review Board determined that
this study did not require its approval.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13431

