The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An End-to-End Visual-Audio Attention Network
for Emotion Recognition in User-Generated Videos
Sicheng Zhao,1# Yunsheng Ma,2,3# Yang Gu,2 Jufeng Yang,4∗
Tengfei Xing,2 Pengfei Xu,2 Runbo Hu,2 Hua Chai,2 Kurt Keutzer1
1

University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 Didi Chuxing, China
Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China 4 Nankai University, China
{schzhao, yunsheng.ma98}@gmail.com, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn
{guyangdavid, xingtengfei, xupengfeipf, hurunbo, chaihua}@didiglobal.com, keutzer@berkeley.edu
3

Abstract
Emotion recognition in user-generated videos plays an important role in human-centered computing. Existing methods mainly employ traditional two-stage shallow pipeline,
i.e. extracting visual and/or audio features and training classiﬁers. In this paper, we propose to recognize video emotions in an end-to-end manner based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Speciﬁcally, we develop a deep VisualAudio Attention Network (VAANet), a novel architecture
that integrates spatial, channel-wise, and temporal attentions
into a visual 3D CNN and temporal attentions into an audio 2D CNN. Further, we design a special classiﬁcation
loss, i.e. polarity-consistent cross-entropy loss, based on the
polarity-emotion hierarchy constraint to guide the attention
generation. Extensive experiments conducted on the challenging VideoEmotion-8 and Ekman-6 datasets demonstrate
that the proposed VAANet outperforms the state-of-the-art
approaches for video emotion recognition. Our source code
is released at: https://github.com/maysonma/VAANet.

Figure 1: Illustration of the keyframes and discriminative regions for emotion recognition in user-generated videos. Although the story in a video may contain different stages, the
emotion is mainly evoked by some keyframes (as shown by
the temporal attentions in the color bar) and corresponding
discriminative regions (as illustrated by the spatial attentions
in the heat map).

Introduction

user-generated videos (UGVs) can help companies analyze
how customers evaluate their products and assist governments to manage the Internet.
Although with the advent of deep learning, remarkable progress has been made on text sentiment classiﬁcation (Zhang, Wang, and Liu 2018), image emotion analysis (Zhao et al. 2018a; 2018b; Yang et al. 2018a), and
video semantic understanding (Zhu et al. 2018; Choutas et
al. 2018). Emotion recognition in UGVs still remains an unsolved problem, due to the following challenges. (1) Large
intra-class variation. Videos captured in quite different scenarios may evoke similar emotions. For example, visiting
an amusement park, taking part in sport competition, and
playing video games may all make viewers feel “excited”.
This results in obvious “affective gap” between low-level
features and high-level emotions. (2) Low structured consistency. Unlike professional and commercial videos, such
as movies (Wang and Cheong 2006) and GIFs (Jou, Bhattacharya, and Chang 2014; Yang, Zhang, and Luo 2019),
UGVs are usually taken with diverse structures, e.g. various
resolutions and image blurring noises. (3) Sparse keyframe
expression. Only limited keyframes directly convey and de-

The convenience of mobile devices and social networks has
enabled users to generate videos and upload to Internet in
daily life to share their experiences and express personal
opinions. As a result, an explosive growing volume of videos
are being created, which results in urgent demand for the
analysis and management of these videos. Besides the objective content recognition, such as objects and actions (Zhu
et al. 2018; Choutas et al. 2018), understanding the emotional impact of the videos plays an important role in humancentered computing. On the one hand, the videos can, to
a large extent, reﬂect the psychological states of the video
generators. We can predict the generators’ possible extreme
behaviors, such as depression and suicide, and take corresponding preventive actions. On the other hand, the videos
that evoke strong emotions can easily resonate with viewers
and bring them immersive watching experiences. Appropriate emotional resonation is crucial in intelligent advertising
and video recommendation. Further, emotion recognition in
∗

Corresponding Author. # Equal Contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
303

