The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On the Parameterized Complexity of
Clustering Incomplete Data into Subspaces of Small Rank
Robert Ganian,1 Iyad Kanj,2 Sebastian Ordyniak,3 Stefan Szeider1
1

Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Austria. Emails: rganian@gmail.com, stefan@szeider.net
2
School of Computing, DePaul University, USA. Email: ikanj@cs.depaul.edu
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Shefﬁeld, UK. Email: sordyniak@gmail.com

2010b; Recht 2011) and is known to be NP-hard (Peeters
1996) even for binary matrices (i.e., over GF(2)) with d = 3.
The second problem generalized by CSC is the L OW I DEN TICAL ROW M ATRIX C OMPLETION P ROBLEM (Ganian et
al. 2018); the decision version of this problem corresponds to
the case of d = 1 in the CSC problem and is NP-hard already
for matrices over GF(2).
CSC also has strong connections to the R ANK PARTITION
problem: partition the rows of a given binary matrix into two
submatrices of speciﬁed sizes in a way that minimizes the
sum of the ranks of the two submatrices. R ANK PARTITION is
closely related to the notion of the Trellis complexity of binary
linear codes, and has been extensively studied in information
theory (Horn and Kschischang 1996; Kashyap 2008; Vardy
1997a; 1997b; Jain, Mandoiu, and Vazirani 1998); in fact,
settling the complexity of these problems and their variants
was a long-standing open problem in that ﬁeld.
Moreover, CSC reﬂects a recent line of research in the
area of ranking problems over incomplete data, pioneered
by Choi, den Broeck, and Darwiche (2015), and which has
shown great promise in subsequent work (Choi, Tavabi, and
Darwiche 2016; Chen et al. 2016; Choi, Shen, and Darwiche
2017; Yao, Choi, and Darwiche 2017). Finally, the subspace
clustering problem, in the two settings where the matrix is
complete or incomplete, has been the subject of a vast amount
of research works (see, e.g., Eriksson, Balzano, and Nowak,
2012; Li and Vidal, 2016; Pimentel-Alarcón et al., 2016).
Related results are also presented in very recent works
which investigated the complexity of different matrix editing
and clustering problems from the parameterized and approximation perspectives (Fomin, Golovach, and Panolan 2018;
Fomin et al. 2019; Eiben et al. 2019). All of these papers
except for the last one are concerned with the complete data
setting.
Contribution We initiate the study of the complexity landscape of CSC not only from the classical viewpoint, but also
from the perspective of parameterized complexity—a modern paradigm that allows us to make more precise statements
about the asymptotic performance of algorithms and corresponding lower bounds1 . In the parameterized setting, we

Abstract
We consider a fundamental matrix completion problem where
we are given an incomplete matrix and a set of constraints
modeled as a CSP instance. The goal is to complete the matrix subject to the input constraints and in such a way that
the complete matrix can be clustered into few subspaces with
low rank. This problem generalizes several problems in data
mining and machine learning, including the problem of completing a matrix into one with minimum rank. In addition to
its ubiquitous applications in machine learning, the problem
has strong connections to information theory, related to binary
linear codes, and variants of it have been extensively studied
from that perspective. We formalize the problem mentioned
above and study its classical and parameterized complexity.
We draw a detailed landscape of the complexity and parameterized complexity of the problem with respect to several
natural parameters that are desirably small and with respect to
several well-studied CSP fragments.

Introduction
Problem Deﬁnition and Motivation Motivated by a wide
range of applications from data completion, clustering, and
prediction, we study the computational complexity of the
following fundamental C OMPLETION TO S UBSPACE C LUS TERING problem (CSC):
Given an incomplete matrix M over some ﬁxed ﬁnite
ﬁeld, a set C of constraints, and t, d ∈ N, ﬁnd a completion of M satisfying all constraints in C and a partitioning of its rows into at most t subspaces, each of rank at
most d.
CSC generalizes and/or has connections to several wellstudied matrix completion problems. The ﬁrst problem it
generalizes is referred to as the L OW-R ANK M ATRIX C OM PLETION problem, in which the goal is to complete the matrix
into one with minimum rank, whose decision version corresponds to the constant parameter value t = 1 in the CSC
problem. The L OW-R ANK M ATRIX C OMPLETION problem has been extensively studied (Candès and Plan 2010;
Candès and Recht 2009; Candès and Tao 2010; Fazel 2002;
Hardt et al. 2014; Keshavan, Montanari, and Oh 2010a;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We refer to the respective books for an introduction to parameterized complexity (Downey and Fellows 2013; Cygan et al. 2015)

3906

