The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Integrating Relation Constraints with Neural Relation Extractors
Yuan Ye, Yansong Feng,* Bingfeng Luo, Yuxuan Lai, Dongyan Zhao
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
{pkuyeyuan, fengyansong, bf luo, erutan, zhaodongyan}@pku.edu.cn

have been labeled as Capital for one country and so on. To
alleviate these local contradictions, Chen et al. 2018 collect
constraints on the type and cardinality requirements of relations, such as whether two relations should not have the
same type of subject (object), or whether a relation should
not have multiple subjects (objects) given its object (subject). Further, in the inference stage, they use integer linear
programming (ILP) to ﬁlter and adjust the local predictions
that are inconsistent with these constraints. Basically, ILP
operates in a post-processing way to copy with contradictory predictions, but there is no way to provide feedback to
the original RE model.
In fact, it would be of great importance to utilize those
constraints to backwards improve the original RE models.
For example, enhanced with various attention or pooling
mechanisms, most current neural network extraction models
have shown promising performance on benchmark datasets,
but they still suffer from inconsistent local predictions (Chen
et al. 2018). If those relation constraints can be learned during model training, that will help to further improve the overall performance, and we may no longer need a separate postprocessing step as ILP does.
However, directly integrating relation constraints with
NRE models is not a trivial task: (1) relation constraints
are not deﬁned regarding a single prediction, but often over
combinations of instances, thus it is not easy to ﬁnd appropriate representations for those constraints; (2) it is not easy
to evaluate how well pairwise predictions match the constraints in a batch, and it is not clear how to feed the information back to the NRE models.
To tackle the challenges, we propose a uniﬁed framework
to ﬂexibly integrate relation constraints with NRE models
by introducing a loss term Constraint Loss. Concretely, we
develop two methods denoted as Coherent and Semantic to
construct Constraint Loss from different perspectives. Coherent captures how well pairwise predictions match the
constraints from an overall perspective, and Semantic pays
more attention to which speciﬁc rule in the constraints the
pairwise predictions should satisfy. In addition, we encode
relation constraints into different representations for each
method. Notably, Constraint Loss is regarded as a rule-based
regularization term within a batch instead of regularizing

Abstract
Recent years have seen rapid progress in identifying predeﬁned relationship between entity pairs using neural networks
(NNs). However, such models often make predictions for
each entity pair individually, thus often fail to solve the inconsistency among different predictions, which can be characterized by discrete relation constraints. These constraints
are often deﬁned over combinations of entity-relation-entity
triples, since there often lack of explicitly well-deﬁned type
and cardinality requirements for the relations. In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed framework to integrate relation
constraints with NNs by introducing a new loss term, Constraint Loss. Particularly, we develop two efﬁcient methods to capture how well the local predictions from multiple instance pairs satisfy the relation constraints. Experiments on both English and Chinese datasets show that our approach can help NNs learn from discrete relation constraints
to reduce inconsistency among local predictions, and outperform popular neural relation extraction (NRE) models even
enhanced with extra post-processing. Our source code and
datasets will be released at https://github.com/PKUYeYuan/
Constraint-Loss-AAAI-2020.

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE) aims to extract predeﬁned relations
between two marked entities in plain texts, and its success
can beneﬁt many knowledge base (KB) related tasks like
knowledge base population (KBP) (Suchanek et al. 2013;
Wu, He, and Hu 2018), question answering (QA) (Dai, Li,
and Xu 2016; Yu et al. 2017; Lai et al. 2019) and etc.
Most existing works investigate the RE task in a classiﬁcation style. A sentence marked with a given pair of entities is
fed to a classiﬁer to decide their relationship, also called the
sentence-level RE. Another related setup is to feed a group
of sentences containing the given entity pair to the classiﬁer,
called the bag-level RE. We should note that both sentencelevel RE and bag-level RE make predictions for each entity pair individually and locally. However, when we look at
the model outputs globally, there are always contradictions
among different predictions, such as an entity is regarded
as the object of both Country and City, two different cities
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9442

