The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Discriminating Cognitive Disequilibrium and Flow in Problem Solving:
A Semi-Supervised Approach Using Involuntary Dynamic Behavioral Signals
Mononito Goswami,1,2∗ Lujie Chen,2* Artur Dubrawski2
1
Delhi Technological University, New Delhi, India
Auton Lab, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
mononito bt2k16@dtu.ac.in, lujiec@andrew.cmu.edu, awd@cs.cmu.edu
2

2016). Problem solving is a complex affective and cognitive process replete with states of cognitive disequilibrium
manifested by a mixture of confusion, frustration, indecisiveness or struggle, as well as states of ﬂow (Csikszentmihalyi 2013) when one is (or at least is feeling of) moving
forward smoothly. The cognitive disequilibrium triggered by
conﬂicts and contradictions in these problem solving processes can be beneﬁcial for learning only if appropriately
regulated and resolved (D’Mello and Graesser 2014) (Facilitative Confusion Hypothesis), which may be challenging
for an inexperienced problem solver whose self-regulation
and problem solving skills are in their nascent stages.

Abstract
Problem solving is one of the most important 21st century
skills. However, effectively coaching young students in problem solving is challenging because teachers must continuously monitor their cognitive and affective states, and make
real-time pedagogical interventions to maximize their learning outcomes. It is an even more challenging task in social environments with limited human coaching resources. To lessen
the cognitive load on a teacher and enable affect-sensitive intelligent tutoring, many researchers have investigated automated cognitive and affective detection methods. However,
most of the studies use culturally-sensitive indices of affect
that are prone to social editing such as facial expressions,
and only few studies have explored involuntary dynamic behavioral signals such as gross body movements. In addition,
most current methods rely on expensive labelled data from
trained annotators for supervised learning. In this paper, we
explore a semi-supervised learning framework that can learn
low-dimensional representations of involuntary dynamic behavioral signals (mainly gross-body movements) from a modest number of short time series segments. Experiments on a
real-world dataset reveal a signiﬁcant advantage of these representations in discriminating cognitive disequilibrium and
ﬂow, as compared to traditional complexity measures from
dynamical systems literature, and demonstrate their potential
in transferring learned models to previously unseen subjects.

1

Therefore, effectively coaching young students requires
teachers to continuously monitor their cognitive and affective states and make real time pedagogical decisions such as
when to intervene and how best to do so, especially in social environments with low teacher-student ratios and with
limited coaching resources available for each student. Moreover, teachers also have to effectively handle the high cognitive loads of monitoring a diverse cohort students varying signiﬁcantly in their perception of academic self-efﬁcacy
and ability to use of self-regulated learning strategies (Zimmerman and Martinez-Pons 1990). Intelligent Tutoring Systems that attempt to teach problem-solving also face similar
challenges. To lessen the cognitive load of teachers and also
to improve the effectiveness of intelligent tutoring, we envision a decision support system which can monitor the cognitive and affective states of multiple students simultaneously
in real time. The focus of this paper is on the state detection
capability of such a system, speciﬁcally needed to discriminate between cognitive disequilibrium (CD) and ﬂow states,
which are the critical inputs to inform appropriate subsequent interventions.

Introduction

One of the fundamental goals of education is to transform
students into mature problem solvers who are able to overcome the inherent uncertainty of problems, failed attempts
and impasses. For young children, solving challenging nonroutine math problems emulates the real life challenges they
will encounter later in their lives. Different from routine
math exercises (e.g. back-of-chapter exercises), non-routine
problems may not have immediate solutions, and thus require innovative thinking, and may often invite a child to
ride an ”emotional roller-coaster” as the student advances
through various stages of problem solving (Chen et al.

In this work, we investigate a method designed to discriminate between CD and ﬂow using involuntary behavioral signals that are less prone to social editing, including
head and eye movement, which can be non-invasively collected using inexpensive sensors such as cameras. To overcome limited supply of labeled data, while taking advantage
of the large supply of unlabeled data, we explore a semisupervised approach where deep embedding features are derived from unlabeled time series segments, which are then

∗
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the ﬁrst
two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

420

