The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generating Diverse Translation by Manipulating Multi-Head Attention
Zewei Sun, Shujian Huang, Hao-Ran Wei, Xin-yu Dai, Jiajun Chen
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
sunzw@smail.nju.edu.cn, whr94621@foxmail.com
{huangsj, daixinyu, chenjj}@nju.edu.cn

In other words, multi-head attention actually learns multiple
alignment choices. Further, by means of picking different attention heads, we can precisely control the following word
generation. We verify this characteristic by a series of statistic study afterwards.
Straightway, we consider taking advantage of this intrinsic characteristic to generate diverse translations due to
the multiple generation candidates. Natural language can
be diversely translated through different syntax structures
or word orders. However, it has been well recognized that
NMT system severely lacks translation diversity, distinguished from human beings (He, Haffari, and Norouzi 2018;
Ott et al. 2018; Edunov et al. 2018). We try to tackle this issue with a new method based on our observation.
There have been a few works attempting to generate
more diverse translation, which can be roughly divided
into two categories. The ﬁrst category tries to encourage
diversity during beam search by adding some regularization items (Li, Monroe, and Jurafsky 2016; Vijayakumar
et al. 2018). However, these methods actually fail to produce satisﬁed diversity in our re-implementation experiments. The other category tends to augment diversity by introducing latent variables (He, Haffari, and Norouzi 2018;
Shen et al. 2019). However, they heavily increase training
barrier and lack interpretability.
Different from them, we make use of the diverse factors we observe inside the model structure, which is more
lightweight and interpretable. Since multi-head attention has
the potential to identify different translation candidates, we
propose a method to manipulate it to generate diverse translations. Our method works simply but more effectively than
previous works, bringing in no extra parameter or regularization item. Furthermore, we propose to combine diverse
translations with the back-translation technique for better
data augmentation.
Experiment results show that the proposed method could
generate diverse translations without a severe drop in
translation performance. Besides, improvements could be
achieved by employing our more diverse back-translation
results for machine translation. An auxiliary experiment of
conversation response generation proves the effect of diversity as well.

Abstract
Transformer model (Vaswani et al. 2017) has been widely
used in machine translation tasks and obtained state-of-theart results. In this paper, we report an interesting phenomenon
in its encoder-decoder multi-head attention: different attention heads of the ﬁnal decoder layer align to different word
translation candidates. We empirically verify this discovery
and propose a method to generate diverse translations by manipulating heads. Furthermore, we make use of these diverse
translations with the back-translation technique for better
data augmentation. Experiment results show that our method
generates diverse translations without a severe drop in translation quality. Experiments also show that back-translation
with these diverse translations could bring a signiﬁcant improvement in performance on translation tasks. An auxiliary
experiment of conversation response generation task proves
the effect of diversity as well.

Introduction
In recent years, neural machine translation (NMT) has
shown its ability to produce precise and ﬂuent translations
(Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015). More and
more novel network structures has been proposed (Barone
et al. 2017; Gehring et al. 2017; Vaswani et al. 2017),
among which Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) achieves
the best results. The main differences between Transformer
and other translation models are: i) self-attention architecture, ii) multi-head attention mechanism. We focus on the
second one in this paper.
Intuitively, the attention mechanism in traditional
attention-based sequence-to-sequence models plays the role
of choosing the next source word to be translated, which
could be seen as an alignment between source and target
words (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Luong, Pham, and
Manning 2015). However, how multi-head attention works
seems unclear.
In this paper, we report an interesting phenomenon in
Transformer: in the ﬁnal layer of its decoder, each individual
encoder-decoder attention head dispersedly aligns to a speciﬁc source word which is highly likely to be translated next.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8976

