The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

The Choice Function Framework for Online Policy Improvement
Murugeswari Issakkimuthu, Alan Fern, Prasad Tadepalli
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA

Ideally, due to the additional online computation, we
would like an OSPI procedure to yield improved performance compared to the base policy. Perhaps more importantly, we would at least like to guarantee that an OSPI procedure is “safe” in the sense that it does not perform worse
than just using the base policy. For example, the policy rollout algorithm is guaranteed to be safe in this sense. However, as we show in Section 3, many OSPI procedures are
not safe, even when 1) using a perfect transition model, 2)
using the exact policy value function for leaf evaluation, and
3) the base policy action is expanded at each tree node.
Our primary goal is to derive safety conditions for OSPI.
For this purpose, we introduce the choice-function framework for analyzing OSPI procedures. The key idea is to notice that OSPI procedures primarily differ in their choice of
which actions other than the base policy action to expand at
each tree node. Thus, each procedure can be characterized
by a choice function, which speciﬁes the actions to consider
at each node of the search tree. Thus, we can characterize
properties of an OSPI procedure, such as safety, via properties of the corresponding choice function.
Our main contribution is to give sufﬁcient conditions on
choice functions that guarantee safety. This is done for both
stationary and non-stationary choice functions. In addition,
we describe a parametric class of safe choice functions, that
captures a number of existing approaches. This allows for
hyperparameter search over a safe space of OSPI procedures
in order to optimize online performance. Using this class
we provide illustrative empirical results that demonstrate the
practical potential of the framework.

Abstract
There are notable examples of online search improving over
hand-coded or learned policies (e.g. AlphaZero) for sequential decision making. It is not clear, however, whether or
not policy improvement is guaranteed for many of these approaches, even when given a perfect leaf evaluation function
and transition model. Indeed, simple counterexamples show
that seemingly reasonable online search procedures can hurt
performance compared to the original policy. To address this
issue, we introduce the choice function framework for analyzing online search procedures for policy improvement. A
choice function speciﬁes the actions to be considered at every
node of a search tree, with all other actions being pruned. Our
main contribution is to give sufﬁcient conditions for stationary and non-stationary choice functions to guarantee that the
value achieved by online search is no worse than the original
policy. In addition, we describe a general parametric class of
choice functions that satisfy those conditions and present an
illustrative use case of the empirical utility of the framework.

1

Introduction

For many applications of sequential decision making, it is
possible to learn or hand-code a reactive policy for online
operation, e.g. (Hussein et al. 2017; Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013; Schatzmann et al. 2006). While such policies are
computationally cheap to apply, they will generally be suboptimal in some or many states. This motivates using additional computation during online operation to improve upon
such base policies. The focus of this paper is on approaches
that use online lookahead search for this purpose, which we
refer to as Online Search for Policy Improvement (OSPI).
At each state encountered during online operation, OSPI
approaches use an environment simulator or model to construct a search tree that includes the base-policy action
choices along with a subset of other action choices. The action values at the root can then be used to select an action.
Well-known examples of OSPI include the policy-rollout algorithm (Tesauro and Galperin 1997), which was ﬁrst shown
to improve Backgammon policies, and AlphaZero (Silver et
al. 2017), which improves over an underlying greedy policy
via Monte-Carlo Tree Search.

2

Related Work

An early approach for OSPI is the policy-rollout algorithm (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1996; Tesauro and Galperin
1997), which has been shown to signiﬁcantly improve policies in a variety of applications, e.g. Backgammon (Tesauro
and Galperin 1997), combinatorial optimization (Bertsekas,
Tsitsiklis, and Wu 1997) and stochastic scheduling (Bertsekas and Castanon 1999). Nested rollout (Yan et al. 2005;
Cazenave 2009) allows for leveraging additional computation time to further improve a policy by approximating multiple steps of policy iteration. Policy Switching (Chang, Gi-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10178

