The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Query Rewriting for Ontology-Mediated Conditional Answers
Medina Andreşel, Magdalena Ortiz, Mantas Šimkus
{andresel, ortiz}@kr.tuwien.ac.at, simkus@dbai.tuwien.ac.at
Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria

make them true certain answers. Traditional certain answers
are just assumptive answers where the assumption component is empty. Conditional answers are a well known tool for
acccessing data that need not be current and complete (Demolombe 1992; 1998; Christiansen and Andreasen 1998),
and have been explored in databases for several purposes,
including temporal data (Arenas and Bertossi 2002), data
streams (Cruz-Filipe, Gaspar, and Nunes 2019), and other
forms of incomplete data (Zhang et al. 2007). In the setting
of OMQs, they are very natural. For example, when querying diverse data sources—a key application of OMQs—
parts of the data may be missing completely or be very
costly to obtain.With the above in mind, we enrich OMQs
with assumption patterns, which deﬁne the form of complex assertions that may become true about some individuals. This leads to a powerful formalism, but does not impact
signiﬁcantly the worst-case complexity compared to plain
OMQs. Importantly, our OMQs with assumptions are ﬁrstorder (FO) rewritable for DL-LiteR (Artale et al. 2009).
An OMQ is said to be FO-rewritable if it can be converted into FO queries that return all the answers to the
OMQ when evaluated over the data alone (with no ontology). FO-rewritability is highly desired: it implies very low
data complexity, and that OMQ answering can be realized
using existing database technologies (Bienvenu et al. 2018;
Gottlob et al. 2014).

Abstract
Among many solutions for extracting useful answers from
incomplete data, ontology-mediated queries (OMQs) use domain knowledge to infer missing facts. We propose an extension of OMQs that allows us to make certain assumptions—
for example, about parts of the data that may be unavailable
at query time, or costly to query—and retrieve conditional
answers, that is, tuples that become certain query answers
when the assumptions hold. We show that querying in this
powerful formalism often has no higher worst-case complexity than in plain OMQs, and that these queries are ﬁrst-order
rewritable for DL-LiteR . Rewritability is preserved even if we
allow some use of closed predicates to combine the (partial)
closed- and open-world assumptions. This is remarkable, as
closed predicates are a very useful extension of OMQs, but
they usually make query answering intractable in data complexity, even in very restricted settings.

Introduction
Querying incomplete data and extracting useful answers
from it is a long-standing challenge, and many approaches
have been proposed over the years. Ontology-mediated
queries (OMQs) are a promising way to exploit domain
knowledge for this purpose (Xiao et al. 2018; Bienvenu and
Ortiz 2015). In an OMQ a regular database query is paired
with ontological knowledge expressed as a theory in a suitable logical formalism; frequently, Description Logics (DLs)
are used to write ontologies (Baader et al. 2003). When the
OMQ is evaluated over an input dataset, it can access not
only the explicit facts, but also implicit facts that can be
inferred from the data and the ontology. OMQs are useful, but in many scenarios they are insufﬁcient. In particular,
they provide limited means to return relaxed query answers,
i.e. answers that are not certain (in terms of logical entailment), but that are still related to the initial query.
To obtain more and better answers from incomplete data,
we extend OMQs in a novel way, building on a classic idea:
rather than obtaining only certain answers, we retrieve conditional answers which, in a nutshell, pair tuples (which
need not be certain answers) with sets of facts that would

Our extension of OMQs turns out to be particularly powerful when complete and incomplete information coexist.
Based on classical logic, standard OMQs make the openworld assumption (OWA), where a fact that cannot be inferred may be either true or false. Traditional databases, in
contrast, make the closed-world assumption (CWA): facts
that cannot be inferred are assumed false. The OWA makes
OMQs useful for incomplete data, but at the same time, too
weak to yield useful answers when the data is known to be
partially complete. For example, consider an OMQ where a
query asking for stations accessible from airport Heathrow:
q(x) = conn(Heathrow, x) ∧ Station(x) is paired with
a TBox stating that each airport is connected to some station: (Airport  ∃conn.Station in DL notation). Under the
classical semantics, this OMQ does not have answers over
the dataset {Airport(Heathrow), Station(HydePark)}: we

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2734

