The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Label Causal Feature Selection
Xingyu Wu,1 Bingbing Jiang,2 Kui Yu,3 Huanhuan Chen,1∗ Chunyan Miao4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China.
2
Hangzhou Institute of Service Engineering, Hangzhou Normal University.
3
School of Computer and Information, Hefei University of Technology.
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University.
xingyuwu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiangbb@hznu.edu.cn, yukui@hfut.edu.cn, hchen@ustc.edu.cn, ascymiao@ntu.edu.sg.
Abstract
Multi-label feature selection has received considerable attentions during the past decade. However, existing algorithms do
not attempt to uncover the underlying causal mechanism, and
individually solve different types of variable relationships, ignoring the mutual effects between them. Furthermore, these
algorithms lack of interpretability, which can only select features for all labels, but cannot explain the correlation between
a selected feature and a certain label. To address these problems, in this paper, we theoretically study the causal relationships in multi-label data, and propose a novel Markov blanket
based multi-label causal feature selection (MB-MCF) algorithm. MB-MCF mines the causal mechanism of labels and
features ﬁrst, to obtain a complete representation of information about labels. Based on the causal relationships, MBMCF then selects predictive features and simultaneously distinguishes common features shared by multiple labels and
label-speciﬁc features owned by single labels. Experiments
on real-world data sets validate that MB-MCF could automatically determine the number of selected features and simultaneously achieve the best performance compared with
state-of-the-art methods. An experiment in Emotions data set
further demonstrates the interpretability of MB-MCF.

(a) Multiple irrelevant labels. (b) Multiple relevant labels.

Figure 1: Causal structures of two extreme cases. Labels are
highlighted in red and features are highlighted in green.
space, which can be broadly classiﬁed into transformationbased methods and direct methods (Pereira et al. 2018).
Multi-label data contains three types of variable relationships, i.e., relationships between labels, between features,
and between labels and features. Earlier feature selection
methods, such as some transformation-based methods, only
focus on the last two types of relationships, and transform
a multi-label problem into one or several single-label problems with transformation techniques (Godbole and Sarawagi
2004; Read 2008). While some recent direct approaches revise traditional single-label feature selection algorithms to
process the multi-label data directly, such as sub-feature uncovering with sparsity (SFUS) (Ma et al. 2012) and multilabel informed feature selection (MIFS) (Jian et al. 2016),
which have taken label correlation into consideration. However, most of these algorithms consider the three types of
relationships individually. For example, MIFS uses a matrix to encode label correlations only. Separately solving the
three types of relationships would ignore the mutual effects
between different types of relationships, which limits the effectiveness of feature selection. Simultaneously analyzing
all the relationships needs to consider the underlying mechanism, while existing methods do not attempt to uncover it.
Another problem is that, existing methods lack of interpretability, i.e., cannot explain the correlation between a selected feature and a certain label. It is necessary to know
which labels are inﬂuenced by a selected feature. For example, the recently presented topic, label-speciﬁc feature
(Zhang and Wu 2015), aiming to the phenomenon that different class labels may carry speciﬁc characteristics of their

Introduction
In machine learning research, multi-label learning focuses
on the problem that each instance is associated with multiple class labels simultaneously (Zhang and Zhou 2006),
which is ubiquitous in many real-world applications, such
as image annotation (Liu et al. 2018), text categorization
(Liu et al. 2017), and gene function classiﬁcation (Fodeh and
Tiwari 2018). Similar to single-label learning, high dimensional data with an enormous amount of redundant features
signiﬁcantly increases the computational burden of multilabel learning, which could also lead to over-ﬁtting and
performance degradation of learning algorithms (Lin et al.
2015). Previous studies (Liu and Motoda 2007) have shown
that only a subset of relevant features carry the most discriminative information. Thus, in recent years, many multilabel feature selection algorithms have been proposed to ﬁnd
a lower-dimensional representation of the original feature
∗

Corresponding author: Huanhuan Chen.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6430

