The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

PIQA: Reasoning about Physical Commonsense in Natural Language
Yonatan Bisk,1,2,3,4 Rowan Zellers,1,4 Ronan Le Bras,1 Jianfeng Gao,2 Yejin Choi1,4
1

Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence 2 Microsoft Research AI 3 Carnegie Mellon University
4
Paul G. Allen School for Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington
http://yonatanbisk.com/piqa

Abstract

To separate egg whites from the yolk
using a water bottle, you should…

To apply eyeshadow without a brush, should I use a cotton
swab or a toothpick? Questions requiring this kind of physical commonsense pose a challenge to today’s natural language understanding systems. While recent pretrained models (such as BERT) have made progress on question answering over more abstract domains – such as news articles and
encyclopedia entries, where text is plentiful – in more physical domains, text is inherently limited due to reporting bias.
Can AI systems learn to reliably answer physical commonsense questions without experiencing the physical world?
In this paper, we introduce the task of physical commonsense
reasoning and a corresponding benchmark dataset Physical
Interaction: Question Answering or PIQA . Though humans ﬁnd the dataset easy (95% accuracy), large pretrained
models struggle (∼75%). We provide analysis about the dimensions of knowledge that existing models lack, which offers signiﬁcant opportunities for future research.

a. Squeeze the water
b. Place the water bottle
bottle and press it
and press it against the
against the yolk.
yolk. Keep pushing,
Release, which creates
which creates suction
suction and lifts the yolk.
and lifts the yolk.

???
a!
Figure 1: PIQA : Given a physical goal expressed in natural language, like ‘to separate egg whites...,’ a model must
choose the most sensible solution. Our dataset tests the ability of natural language understanding models to link text to
a robust intuitive-physics model of the world. Here, humans
easily pick answer a) because separating the egg requires
pulling the yolk out, while machines are easily fooled.

Introduction
Physical commonsense is a common understanding of the
physical properties and affordances of everyday objects.
Physical commonsense is an essential aspect of how we
move through and interact with the world, but as its is assumed knowledge, it is rarely articulated and therefore absent from the abstract world of text inhabited by Natural
Language Processing (NLP).
Much of the recent progress in NLP has focused on building large-scale pretrained representations from unlabeled
text (Radford et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019).
These representations transfer well to core abstract tasks
and domains, such as answering questions given an encyclopedia article (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) or recognizing named
entities (Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder 2003).
However, there is a crucial disconnect between how deep
models – versus humans – learn language. While humans
continuously reﬁne a rich model of the world through experience, today’s state-of-the-art NLP models are instead
spoon-fed mass quantities of text and attempt to reverse engineer the real world. This leads to issues of reporting bias,

whereby everyday ‘low level’ physical details are commonly
ignored or misrepresented in text. While reporting bias is
often discussed colloquially in the context of physical or visual attributes (e.g. computers assuming all sheep are black),
the community lacks a large-scale resource for studying and
evaluating such physical knowledge.
To study this question and begin bridging the representational gap, we introduce Physical Interaction: Question
Answering, or PIQA
to evaluate language representations on their knowledge of physical commonsense. We focus on everyday situations with a preference for atypical solutions. Our dataset is inspired by instructables.com,
which provides users with instructions on how to build, craft,
bake, or manipulate objects using everyday materials. We
asked annotators to provide semantic perturbations or alternative approaches which are otherwise syntactically and
topically similar to ensure physical knowledge is targeted.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7432

