The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Verb Class Induction with Partial Supervision
Daniel Peterson

Susan W. Brown, Martha Palmer

Oracle Labs
Burlington, MA 01803
daniel.peterson@oracle.com

University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309
{susan.brown, martha.palmer}@colorado.edu

new VerbNets for low-resource languages. In addition, automatic clustering could improve the coverage of the English VerbNet and similar resources in other languages. The
English VerbNet is still missing many verbs and some important senses of common verbs. As the resource grows,
the task of adding new elements becomes harder, and the
long-tail nature of language use means there are many thousands of infrequent verbs, verb senses, or verb-particle constructions that may require special handling. Interest in expanding VerbNet algorithmically and generating VerbNets
for other languages has led to a rich history of algorithms
for generating Levin-style verb clusters (Kipper et al. 2000;
Im Walde 2000; Brew and Schulte im Walde 2002; Korhonen, Krymolowski, and Marx 2003; Lapata and Brew 2004;
Li and Brew 2008; Sun and Korhonen 2011; Majewska et al.
2018).
Probabilistic graphical models have shown the most
promise creating VerbNet-like clusterings from minimallyprocessed corpus data (Kawahara, Peterson, and Palmer
2014; Peterson and Palmer 2018). In these approaches, each
sentence in the corpus is used as context to assign a cluster
label to the root verb of the sentence. Clustering approaches
have the advantage that they can discover new verb senses
to add to existing VerbNet classes, but can also propose
new VerbNet classes. However, these automatically-induced
clusters have been noisy, and have not yet been used by
VerbNet annotators.
In this paper, we develop a simple, computationally efﬁcient technique to bias the sampling procedure toward discovering a known subset of VerbNet classes, on a limited set
of annotations. This builds on state-of-the-art probabilistic
clustering approaches for creating VerbNet clusters, which
use Dirichlet-multinomial (D-M) mixtures for both sense
induction and clustering (Kawahara, Peterson, and Palmer
2014; Peterson and Palmer 2018). We have a small number of sentences labeled with VerbNet senses, and we bias
our sampling by observing these labeled sentences in their
correct clusters at initialization, and not re-sampling these
initial assignments. The sampling procedure for all other tokens in the corpus proceeds as normal, so this initialization
causes negligible impact on the running time of the algorithm, and allows the sense induction and clustering for all
other verbs to proceed unchanged.
This method uses a small amount of labeled data, in com-

Abstract
Dirichlet-multinomial (D-M) mixtures like latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) are widely used for both topic modeling and
clustering. Prior work on constructing Levin-style semantic
verb clusters achieves state-of-the-art results using D-M mixtures for verb sense induction and clustering. We add a bias
toward known clusters by explicitly labeling a small number
of observations with their correct VerbNet class. We demonstrate that this partial supervision guides the resulting clusters effectively, improving the recovery of both labeled and
unlabeled classes by 16%, for a joint 12% absolute improvement in F1 score compared to clustering without supervision.
The resulting clusters are also more semantically coherent.
Although the technical change is minor, it produces a large
effect, with important practical consequences for supervised
topic modeling in general.

Introduction
VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler 2005; Kipper et al. 2006) is a useful semantic resource but faces coverage issues. It is organized on principles outlined by (Levin 1993), who demonstrated a signiﬁcant link between verb semantics and the allowed syntactic structures for those verbs. VerbNet has been
greatly expanded by linguists over the years (Bonial, Stowe,
and Palmer 2013a), adding coverage while adhering to its organizing principles. VerbNet now contains 270 classes and
5300 entries, and its granularity is relatively coarse while
providing clear semantic groupings. VerbNet class annotations have proven useful for tasks like semantic role labeling (Giuglea and Moschitti 2006; Hartmann, Eckle-Kohler,
and Gurevych 2016), which is an intermediate task used
for systems like information extraction and question answering (Shen and Lapata 2007; Christensen et al. 2010;
Moreda et al. 2011). Its success in supporting NLP tasks has
led to the creation of similar resources in other languages,
such as Urdu (Hautli-Janisz, King, and Ramchand 2015),
French (Pradet, Danlos, and De Chalendar 2014), Basque
(Aldezabal et al. 2010) and Arabic (Mousser 2010).
VerbNet beneﬁts from linguistic theory and careful curation, but the time and effort required to create such a resource manually is substantial. A means of automatically
inducing verb sense clusters could aid in the creation of
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8616

