The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Online Metric Learning for Multi-Label Classiﬁcation
Xiuwen Gong, Dong Yuan, Wei Bao
Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
{xiuwen.gong, dong.yuan, wei.bao}@sydney.edu.au

Zhou et al. 2019b; Liu et al. 2019). These methods assume that all data are available in advance for learning.
However,there are two major limitations of developing
multi-label methods under such an assumption: ﬁrstly, these
methods are impractical for large-scale datasets, since they
require all datasets to be stored in memory; secondly, it
is non-trivial to adapt off-line multi-label methods to the
sequential data. In practice, data is collected sequentially,
and data that is collected earlier in this process may expire
as time passes. Therefore, it is important to develop new
multi-label classiﬁcation methods to deal with streaming
data.
Several online multi-label classiﬁcation studies have recently been developed to overcome the above-mentioned
limitations. For example, online learning with accelerated
nonsmooth stochastic gradient (OLANSGD) (Park and Choi
2013) was proposed to solve the online multi-label classiﬁcation problem. Moreover, the online sequential multilabel extreme learning machine (OSML-ELM) (Venkatesan et al. 2017) is a single-hidden layer feed-forward neural network-based learning technique. OSML-ELM classiﬁes the examples by their output weight and activation function. Unfortunately, all of these online multi-label classiﬁcation methods lack an analysis of loss function and disregard
label dependencies. Many studies (Dembczynski, Cheng,
and Hüllermeier 2010; Read et al. 2011; Bhatia et al. 2015;
Yen et al. 2016; Liu, Tsang, and Müller 2017) have shown
that multi-label learning methods that do not capture label dependency usually achieve degraded prediction performance. This paper aims to ﬁll these gaps.
k-nearest neighbour (kNN) algorithms have achieved superior performance in various applications (Deng et al.
2010). Moreover, experiments show that distance metric
learning on single-label prediction can improve the prediction performance of kNN. Nevertheless, there are two problems associated with applying a kNN algorithm to an online multi-label setting. Firstly, naive kNN algorithms do
not consider label dependencies. Secondly, it is non-trivial
to learn an appropriate metric for online multi-label classiﬁcation.
To break the bottleneck of kNN, we here propose a novel
multi-label learning paradigm for multi-label classiﬁcation.

Abstract
Existing research into online multi-label classiﬁcation, such
as online sequential multi-label extreme learning machine
(OSML-ELM) and stochastic gradient descent (SGD), has
achieved promising performance. However, these works lack
an analysis of loss function and do not consider label dependency. Accordingly, to ﬁll the current research gap, we propose a novel online metric learning paradigm for multi-label
classiﬁcation. More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst project instances and
labels into a lower dimension for comparison, then leverage the large margin principle to learn a metric with an efﬁcient optimization algorithm. Moreover, we provide theoretical analysis on the upper bound of the cumulative loss for our
method. Comprehensive experiments on a number of benchmark multi-label datasets validate our theoretical approach
and illustrate that our proposed online metric learning (OML)
algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Real-world applications often involve a large number of
classes, each instance of which can be assigned multiple
labels. For example, many web-related applications, such
as Twitter, Facebook and Instagram posts and RSS feeds,
are attached with multiple essential forms of categorization
tags (Zhang, Graepel, and Herbrich 2012). In the search
industry, revenue comes from clicks on ads embedded in
the result pages. Ad selection and placement can be significantly improved if ads are tagged correctly. This scenario,
referred to as ’online multi-label classiﬁcation’ in a machine
learning context, is also useful in some other applications,
such as object detection in video surveillance (Popovici,
Weiler, and Grossniklaus 2014) and image retrieval in dynamic databases (Dong and Bhanu 2003).
In the development of multi-label classiﬁcation
(Tsoumakas,
Zhang,
and
Zhou
2012;
Gibaja and Ventura 2015), one challenge that remains unsolved is that most multi-label classiﬁcation algorithms are developed in an off-line mode
(Cheng and Hüllermeier 2009; Chen and Lin 2012;
Babbar and Schölkopf 2017; Liu and Tsang 2017;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4012

