The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Part-Level Graph Convolutional Network for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Linjiang Huang,1,3 Yan Huang,1,3 Wanli Ouyang,4 Liang Wang1,2,3∗
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC)
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
University of Sydney
SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
linjiang.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au
Graph convolution

Abstract
Recently, graph convolutional networks have achieved remarkable performance for skeleton-based action recognition.
In this work, we identify a problem posed by the GCNs for
skeleton-based action recognition, namely part-level action
modeling. To address this problem, a novel Part-Level Graph
Convolutional Network (PL-GCN) is proposed to capture
part-level information of skeletons. Different from previous
methods, the partition of body parts is learnable rather than
manually deﬁned. We propose two part-level blocks, namely
Part Relation block (PR block) and Part Attention block (PA
block), which are achieved by two differentiable operations,
namely graph pooling operation and graph unpooling operation. The PR block aims at learning high-level relations between body parts while the PA block aims at highlighting
the important body parts in the action. Integrating the original GCN with the two blocks, the PL-GCN can learn both
part-level and joint-level information of the action. Extensive
experiments on two benchmark datasets show the state-ofthe-art performance on skeleton-based action recognition and
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

(a) PR block

Joint graph

Part graph

Graph
unpooling

(b) PA block

Figure 1: Illustration of our main idea. The PR block aims
at capturing part-level relations. Besides, the PA block aims
at highlighting important body parts. The partition of body
parts is learned in a data-driven way.

legs. Actually, in many cases, body parts can be considered
as the smallest unit of action execution, which means these
actions can be identiﬁed only by the movement of body
parts. However, GCN only propagates information across
the edges, even we can stack many layers to make the joints
of different body parts inter-aware, it’s hard to automatically
learn such a high-level structure from data by GCN itself.
Recently, Thakkar et al. (Thakkar and Narayanan 2018)
propose a part-based graph convolutional network that manually divides the graph into several subgraphs with shared
nodes. They ﬁrst employ graph convolution operation within
the subgraphs of body parts, and then propagate information
between subgraphs via the shared nodes. Although they introduce the concept of body parts into graph convolutional
networks, they still face the above problem because they lack
the process of aggregating information from body joints to
body parts. Moreover, different actions may have different
deﬁnition of body parts (e.g., hands for clapping and arms
for waving), it may be sub-optimal for action recognition to
manually partition body parts.
In light of these observations, we propose a novel PartLevel Graph Convolutional Network (PL-GCN). Our main
target is to automatically aggregate body joints into body
parts for capturing part-level information of actions. Thus,
a differentiable graph pooling operation is devised to ensure
the ﬂexibility of this process, such that the body parts can
be learned in a data-driven way. Besides, the connectivity
of body parts can also be learned in this process, making it

Introduction
Action recognition is a fundamental problem in computer vision with many applications (Poppe 2010). Due to the development of depth sensors and pose estimation (Shotton et al.
2011), skeleton-based action recognition has drawn much attention recently. Considering graph convolutional networks
have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many tasks
(Kipf and Welling 2016b; Schlichtkrull et al. 2018), several
recent works (Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Li et al. 2018b)
propose to employ the GCNs to automatically learn the
spatial-temporal patterns of skeletons.
Nevertheless, there are some challenges existing in these
GCN-based methods. In this work, we mainly focus on one
of these challenges, dubbed as part-level action modeling.
This issue has not been well considered before and has notably limited the performance. Let’s imagine some actions,
such as running and waving. Most of these actions are performed by the co-movement of body parts, e.g., arms and
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11045

