The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reasoning with Heterogeneous Graph Alignment for Video Question Answering∗
Pin Jiang, Yahong Han†
College of Intelligence and Computing
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{jpin, yahong}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

Video:
Visual
Factors

The dominant video question answering methods are based
on ﬁne-grained representation or model-speciﬁc attention
mechanism. They usually process video and question separately, then feed the representations of different modalities
into following late fusion networks. Although these methods
use information of one modality to boost the other, they neglect to integrate correlations of both inter- and intra-modality
in an uniform module. We propose a deep heterogeneous
graph alignment network over the video shots and question words. Furthermore, we explore the network architecture
from four steps: representation, fusion, alignment, and reasoning. Within our network, the inter- and intra-modality information can be aligned and interacted simultaneously over
the heterogeneous graph and used for cross-modal reasoning. We evaluate our method on three benchmark datasets
and conduct extensive ablation study to the effectiveness of
the network architecture. Experiments show the network to
be superior in quality.

1

Shot

Shot

Shot

Shot

Shot

Question:
What does

the woman

do

before

put hand

in hair

Linguistic
Factors

Answer: dance
S2

S5

S1
S3

W3
W1

W2

S4

W5
W6
W4

Heterogeneous Graph

ce
pa
ls
ua
vis
e
ac
sp
tic
s
i
gu
lin

Figure 1: Given a shot-level video and a question, our model
performs cross-modal reasoning over a heterogeneous graph
between factors, shots si and words wi , then answers it. Heterogeneous means both inter- and intra-modality. The highlighted lines indicate the reasoning process between factors.

Introduction

Video question answering (VideoQA), which aims to automatically infer the correct answer given a video and a related textual question, has received an increasing amount of
attention in recent years (Jang et al. 2019). VideoQA’s inference always involves heterogeneous data from two domains,
i.e., spatio-temporal video content and word sequence in language.
Recent efforts towards VideoQA (Tapaswi et al. 2016;
Jang et al. 2017) try to uncover latent correlations between
video content and words’ semantics, which could be taken
as inter-modality correlations. Li et al. introduced a speciﬁc
co-attention mechanism to attend to relevant video and language. Kim et al. proposed a progressive attention memory
to conduct dynamic modality fusion.
Meanwhile, it has been shown that appropriately incorporating correlations inside videos or dependencies
among word sequence do help improve the performance

of VideoQA, which could be regarded as exploiting intramodality correlations. A common practice is to encode video
and word sequences using RNN-based encoders separately
(Jang et al. 2017). A further contribution is that Fan et
al. proposed heterogeneous memory to fuse visual features
while devised another memory to process question.
On the other hand, in most cases, integrating correlations
of both inter-modality and intra-modality (also referred to as
heterogeneous relation) in a more ﬂexible way may further
beneﬁt the inference of VideoQA, such as graph-structured
methods. As shown in the upper part of Fig. 1, to answer
the question, we need ﬁrstly establish semantic relations between the word woman and visual regions in video, then localize the action put hand. Moreover, we need inter-modality
alignment with semantic similarity to ﬁgure out the action
dance after temporal reasoning. However, current methods
of VideoQA lack an uniform model for simultaneously modeling and reasoning with inter- and intra-modality relations.
In this paper, we propose a novel network of heterogeneous graph alignment (HGA) to perform cross-modal reasoning and VideoQA. We ﬁrstly build an uniform hetero-

∗
This work is supported by the NSFC (under Grant 61876130,
61932009, U1509206).
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11109

