The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Object-Oriented Dynamics Learning through Multi-Level Abstraction
Guangxiang Zhu,1∗ Jianhao Wang,1∗ Zhizhou Ren,1∗ Zichuan Lin,2 Chongjie Zhang1
1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{zhu-gx15, wjh19, rzz16, linzc16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

2

environments with multiple controllable and uncontrollable
dynamic objects and different static object layouts.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel threelevel learning framework for self-supervised learning of
object-oriented dynamics model, called Multi-level Abstraction Object-oriented Predictor (MAOP). This framework
simultaneously learns disentangled object representations
and predicts object motions conditioned on their historical
states, their interactions to other objects, and an agent’s actions. To reduce the complexity of such concurrent learning
and improve sample efﬁciency, MAOP employs a three-level
learning architecture from the most abstract level of motion
detection, to dynamic instance segmentation, and to dynamics learning and prediction. A more abstract learning level
solves an easier problem and has lower learning complexity,
and its output provides a coarse-grained guidance for a less
abstract learning level, improving its speed and quality of
learning.
Speciﬁcally, we perform motion detection to detect proposal regions that potentially contain dynamic instances for
the follow-up dynamic instance segmentation. Then we exploit spatial-temporal information of locomotion property
and appearance patterns to capture coarse region proposals of dynamic instances. Finally we use them to guide the
learning of the object representations and instance localization at the level of dynamics learning. This three-level architecture is inspired by humans’ multi-level motion perception from cognitive science studies (Johansson 1975;
Lu and Sperling 1995) and multi-level abstraction search in
constraint optimization (Zhang and Shah 2016). In addition,
we design a novel CNN-based spatial-temporal relational
reasoning mechanism for MAOP, which includes a Relation
Net to reason about spatial relations between objects and an
Inertia Net to learn temporal effects. This mechanism offers
a disentangled way to handle physical reasoning in settings
with partial observability.
Our results show that MAOP signiﬁcantly outperforms
previous methods for learning dynamics models in terms of
sample efﬁciency and generalization over novel settings with
multiple controllable and uncontrollable dynamic objects
and different object layouts. MAOP enables model learning from few interactions with environments and accurately

Abstract
Object-based approaches for learning action-conditioned dynamics has demonstrated promise for generalization and interpretability. However, existing approaches suffer from structural limitations and optimization difﬁculties for common environments with multiple dynamic objects. In this paper, we
present a novel self-supervised learning framework, called
Multi-level Abstraction Object-oriented Predictor (MAOP),
which employs a three-level learning architecture that enables
efﬁcient object-based dynamics learning from raw visual observations. We also design a spatial-temporal relational reasoning mechanism for MAOP to support instance-level dynamics
learning and handle partial observability. Our results show that
MAOP signiﬁcantly outperforms previous methods in terms of
sample efﬁciency and generalization over novel environments
for learning environment models. We also demonstrate that
learned dynamics models enable efﬁcient planning in unseen
environments, comparable to true environment models. In addition, MAOP learns semantically and visually interpretable
disentangled representations.

Introduction
Model-based deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has recently
attracted much attention for improving sample efﬁciency
of DRL (Gu et al. 2016; Racanière et al. 2017; Finn and
Levine 2017). One of the core problems for model-based
DRL is to learn action-conditioned dynamics models through
interacting with environments. Pixel-based approaches have
been proposed for such dynamics learning from raw visual
perception, achieving remarkable performance in training
environments (Oh et al. 2015; Chiappa et al. 2017).
To unlock sample efﬁciency of model-based DRL, learning action-conditioned dynamics models that generalize over
unseen environments is critical yet challenging. Finn, Goodfellow, and Levine (2016) proposed a dynamics learning
method that takes a step towards generalization over object
appearances. Zhu, Huang, and Zhang (2018) developed an
object-oriented dynamics predictor to support generalization.
However, due to structural limitations and optimization difﬁculties, these methods do not efﬁciently generalize over
∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6989

