The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Variational Perturbative Approach to
Planning in Graph-Based Markov Decision Processes
Dominik Linzner,1 Heinz Koeppl1,2
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology
2
Department of Biology
Technische Universität Darmstadt
{dominik.linzner, heinz.koeppl}@bcs.tu-darmstadt.de
spaces are high dimensional, e.g., in multi-agent settings
(Boutilier, Dean, and Hanks 1996), where the size of the state
and action space of the underlying global MDP in general
scales exponentially in the number of agents. Solving such
problems exactly is infeasible for large-scale systems. For
this reason, various simplifying assumptions on the structure
of MDPs have been proposed. Assuming a factorized state
space, a local representation of the transition model and the
reward function, decomposing according to a graph-structure,
so-called factored MDPs (FMDPs) (Guestrin, Koller, and
Parr 2001; Boutilier 1996) have been deﬁned. For this model,
various approximate solution schemes have been developed
(Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2001; Guestrin et al. 2003).
Graph-based MDPs (GMDPs), as proposed in (Sabbadin,
Peyrard, and Forsell 2012), present a subclass of FMDPs,
where additionally, agent-wise policies are assumed. We note,
that this renders GMDPs equivalent to mMDPs (Boutilier,
Dean, and Hanks 1996), interacting and communicating over
a graph-structure. GMDPs can be solved approximately using approximate linear programming (Sabbadin, Peyrard,
and Forsell 2012), approximate policy iteration (Sabbadin,
Peyrard, and Forsell 2012) or approximate value iteration
using mean ﬁeld or cluster variational methods (Cheng and
Chen 2013). Additional simplifying assumptions, such as
transition-independence of agents (TI-Dec-MDP) can be
made (Sigaud and Buffet 2013), however reducing the descriptive power of the model. We will thus not compare to
such models.
In this work, we propose a novel method for approximate
inference and planning for GMDPs inspired by advances
in statistical physics. We emphasize that in planning problems (Fleming and Soner 2006), system dynamics are known,
given a policy. Thus, we do not encounter problems as in reinforcement learning, e.g., as the exploration-exploitation
dilemma (Puterman 2005). We employ a scheme based
on variational perturbation theory (Tanaka 1999; Paquet,
Winther, and Opper 2009; Opper, Paquet, and Winther 2013;
Linzner and Koeppl 2018), which was originally introduced
in (Plefka 1982).
The manuscript is organized as follows: In Section 2, we
brieﬂy summarize the connection between variational inference and planning. Here, the main result is that maximization of expected reward can be coined as maximization
of a variational lower bound (Toussaint and Storkey 2006;

Abstract
Coordinating multiple interacting agents to achieve a common
goal is a difﬁcult task with huge applicability. This problem
remains hard to solve, even when limiting interactions to be
mediated via a static interaction-graph. We present a novel
approximate solution method for multi-agent Markov decision
problems on graphs, based on variational perturbation theory.
We adopt the strategy of planning via inference, which has
been explored in various prior works. We employ a non-trivial
extension of a novel high-order variational method that allows
for approximate inference in large networks and has been
shown to surpass the accuracy of existing variational methods.
To compare our method to two state-of-the-art methods for
multi-agent planning on graphs, we apply the method different
standard GMDP problems. We show that in cases, where the
goal is encoded as a non-local cost function, our method performs well, while state-of-the-art methods approach the performance of random guess. In a ﬁnal experiment, we demonstrate
that our method brings signiﬁcant improvement for synchronization tasks.

Introduction
Understanding and designing the behavior of multiple agents
interacting through large networks in order to achieve a common goal is a task studied across many ﬁelds, such as artiﬁcial intelligence (Sigaud and Buffet 2013), electrical engineering (Tousi, Hosseinian, and Menhaj 2010), but also
economics and biological sciences (Castellano, Fortunato,
and Loreto 2009) and epidemics (Venkatramanan et al. 2018).
Finding optimal policies, e.g., for the distribution of information across a social or communication network, for effective intervention in molecular networks or for vaccinations
in order to prevent spreading of diseases are actively discussed problems. In many of these applications, there exists
no unique natural time-scale. In such cases, it is appropriate
to reason in continuous-time. The setting of multiple agents
on a graph in continuous-time has been previously explored
(Kan and Shelton 2008).
For a Markov decision process (MDP), an optimal policy
can be computed in time scaling polynomially in the size
of the state and action space using dynamic programming
(Puterman 2005). However, in many realistic scenarios, these
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7203

