The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

RoadTagger: Robust Road Attribute Inference with Graph Neural Networks
Songtao He,1 Favyen Bastani,1 Satvat Jagwani,1 Edward Park,1 Soﬁane Abbar,2
Mohammad Alizadeh,1 Hari Balakrishnan,1 Sanjay Chawla,2
Samuel Madden,1 Mohammad Amin Sadeghi3
1

MIT Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory (MIT CSAIL)
2
Qatar Computing Research Institute (QCRI)
3
University of Tehran
{songtao, favyen, satvat, parke, alizadeh, hari, madden}@csail.mit.edu,
{sabbar, schawla}@hbku.edu.qa, msadegh2@illinois.edu

Abstract
Inferring road attributes such as lane count and road type from
satellite imagery is challenging. Often, due to the occlusion in
satellite imagery and the spatial correlation of road attributes,
a road attribute at one position on a road may only be apparent when considering far-away segments of the road. Thus, to
robustly infer road attributes, the model must integrate scattered information and capture the spatial correlation of features along roads. Existing solutions that rely on image classiﬁers fail to capture this correlation, resulting in poor accuracy.
We ﬁnd this failure is caused by a fundamental limitation –
the limited effective receptive ﬁeld of image classiﬁers.
To overcome this limitation, we propose RoadTagger, an endto-end architecture which combines both Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
to infer road attributes. Using a GNN allows information
to propagate on the road network graph and eliminates the
receptive ﬁeld limitation of image classiﬁers. We evaluate
RoadTagger on both a large real-world dataset covering 688
km2 area in 20 U.S. cities and a synthesized dataset. In the
evaluation, RoadTagger improves inference accuracy over the
CNN image classiﬁer based approaches. In addition, RoadTagger is robust to disruptions in the satellite imagery and
is able to learn complicated inductive rules for aggregating
scattered information along the road network.

1

Figure 1: Challenges in road attribute inference. In (a) the
lane markings are absent on one side of the road. In (b) the
road is occluded by trees and the lane markings are also partially missing. To make correct predictions at all positions on
the road, we need to incorporate both the local information
and the global information along the road network graph.

Consider the problem of determining the number of lanes
on the road from images. A natural approach would be to
map this problem to an image classiﬁcation problem. Because the number of lanes of one road may vary, we can scan
the road with a sliding window and train a classiﬁer to predict the number of lanes in each window along the road independently. After we have the classiﬁer predictions in each
window, we can apply a post-processing step to improve
the prediction results; e.g., using the road network graph
to remove inconsistent predictions along the road. Some
prior map inference papers adopt such a strategy (Cadamuro,
Muhebwa, and Taneja 2018; Najjar, Kaneko, and Miyanaga
2017).
This approach suffers from a fundamental limitation: the
limited effective-receptive-ﬁeld of image classiﬁers. Consider Figure 1(a), where lane markings are visible only on
the left. Because the road width remains the same, these
lane markings imply the remainder of the road on the right
has the same number of lanes, despite not having explicit
markings. However, because practical image classiﬁers can
only be scalably trained with small windows of the city-wide

Introduction

Detailed road attributes enrich maps and enable numerous
new applications. For example, mapping the number of lanes
on each road makes lane-to-lane navigation possible, where
a navigation system informs the driver which lanes will diverge to the correct branch at a junction. Similarly, maps that
incorporate the presence of bicycle lanes along each road enable cyclists to make more informed decisions when choosing a route. Additionally, maps with up-to-date road conditions and road types improve the efﬁciency of road maintenance and disaster relief.
Unfortunately, producing and maintaining digital maps
with road attributes is tedious and labor-intensive. In this
paper, we show how to automate the inference of road attributes from satellite imagery.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10965

