The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Tensor Completion for Weakly-Dependent
Data on Graph for Metro Passenger Flow Prediction
Ziyue Li,1∗ Nurettin Dorukhan Sergin,2
Hao Yan,3 Chen Zhang,4 Fugee Tsung5
1,5

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2,3
Arizona State University, 4 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Low-rank tensor decomposition and completion have attracted signiﬁcant interest from academia given the ubiquity
of tensor data. However, low-rank structure is a global property, which will not be fulﬁlled when the data presents complex and weak dependencies given speciﬁc graph structures.
One particular application that motivates this study is the spatiotemporal data analysis. As shown in the preliminary study,
weakly dependencies can worsen the low-rank tensor completion performance. In this paper, we propose a novel lowrank CANDECOMP / PARAFAC (CP) tensor decomposition and completion framework by introducing the L1 -norm
penalty and Graph Laplacian penalty to model the weakly
dependency on graph. We further propose an efﬁcient optimization algorithm based on the Block Coordinate Descent
for efﬁcient estimation. A case study based on the metro passenger ﬂow data in Hong Kong is conducted to demonstrate
an improved performance over the regular tensor completion
methods.

Figure 1: (a) The weakly-dependent property of each stations (b) Passenger Flow at Station 8 (c) Passenger Flow at
Station 77
However, tensor completion of spatiotemporal data is a
challenging task due to its complex spatial and temporal
dependencies. Take the metro passenger ﬂow tensor as an
example, for temporal dependence, the prediction of a certain time is usually correlated with the historical observations. Passenger ﬂow patterns also display a strong periodicity with period as 7 days.
For spatial dependency, graph structures are commonly
used. For example, a geographical graph is often deﬁned
based on its spatially adjacent neighbours. Furthermore, a
contextual graph is often deﬁned based on the contextual
similarity, which quantiﬁes whether two stations share a
similar function (e.g., business center, residential area or
school etc.). In the relevant literature, it has been highlighted
that both the geographical graph and contextual graphs signiﬁcantly affect passenger ﬂow patterns at station points
(Zhong et al. 2017).
Taking the metro passenger ﬂow data as example, denoted
as three-mode tensor X station×point×day , as a result of the
geographical and contextual graphs along the station mode,
if any two stations are picked, they are less likely to be
highly-dependent to each other if they are not connected in
either of the two graphs, such as Station 8 and Station 77 in
Figure 1(b), (c) having quite different passenger ﬂow proﬁle. With the amount of stations increasing, the chance that
all stations are strongly dependent is very small. This data

Introduction
Higher-order tensors have been actively used in research
since they have an inclination to successfully preserve the
complicated innate structural properties of data(Kolda and
Bader 2009). A tensor can be deﬁned mathematically as
the multi-dimensional arrays. The order of a tensor is the
number of dimensions, also known as modes. Tensor completion, which is a missing data imputation task based on
the observed data, has attracted signiﬁcant amounts of research in areas such as image processing and machine learning. Speciﬁcally, spatiotemporal data can normally be modeled as high-order tensors with spatial and temporal modes;
tensor analysis for spatiotemporal data is widely used for
prediction and feature extractions (Sun and Axhausen 2016;
Dunlavy, Kolda, and Acar 2011). Tensor completion can be
also used as a prediction method, with the prediction horizon
regarded as missing entries, and historical data as observed
entries (Tan et al, 2016, Luan, Zhang 2018).
∗

We show our great appreciation to the Metro Corporation for
sharing this passenger ﬂow data, and in the protection of privacy,
all data has been desensitized.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4804

