The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Type Resource Allocation with Partial Preferences
Haibin Wang,1 Sujoy Sikdar,2 Xiaoxi Guo,1 Lirong Xia,3 Yongzhi Cao,1* Hanpin Wang4,1
1
Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies (MOE),
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China
2
Computer Science & Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis
3
Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
4
School of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering, Guangzhou University, China
{beach, guoxiaoxi, caoyz, whpxhy}@pku.edu.cn, sujoy@wustl.edu, xialirong@gmail.com,
*
Corresponding Author

When there is one type (p = 1), fractional mechanisms
broadly fall in two classes. The random priority (RP) mechanism (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez 1998) exempliﬁes the
ﬁrst class: agents consume their favorite remaining item oneby-one according to an ordering drawn from the uniform
distribution. Each agent is allocated a fraction of each item
equal to the probability that they consume the item. It is easy
to see that RP satisﬁes ex-post-efﬁciency and equal treatment of equals. Additionally, RP satisﬁes notions of envyfreeness and strategyproofness through the idea of stochastic dominance (sd). Given strict preferences, a fractional allocation p dominates another q, if at every item o, the total
share of o and items preferred to o under p is at least the
total share under q. RP satisﬁes weak-sd-envy-freeness and
sd-strategyproofness (Bogomolnaia and Moulin 2001).

Abstract
We propose multi-type probabilistic serial (MPS) and multitype random priority (MRP) as extensions of the well-known
PS and RP mechanisms to the multi-type resource allocation
problems (MTRAs) with partial preferences. In our setting,
there are multiple types of divisible items, and a group of
agents who have partial order preferences over bundles consisting of one item of each type. We show that for the unrestricted domain of partial order preferences, no mechanism
satisﬁes both sd-efﬁciency and sd-envy-freeness. Notwithstanding this impossibility result, our main message is positive: When agents’ preferences are represented by acyclic CPnets, MPS satisﬁes sd-efﬁciency, sd-envy-freeness, ordinal
fairness, and upper invariance, while MRP satisﬁes ex-postefﬁciency, sd-strategyproofness, and upper invariance, recovering the properties of PS and RP. Besides, we propose a
hybrid mechanism, multi-type general dictatorship (MGD),
combining the ideas of MPS and MRP, which satisﬁes
sd-efﬁciency, equal treatment of equals and decomposability
under the unrestricted domain of partial order preferences.

The probabilistic serial (PS) mechanism belongs to the
class of “simultaneous eating” mechanisms (Bogomolnaia
and Moulin 2001). PS proceeds in multiple rounds. In each
round, all agents simultaneously “eat” their favorite remaining item at a constant, uniform rate, until one of the
items being consumed is exhausted. This terminates when
all items are fully consumed, and the output allocates each
agent with a fraction of each item that they would consume by this procedure. PS satisﬁes sd-efﬁciency, sd-envyfreeness, and weak-sd-strategyproofness (Bogomolnaia and
Moulin 2001). Besides, PS is the only mechanism that simultaneously satisﬁes sd-efﬁciency, sd-envy-freeness, and
bounded invariance (Bogomolnaia and Heo 2012; Bogomolnaia 2015).

Introduction
Consider the example of rationing (Elster 1992) two types
of divisible resources: food (F) and beverage (B) among two
families who have heterogeneous preferences over combinations of food and beverage they wish to consume. For example, a family may prefer water with rice, and milk with
wheat. How should we distribute available resources to the
families fairly and efﬁciently?
In this paper, we consider the problems of divisible multitype resource allocation problems (MTRAs) (Mackin and
Xia 2016) with partial preferences. Here, there are p ≥ 1
types of n divisible items per type, with one unit of supply of
each item, and a group of n agents with partial preferences
over receiving bundles consisting of one unit of each type.
Our goal is to design mechanisms to fairly and efﬁciently
allocate one unit of items of each type to every agent given
their partial preferences over bundles. Such mechanisms are
called fractional mechanisms, because an agent may receive
fractions of items.

Our work is the ﬁrst to consider the design of fair and efﬁcient mechanisms for MTRAs with partial preferences, and
the ﬁrst to extend fractional mechanisms to MTRAs with
partial preferences, to the best of our knowledge. Katta and
Sethuraman (2006) mention that PS can be extended to partial orders but we are not aware of a (formal or informal)
work that explicitly deﬁnes such an extension and studies
its properties. Monte and Tumennasan (2015) and Mackin
and Xia (2016) consider the problem of MTRAs under linear preferences, but do not fully address the issue of fairness. Ghodsi et al. (2011) consider the problem of allocating
multiple types of resources, when the resources of each type
are indistinguishable, and agents have different demands for

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2260

