The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Exploiting Spatial Invariance for Scalable Unsupervised Object Tracking
Eric Crawford

Joelle Pineau

Mila/McGill University
Montreal, QC, Canada
eric.crawford@mail.mcgill.ca

Mila/McGill University
Montreal, QC, Canada
jpineau@cs.mcgill.ca

directly provided by the environment, thereby avoiding the
problem of discovering and learning to track objects.
In the current work, we aim to make progress on this task
of discovering and tracking objects, which we call unsupervised object tracking. Our general approach is to formulate a
Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013)
for videos, endowed with a highly structured, object-like latent representation. This VAE is composed of a number of
modules that are applied each timestep of the input video,
notably a discovery module which detects new objects in the
current frame, and a propagation module which updates the
attributes of objects discovered in previous frames based on
information from the current frame. For each input frame,
a rendering module creates a corresponding output frame
from the objects proposed by the discovery and propagation
modules. The network is trained by maximizing the VAE
evidence lower bound, which encourages the output frames
to be accurate reconstructions of the input frames. At the end
of training, it is expected that the discovery module will have
become a competent object detector, while the propagation
module will have learned object dynamics. This overall architecture was ﬁrst proposed in Sequential Attend Infer Repeat
(SQAIR) (Kosiorek et al. 2018).
However, as we demonstrate empirically, SQAIR struggles at processing spatially large videos that contain many
densely packed objects. We hypothesize that this is because
SQAIR does not fully exploit the spatial statistics of objects. One example is SQAIR’s discovery module, which
processes input frames holistically. Speciﬁcally, it computes
an initial representation for an input frame by processing it
with a Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP), effectively discarding
all spatial structure, before recurrently emitting a sequence
of detected objects. The discovery module is consequently
unable to exploit the fact that objects are spatially local. A
consequence of this spatial locality is that in order to detect
an object, a local detector can be used which only has access to a sub-region of the frame. Doing so has the notable
advantage that a sub-region will have signiﬁcantly less complexity than the frame as a whole, making the detector’s job
easier. In order to ensure the entire frame is covered, the local
detector can be applied repeatedly to different (but possibly
overlapping) sub-regions. This scheme can be implemented
efﬁciently through the use of convolutional neural networks;
indeed, this is the intuition behind the success of recent su-

Abstract
The ability to detect and track objects in the visual world is a
crucial skill for any intelligent agent, as it is a necessary precursor to any object-level reasoning process. Moreover, it is
important that agents learn to track objects without supervision
(i.e. without access to annotated training videos) since this
will allow agents to begin operating in new environments with
minimal human assistance. The task of learning to discover
and track objects in videos, which we call unsupervised object
tracking, has grown in prominence in recent years; however,
most architectures that address it still struggle to deal with
large scenes containing many objects. In the current work,
we propose an architecture that scales well to the large-scene,
many-object setting by employing spatially invariant computations (convolutions and spatial attention) and representations
(a spatially local object speciﬁcation scheme). In a series of
experiments, we demonstrate a number of attractive features
of our architecture; most notably, that it outperforms competing methods at tracking objects in cluttered scenes with many
objects, and that it can generalize well to videos that are larger
and/or contain more objects than videos encountered during
training.

1

Introduction

The ability to reason about objects is a vital skill for intelligent agents. Indeed, it underlies much of human intelligence,
and is one of several “core” domains of human cognition,
meaning that it is sufﬁciently important that evolution has
endowed humans (and many animals) with special-purpose
hardware for discovering, tracking and reasoning about objects (Carey 2009). Recently, signiﬁcant progress has been
made in the design of neural networks that can reason about
objects, and these architectures have been shown to possess
a number of signiﬁcant advantages over systems that lack
object-like representations (Diuk, Cohen, and Littman 2008;
Chang et al. 2016; Kansky et al. 2017; Zambaldi et al. 2018).
However, in order to reason in terms of objects, a system ﬁrst
needs a way of discovering and tracking objects in the world;
moreover, the system should be able to do this without supervision, in order to be able to adapt to new environments with
little human oversight. Much of the recent work on objectlevel reasoning assumes that object-like representations are
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3684

