The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Reservoir Computing Meets 5G MIMO-OFDM Systems in Symbol Detection
Zhou Zhou,1 Lingjia Liu,1 Vikram Chandrasekhar,2 Jianzhong Zhang,2 Yang Yi1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, USA
{zhouzhou, ljliu, yangyi8}@vt.edu
2
Samsung Research America, USA
{v.chandrasek, jianzhong.z}@samsung.com

global subscriptions of 5G is expected to reach 8.3 billion
by the end of 2024, where 95 percent will be broadband services (Cerwall et al. 2019). In 5G new radio (NR), enhanced
mobile broadband (eMBB) is one of the primary use cases
deﬁned for the high data rate transmission. To be speciﬁc,
eMBB is expected to support stable wireless connections
with very high data rates (tens of Gigabits per second) for
low speed mobile users as well as moderate data rates for
high speed mobile users. Meanwhile, 5G networks will support user mobility upto 500 km/h (Murara 2017) creating a
large variation on the dynamics of the underlying wireless
channel. Therefore, it is extremely important to have a 5G
receiver that is able to conduct high speed symbol detection
and is robust under different wireless propagation characteristics. Invoking neural networks into the 5G NR receiving process is a promising direction to improve the state of
the art model-based receiving architecture for 5G and Beyond (Shaﬁn et al. 2020).
In this work we aim to exploit the dynamic behaviors of
deep recurrent neural networks (RNNs) for the task of symbol detection in a multiple-input multiple-output with orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (MIMO-OFDM)
system. Note that MIMO-OFDM is the adopted waveform
for 4G/5G (Liu et al. 2012) and is expected to be the dominant waveform for Beyond 5G systems as well. The main
motivation of adopting RNNs instead of other neural network architectures is based on the fact that under fairly mild
and general assumptions, RNNs are universal approximations of dynamic systems (Funahashi and Nakamura 1993).
This feature is extremely important for 5G systems which
are highly dynamic over time and frequency. However, to realize the full potential of RNNs for MIMO-OFDM symbol
detection, new research challenges need to be addressed:

Abstract
Conventional reservoir computing (RC) is a shallow recurrent neural network (RNN) with ﬁxed high dimensional hidden dynamics and one trainable output layer. It has the nice
feature of requiring limited training which is critical for certain applications where training data is extremely limited and
costly to obtain. In this paper, we consider two ways to extend
the shallow architecture to deep RC to improve the performance without sacriﬁcing the underlying beneﬁt: (1) Extend
the output layer to a three layer structure which promotes a
joint time-frequency processing to neuron states; (2) Sequentially stack RCs to form a deep neural network. Using the new
structure of the deep RC we redesign the physical layer receiver for multiple-input multiple-output with orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (MIMO-OFDM) signals since
MIMO-OFDM is a key enabling technology in the 5th generation (5G) cellular network. The combination of RNN dynamics and the time-frequency structure of MIMO-OFDM
signals allows deep RC to handle miscellaneous interference
in nonlinear MIMO-OFDM channels to achieve improved
performance compared to existing techniques. Meanwhile,
rather than deep feedforward neural networks which rely on
a massive amount of training, our introduced deep RC framework can provide a decent generalization performance using
the same amount of pilots as conventional model-based methods in 5G systems. Numerical experiments show that the deep
RC based receiver can offer a faster learning convergence and
effectively mitigate unknown non-linear radio frequency (RF)
distortion yielding twenty percent gain in terms of bit error
rate (BER) over the shallow RC structure.

Introduction
The early prosperity in academia of applying artiﬁcial neural networks to communications engineering can be traced
back to 20 years ago (Patnaik et al. 2004). Due to the recent success of deep neural networks (DNNs), applications
of DNNs in communications have attracted growing attention again. Although conventional wireless communications
systems are established well through modeling methods,
the advent of the 5th generation (5G) challenges the conventional physical layer transmission technologies and network architecture according to the great market growth: The

• From system design’s perspective, training a neural network (NN)-based receiver using over-the-air feedback —
to update layer weights of the NN based on the backpropagation algorithm — is prohibitively expensive in
terms of uplink control overhead. Over-ﬁtting could happen when the selected NN model is too complicated.
• The underlying wireless environment is changing dynamically over time and frequency. This is especially
true for 5G and future 6G systems which will utilize

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1266

