The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MRI Reconstruction with Interpretable
Pixel-Wise Operations Using Reinforcement Learning
Wentian Li,∗ Xidong Feng,∗ Haotian An, Xiang Yao Ng, Yu-Jin Zhang
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
li-wt17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

To accelerate the data acquisition, compressed-sensing
MRI (CS-MRI) (Lustig et al. 2008) is a practical solution, as
no additional hardware is required. CS-MRI reduces traversals in the k-space. In order to apply the Compressed Sensing technique, several conditions need to be satisﬁed. The
image should have a sparse representation in a known transform domain, and the aliasing artifacts due to k-space downsampling should be incoherent in that transform domain. Although the conditions are not always satisﬁed for MRI, CSMRI still receives much attention in the research ﬁeld and
exhibits fairly promising results. There are different sampling schemes and patterns in k-space, such as grid spiral, radial, etc. Cartesian down-sampling scheme (Lustig, Donoho,
and Pauly 2007), which follows Gaussian distribution and
retains the low frequencies, was carefully designed to mimic
the property of pure randomness to make the aliasing as incoherent as possible after zero-ﬁlling the unsampled positions in the k-space. The resulted artifacts in image domain,
while not totally incoherent, can be perceived as a mixture
of aliasing, blur and noise.
After obtaining partially sampled k-space data, MRI reconstruction can be performed using software algorithms.
Optimization-based algorithms usually enforces both sparsity in the transform domain, which is required by compressed sensing, and data consistency in frequency domain,
which means that the k-space values of the reconstructed
image at the sampled positions do not deviate from the originally acquired k-space data.
Recent advances of deep learning has greatly improved
the reconstruction precision, measured by NMSE, PSNR,
and SSIM. Most deep-learning based methods (Sun et al.
2016; Schlemper et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2017; Hammernik
et al. 2018; Hyun et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2018) directly take
the image from the zero-ﬁlled k-space or the original k-space
data as the input of the deep neural networks and output the
reconstructed image. These models are often trained end-toend and function as black boxes.
Interpreterbility is a challenge for deep-learning based
medical image processing (Razzak, Naz, and Zaib 2018).
Since the primary purpose of MRI reconstruction is to facilitate diagnosis by removing aliasing artifacts and recovering
details, it may pose risk if the transformation process of the

Abstract
Compressed sensing magnetic resonance imaging (CS-MRI)
is a technique aimed at accelerating the data acquisition of
MRI. While down-sampling in k-space proportionally reduces the data acquisition time, it results in images corrupted
by aliasing artifacts and blur. To reconstruct images from
the down-sampled k-space, recent deep-learning based methods have shown better performance compared with classical
optimization-based CS-MRI methods. However, they usually
use deep neural networks as a black-box, which directly maps
the corrupted images to the target images from fully-sampled
k-space data. This lack of transparency may impede practical
usage of such methods. In this work, we propose a deep reinforcement learning based method to reconstruct the corrupted
images with meaningful pixel-wise operations (e.g. edge enhancing ﬁlters), so that the reconstruction process is transparent to users. Speciﬁcally, MRI reconstruction is formulated
as Markov Decision Process with discrete actions and continuous action parameters. We conduct experiments on MICCAI dataset of brain tissues and fastMRI dataset of knee images. Our proposed method performs favorably against previous approaches. Our trained model learns to select pixel-wise
operations that correspond to the anatomical structures in the
MR images. This makes the reconstruction process more interpretable, which would be helpful for further medical analysis.

Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive medical imaging technique that uses magnetic ﬁelds and radio
waves to generate images of the organs in the human body.
Compared with other forms of medical imaging, MRI typically has better resolution related to soft tissues. However,
the data acquisition process of MRI is very time-consuming.
The data is sampled sequentially in k-space (frequency domain) and the speed is limited by physical and physiological
constraints (Lustig, Donoho, and Pauly 2007), taking about
15 minutes up to over an hour, while the patients are required to remain still. The long scan time severely limits the
applicability of MRI.
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
792

