The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reduction and Local Search for Weighted Graph Coloring Problem
Yiyuan Wang,1,4 Shaowei Cai,2,* Shiwei Pan,1 Ximing Li,3,4 Minghao Yin1,4∗
1

School of Computer Science and Information Technology, Northeast Normal University, China
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
4
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
yiyuanwangjlu@126.com, caisw@ios.ac.cn, {pansw779, ymh}@nenu.edu.cn, liximing86@gmail.com
2

WGCP is n1−ε for all ε > 0 (Zuckerman 2006), resulting in intractable computations. Although GCP is extensively studied and numerous methods (Verma, Buchanan,
and Butenko 2015; Peng et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2017;
Zhou, Duval, and Hao 2018; Hébrard and Katsirelos 2018;
2019) have been developed to solve GCP on graphs with
various types and sizes, the GCP methods cannot be directly
applicable for WGCP due to its additional features and hardness. Naturally, WGCP nowadays is still a challenging problem.

Abstract
The weighted graph coloring problem (WGCP) is an important extension of the graph coloring problem (GCP) with wide
applications. Compared to GCP, where numerous methods
have been developed and even massive graphs with millions
of vertices can be solved well, fewer works have been done
for WGCP, and no solution is available for solving WGCP for
massive graphs. This paper explores techniques for solving
WGCP, including a lower bound and a reduction rule based
on clique sampling, and a local search algorithm based on two
selection rules and a new variant of conﬁguration checking.
This results in our algorithm RedLS (Reduction plus Local
Search). Experiments are conducted to compare RedLS with
the state-of-the-art algorithms on massive graphs as well as
conventional benchmarks studied in previous works. RedLS
exhibits very good performance and robustness. It signiﬁcantly outperforms previous algorithms on all benchmarks.

During the past decades, many efforts have been made
for handling WGCP. Several exact algorithms have been designed to solve WGCP. For example, Ribeiro et al. (1989)
combined branch and bound as well as column generation techniques in a very efﬁcient manner to solve WGCP.
The branch and price based WGCP algorithm (Furini and
Malaguti 2012) followed a classical rule from traditional
GCP to deeply exploit the problem structure. Besides, a recent work (Hsu and Chang 2016) provided the upper bound
on the smallest number of colors needed in an optimal
WGCP solution in terms of the ratio of the maximum vertex
weight and the minimum vertex weight. Those exact WGCP
algorithms can prove the optimality of the obtained solutions, but they may fail to solve the problem within reasonable time, especially for massive graphs.

Introduction
Graph coloring problem (GCP) is a well-known combinatorial optimization problem. In classical GCP, a basic assumption is that vertices in the graph are equally important, however, it is hard to hold in many real world scenarios where
each vertex is associated with various types of weights. The
paradigm of dealing with such vertex weighted graph refers
to the weighted graph coloring problem (WGCP) as a form
of vertex colouring, which is also known as the weighted
vertex coloring problem or max-coloring problem. Formally,
WGCP aims to partition all the vertices into several disjoint
subsets such that the sum of those subset costs is minimized,
where the cost of each subset is given by the maximum
weight of a vertex within the current subset. WGCP has been
widely used in many ﬁelds (Ribeiro, Minoux, and Penna
1989; Hochbaum and Landy 1997; Gavranovic and Finke
2000; Pemmaraju, Raman, and Varadarajan 2004). Also,
WGCP can be directly encoded as the maximum weight
stable set problem (MWSS) (Cornaz, Furini, and Malaguti
2017).
WGCP is an NP-hard problem (Garey and Johnson 1979).
Assuming that NP=ZPP, the best approximation ratio of

To address this, some approximate but fast heuristic
WGCP algorithms have been developed. A greedy randomized adaptive search procedure GRASP was designed
for ﬁnding approximate solutions to WGCP, which used
constructive and destructive moves and a ﬁltering technique (Prais and Ribeiro 2000). A two-phase algorithm
(Malaguti, Monaci, and Toth 2009), called 2Phase, generated a large number of feasible solutions by fast greedy
heuristics in the ﬁrst phase and computed the solutions using
a Lagrangian-based heuristic method in the second phase.
According to the literature, the current best heuristic algorithm for WGCP, namely AFISA (Sun et al. 2018), relied on a mixed search strategy exploring both feasible and
infeasible solutions. Although the AFISA has empirically
achieved competitive performance on conventional graphs,
it involves high-complexity heuristics, making it less efﬁcient for massive graphs such as social networks (Rossi and

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2433

