The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Find Objects and Focus on Highlights: Mining Object
Semantics for Video Highlight Detection via Graph Neural Networks
Yingying Zhang,1,2∗ Junyu Gao,1,2,3∗ Xiaoshan Yang,1,3 Chang Liu,4
Yan Li,4 Changsheng Xu1,2,3
1

National Lab of Pattern Recognition,Institution of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, 4 Kuaishou Technology
{zhangyingying2017, gaojunyu2015}@ia.ac.cn, {xiaoshan.yang, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{liuchang03, liyan}@kuaishou.com
Abstract

With the increasing prevalence of portable computing devices, browsing unedited videos is time-consuming and tedious. Video highlight detection has the potential to significantly ease this situation, which discoveries moments of
user’s major or special interest in a video. Existing methods suffer from two problems. Firstly, most existing approaches only focus on learning holistic visual representations of videos but ignore object semantics for inferring video
highlights. Secondly, current state-of-the-art approaches often adopt the pairwise ranking-based strategy, which cannot
enjoy the global information to infer highlights. Therefore,
we propose a novel video highlight framework, named VHGNN, to construct an object-aware graph and model the relationships between objects from a global view. To reduce
computational cost, we decompose the whole graph into two
types of graphs: a spatial graph to capture the complex interactions of object within each frame, and a temporal graph to
obtain object-aware representation of each frame and capture
the global information. In addition, we optimize the framework via a proposed multi-stage loss, where the ﬁrst stage
aims to determine the highlight-probability and the second
stage leverage the relationships between frames and focus on
hard examples from the former stage. Extensive experiments
on two standard datasets strongly evidence that VH-GNN obtains signiﬁcant performance compared with state-of-the-arts.

Figure 1: Comparison between our method and conventional
pair-wise highlight prediction method. (a) Pervious methods
with pair-wise ranking. (b) Our VH-GNN builds an objectaware graph to capture the object semantics and the global
information with a proposed multi-stage loss.

Introduction
The video overload problem is intensifying. With the increasing prevalence of digital devices and the rapid development of social media platforms (like Taptap and Kwai), it
is seamless for users to record massive amounts of videos.
To mitigate the overload, video highlight detection has attracted increasing attention in research and industrial communities. The goal of video highlight detection is to retrieve
a short video clip that captures a person’s primary attention or interest within an unedited video. It also has a wide
range of applications such as video retrieval, event recognition, and video recommendation. Despite much progress
has been achieved in recent years (Yao, Mei, and Rui 2016;

Jiao et al. 2018; Zhao, Li, and Lu 2018), this topic remains
difﬁcult due to the challenging nature of videos such as a
huge semantic gap between visual features and high-level
semantics, and complex temporal structures.
Video highlight detection algorithms are generally categorized as either unsupervised or supervised methods. Unsupervised techniques create video highlights by employing
heuristics, such as video duration (Xiong et al. 2019) and visual co-occurrence (Chu, Song, and Jaimes 2015), to achieve
desired characteristics. Without human-guided signals, however, the results are not satisfying enough. As opposed to unsupervised ones, supervised approaches explicitly make full
use of the correspondence between the predicted video highlight and the human-annotated one, which achieve promis-

∗

Equal Contributions.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12902

