The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

What Do You Mean ‘Why?’: Resolving Sluices in Conversations
Victor Petrén Bach Hansen,1,2 Anders Søgaard1,3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
2
Topdanmark A/S, Denmark
3
Google Research, Berlin
{victor.petren, soegaard}@di.ku.dk

Q1 :

Abstract

A1 :
Q2 :

In conversation, we often ask one-word questions such as
‘Why?’ or ‘Who?’. Such questions are typically easy for humans to answer, but can be hard for computers, because their
resolution requires retrieving both the right semantic frames
and the right arguments from context. This paper introduces
the novel ellipsis resolution task of resolving such one-word
questions, referred to as sluices in linguistics. We present
a crowd-sourced dataset containing annotations of sluices
from over 4,000 dialogues collected from conversational QA
datasets, as well as a series of strong baseline architectures.

1

R1 :
R2 :

Where was the bombing?
San Diego’s Edward J. Schwartz Federal
Courthouse.
When?
When [was the bombing?]
When [was the bombing of San Diego’s
Edward J. Schwartz Federal Courthouse]?

Figure 1: Example of conversational sluicing. Q1 and A1
provides a context for the second question Q2 which has
multiple correct resolutions, denoted in brackets, such as R1
and R2 .

Introduction
Contributions In this paper we introduce the task of resolving conversational sluicing, a pervasive and challenging
ellipsis phenomenon. We crowd-source a new dataset containing over 4000 annotated sluices, gathered from existing
conversational QA datasets. We conduct a series of baseline
experiments on this task, using both encoder-decoder frameworks, as well as language modelling objectives, and show
through human evaluation of the predicted resolutions that
these baselines are quite strong and at times even rival the
quality of human annotators.

Stand-alone wh-word questions, such as When? in Figure
1, are easy for us to understand, but in order to interpret
them we need to retrieve implicit information from context.
Learning to do so is an instance of sluicing, an ellipsis phenomenon, deﬁned by Ross (1969) as ‘the effect of deleting everything but the preposed constituent of an embedded question, under the condition that the remainder of the
question is identical to some other part of the sentence, or a
preceding sentence.’ In the context of conversations, oneword wh-word questions are particularly frequent (Anand
and Hardt 2016; Rønning, Hardt, and Søgaard 2018), and
because they are often hard to resolve, they seem to be a frequent source of error in conversational question answering
(Choi et al. 2018; Reddy, Chen, and Manning 2018) and dialogue understanding (Vlachos and Clark 2014). We refer to
this type of sluicing as conversational sluicing.
Unlike previous work where sluice resolution is treated
as predicting the span of the antecedent (Anand and Hardt
2016; Rønning, Hardt, and Søgaard 2018), we frame conversational sluice resolution as a Natural Language Generation (NLG) task, in which we seek to automatically generate the full question, given a question-answer context and a
one-word question. To this end, we provide a novel corpus
of conversational sluice annotations and explore a series of
strong baselines and their performance on this dataset.

2

Background

Sluicing Ellipsis is the linguistic phenomenon that describes the omission of one or more words from a phrase
that can be retrieved from a previous context. Sluicing is a
case of ellipsis where content is elided from a question, leaving behind only the wh-remnant. Anand and Hardt (2016)
and Rønning, Hardt, and Søgaard (2018) consider two types
of sluices, namely embedded sluices and root sluices, also
sometimes referred to as bare sluices.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

(1)

My neighbor said he would stop by, but I don’t know
when [he would stop by].

(2)

a.
b.

My neighbor is stopping by.
When [is the stopping by]?

In Example (1), we see an instance of embedded sluicing
where the question is a part of a larger structure, and (2)
7887

