The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Rethinking the Bottom-Up Framework for Query-Based Video Localization
Long Chen,1∗ Chujie Lu,1∗ Siliang Tang,1† Jun Xiao,1 Dong Zhang,2 Chilie Tan,3 Xiaolin Li3,4
1

2

DCD Lab, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 3 Tongdun Technology 4 University of Florida
{longc, siliang, junx}@zju.edu.cn; chujielu@outlook.com;
dongzhang@njust.edu.cn; chilie.tan@tongdun.net; andyli@ece.uﬂ.edu

Abstract

Query:

In this paper, we focus on the task query-based video localization, i.e., localizing a query in a long and untrimmed video.
The prevailing solutions for this problem can be grouped into
two categories: i) Top-down approach: It pre-cuts the video
into a set of moment candidates, then it does classiﬁcation
and regression for each candidate; ii) Bottom-up approach: It
injects the whole query content into each video frame, then
it predicts the probabilities of each frame as a ground truth
segment boundary (i.e., start or end). Both two frameworks
have respective shortcomings: the top-down models suffer
from heavy computations and they are sensitive to the heuristic rules, while the performance of bottom-up models is behind the performance of top-down counterpart thus far. However, we argue that the performance of bottom-up framework
is severely underestimated by current unreasonable designs,
including both the backbone and head network. To this end,
we design a novel bottom-up model: Graph-FPN with Dense
Predictions (GDP). For the backbone, GDP ﬁrstly generates a
frame feature pyramid to capture multi-level semantics, then
it utilizes graph convolution to encode the plentiful scene relationships, which incidentally mitigates the semantic gaps in
the multi-scale feature pyramid. For the head network, GDP
regards all frames falling in the ground truth segment as the
foreground, and each foreground frame regresses the unique
distances from its location to bi-directional boundaries. Extensive experiments on two challenging query-based video
localization tasks (natural language video localization and
video relocalization), involving four challenging benchmarks
(TACoS, Charades-STA, ActivityNet Captions, and ActivityVRL), have shown that GDP surpasses the state-of-the-art
top-down models.

A lady is seen putting wax on a mans shoes.

Ref:
0.0s

21.4s

(a)
Query:

Ref:
19.5s

24.6s

(b)
Figure 1: (a) Natural Language Video Localization: The
query is a natural language; (b) Video Relocalization: The
query is a video clip. Both tasks aim to localize a segment
with start (0.0s/19.5s) and end (21.4s/24.6s) in the reference
video (Ref) which semantically corresponds to the query.

were recently proposed: 1) Natural Language Video Localization (NLVL) (Gao et al. 2017; Anne Hendricks et
al. 2017), where the query is a natural language description
(Figure 1 (a)). 2) Video Relocalization (VRL) (Feng et al.
2018), where the query is a video clip (Figure 1 (b)). Both
tasks share the same target, i.e., identifying the start and end
point of the segment in reference video which semantically
corresponds to the query. Moreover, QBVL is an indispensable technique for many important video applications, e.g.,
text-/context- based video highlight detection or retrieval,
video-based person re-id (Liu et al. 2016; Ye et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2012b; 2012a; 2017).
A straightforward solution for QBVL is in a slidingwindow fashion: it explicitly pre-cuts the reference video
into a set of moment candidates by multiple predeﬁned tem-

Introduction
Query-based Video Localization (QBVL), i.e., capturing the
gist of a query and localizing the semantic-similar moment
with the query in a long and untrimmed reference video, is
one of the core tasks in video scene understanding. With
the release of large scale video datasets and developments in
video representation learning, two challenging QBVL tasks
∗

L. Chen and C. Lu are co-ﬁrst authors with equal contributions.
Siliang Tang is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10551

