The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Awareness of Human Relational Strategies in Virtual Agents
Ian Beaver, Cynthia Freeman

Abdullah Mueen

Verint Next IT
Spokane Valley, WA USA
{ian.beaver, cynthia.freeman}@verint.com

Department of Computer Science
University of New Mexico, USA
mueen@unm.edu

well addressed in conversational AI is the relational strategies (e.g. self-disclosure and justiﬁcation) that humans employ when conversing with one another.
As IVAs become more human-like, we theorize that users
will increasingly use relational strategies with IVAs similar
to conversing with humans. There is a large body of work
on development of trust between humans engaged in virtual
dialog (Ballantyne 2004; Coppola, Hiltz, and Rotter 2004;
Bickmore and Cassell 2001). In addition, there has been signiﬁcant research into how humans communicate relationally when trying to perform tasks with other humans. Such
communication may be to inﬂuence (e.g. compliance gaining (Littlejohn and Foss 2009; Wilson 2002) and afﬁnity
seeking (Bell and Daly 1984)) or to invoke reciprocal relational strategies (Mottet, Martin, and Myers 2004) by the
other party. The overarching focus of such work is on how
relational strategies contribute to trust and communication
between human speakers. From this literature, we predict
the types of strategies humans may employ with IVAs as
they relate to them in an increasingly human manner.
In customer service and personal assistant domains, trust
is necessary between the human agent and customer. The
customer’s issues must be viewed by the agent as legitimate for proper attention to be given. Likewise, customers
must trust that the agent is capable of assisting them and
will not mistreat their information. Current research shows
that human-like virtual agents are associated with not only
greater user trust but also trust resilience when the agent
makes mistakes (de Visser et al. 2016; Bickmore and Picard 2005). To build trust with the agent, users may establish
credibility through small talk, self-disclosure, and by providing justiﬁcation of their requests (Bickmore and Cassell
2001). Handling such relational language directly has not
yet been a focus of the conversational AI community.
In interactive question answering, such as dialogs with an
IVA, understanding user intent is essential for the success
of the IVA (Chai, Zhang, and Baldwin 2006). The intent can
be deﬁned as the interpretation of a user input that allows an
agent to formulate the best response. However, when relational strategies are applied to IVAs, the additional language
introduced can obfuscate the primary user intent. If not anticipated, such language can lead to confusion in the IVA and
a degradation of user experience in the form of clariﬁcation
questions and wrong information.

Abstract
As Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVAs) increase in adoption
and further emulate human personalities, we are interested
in how humans apply relational strategies to them compared
to other humans in a service environment. Human-computer
data from three live customer service IVAs was collected, and
annotators marked all text that was deemed unnecessary to
the determination of user intention as well as the presence of
multiple intents. After merging the selections of multiple annotators, a second round of annotation determined the classes
of relational language present in the unnecessary sections
such as Greetings, Backstory, Justiﬁcation, Gratitude, Rants,
or Expressing Emotions. We compare the usage of such language in human-human service interactions. We show that
removal of this language from task-based inputs has a positive effect by both an increase in conﬁdence and improvement
in responses, as evaluated by humans, demonstrating the need
for IVAs to anticipate relational language injection. This work
provides a methodology to identify relational segments and a
baseline of human performance in this task as well as laying
the groundwork for IVAs to reciprocate relational strategies
in order to improve their believeability.

Introduction
Conversational AI is an active ﬁeld of research involving
techniques for software agents to engage in natural conversational interactions with humans (Ram et al. 2018). A popular application of conversational AI is Intelligent Personal
Assistants such as Apple’s Siri or Google Assistant, which
are commonly used for answering questions and task optimization. Company-speciﬁc automated assistants, known
as Intelligent Virtual Agents/Assistants or IVAs, are increasingly automating the ﬁrst layer of technical and product support with a market value projected to reach $11.3 billion by
2024 (IMARC Group 2019). In these business domains the
accuracy and efﬁciency of IVAs directly impacts customer
satisfaction and company support costs.
To better assist humans, IVA designers strive to support human-like interactions. Take, for example, Amazon’s
Alexa Prize competition where student developers attempt to
build IVAs that can carry on meaningful and engaging conversations for 20 minutes (Khatri et al. 2018). One psychological aspect of human conversation that has not yet been
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2602

