The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bridging the Gap between Pre-Training
and Fine-Tuning for End-to-End Speech Translation
Chengyi Wang,1∗ Yu Wu,2 Shujie Liu,2 Zhenglu Yang,1 Ming Zhou2
1
Nankai University, Tianjin, China
Microsoft Research Aisa, Beijing, China
cywang@mail.nankai.edu.cn, {Wu.Yu, shujliu, mingzhou}@microsoft.com, yangzl@nankai.edu.cn
2

and MT. A common practice is to pre-train two encoderdecoder models for ASR and MT respectively, and then initialize the ST model with the encoder of the ASR model and
the decoder of the MT model. Subsequently, the ST model
is optimized with the multi-task learning by weighing the
losses of ASR, MT, and ST. This approach, however, causes
a huge gap between pre-training and ﬁne-tuning, which are
summarized into three folds:

Abstract
End-to-end speech translation, a hot topic in recent years,
aims to translate a segment of audio into a speciﬁc language
with an end-to-end model. Conventional approaches employ
multi-task learning and pre-training methods for this task,
but they suffer from the huge gap between pre-training and
ﬁne-tuning. To address these issues, we propose a Tandem
Connectionist Encoding Network (TCEN) which bridges the
gap by reusing all subnets in ﬁne-tuning, keeping the roles
of subnets consistent, and pre-training the attention module.
Furthermore, we propose two simple but effective methods
to guarantee the speech encoder outputs and the MT encoder
inputs are consistent in terms of semantic representation and
sequence length. Experimental results show that our model
leads to signiﬁcant improvements in En-De and En-Fr translation irrespective of the backbones.

1

• Subnet Waste: The ST system just reuses the ASR encoder and the MT decoder, while discards other pretrained subnets, such as the MT encoder. Consequently,
valuable semantic information captured by the MT encoder cannot be inherited by the ﬁnal ST system.
• Role Mismatch: The speech encoder plays different roles
in pre-training and ﬁne-tuning. The encoder is a pure
acoustic model in pre-training, while it has to extract semantic and linguistic features additionally in ﬁne-tuning,
which signiﬁcantly increases the learning difﬁculty.

Introduction

Speech-to-Text translation (ST) is essential for a wide range
of scenarios: for example in emergency calls, where agents
have to respond emergent requests in a foreign language
(Munro 2010); or in online courses, where audiences and
speakers use different languages (Jan et al. 2018). To tackle
this problem, existing approaches can be categorized into
cascaded method (Ney 1999; Ma et al. 2019), where a machine translation (MT) model translates outputs of an automatic speech recognition (ASR) system into target language, and end-to-end method (Duong et al. 2016; Weiss
et al. 2017), where a single model learns acoustic frames
to target word sequence mappings in one step towards the
ﬁnal objective of interest. Although the cascaded model remains the dominant approach due to its better performance,
the end-to-end method becomes more and more popular because it has lower latency by avoiding inferences with two
models and rectiﬁes the error propagation in theory.
Since it is hard to obtain a large-scale ST dataset, multitask learning (Weiss et al. 2017; Bérard et al. 2018) and pretraining techniques (Bansal et al. 2019) have been applied to
end-to-end ST model to leverage large-scale datasets of ASR

• Non-pre-trained Attention Module: Previous work
(Bérard et al. 2018) trains attention modules for ASR, MT
and ST respectively, hence, the attention module of ST
does not beneﬁt from the pre-training.
To address these issues, we propose a Tandem Connectionist Encoding Network (TCEN), which is able to reuse
all subnets in pre-training, keep the roles of subnets consistent, and pre-train the attention module. Concretely, the
TCEN consists of three components, a speech encoder, a text
encoder, and a target text decoder. Different from the previous work that pre-trains an encoder-decoder based ASR
model, we only pre-train an ASR encoder by optimizing
the Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) (Graves et
al. 2006) objective function. In this way, the additional decoder of ASR is not required while keeping the ability to
read acoustic features into the source language space by the
speech encoder. Besides, the text encoder and decoder can
be pre-trained on a large MT dataset. After that, we employ
common used multi-task learning method to jointly learn
ASR, MT and ST tasks.
Compared to prior works, the encoder of TCEN is a concatenation of an ASR encoder and an MT encoder and our
model does not have an ASR decoder, so the subnet waste

∗

Works are done during internship at Microsoft
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9161

