The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neural Machine Translation with Byte-Level Subwords

†

Changhan Wang,† Kyunghyun Cho,†‡ Jiatao Gu†

Facebook AI Research; ‡ New York University;  CIFAR Global Scholar
{changhan, kyunghyuncho, jgu}@fb.com

Abstract

ᇆ|
ಋ΄
| ೌಋ |
΄
|
ᶪ
ᇆ | ಋ E3 81 | AE | ೌ | ಋ E3 81 | AE | E9 9F | B3

Almost all existing machine translation models are built on
top of character-based vocabularies: characters, subwords or
words. Rare characters from noisy text or character-rich languages such as Japanese and Chinese however can unnecessarily take up vocabulary slots and limit its compactness.
Representing text at the level of bytes and using the 256
byte set as vocabulary is a potential solution to this issue.
High computational cost has however prevented it from being widely deployed or used in practice. In this paper, we
investigate byte-level subwords, speciﬁcally byte-level BPE
(BBPE), which is compacter than character vocabulary and
has no out-of-vocabulary tokens, but is more efﬁcient than using pure bytes only is. We claim that contextualizing BBPE
embeddings is necessary, which can be implemented by a
convolutional or recurrent layer. Our experiments show that
BBPE has comparable performance to BPE while its size is
only 1/8 of that for BPE. In the multilingual setting, BBPE
maximizes vocabulary sharing across many languages and
achieves better translation quality. Moreover, we show that
BBPE enables transferring models between languages with
non-overlapping character sets.

Figure 1: BPE (upper) and BBPE (lower) tokenization of a
Japanese sentence. Bytes (from partial characters) are represented by hexadecimal digits.

well as in a novel setup of transfer learning to a new language with a non-overlapping character set.

Byte Level Text Representation
Encoding Byte-Level Representation We consider UTF8 encoding of text, which encodes each Unicode character
into 1 to 4 bytes. This allows us to model a sentence as a sequence of bytes instead of characters. While there are 138K
Unicode characters covering over 150 languages, we represent a sentence in any language as a sequence of UTF-8
bytes (248 out of 256 possible bytes).
A byte sequence representation of text is often much
longer (up to 4x) than a character sequence representation, which makes it computationally demanding to use
bytes as they are. As an alternative, we consider segmenting a byte sequence into variable-length n-grams (byte-level
“subwords”). Speciﬁcally, we learn BPE vocabulary on the
byte-level representation which extends UTF-8 byte set with
byte n-grams. We denote this type of vocabulary as B(ytelevel)BPE in the rest of the paper. Figure 1 shows an example of BBPE tokenization.
BBPE symbols can be partial characters shared by different characters or the combination of complete and partial
characters. This arbitrariness may necessitate incorporating
a larger context surrounding each symbol for disambiguation and learning the character boundaries. In this work, we
base our experiments on Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017)
models. We propose to use either a depth-wise convolutional
layer (Kaiser, Gomez, and Chollet 2017) or a bidirectional
recurrent layer with gated recurrent units (Cho et al. 2014,
GRU,) to contextualize BBPE embeddings before feeding
them into the model:

Introduction
It has become a standard practice to build a vocabulary
in neural machine translation (NMT) (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) using bytepair encoding (BPE) (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2015).
In this practice, we notice that BPE is used at the level of
characters rather than at the level of bytes, which is more
common in data compression. We suspect this is because
text is often represented naturally as a sequence of characters, although it has recently been noticed that byte representation of text has its own advantages, such as compactness
(up to 256 possible values) and being agnostic to languages.
In this paper, we look into byte-level “subwords” that are
used to tokenize text into variable-length byte n-grams, as
opposed to character-level subwords in which we represent
text as a sequence of character n-grams. We speciﬁcally focus on byte-level BPE (BBPE), examining compact BBPE
vocabularies in both bilingual and multilingual settings as
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9154

