The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

PIDS: An Intelligent Electric Power Management Platform
Yongqing Zheng,1,2,3 Han Yu,3,4* Yuliang Shi,1,2,3* Kun Zhang,1,2,5 Shuai Zhen,2
Lizhen Cui,1,3 Cyril Leung,3,6 Chunyan Miao3,4*
1

School of Software, Shandong University (SDU), Jinan, China
2
Dareway Software Co. Ltd, Jinan, China
3
Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (C-FAIR), Shandong University (SDU), Jinan, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
5
School of Information Science and Engineering, University of Jinan, Jinan, China
6
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of British Columbia (UBC), Vancouver, BC, Canada
*Corresponding Authors: {han.yu, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg, shiyuliang@sdu.edu.cn
Abstract
Short-term Power Usage Gap
Prediction

Electricity information tracking systems are increasingly being adopted across China. Such systems can collect real-time
power consumption data from users, and provide opportunities for artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) to help power companies
and authorities make optimal demand-side management decisions. In this paper, we discuss power utilization improvement in Shandong Province, China with a deployed AI application - the Power Intelligent Decision Support (PIDS)
platform. Based on improved short-term power consumption
gap prediction, PIDS uses an optimal power adjustment plan
which enables ﬁne-grained Demand Response (DR) and Orderly Power Utilization (OPU) recommendations to ensure
stable operation while minimizing power disruptions and improving fair treatment of participating companies. Deployed
in August 2018, the platform is helping over 400 companies
optimize their power consumption through DR while dynamically managing the OPU process for around 10,000 companies. Compared to the previous system, power outage under
PIDS through planned shutdown has been reduced from 16%
to 0.56%, resulting in signiﬁcant gains in economic activities.

No

Threshold
Exceeded?
Yes
Power Usage Adjustment
Planning

Gathering Responses from
Participating Companies

Executing the Adjustment Plan

Approval and Archival

Figure 1: The general workﬂow of existing demand-side
power management systems in China.

Introduction

2. Demand side, through consumer usage scheduling.
In China, power generation capacity is still limited by coal
ﬁred power plants. There is not much room for optimization
on the supply side. Thus, the focus of existing power management systems in China is generally on the demand side
to mitigate peaks and troughs in power demand in order to
maintain safe operation (Zhou and Yang 2015).
Existing demand-side power management systems in
China generally operate following the steps below (Figure
1):
1. Short-term power consumption gap prediction: this step
is typically performed by experts based on domain
knowledge. In the case of Shandong province, the 3-day
moving average values of previous power demand and
supply are used as the basis for predicting the power consumption gaps in ﬁve days’ time. If the predicted usage
gap is larger than a predeﬁned threshold value, the power
consumption adjustment operations will be triggered.
2. Developing a hierarchical power consumption adjustment plan: based on the predicted power consumption

With the rapid development of the Chinese economy, the
electricity demand by various industries is also increasing.
Many provinces in China primarily rely on coal to generate electricity. This results in much environmental pollution;
in addition, the coal supply limits the electric power generation (Meng et al. 2019). The inconsistent quality of coal
results in high maintenance cost at the power plants. Seasonal climate changes and natural disasters may also cause
short-term imbalances in the demand and supply of electricity, putting transient pressure on the power grid (Li, Pizer,
and Wu 2019). These factors can result in reduced power
generation capacities, ﬂuctuations in electricity prices and
sometimes forced power outages, thereby negatively affecting the stability and safe operation of the power grid.
At present, power grid management is carried out using
two main approaches (Colak et al. 2016):
1. Supply side, through power grid scheduling;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13220

