The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Transductive Ensemble Learning for Neural Machine Translation
Yiren Wang,1,* Lijun Wu,2,∗ Yingce Xia,3,† Tao Qin,3 ChengXiang Zhai,1 Tie-Yan Liu3
2

1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
3
Microsoft Research Asia
1
{yiren, czhai}@illinois.edu
2
wulijun3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
3
{Yingce.Xia, taoqin, tyliu}@microsoft.com

step. The quality of ensemble results depends on both the
accuracy and diversity of individual models (Imamura and
Sumita 2017), which are usually obtained through independent training.
While model ensemble is one of the most popular and
important techniques to enhance the performance of NMT
systems, it does not always perform well and suffers from
several limitations in different scenarios: 1) Ensemble of
strong models. It has been observed from both previous
work (Deng et al. 2018) and our empirical studies (Table 3
and 4) that only marginal improvements can be obtained
from ensemble when the individual models are of high accuracy. 2) Diminishing effect of more models. Ensemble of
more models does not always lead to better performance
and may even hurt the ﬁnal accuracy (Figure 2). Complex
model selection approach (Deng et al. 2018) or carefully
designed weights (Garmash and Monz 2016) are often required, which is a non-trivial process when there are a large
number of individual models available.
In this work, we propose a new approach to effectively
leverage multiple NMT models for better performance and
overcome the aforementioned limitations of the conventional model ensemble. The key idea is to leverage full or
partial input test data with ensemble learning. Speciﬁcally,
source input sentences from the validation and test sets are
ﬁrstly translated to the target language space with multiple
different well-trained NMT models, which results in a pretranslated synthetic dataset. The individual models are then
ﬁnetuned on the generated synthetic dataset. At last, only
one single model (selected by the accuracy on the validation
set) will be used during the ﬁnal inference phase. The idea of
leveraging full or partial test set falls into the setting of transductive learning (Gammerman, Vovk, and Vapnik 1998;
Joachims 1999), which has various application scenarios
when real-time inference is not needed. For example, ofﬂine translation of a document1 or a book, ofﬂine question answering or document reading comprehension such
as SQuAD challenge2 . We name the proposed approach
“Transductive Ensemble Learning” (TEL).
We conduct extensive experiments on different transla-

Abstract
Ensemble learning, which aggregates multiple diverse models for inference, is a common practice to improve the accuracy of machine learning tasks. However, it has been observed
that the conventional ensemble methods only bring marginal
improvement for neural machine translation (NMT) when individual models are strong or there are a large number of individual models. In this paper, we study how to effectively aggregate multiple NMT models under the transductive setting
where the source sentences of the test set are known. We propose a simple yet effective approach named transductive ensemble learning (TEL), in which we use all individual models
to translate the source test set into the target language space
and then ﬁnetune a strong model on the translated synthetic
corpus. We conduct extensive experiments on different settings (with/without monolingual data) and different language
pairs (English↔{German, Finnish}). The results show that
our approach boosts strong individual models with signiﬁcant
improvement and beneﬁts a lot from more individual models.
Speciﬁcally, we achieve the state-of-the-art performances on
the WMT2016-2018 English↔German translations.

1

Introduction

Ensemble learning, which aggregates multiple models during inference, is an effective and widely used technique to
boost performance in machine learning tasks (Zhou 2012).
Different aggregating methods have been proposed, including bagging (Breiman 1996), (ada)boosting (Kuznetsov,
Mohri, and Syed 2014), etc. Ensemble of neural networks (Hansen and Salamon 1990) has effectively improved
the accuracy of neural machine translation (NMT), making
it an important and widely adopted technique in the stateof-the-art NMT systems (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Gehring et al. 2017;
Vaswani et al. 2017; Hassan et al. 2018). In the context of
NMT, a common practice is to average probabilities computed by individual models for each word and choose the
word with the largest averaged probability at each decoding
∗
The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work. This
work was conducted at Microsoft Research Asia.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

6291

http://www.statmt.org/wmt19
https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer

