The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Pyramid Constrained Self-Attention
Network for Fast Video Salient Object Detection
Yuchao Gu,1* Lijuan Wang,1∗ Ziqin Wang,2 Yun Liu,1
Ming-Ming Cheng,1† Shao-Ping Lu1
1

TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University
2
The University of Sydney
{ycgu, wlj, nk12csly}@mail.nankai.edu.cn
slu@nankai.edu.cn
ziqin.wang.edu@gmail.com
Abstract
Spatiotemporal information is essential for video salient object detection (VSOD) due to the highly attractive object motion for human’s attention. Previous VSOD methods usually use Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) or 3D ConvNet
(C3D), which can only encode motion information through
step-by-step propagation in the temporal domain. Recently,
the non-local mechanism is proposed to capture long-range
dependencies directly. However, it is not straightforward to
apply the non-local mechanism into VSOD, because i) it fails
to capture motion cues and tends to learn motion-independent
global contexts; ii) its computation and memory costs are prohibitive for video dense prediction tasks such as VSOD. To
address the above problems, we design a Constrained SelfAttention (CSA) operation to capture motion cues, based on
the prior that objects always move in a continuous trajectory. We group a set of CSA operations in Pyramid structures (PCSA) to capture objects at various scales and speeds.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method
outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods in both accuracy and speed (110 FPS on a single Titan Xp) on ﬁve challenge datasets. Our code is available at https://github.com/
guyuchao/PyramidCSA.

D 1RQORFDO

E &RQVWUDLQHG6HOI$WWHQWLRQ

Figure 1: The reference area of the non-local operation and
the CSA. (a) The non-local measures the pair-wise relation
on all space-time position. (b) The CSA measures the pairwise relation in the neighbor area of query position in consecutive frames.
capture the temporal information. However, these traditional
techniques can only process adjacent areas at a speciﬁc time
in the temporal domain, it is difﬁcult for them to capture
long-range temporal information directly.
The recently proposed non-local neural network (Wang et
al. 2018) generalizes self-attention mechanism (Vaswani et
al. 2017) in machine translation. It can model long-range
temporal dependencies in video classiﬁcation by learning
pairwise relationships among feature elements of different
frames. However, in VSOD, we ﬁnd that the non-local operation would focus on global contexts rather than motion
cues. Since the non-local is a distance-independent operation in space and time, it tends to learn global contexts that
ﬁt all queries.
In order to model motion dependencies in the video segment, we design an alternative to non-local, named Constrained Self-Attention (CSA). CSA is based on the motion
prior that objects always move in a continuous trajectory.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, instead of learning dense pairwise
relationships globally, CSA learns relations in a neighbor

Introduction
Video Salient Object Detection (VSOD) aims at locating the
most attractive object in video sequences. It usually serves as
a pre-processing step for many real-time applications, such
as video tracking (Wu, Li, and Luo 2014), video segmentation (Wang, Shen, and Porikli 2015) and human-computer
interaction (Xu et al. 2016). Therefore, both efﬁciency and
accuracy are important for the VSOD model design.
Since object motion is highly attractive to human’s attention, spatiotemporal information is essential for VSOD. Previous state-of-the-art VSOD approaches (Le and Sugimoto
2018; Li et al. 2018a; Song et al. 2018; Fan et al. 2019)
mainly rely on some traditional techniques, including 3D
ConvNet (C3D) (Tran et al. 2015), ConvLSTM (Xingjian
et al. 2015), and optical ﬂow (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015), to
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author: cmm@nankai.edu.cn.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10869

