The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Chained Representation Cycling: Learning to Estimate
3D Human Pose and Shape by Cycling Between Representations
Nadine Rüegg,1,2 Christoph Lassner,3 Michael Black,2 Konrad Schindler1
1

ETH Zürich, 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, 3 Amazon
{nrueegg, classner, black}@tue.mpg.de, schindler@ethz.ch

then we posit that this approach should be powerful enough
to generalize to many other scenarios.
Consider the example in Fig. 1. Here, we have three representations of the human body: pixels, segment-based, semantic 2D maps, and 3D models. The goal is to learn the
mapping from image pixels to 3D models, but we take a
path through an intermediate representation and argue that
this sequence is easier to learn. The key question is: what
properties should intermediate representations in the chain
have to facilitate learning? We suggest that a good intermediate representation should be pixel-based, so that the
system can learn a per-pixel mapping from the image pixels to the representation. That is, our part segmentations
are not so abstract that the mapping becomes too hard
to learn in an unsupervised way. Second, the intermediate representation should support 3D inference. That is, it
should carry enough information that it is easy to learn the
mapping to 3D pose and shape. Previous work has shown
that it is possible to learn the mapping that “lifts” human
part segmentations to 3D human pose (Lassner et al. 2017;
Omran et al. 2018). We go further to show that we can learn
a mapping from image pixels via the intermediate representation to 3D, and vice versa, with little or no training data.
Speciﬁcally, imagine you are given a set of images, IM,
showing people with arbitrary pose and appearance. Moreover, you have access to a “high-level” 3D human body
model. Rendering photo-realistic training images from a 3D
body remains a hard problem, while it is easy to render the
body parts as a segmentation mask (see Figure 1). But we do
not know the relationship between the set of rendered segmentations, PR, and the natural image set IM. Can we nevertheless use the two unrelated sets of pictures to learn the
mapping from raw pixels in IM to 3D body shape and pose?
To do this we develop a novel, unsupervised multi-step cycle model—a representation chain—between three different
representations: pixels, segments, and 3D parameters.
The presented approach provides a step towards unsupervised learning of 3D object pose from images. A key advantage of such a direction is that it theoretically allows us to
train from unlimited amounts of data, which should improve
robustness to real imaging conditions and natural variability.
To test the effectiveness of the approach, we experiment

Abstract
The goal of many computer vision systems is to transform
image pixels into 3D representations. Recent popular models use neural networks to regress directly from pixels to
3D object parameters. Such an approach works well when
supervision is available, but in problems like human pose
and shape estimation, it is difﬁcult to obtain natural images
with 3D ground truth. To go one step further, we propose a
new architecture that facilitates unsupervised, or lightly supervised, learning. The idea is to break the problem into a
series of transformations between increasingly abstract representations. Each step involves a cycle designed to be learnable
without annotated training data, and the chain of cycles delivers the ﬁnal solution. Speciﬁcally, we use 2D body part segments as an intermediate representation that contains enough
information to be lifted to 3D, and at the same time is simple
enough to be learned in an unsupervised way. We demonstrate the method by learning 3D human pose and shape from
un-paired and un-annotated images. We also explore varying
amounts of paired data and show that cycling greatly alleviates the need for paired data. While we present results for
modeling humans, our formulation is general and can be applied to other vision problems.

Introduction
A fundamental task of any vision system, whether natural
or artiﬁcial, is to learn the relationship between the observed
“image” and the 3D scene structure. That is, the system must
transform pixels into 3D information and, conversely, take
3D hypotheses about the world and conﬁrm them in the image. This can be thought of as a “cycle” from image pixels to
3D models. Learning such a cyclic mapping is challenging
and current methods assume paired training data of image
pixels and ground truth 3D. We present an approach that requires little, or no, paired data.
To make the problem concrete, we consider the problem
of 3D human pose and shape estimation. This is a challenging test domain since the human body is complex, deformable, and articulated. Additionally, it varies dramatically in appearance due to clothing, hairstyles, etc. If we can
ﬁnd a solution to learn 3D body shape and pose from pixels,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5561

