The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hierarchical Online Instance Matching for Person Search
Di Chen,1,4 Shanshan Zhang,1,3∗ Wanli Ouyang,5 Jian Yang,1,2∗ Bernt Schiele4
1

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministryof Education,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
3
Science and Technology on Parallel and Distributed Processing Laboratory (PDL)
4
MPI Informatics, 5 The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
{dichen, shanshan.zhang, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, {dichen, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au
Abstract

Person Search is a challenging task which requires to retrieve
a person’s image and the corresponding position from an image dataset. It consists of two sub-tasks: pedestrian detection and person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID). One of the key challenges is to properly combine the two sub-tasks into a uniﬁed
framework. Existing works usually adopt a straightforward
strategy by concatenating a detector and a re-ID model directly, either into an integrated model or into separated models. We argue that simply concatenating detection and re-ID
is a sub-optimal solution, and we propose a Hierarchical Online Instance Matching (HOIM) loss which exploits the hierarchical relationship between detection and re-ID to guide
the learning of our network. Our novel HOIM loss function harmonizes the objectives of the two sub-tasks and encourages better feature learning. In addition, we improve the
loss update policy by introducing Selective Memory Refreshment (SMR) for unlabeled persons, which takes advantage of
the potential discrimination power of unlabeled data. From
the experiments on two standard person search benchmarks,
i.e. CUHK-SYSU and PRW, we achieve state-of-the-art performance, which justiﬁes the effectiveness of our proposed
HOIM loss on learning robust features.

0.9

0.1

Person

Background

…
Ϭ͘ϬϮ

Ϭ͘Ϯϰ
Ϭ͘ϱϬ

ϭ

Ϯ

…

Ϭ͘ϭϯ

Ϭ͘Ϭϭ

ϯ

͍

͍

…
Figure 1: The hierarchical relationship between detection (the ﬁrst layer) and re-identiﬁcation (the second layer).

On the topic of person search, a few works have been
proposed since the release of two large-scale person search
datasets (Xiao et al. 2017b; Zheng et al. 2017). Generally, these works can be clustered into two categories: onestage methods (Xiao et al. 2017b; 2017a; Liu et al. 2017a;
Chang et al. 2018; Munjal et al. 2019; Yan et al. 2019)
that solve detection and re-ID in an end-to-end model and
two-stage methods (Zheng et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018;
Lan, Zhu, and Gong 2018) that split detection and re-ID into
two independent models. One-stage methods aim to learn a
mutual representation shared by the two sub-tasks, but they
suffer from contradictory objectives of the two sub-tasks
and conﬂicting focusing points as discussed in (Chen et al.
2018), since they are simple concatenations of a detector and
a linear embedding layer without harmonizing the two subtasks. On the other hand, two-stage methods avoid this issue
by separated modeling and they usually yield better performance, but neglect the inter-dependency between pedestrian
detection and re-ID and incur a higher computation cost.
Motivated by the discussion above, we propose to explicitly model the relationship between pedestrian detection and
re-ID, and further exploit it as a prior to guide the onestage model learning. Speciﬁcally, detection and re-ID form

Introduction
In video surveillance, pedestrian detection and person reidentiﬁcation are two important tasks. They have attracted a
lot of research attention in recent years individually. Pedestrian detection requires to detect the bounding box of persons in a panorama image regardless of their identity information, while person re-ID aims to match the reappearance
of a probe person within pre-deﬁned bounding boxes. Both
tasks are important but they are not directly applicable to
a surveillance system because of their limited functionality.
Therefore, person search is introduced by (Xu et al. 2014),
which consolidates the two sub-tasks into a uniﬁed system.
However, the task of person search is more challenging since
it gathers domain-speciﬁc difﬁculties from the two sub-tasks
together, e.g. viewpoint and pose variance, occlusion, complex background, false alarms, misalignments, etc.
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10518

