The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

General Partial Label Learning via Dual Bipartite Graph Autoencoder
Brian Chen,1 Bo Wu,1 Alireza Zareian,1 Hanwang Zhang,2 Shih-Fu Chang1
1

Columbia University, 2 Nanyang Technological University
{bc2754, bo.wu, az2407, sc250}@columbia.edu; hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We formulate a practical yet challenging problem: General
Partial Label Learning (GPLL). Compared to the traditional
Partial Label Learning (PLL) problem, GPLL relaxes the supervision assumption from instance-level — a label set partially labels an instance — to group-level: 1) a label set partially labels a group of instances, where the within-group
instance-label link annotations are missing, and 2) crossgroup links are allowed — instances in a group may be partially linked to the label set from another group. Such ambiguous group-level supervision is more practical in real-world
scenarios as additional annotation on the instance-level is no
longer required, e.g., face-naming in videos where the group
consists of faces in a frame, labeled by a name set in the corresponding caption. In this paper, we propose a novel graph
convolutional network (GCN) called Dual Bipartite Graph
Autoencoder (DB-GAE) to tackle the label ambiguity challenge of GPLL. First, we exploit the cross-group correlations
to represent the instance groups as dual bipartite graphs:
within-group and cross-group, which reciprocally complements each other to resolve the linking ambiguities. Second,
we design a GCN autoencoder to encode and decode them,
where the decodings are considered as the reﬁned results. It
is worth noting that DB-GAE is self-supervised and transductive, as it only uses the group-level supervision without a
separate ofﬂine training stage. Extensive experiments on two
real-world datasets demonstrate that DB-GAE signiﬁcantly
outperforms the best baseline over absolute 0.159 F1-score
and 24.8% accuracy. We further offer analysis on various levels of label ambiguities.

Figure 1: Top: Traditional PLL problem — each face is associated with one of the names in the caption. Bottom: The
proposed GPLL problem addressed in this paper — there
are general cases of faces without names or names without
faces. See Figure 2 for illustrative formulation differences.
Images are from MPII-MD (Rohrbach et al. 2017) and MVAD (Pini et al. 2019)

of PLL will be prohibitively expensive. Figure 1 (bottom)
shows several examples of the relaxation from instance-level
to group-level: a group of instances
and the candidate label set [
,
]. Compared to
the tradition PLL, this is more complex and ambiguous: 1)
within-group annotations are dropped, 2) cross-group links
are allowed —
appears in the candidate label set
of another group [
], and 3) there are some instances
with null label that is not in any label set. Such relaxed supervision is more appealing since it requires NO extra annotation on the instance-level. To this end, we propose
a novel problem: General Partial Label Learning (GPLL),
whose training annotation only comes from the inherent data
pair (Figure 1 bottom), and thus is very challenging. Figure 2
illustrates some related problems with progressively relaxed
supervisions.
A straightforward approach to GPLL is to consider some
within-/cross-group heuristics such as : 1) Instances with
across groups likely belong
similar features
to the same label. 2) Similar instances
cooccur with the same label
across groups implies
that the label is likely assigned to those instances. 3) An instance cannot belong to multi-labels
→
,

Introduction
Labels are not always clean, complete, and unequivocal. As illustrated in Figure 1 (top), given a training instance
, it corresponds to a candidate label set
[
,
] where only one of them is correct. Learning from such ambiguous labels is known as Partial Label
Learning (PLL) (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011), which is a
practical problem since it signiﬁcantly reduces the human
label effort compared to other one-to-one supervisions.
However, the assumption of PLL is still hardly feasible
in large-scale scenarios: if we have millions of frames in
videos or Web images, the instance-level label annotation
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10502

