The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Human-Machine Collaboration for Fast Land Cover Mapping
Caleb Robinson,1,∗ Anthony Ortiz,2,∗ Kolya Malkin,3 Blake Elias,6 Andi Peng,6
Dan Morris,4 Bistra Dilkina,5 Nebojsa Jojic6,†
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 University of Texas at El Paso, 3 Yale University,
Microsoft AI for Earth, 5 University of Southern California, 6 Microsoft Research

4

changes in the statistics of real-world input compared to the
training input can degrade performance considerably. Thus,
the algorithm is constantly reevaluated through human monitoring, which may trigger a process requiring repeated data
acquisition and retraining (Sculley et al. 2015). Hence, most
practical deployments are better thought of as examples of
hybrid – rather than purely artiﬁcial – intelligence. Active
learning loops can be seen as an approximate model of such
hybrid human-machine intelligence, as long as humans are
allowed deeper involvement than just as labeling oracles.
More speciﬁcally, the hypothesis is that if humans are allowed to choose which samples to label, and subsequently
ﬁne-tune a deployed model with, then they will be able to
correct model errors, such as those from input domain shift.
Image segmentation is an ideal task to test hybrid humanmachine intelligence, as segmentation is a natural ability of
humans (Grifﬁths, Abbott, and Hsu 2016) and one where
humans can exploit the spatial structure of input to identify
errors. Recent work has probed the complementary abilities
of humans and machines on image labeling tasks (Cai et
al. 2019; Nushi, Kamar, and Horvitz 2018). We investigate
whether it is possible to maximize performance on one such
application, land cover mapping from high-resolution satellite imagery, by directly integrating humans into the training loop instead of isolating the artiﬁcially intelligent component. Our methods can be applied in settings where the
human-in-the-loop can quickly search and evaluate the deployed model over unlabeled examples. This is the case in
geospatial image labeling tasks and medical image segmentation tasks (e.g., segmenting tumor-inﬁltrated lymphocytes
in pathology imagery), where unlabeled points have a strong
spatial structure (i.e., points can be thought of as part of a
large continuous image).
We summarize our main contributions as follows:

Abstract
We propose incorporating human labelers in a model ﬁnetuning system that provides immediate user feedback. In our
framework, human labelers can interactively query model
predictions on unlabeled data, choose which data to label,
and see the resulting effect on the model’s predictions. This
bi-directional feedback loop allows humans to learn how
the model responds to new data. We implement this framework for ﬁne-tuning high-resolution land cover segmentation models and compare human-selected points to points selected using standard active learning methods. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁne-tune a deep neural network – trained to segment highresolution aerial imagery into different land cover classes in
Maryland, USA – to a new spatial area in New York, USA
using both our human-in-the-loop method and traditional active learning methods. The tight loop in our proposed system
turns the algorithm and the human operator into a hybrid system that can produce land cover maps of large areas more efﬁciently than the traditional workﬂows. Our framework has applications in machine learning settings where there is a practically limitless supply of unlabeled data, of which only a small
fraction can feasibly be labeled through human efforts, such
as geospatial and medical image-based applications.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are usually imagined as artiﬁcially “intelligent” agents that mimic human autonomy and
generalization abilities: having explored their training environment, machine learning models are supposed to choose
their actions independently and reliably in similar situations.
While this notion of intelligence guides the design and testing of new algorithmic ideas, in practice, the resulting algorithms are rarely capable of either autonomy or generalization. Instead, human decision-making is present throughout
a AI model’s development and lifetime: researchers and engineers acquire data with a speciﬁc goal in mind, then work
on ﬁnding and tuning the methods that handle the peculiarities of the data well. When the algorithm is eventually
deployed, it often suffers from domain shift, where slight

• We design an interactive web tool that enables users to
test a high-resolution land cover model on any patch of
land on a satellite map, then – in the same interface – relabel pixels of their choosing and retrain (“ﬁne-tune”) the
model in real time (see Fig. 2).

∗

Work done while interning at Microsoft Research
jojic@microsoft.com
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We study the effectiveness of the combination of different
active learning query methods with different model ﬁnetuning methods in an ofﬂine study and ﬁnd that query-

†

2509

