The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MatchU: An Interactive Matching Platform
James Ferris, Hadi Hosseini
Department of Computer Science
Rochester Institute of Technology
{jef1771, hhvcs}@rit.edu

Abstract
MatchU is a web-based platform that offers an interactive
framework to ﬁnd how to form mutually-beneﬁcial relationships, decide how to distribute resources, or resolve conﬂicts
through a suite of matching algorithms rooted in economics
and artiﬁcial intelligence. In this paper, we discuss MatchU’s
vision, solutions, and future directions.

Introduction

Figure 1: A screenshot of the MatchU platform.

Matching problems are present in a myriad of real-world situations that concern mutually beneﬁcial decisions for multiple agents. These problems often arise when assigning
workers to employers in labor markets, students to colleges,
courses to students, nurses to doctors, inheritance to heirs,
or other conﬂict resolutions over scarce resources.
MatchU (MatchU.ai) offers a web-based framework for interactive representation and analysis of a variety of onesided, two-sided, and probabilistic matching mechanisms.
Its primary objective is to foster the adoption of matching
algorithms in everyday situations that involve distributing a
set of resources or forming beneﬁcial relationships through
a suite of algorithms and techniques that are rooted in economics, computer science, and artiﬁcial intelligence. From
a pedagogical perspective, MatchU leverages interactive design to inspire learners and to facilitate education in a novel
animated and customizable framework through instructional
scaffolding and inquiry-based learning. In the following sections, we describe a generic matching model and our desirable properties, and provide a description of matching solutions currently offered by MatchU (see Figure 1). We discuss
the steps of generating or modifying instances, manipulating
the interface, interacting with algorithms, and utilizing the
available tools to make matching decisions.

that N and M are the preference lists for i ∈ N and
j ∈ M , respectively. Each agent has an associated list i
representing her strict linear order over the members of the
opposite set. Thus, agent i ∈ N prefers j ∈ M to j  ∈ M if
j i j  , and similarly agent j ∈ M prefers i ∈ N to i ∈ N
if i j i . A matching problem is one-sided when agents in
one set, say M , do not have preferences over N . Agents in
N may be initially endowed with a member in M . We denote by ω the endowment proﬁle, i.e. ω = (ω1 , . . . , ωn ) such
that ∀i, i ∈ N and i = i we have ωi ∩ ωi = ∅. A matching
μ ∈ M is a mapping between the two sets that indicates an
outcome for each agent i as μ(i). A matching mechanism
takes as input preference and endowment proﬁles (which
could be empty) and outputs a matching μ ∈ M. A mechanism is probabilistic if it outputs a probability distribution
over a set of deterministic matchings, that is, μ̄ ∈ Δ(M).
Desirable Guarantees. A matching μ is stable if there exists no pair of agents (i, j) ∈ N × M such that they both
prefer each other to the (subset of) matching speciﬁed by μ.
A matching is Pareto efﬁcient if no other matching exists
that can make at least one agent better off without making
any other agent worse off. A matching is individually rational if every agent is guaranteed to receive no worse than
her initial endowment, i.e., ∀i ∈ N , either μ(i) i ωi or
μ(i) = ωi . We focus on fairness in a probabilistic sense. A
matching satisﬁes equal treatment of equals if it assigns the
same chances to agents with identical preferences. A matching is envy-free if no agent prefers the lottery assigned to
another agent. A mechanism is truthful (or strategyproof) if
no agent can beneﬁt from misreporting her preferences.

Matching Model
A matching problem is concerned with ﬁnding a mutually
beneﬁcial matching between two disjoint sets. Let N =
{1, . . . , n} and M = {1, . . . , m} denote two ﬁnite and disjoint sets. Let = (N , M ) be a preference proﬁle such
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13606

