The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Re-Attention for Visual Question Answering
Wenya Guo,1 Ying Zhang,1∗ Xiaoping Wu,1 Jufeng Yang,1
Xiangrui Cai,2 Xiaojie Yuan1,2
1

College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
College of Cyber Science, Nankai Univeristy, Tianjin, China
guowenya@dbis.nankai.edu.cn, xpwu95@163.com,
{yangjufeng, caixr, yuanxj, yingzhang}@nankai.edu.cn



Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) requires a simultaneous
understanding of images and questions. Existing methods
achieve well performance by focusing on both key objects in
images and key words in questions. However, the answer also
contains rich information which can help to better describe
the image and generate more accurate attention maps. In this
paper, to utilize the information in answer, we propose a reattention framework for the VQA task. We ﬁrst associate image and question by calculating the similarity of each objectword pairs in the feature space. Then, based on the answer,
the learned model re-attends the corresponding visual objects
in images and reconstructs the initial attention map to produce
consistent results. Beneﬁting from the re-attention procedure,
the question can be better understood, and the satisfactory answer is generated. Extensive experiments on the benchmark
dataset demonstrate the proposed method performs favorably
against the state-of-the-art approaches.













4+RZPDQ\WLUHV"

+RZPDQ\WLUHV"
$ WLUHV

$WWHQWLRQ

5H$WWHQWLRQ

       

















       

*XLGH

















Figure 1: Example of the re-attention VQA scheme. Normally, for the question “Q”, the VQA model generates initial
attention for visual image and may focus on several relevant
components of the car. The proposed re-attention mechanism obtains more accurate attention when taking additional
cues from answer “A” into consideration.

Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is one of the fundamental tasks that involve multiple modalities, i.e., text and images. It can be formulated as a classiﬁcation problem, which
predicts the correct answer for the given question according
to an image. Besides answering the given question, VQA
also beneﬁts to various applications in practice, such as education and blind person assistance (Gurari et al. 2018).
In the past years, extensive works are proposed to tackle
the VQA problem (Anderson et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2019).
They attempt to understand the image and question in the
ﬁne-grained scenario. Some of the existing methods are designed to obtain critical visual information relevant to the
question, in which the visual attention mechanism is widely
applied. In these models, the performance is improved by
learning meaningful regions or objects according to a uniﬁed question representation (Anderson et al. 2018). Some
other methods (Gao et al. 2019; Lu et al. 2016) also propose
that it is signiﬁcant to focus on key words in the question.
Both the informative visual contents in images and important words are utilized to achieve better performance.

Actually, VQA includes three elements: images, questions, and answers (Antol et al. 2015). The goal of VQA is to
predict the correct answer to the question about the image.
Existing methods treat the answer as a classiﬁcation label.
Yet the answer contains richer information. Both the questions and answers contribute to describing visual contents.
Take the question (“How many tires?”) in Figure 1 as an
example. In order to predict the correct answer “2”, VQA
methods need to understand the question and ﬁgure out the
“tires” in the image. As shown in in Figure 1, when only
the question is considered, the “car” numbered as “3” and
the “tires” are assigned higher weights compared to other
objects. Obviously, the weight assigned to the “car” is out
of place. After the answer is taken into account, i.e., “How
many tires? 2 (tires)”, the learned visual attention is more
centralized on the tires numbered as “7” and “8”. This accurate attention map can guide the visual attention learning as
expected. And accurate visual attentions help VQA models
predict correct answers.
In this paper, we propose a novel re-attention framework,
in which the answer information is used for VQA. In the re-

∗

corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
91

