The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Automated Utterance Generation
Soham Parikh,1∗ Quaizar Vohra,2 Mitul Tiwari2
1

University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA USA
2
Passage AI, Mountain View, CA USA
1
sohamp@seas.upenn.edu, 2 {quaizar, mitul}@passage.ai

In this paper we address the problem of utterance generation in the context of conversational virtual assistant
and question-answering. In case of question-answering, we
generate utterances for questions (for example, Frequently
Asked Questions or FAQs) so that we can identify the right
answer for the corresponding question even if the question
is asked in many different ways. We propose an ensemble
method for the utterance generation problem with a novel
candidate selection algorithm. Our method ﬁrst uses extractive summarization to extract important sentences from the
description. Second, we use multiple paraphrase generation
techniques to generate a diverse set of paraphrases of the title
and summary sentences. Some of the techniques we use are
full sentence backtranslation, noun/verb phrase backtranslation using constituency parsing, synonym replacement and
phrase replacement for paraphrase generation. We use an
ensemble method to combine all these different paraphrasing techniques. Finally, we use a novel candidate selection
algorithm that utilizes a combination of ﬁltering and deduplication techniques to select a good set of utterances by
leveraging some of the latest contextual embedding techniques such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) to ﬁnd semantically similar utterances and to ﬁlter out unrelated utterances
and remove duplicate utterances. Our experimental results
demonstrate that our ensemble method performs well. The
main contributions of this paper are as follows.
• First, we propose an ensemble method for the utterance
generation problem, which combines many approaches
to utterance generation, and is scalable to add new approaches.
• Second, a novel candidate selection algorithm that uses a
combination of ﬁltering and de-duplication techniques to
select generated utterances.
• Third, we adopt recent advances in large scale pre-trained
contextual embeddings like BERT and Universal Sentence Encoding for candidate selection to ﬁnd good utterances.
• Finally, we demonstrate through extensive experiments
that the proposed techniques work well for the utterance
generation problem.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2

Abstract
Conversational AI assistants are becoming popular and
question-answering is an important part of any conversational
assistant. Using relevant utterances as features in questionanswering has shown to improve both the precision and recall
for retrieving the right answer by a conversational assistant.
Hence, utterance generation has become an important problem with the goal of generating relevant utterances (sentences
or phrases) from a knowledge base article that consists of a
title and a description. However, generating good utterances
usually requires a lot of manual effort, creating the need for
an automated utterance generation. In this paper, we propose
an utterance generation system which 1) uses extractive summarization to extract important sentences from the description, 2) uses multiple paraphrasing techniques to generate a
diverse set of paraphrases of the title and summary sentences,
and 3) selects good candidate paraphrases with the help of a
novel candidate selection algorithm.

1

Introduction

Utterance generation is an important problem in QuestionAnswering, Information Retrieval, and Conversational AI
Assistants. Voice assistants like Alexa, Google Assistant,
Apple Siri, and Microsoft Cortana are proliferating and now
billions of devices have these voice assistants. Any conversational skill developed for these devices needs to understand various ways an end user is asking a question, and
be able to respond accurately. While voice assistants are
becoming very common, chatbots and conversational interfaces are getting adopted for various conversational automation use cases such as website assistants, customer service automation and IT and enterprise service automation.
Question-answering is an important part of any conversational automation use case. It is critical that a conversational assistant understands various ways that could be used
in asking the same question, essentially paraphrases of the
later. Using relevant utterances as features in a questionanswering system has shown to improve the accuracy both
in terms of precision and recall to retrieve the right answer.
∗

Work was done during an internship at PassageAI
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13344

