The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Facial Attribute Capsules for Noise Face Super Resolution
Jingwei Xin,† Nannan Wang,‡∗ Xinrui Jiang,‡ Jie Li,† Xinbo Gao,† Zhifeng Li§
†
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
‡
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
§
Tencent AI Lab, China,

Abstract
Existing face super-resolution (SR) methods mainly assume
the input image to be noise-free. Their performance degrades
drastically when applied to real-world scenarios where the
input image is always contaminated by noise. In this paper,
we propose a Facial Attribute Capsules Network (FACN) to
deal with the problem of high-scale super-resolution of noisy
face image. Capsule is a group of neurons whose activity vector models different properties of the same entity. Inspired
by the concept of capsule, we propose an integrated representation model of facial information, which named Facial
Attribute Capsule (FAC). In the SR processing, we ﬁrst generated a group of FACs from the input LR face, and then reconstructed the HR face from this group of FACs. Aiming to
effectively improve the robustness of FAC to noise, we generate FAC in semantic, probabilistic and facial attributes manners by means of integrated learning strategy. Each FAC can
be divided into two sub-capsules: Semantic Capsule (SC) and
Probabilistic Capsule (PC). Them describe an explicit facial
attribute in detail from two aspects of semantic representation and probability distribution. The group of FACs model
an image as a combination of facial attribute information in
the semantic space and probabilistic space by an attributedisentangling way. The diverse FACs could better combine
the face prior information to generate the face images with
ﬁne-grained semantic attributes. Extensive benchmark experiments show that our method achieves superior hallucination
results and outperforms state-of-the-art for very low resolution (LR) noise face image super resolution.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 1: Our face SR results on different noise levels. (a) Original
HR images. (b),(c) and (d) are the blurry LR image with 5, 10 and
30 level noise. (e) Our SR result from the LR image. (f), (g) and
(h) are our SR result from the (b),(c) and (d), respectively

Deep convolutional neural network (CNN) based Face SR
methods have received signiﬁcant attentions in recent years.
Dong et al. (Dong et al. 2015) proposed SRCNN by ﬁrstly
introducing CNN to image SR, which established a nonlinear mapping from LR to HR image. Considering the feature extraction ability of deep learning, Zhou et.al (Zhou et
al. 2015) reconstructed HR face images by combining input
face images with their depth features. Face hallucination is a
domain speciﬁc super-resolution problem, the prior knowledge in face images could be pivotal for face image superresolution. Tuzel et al.(Tuzel, Taguchi, and Hershey 2016)
proposed GLN to extract the global and local information
from face images. Yu et al. (Yu and Porikli 2016) investigated GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014) to create perceptually
realistic HR face images. Zhu et al. (Zhu et al. 2016) proposed CBN to overcome the different face spatial conﬁguration by dense correspondence ﬁeld estimation. Tai et al.
(Chen et al. 2018) employed facial landmarks and parsing
maps to train the network. However, all of the above methods are based on image pixel level representation to superresolve face images. Their performance degrades drastically
if the input image is contaminated by noise.
Rather than learning the deep model from the holistic appearance, the face hallucination methods, i.e.,face encoding
and facial attributes, which is based on the facial seman-

Introduction
Face image super resolution (SR) is a special case of general image SR, aiming to generate a High-Resolution (HR)
face image from a Low-Resolution (LR) input image. It can
provide more critical information for visual perception and
identity analysis. However, when images are noisy and their
resolutions are inadequately small (e.g. as in some real situations), there is little information available to be inferred reliably from these LR images. Very low-resolution and noisy
face images not only impede human perception but also impair computer analysis.
∗
Corresponding
author:
Nannan
Wang
(nnwang@xidian.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12476

