The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Inverse Depth Regression for
Multi-View Stereo with Correlation Cost Volume
Qingshan Xu, Wenbing Tao*
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing
School of Artiﬁcal Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{qingshanxu, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn

suring the similarity between these pixels. Traditional methods (Galliani, Lasinger, and Schindler 2015; Schönberger et
al. 2016; Xu and Tao 2019) depend on hand-crafted similarity metrics, e.g., sum of absolute differences (SAD) and normalized cross correlation (NCC), and thus these metrics are
sensitive to textureless areas, reﬂective surfaces and repetitive patterns. To deal with the above challenges, some methods (Kolmogorov and Zabih 2002; Hosni et al. 2013) resort
to regularization technologies, such as graph-cuts and cost
ﬁltering. However, these engineered regularization methods
still struggle in the above challenging areas.

Abstract
Deep learning has shown to be effective for depth inference
in multi-view stereo (MVS). However, the scalability and accuracy still remain an open problem in this domain. This can
be attributed to the memory-consuming cost volume representation and inappropriate depth inference. Inspired by the
group-wise correlation in stereo matching, we propose an average group-wise correlation similarity measure to construct
a lightweight cost volume. This can not only reduce the memory consumption but also reduce the computational burden in
the cost volume ﬁltering. Based on our effective cost volume
representation, we propose a cascade 3D U-Net module to
regularize the cost volume to further boost the performance.
Unlike the previous methods that treat multi-view depth inference as a depth regression problem or an inverse depth
classiﬁcation problem, we recast multi-view depth inference
as an inverse depth regression task. This allows our network
to achieve sub-pixel estimation and be applicable to largescale scenes. Through extensive experiments on DTU dataset
and Tanks and Temples dataset, we show that our proposed
network with Correlation cost volume and Inverse DEpth Regression (CIDER1 ), achieves state-of-the-art results, demonstrating its superior performance on scalability and accuracy.

To overcome the above difﬁculties, recent works (Yao et
al. 2018; 2019; Huang et al. 2018) leverage deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN) to learn multi-view depth
inference. Thanks to their powerful cost volume representation and ﬁltering, these works achieve comparable results to
the traditional state-of-the-arts. However, because the cost
volume representation is proportional to the model resolution, it always requires taking up a lot of memory (Huang et
al. 2018; Yao et al. 2018). This greatly limits the use of these
methods in large-scale and high-resolution scenarios. To alleviate this problem, R-MVSNet (Yao et al. 2019) utilizes
the gated recurrent unit (GRU) to sequentially regularize 2D
cost maps along the depth direction. Although this dramatically reduces the memory consumption, it cannot incorporate enough context information over the cost volume like
the 3D U-Net in MVSNet (Yao et al. 2018). As a result, the
performance of the network self degrades and a traditional
variational reﬁnement is required.

Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) has attracted great interest in the
past few years for its wide applications in autonomous driving, virtual/augmented reality, 3D printing etc. The goal of
MVS is to establish the 3D model of a scene from a collection of 2D images with known camera parameters. Recently,
this task always follows a two-stage pipeline: depth map estimation and fusion. Of these two stages, depth map estimation plays an important role in the whole pipeline and many
MVS methods (Zheng et al. 2014; Galliani, Lasinger, and
Schindler 2015; Schönberger et al. 2016; Xu and Tao 2019;
Huang et al. 2018; Yao et al. 2018; 2019) have put effort into
accurate depth sensing.
The core of depth map estimation is to compute the correspondence of each pixel across different images by mea-

Inspired by the group-wise correlation in stereo matching (Guo et al. 2019), we propose an average group-wise
correlation similarity measure to construct a lightweight cost
volume representation. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst extract the deep
features for the reference image and source images. With a
differential warping module, we compute compact similarity
scores between every source image and the reference image
using the group-wise correlation. To aggregate an arbitrary
number of neighboring image information, we average the
similarity scores of all source images to produce a uniﬁed
cost feature in the cost volume. In this way, our network can
greatly reduce the memory consumption and simultaneously
ﬁt in an arbitrary number of neighboring images. Based on

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code will be available at https://github.com/GhiXu/CIDER.

12508

