The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adaptive Unimodal Cost Volume Filtering for Deep Stereo Matching
Youmin Zhang,1 ∗ Yimin Chen,1∗ Xiao Bai,1† Suihanjin Yu,1 Kun Yu,2 Zhiwei Li,2 Kuiyuan Yang2
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing,
Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University, Beijing, China 2 DeepMotion
{youmi, minwellcym, baixiao, fakecoderemail}@buaa.edu.cn {kunyu, zhiweili, kuiyuanyang}@deepmotion.ai

Abstract
State-of-the-art deep learning based stereo matching approaches treat disparity estimation as a regression problem,
where loss function is directly deﬁned on true disparities and
their estimated ones. However, disparity is just a byproduct of a matching process modeled by cost volume, while
indirectly learning cost volume driven by disparity regression is prone to overﬁtting since the cost volume is under
constrained. In this paper, we propose to directly add constraints to the cost volume by ﬁltering cost volume with unimodal distribution peaked at true disparities. In addition, variances of the unimodal distributions for each pixel are estimated to explicitly model matching uncertainty under different contexts. The proposed architecture achieves state-ofthe-art performance on Scene Flow and two KITTI stereo
benchmarks. In particular, our method ranked the 1st place
of KITTI 2012 evaluation and the 4th place of KITTI 2015
evaluation (recorded on 2019.8.20). The codes of AcfNet are
available at: https://github.com/youmi-zym/AcfNet.

Figure 1: An example of cost distribution along the disparity dimension of cost volume. The ﬁrst row is the output of
PSMNet (Chang and Chen 2018) trained with soft argmin.
The third row is output of our model. For better visualization, we also zoom into the disparity interval [25, 66] in the
second and fourth row, where Estimation and Ground Truth
are the estimated and the groundtruth disparity respectively.
Our method generates a more reasonable cost distribution
peaked at the true disparity.

Introduction
Stereo matching is one of the core technologies in computer vision, which recovers 3D structures of real world
from 2D images. It has been widely used in areas such
as autonomous driving (Sivaraman and Trivedi 2013), augmented reality (Zenati and Zerhouni 2007) and robotics
navigation (Schmid et al. 2013; Luo, Yu, and Ren 2017;
Luo et al. 2019). Given a pair of rectiﬁed stereo images, the
goal of stereo matching is to compute the disparity d for
each pixel in the reference image (usually refers to the left
image), where disparity is deﬁned as the horizontal displacement between a pair of corresponding pixels in the left and
right images.
According to the seminar work (Scharstein and Szeliski
2002), a stereo matching algorithm typically consists of
four steps: matching cost computation, cost aggregation, disparity regression and disparity reﬁnement. Among them,
matching cost computation, i.e., obtaining cost volume, is

arguably the most crucial ﬁrst step. A cost volume is usually
denoted by a H × W × D tensor, where H, W , D are the
height, width and maximal disparity of the reference image.
In traditional methods, cost volume is computed by a predeﬁned cost function of manually designed image features,
e.g., squared or absolute difference of image patches.
In the deep learning era, both image feature and cost function are modeled as network layers (Kendall et al. 2017;
Chang and Chen 2018). To make all layers differentiable and
achieve sub-pixel estimation of disparity, soft argmin is used
to estimate disparity by softly weighting indices according
to their costs, which is in contrast to argmin that takes the index with minimal cost as estimated disparity. The loss function is deﬁned on the estimated disparity and the ground
truth for end-to-end training. Beneﬁt from large-scale training data and end-to-end training, deep learning based stereo
approaches achieve state-of-the-art performance.
In the deep learning models, the cost volume is indi-

∗

Joint ﬁrst authorship. {youmi,minwellcym}@buaa.edu.cn.
Corresponding author, baixiao@buaa.edu.cn.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12926

