The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Compact Autoregressive Network
Di Wang,1 Feiqing Huang,1 Jingyu Zhao,1 Guodong Li,1∗ Guangjian Tian2
1

Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong, China
{diwang, amieehuang, gladys17, gdli}@hku.hk, Tian.Guangjian@huawei.com

with convolutional or other speciﬁc architectures have been
proposed recently for sequence modeling, and are shown to
have state-of-the-art accuracy. For example, some autoregressive networks, such as PixelCNN (Van den Oord et al.
2016b) and WaveNet (Van den Oord et al. 2016a) for image
and audio sequence modeling, are compelling alternatives to
the recurrent networks.
This paper aims at the autoregressive model (1) with a
large number of sequences. This problem can be implemented by a fully connected network with N P inputs and N
outputs. The number of weights will be very large when the
number of sequences N is large, and it will be much larger
if the data have long-range sequential dependence. This will
lead to excessive computational burden and low learning efﬁciency. Recently, Du et al. (2018) showed that the sample complexity in training a convolutional neural network
(CNN) is directly related to network complexity, which indicates that compact models are highly desirable when available samples have limited sizes.
To reduce the redundancy of parameters in neural networks, many low-rank based approaches have been investigated. One is to reparametrize the model, and then to modify
the network architecture accordingly. Modiﬁcation of architectures for model compression can be found from the early
history of neural networks (Fontaine, Ris, and Boite 1997;
Grézl et al. 2007). For example, a bottleneck layer with a
smaller number of units can be imposed to constrain the
amount of information traversing the network, and to force a
compact representation of the original inputs in a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) or an autoencoder (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006). The bottleneck architecture is equivalent to a
fully connected network with a low-rank constraint on the
weight matrix in a linear network.
Another approach is to constrain the rank of parameter
matrices directly. For instance, Denil et al. (2013) demonstrated signiﬁcant redundancy in large CNNs, and proposed
a low-rank structure of weight matrices to reduce it. If we
treat weights in a layer as a multi-dimensional tensor, tensor decomposition methods can then be employed to represent the low-rank structure, and hence compress the network. Among these works, Lebedev et al. (2014) applied
the CP decomposition for the 4D kernel of a single convo-

Abstract
Autoregressive networks can achieve promising performance
in many sequence modeling tasks with short-range dependence. However, when handling high-dimensional inputs and
outputs, the massive amount of parameters in the network
leads to expensive computational cost and low learning efﬁciency. The problem can be alleviated slightly by introducing
one more narrow hidden layer to the network, but the sample
size required to achieve a certain training error is still substantial. To address this challenge, we rearrange the weight
matrices of a linear autoregressive network into a tensor form,
and then make use of Tucker decomposition to represent lowrank structures. This leads to a novel compact autoregressive
network, called Tucker AutoRegressive (TAR) net. Interestingly, the TAR net can be applied to sequences with longrange dependence since the dimension along the sequential
order is reduced. Theoretical studies show that the TAR net
improves the learning efﬁciency, and requires much fewer
samples for model training. Experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate the promising performance
of the proposed compact network.

Introduction
Sequence modeling has been used to address a broad range
of applications, including macroeconomic time series forecasting, ﬁnancial asset management, speech recognition and
machine translation. Recurrent neural networks (RNN) and
their variants, such as Long-Short Term Memory (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and Gated Recurrent Unit (Cho
et al. 2014), are commonly used as the default architecture
or even the synonym of sequence modeling by deep learning practitioners (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016).
In the meanwhile, especially for high-dimensional time series, we may also consider the autoregressive modeling or
multi-task learning,
yt = f (y t−1 , y t−2 , . . . , y t−P ),

(1)

where the output yt and each input y t−i are N -dimensional,
and the lag P can be very large for accomodating sequential dependence. Some non-recurrent feed-forward networks
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6145

