The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Uncertainty-Aware Search Framework for Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization
Syrine Belakaria, Aryan Deshwal, Nitthilan Kannappan Jayakodi, Janardhan Rao Doppa
School of EECS, Washington State University
{syrine.belakaria, aryan.deshwal, n.kannappanjayakodi, jana.doppa}@wsu.edu

lems with expensive function evaluations. The key idea behind BO is to build a cheap surrogate model (e.g., Gaussian Process (Williams and Rasmussen 2006)) using the
real experimental evaluations; and employ it to intelligently
select the sequence of function evaluations using an acquisition function, e.g., expected improvement (EI). There
is a large body of literature on single-objective BO algorithms (Shahriari et al. 2016) and their applications including hyper-parameter tuning of machine learning methods
(Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012; Kotthoff et al. 2017).
However, there is relatively less work on the more challenging problem of BO for multiple objectives.

Abstract
We consider the problem of multi-objective (MO) blackbox
optimization using expensive function evaluations, where the
goal is to approximate the true Pareto set of solutions while
minimizing the number of function evaluations. For example,
in hardware design optimization, we need to ﬁnd the designs
that trade-off performance, energy, and area overhead using
expensive simulations. We propose a novel uncertainty-aware
search framework referred to as USeMO to efﬁciently select
the sequence of inputs for evaluation to solve this problem.
The selection method of USeMO consists of solving a cheap
MO optimization problem via surrogate models of the true
functions to identify the most promising candidates and picking the best candidate based on a measure of uncertainty. We
also provide theoretical analysis to characterize the efﬁcacy
of our approach. Our experiments on several synthetic and six
diverse real-world benchmark problems show that USeMO
consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Prior work on multi-objective BO is lacking in the following ways. Many algorithms reduce the problem to singleobjective optimization by designing appropriate acquisition
functions, e.g., expected improvement in Pareto hypervolume (Knowles 2006; Emmerich and Klinkenberg 2008). Unfortunately, this choice is sub-optimal as it is hard to capture
the trade-off between multiple objectives and can potentially
lead to aggressive exploitation behavior. Additionally, algorithms to optimize Pareto Hypervolume (PHV) based acquisition functions scale poorly as the number of objectives
and dimensionality of input space grows. PESMO is a stateof-the-art information-theoretic approach that relies on the
principle of input space entropy search (Hernández-Lobato
et al. 2016). However, it is computationally expensive to optimize the acquisition function behind PESMO. A series of
approximations are performed to improve the efﬁciency potentially at the expense of accuracy.

Introduction

Many engineering and scientiﬁc applications involve making design choices to optimize multiple objectives. Some examples include tuning the knobs of a compiler to optimize
performance and efﬁciency of a set of software programs;
and designing new materials to optimize strength, elasticity, and durability. There are two challenges in solving these
kind of optimization problems: 1) The objective functions
are unknown and we need to perform expensive experiments
to evaluate each candidate design. For example, performing
computational simulations and physical lab experiments for
compiler optimization and material design applications respectively. 2) The objectives are conﬂicting in nature and all
of them cannot be optimized simultaneously. Therefore, we
need to ﬁnd the Pareto optimal set of solutions. A solution
is called Pareto optimal if it cannot be improved in any of
the objectives without compromising some other objective.
The overall goal is to approximate the true Pareto set while
minimizing the number of function evaluations.
Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al. 2016) is an
effective framework to solve blackbox optimization prob-

In this paper, we propose a novel Uncertainty-aware
Search framework for optimizing Multiple Objectives
(USeMO) to overcome the drawbacks of prior methods. The
key insight behind USeMO is a two-stage search procedure to improve the accuracy and computational-efﬁciency
of sequential decision-making under uncertainty for selecting candidate inputs for evaluation. USeMO selects the inputs for evaluation as follows. First, it solves a cheap MO
optimization problem deﬁned in terms of the acquisition
functions (one for each unknown objective) to identify a list
of promising candidates. Second, it selects the best candidate from this list based on a measure of uncertainty. Unlike
prior methods, USeMO has several advantages: a) Does not

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10044

