The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Maximizing Overall Diversity for
Improved Uncertainty Estimates in Deep Ensembles
Siddhartha Jain,*1 Ge Liu,*1 Jonas Mueller,2 David Gifford1
*

The authors contribute equally, 1 CSAIL,MIT, 2 Amazon Web Services
{sj1, geliu, gifford}@mit.edu, jonasmue@amazon.com

unwieldy nature of these models (Osband et al. 2016;
Balan et al. 2015; Beluch et al. 2018). Although supervised
learning performance may be enhanced by an ensemble comprised of only a few ERM-trained models, the resulting
ensemble-based uncertainty estimates can exhibit excessive
sampling variability in low-density regions of the underlying
training distribution. Consider the example of an ensemble
comprised of ﬁve models whose predictions just might agree
at points far from the training data by chance. Figure 1 depicts an example of this phenomenon, which we refer to as
uncertainty collapse, since the resulting ensemble-based uncertainty estimates would indicate these predictions are of
high-conﬁdence despite not being supported by any nearby
training datapoints.
Unreliable uncertainty estimates are highly undesirable in
applications where future input queries may not stem from
the same distribution. A shift in input distribution can be
caused by sampling bias, covariate shift, and the adaptive
experimentation that occurs in bandits, Bayesian optimization
(BO), and reinforcement learning (RL) contexts. Here, we
propose Maximize Overall Diversity (MOD), a technique to
stabilize OOD model uncertainty estimates produced by an
ensemble of arbitrary neural networks. The core idea is to
consider all possible inputs and encourage as much overall
diversity in the corresponding model ensemble outputs as can
be tolerated without diminishing the ensemble’s predictive
performance. MOD utilizes an auxiliary loss function and
data-augmentation strategy that is easily integrated into any
existing training procedure.

Abstract
The inaccuracy of neural network models on inputs that do
not stem from the distribution underlying the training data is
problematic and at times unrecognized. Uncertainty estimates
of model predictions are often based on the variation in predictions produced by a diverse ensemble of models applied to
the same input. Here we describe Maximize Overall Diversity
(MOD), an approach to improve ensemble-based uncertainty
estimates by encouraging larger overall diversity in ensemble predictions across all possible inputs. We apply MOD to
regression tasks including 38 Protein-DNA binding datasets,
9 UCI datasets, and the IMDB-Wiki image dataset. We also
explore variants that utilize adversarial training techniques and
data density estimation. For out-of-distribution test examples,
MOD signiﬁcantly improves predictive performance and uncertainty calibration without sacriﬁcing performance on test
data drawn from same distribution as the training data. We also
ﬁnd that in Bayesian optimization tasks, the performance of
UCB acquisition is improved via MOD uncertainty estimates.

Introduction
Model ensembling provides a simple, yet extremely effective technique for improving the predictive performance of
arbitrary supervised learners each trained with empirical risk
minimization (ERM) (Breiman 1996; Brown 2004). Often,
ensembles are utilized not only to improve predictions on test
examples stemming from the same underlying distribution as
the training data, but also to provide estimates of model uncertainty when learners are presented with out-of-distribution
(OOD) examples that may look different than the data encountered during training (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and
Blundell 2017; Osband et al. 2016). The widespread success
of ensembles crucially relies on the variance-reduction produced by aggregating predictions that are statistically prone to
different types of individual errors (Kuncheva and Whitaker
2003). Thus, prediction improvements are best realized by
using a large ensemble with many base models, and a large
ensemble is also typically employed to produce stable distributional estimates of model uncertainty (Breiman 1996;
Papadopoulos, Edwards, and Murray 2001).
Practical applications of massive neural networks (NN)
are commonly limited to small ensembles because of the

Related Work
NN ensembles have been previously demonstrated to produce useful uncertainty estimates for sequential experimentation applications in Bayesian optimization and reinforcement learning (Papadopoulos, Edwards, and Murray 2001;
Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Riquelme,
Tucker, and Snoek 2018). Proposed methods to improve
ensembles include adversarial training to enforce smoothness (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017), and
maximizing ensemble output diversity over the training data
(Brown 2004). Recent work has proposed regularizers based
on augmented out-of-distribution examples, but is primarily speciﬁc to classiﬁcation tasks and non-trivially requires
auxiliary generators of OOD examples (Lee et al. 2018) or

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4264

