The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Revisiting Online Quantum State Learning
Feidiao Yang, Jiaqing Jiang, Jialin Zhang, Xiaoming Sun
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Bejing, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yangfeidiao, jiangjiaqing, zhangjialin, sunxiaoming}@ict.ac.cn

theories may also help solve some interesting problems in
quantum computation and quantum information (Carleo and
Troyer 2017). In this paper, we apply the online learning theory to solve an interesting problem of learning an unknown
quantum state.
Learning an unknown quantum state is a fundamental
problem in quantum computation and quantum information.
The basic version is the quantum state tomography problem (Vogel and Risken 1989), which aims to fully recover
the classical description of an unknown quantum state. Although quantum state tomography gives a complete characterization of the target state, it is quite costly. Recent
advancement showed that fully reconstructing an unknown
quantum state in the worst case needs exponential copies of
the state (Haah et al. 2016; Odonnell and Wright 2016).
However, in some applications, it is unnecessary to fully
reconstruct an unknown quantum state. Some side information is sufﬁcient. Therefore, some learning tasks move on
to learn the success probabilities of applying a collection of
two-outcome measurements to an unknown state, with respect to some metrics. Of which, the shadow tomography
problem (Aaronson 2018) requires to estimate the success
probabilities uniformly over all measurements in the collection. Aaronson (2018) showed that the required number of
copies of the unknown state in the shadow tomography is
nearly linear to the number of qubits and poly-logarithmic
in terms of the number of the measurements.
More generally, it may not need to estimate the success
probabilities within an error uniformly over all two-outcome
measurements. Following the idea of the statistical learning theory, we may assume that there is a distribution over
some possible two-outcome measurements. And our goal is
to learn a quantum state such that the expected difference between the success probabilities of applying a measurement
sampled from the distribution to the learned state and the target state respectively is within a speciﬁc error. This is called
the statistical learning model or the PAC-learning model of
quantum states. Aaronson (2007) proved that the number of
samples for the PAC-learning of quantum states only grows
linearly with the number of qubits of the state, which is surprisingly an exponential reduction compared with the full
quantum state tomography.

Abstract
In this paper, we study the online quantum state learning problem which is recently proposed by Aaronson et al.
(2018). In this problem, the learning algorithm sequentially
predicts quantum states based on observed measurements and
losses and the goal is to minimize the regret. In the previous work, the existing algorithms may output mixed quantum states. However, in many scenarios, the prediction of a
pure quantum state is required. In this paper, we ﬁrst propose a Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader (FTPL) algorithm that
can guarantee to predict pure quantum states. Theoretical
√
analysis shows that our algorithm can achieve an O( T ) expected regret under some reasonable settings. In the case that
the pure state prediction is not mandatory, we propose another deterministic learning algorithm which is simpler and
more efﬁcient. The algorithm is based on the online √
gradient
descent (OGD) method and can also achieve an O( T ) regret bound. The main technical contribution of this result is
an algorithm of projecting an arbitrary Hermitian matrix onto
the set of density matrices with respect to the Frobenius norm.
We think this subroutine is of independent interest and can be
widely used in many other problems in the quantum computing area. In addition to the theoretical analysis, we evaluate
the algorithms with a series of simulation experiments. The
experimental results show that our FTPL method and OGD
method outperform the existing RFTL approach proposed by
Aaronson et al. (2018) in almost all settings. In the implementation of the RFTL approach, we give a closed-form solution to the algorithm. This provides an efﬁcient, accurate,
and completely executable solution to the RFTL method.

Introduction
The interdisciplinary research between quantum computing and machine learning is becoming an attractive area in
recent years (Biamonte et al. 2017; Lloyd, Mohseni, and
Rebentrost 2014). On one hand, people expect to take advantage of the great power of quantum computers to improve the
efﬁciency of the algorithms in big data processing and machine learning. One representative example following this
idea is the HHL algorithm (Harrow, Hassidim, and Lloyd
2009). On the other hand, machine learning algorithms and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6607

