The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Modelling Semantic Categories Using Conceptual Neighborhood
Zied Bouraoui

Jose Camacho-Collados

CRIL - U. Artois - CNRS
zied.bouraoui@cril.fr

Steven Schockaert
Cardiff University, UK
schockaerts1@cardiff.ac.uk

Given that a category corresponds to a set of individuals
(i.e. its instances), modelling them as (possibly imprecise)
regions in the embedding space seems more natural than using vectors. In fact, it has been shown that the vector representations of individuals that belong to the same category are
indeed often clustered together in learned vector space embeddings (Gupta et al. 2015; Jameel, Bouraoui, and Schockaert 2017). The view of categories being regions is also
common in cognitive science (Gärdenfors 2000). However,
learning region representations of categories is a challenging
problem, because we typically only have a handful of examples of individuals that belong to a given category. One common assumption is that natural categories can be modelled
using convex regions (Gärdenfors 2000), which simpliﬁes
the estimation problem. For instance, based on this assumption, Bouraoui, Jameel, and Schockaert (2017) modelled categories using Gaussian distributions and showed that these
distributions can be used for knowledge base completion.
Unfortunately, this strategy still requires a relatively high
number of training examples to be successful.

Abstract
While many methods for learning vector space embeddings
have been proposed in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing, these methods typically do not distinguish between categories and individuals. Intuitively, if individuals are represented as vectors, we can think of categories as (soft) regions
in the embedding space. Unfortunately, meaningful regions
can be difﬁcult to estimate, especially since we often have few
examples of individuals that belong to a given category. To
address this issue, we rely on the fact that different categories
are often highly interdependent. In particular, categories often have conceptual neighbors, which are disjoint from but
closely related to the given category (e.g. fruit and vegetable).
Our hypothesis is that more accurate category representations
can be learned by relying on the assumption that the regions
representing such conceptual neighbors should be adjacent in
the embedding space. We propose a simple method for identifying conceptual neighbors and then show that incorporating
these conceptual neighbors indeed leads to more accurate region based representations.

1

Luis Espinosa-Anke

Cardiff University, UK
Cardiff University, UK
camachocolladosj@cardiff.ac.uk espinosa-ankel@cardiff.ac.uk

Introduction

However, when learning categories, humans do not only
rely on examples. For instance, there is evidence that when
learning the meaning of nouns, children rely on the default
assumption that these nouns denote mutually exclusive categories (Markman 1990). In this paper, we will in particular take advantage of the fact that many natural categories
are organized into so-called contrast sets (Goldstone 1996).
These are sets of closely related categories which exhaustively cover some sub-domain, and which are assumed to be
mutually exclusive; e.g. the set of all common color names,
the set {fruit, vegetable} or the set {NLP, IR, ML}. Categories from the same contrast set often compete for coverage. For instance, we can think of the NLP domain as
consisting of research topics that involve processing textual
information which are not covered by the IR and ML domains. Categories which compete for coverage in this way
are known as conceptual neighbors (Freksa 1991); e.g. NLP
and IR, red and orange, fruit and vegetable. Note that the
exact boundary between two conceptual neighbors may be
vague (e.g. tomato can be classiﬁed as fruit or as vegetable).

Vector space embeddings are commonly used to represent entities in ﬁelds such as machine learning (ML)
(Bordes et al. 2013), natural language processing (NLP)
(Camacho-Collados, Pilehvar, and Navigli 2016), information retrieval (IR) (Deerwester et al. 1990) and cognitive
science (Gärdenfors 2000). An important point, however,
is that such representations usually represent both individuals and categories as vectors (Ma, Cambria, and Gao 2016;
Zheng et al. 2016; Boleda, Gupta, and Padó 2017). Note
that in this paper, we use the term category to denote natural groupings of individuals, as it is used in cognitive science, with individuals referring to the objects from the considered domain of discourse. For example, the individuals
carrot and cucumber belong to the vegetable category1 . We
use the term entities as an umbrella term covering both individuals and categories.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Note that the same entity could be treated as an individual or
a category depending on the context; e.g. carrot is a category of
physical objects, but an instance of the vegetable category.

In this paper, we propose a method for learning region
representations of categories which takes advantage of con7448

