The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Symmetric Metric Learning with Adaptive Margin for Recommendation
∗

Mingming Li,1,2 Shuai Zhang,3 Fuqing Zhu, 1 Wanhui Qian,1,2
∗
Liangjun Zang,1 Jizhong Han,1 Songlin Hu 1,2
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Australia
{limingming, zhufuqing, qianwanhui, zangliangjun, hanjizhong, husonglin}@iie.ac.cn, cheungshuai@outlook.com
2

most representative work, adopts the triple loss (Weinberger
and Saul 2009; Song et al. 2017; Do et al. 2019) to ensure
the distance between user and negative item (user dislikes
) is larger than that between the current user and positive
item (user likes) by a ﬁxed margin of m > 0. That is,
d(u, v) + m ≤ d(u, v − )1 . The principle assumption behind above operation is that a user might be closer to the
items she likes than to those she does not. It is worth noting
that other variants of CML, such as relational metric learning
based methods (Tay, Tuan, and Hui 2018; Park et al. 2018;
Zhou et al. 2019), are also optimized in this triple loss
paradigm.
Despite the effectiveness of existing metric learning recommendation approaches, we argue that they have two inherent limitations:
Firstly, from a geometric perspective, above triple loss
constraint can be regarded as a user-centric metric. In other
words, they only consider the relationship of two edges, i.e.,
uv (positive pair) and uv − (negative pair), while ignoring
the impact of the third edge of vv − . As a result, the position of positive item may be close with the negative item,
i.e., d(u, v) > d(v, v − ). It violates the basic assumption of
metric learning, compromising the performance of the recommender systems seriously. In the metric space, the basic assumption is that the distance measures the similarity. More concretely, short distance between a user and an
item indicates that the user likes the item, and short distance between items means that they tend to co-occurr. As
such, d(v, v − ) should not be smaller than d(u, v), otherwise
it will mislead the prediction of this item to other users.
As shown in Figure 1(left), given a triple (u1 , v1 , v2− ), u1
and u2 have same preferences. In accordance with the constraint of CML, the learning process will be stopped when
d(u1 , v1 ) + m ≤ d(u1 , v2− ). We can observe that the relative distance between positive item and negative item is
too smaller. Thus, these two items are indistinguishable in
the metric space. The learned model might make an incorrect prediction that u2 likes the v2 since u2 likes v1 and
d(u2 , v1 ) ≈ d(u2 , v2 ).
Secondly, the above triple loss paradigm relies on a ﬁx

Abstract
Metric learning based methods have attracted extensive interests in recommender systems. Current methods take the
user-centric way in metric space to ensure the distance between user and negative item to be larger than that between
the current user and positive item by a ﬁxed margin. While
they ignore the relations among positive item and negative
item. As a result, these two items might be positioned closely,
leading to incorrect results. Meanwhile, different users usually have different preferences, the ﬁxed margin used in those
methods can not be adaptive to various user biases, and thus
decreases the performance as well. To address these two
problems, a novel Symmetic Metric Learning with adaptive
margin (SML) is proposed. In addition to the current usercentric metric, it symmetically introduces a positive itemcentric metric which maintains closer distance from positive
items to user, and push the negative items away from the
positive items at the same time. Moreover, the dynamically
adaptive margins are well trained to mitigate the impact of
bias. Experimental results on three public recommendation
datasets demonstrate that SML produces a competitive performance compared with several state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Recommender systems have been widely deployed in web
applications to address the information overload issue. The
goal is to help users target their interests and provide personalized recommendations. Among various recommendation
methods for implicit feedback, BPR (Rendle et al. 2009) has
been proved to be most successful, which learns the discriminative latent factors for users and items by factorizing useritem interaction matrix. Nevertheless, BPR suffers from a
crucial drawback stemmed from the inner product that violates the triangle inequality (Ram and Gray 2012).
To this end, several metric learning based recommendation methods (Feng et al. 2015; Khoshneshin and Street
2010; Chen et al. 2012; Hsieh et al. 2017; Zhang et al.
2018) have been proposed to measure the similarity of useritem with Euclidean distance for satisfying the triangle inequality. Speciﬁcally, CML (Hsieh et al. 2017), one of the
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4634

d(u, v) denotes the distance of u and v.

