The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarial Training Based Multi-Source
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Sentiment Analysis
Yong Dai,1 Jian Liu,1 Xiancong Ren,1 Zenglin Xu1,2
1

SMILE Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Chengdu, Sichuan, China
2
Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
daiyongya@yahoo.com, {liujian.dl, xiancongRen}@std.uestc.edu.cn, zenglin@gmail.com

consider the following two reviews of three products, i.e.,
Phones, Battery, and Car from Amazon.com.
(1) It looks good. (2) It runs fast.

Abstract
Multi-source unsupervised domain adaptation (MS-UDA) for
sentiment analysis (SA) aims to leverage useful information in multiple source domains to help do SA in an unlabeled target domain that has no supervised information. Existing algorithms of MS-UDA either only exploit the shared
features, i.e., the domain-invariant information, or based on
some weak assumption in NLP, e.g., smoothness assumption. To avoid these problems, we propose two transfer learning frameworks based on the multi-source domain adaptation
methodology for SA by combining the source hypotheses to
derive a good target hypothesis. The key feature of the ﬁrst
framework is a novel Weighting Scheme based Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation framework (WS-UDA), which combine
the source classiﬁers to acquire pseudo labels for target instances directly. While the second framework is a Two-Stage
Training based Unsupervised Domain Adaptation framework
(2ST-UDA), which further exploits these pseudo labels to
train a target private extractor. Importantly, the weights assigned to each source classiﬁer are based on the relations between target instances and source domains, which measured
by a discriminator through the adversarial training. Furthermore, through the same discriminator, we also fulﬁll the separation of shared features and private features.Experimental
results on two SA datasets demonstrate the promising performance of our frameworks, which outperforms unsupervised
state-of-the-art competitors.

Apparently, the ﬁrst sentence is positive for all products,
while the second sentence is positive for Car and Phones,
but negative for Battery. Intuitively, there are domaininvariant and domain-speciﬁc characteristics between different domains. For a speciﬁc domain, supervised learning algorithms have been successfully explored to build sentiment
classiﬁers based on the positive or negative labels (Socher et
al. 2013; Liu 2015). However, there exists insufﬁcient or no
labeled data in a target domain of interest in actual scenarios,
while labeling data in this domain may be time-consuming
and expensive. Therefore, cross-domain sentiment analysis,
which borrows knowledge from related source domains with
abundant labeled data to improve the target domain, has
become a promising direction. Specially, cross-domain SA
in the multi-source unsupervised domain adaptation (MSUDA) setting, where there are multiple source domains
available together with one unlabeled target domain, is more
practical and challenging.
To better deal with problems in the MS-UDA setting, researchers have proposed well-developed algorithms. We can
simply categorize them into two groups (Sun, Shi, and Wu
2015). The ﬁrst group of approaches is based on feature representation, which aims to make the feature distributions of
source and target domain similar, either by penalizing or
removing features whose statistics vary between domains
or by learning a feature space embedding or projection in
which a distribution divergence statistic is minimized. For
example, Liu, Qiu, and Huang (2017) ﬁrstly introduce adversarial training and orthogonality constraints to derive more
pure shared features for simultaneously handling multiple
domains of text classiﬁcation. Chen and Cardie (2018) extend this model and provide theoretical guarantees. However, these methods suffer from the loss of private knowledge when applied in the unsupervised setting. Another
group of methods seeks to assign a weight for each prelearned classiﬁer according to the relationship between the
source domain and the target domain. Chattopadhyay et
al.; Sun et al. (2012; 2011) assign different weights to dif-

Introduction
Sentiment analysis (SA) is a computational study of humans’ opinions, sentiments, attitudes towards products, services, etc. Due to the strong theoretical and practical exploring value, SA has been a research hotspot from the early
time of this century. For example, the understanding of customers’ emotional tendency is a key to reshaping business
(e.g., the market system of Amazon). Naturally, there are
different opinions commented on diverse kinds of products
or services and they can be regarded as located in different domains. Because of the domain discrepancy, we often
suppose these diverse opinions come from different distributions and have different characteristics. For illustration, we
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7618

