The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deciding the Loosely Guarded Fragment and
Querying Its Horn Fragment Using Resolution
Sen Zheng, Renate A. Schmidt
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK

Calı̀, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2012; Glimm et al. 2008;
Gottlob, Pieris, and Tendera 2013). In this paper, we particularly focus on an open problem, namely BCQ answering
for the Horn loosely guarded fragment.
The complexity of BCQ answering for the guarded
fragment is 2EXPTIME-complete (Bárány, Gottlob, and
Otto 2010), and satisﬁability checking for the cliqueguarded negation fragment, which subsumes both BCQs
and the loosely guarded fragment, is also 2EXPTIMEcomplete (Bárány, ten Cate, and Segouﬁn 2015). These
complexity results show that BCQ answering for the Horn
(loosely) guarded fragment is decidable, however, as yet
there is no practical (i.e., implementable) procedure.
Let us give a quick review of our settings and explain why
we start our investigation for query answering with deciding the loosely guarded fragment (LGF). A loosely guarded
quantiﬁed formula (van Benthem 1997; Grädel 1999) has
the form ∀x(G1 ∧ . . . ∧ Gn → F ) where G1 , . . . , Gn are
atoms that are called guards, F is a loosely guarded formula
where i) all free variables of F occur in G1 ∧ . . . ∧ Gn ,
and ii) the variables in G1 , . . . , Gn are either free, or they
co-occur with each other in a Gi among the G1 , . . . , Gn .
The Horn fragment of LGF will be referred to Horn LGF.
A Boolean conjunctive query is a ﬁrst-order formula of the
form q = ∃xϕ(x) where ϕ is a conjunction of atoms containing only constants and variables. One can obtain a query
clause Q by simply negating a BCQ. Hence, Q is a negative
clause containing no compound terms.
To answer BCQs over Horn LGF, we begin with deciding LGF, since it can be observed that i) some loosely
guarded formulae are naturally cyclic BCQs (Bernstein and
Chiu 1981) because a loosely guarded formula F allows
multiple guards, and all variables in the clausal form of
F (loosely guarded clauses) co-occur with each other in
one of the guards. E.g., the loosely guarded formula F =
∃xyz(A1 xy ∧ A2 yz ∧ A3 xz) is a cyclic BCQ. In fact, it
shows that the conjunctive queries with the hyper-tree width
property are strongly connected to LGF (Gottlob, Leone,
and Scarcello 2003); ii) a loosely guarded formula allow
variables chaining multiple literals (chained variables), as
in F , which can cause term depth increase during reasoning
(see Example 1). We see that understanding the handling

Abstract
We consider the following query answering problem: Given
a Boolean conjunctive query and a theory in the Horn loosely
guarded fragment, the aim is to determine whether the query
is entailed by the theory. In this paper, we present a resolution decision procedure for the loosely guarded fragment, and
use such a procedure to answer Boolean conjunctive queries
against the Horn loosely guarded fragment. The Horn loosely
guarded fragment subsumes classes of rules that are prevalent
in ontology-based query answering, such as Horn ALCHOI
and guarded existential rules. Additionally, we identify star
queries and cloud queries, which using our procedure, can be
answered against the loosely guarded fragment.

Introduction
Our motivation of considering query answering problem stems from ontology-based data access (OBDA) systems (Xiao et al. 2018), which have attracted much recent
attention in the knowledge representation and database communities. In particular, since the Horn loosely guarded fragment subsumes mainstream rules in OBDA systems, such
as Horn ALCHOI (Baader et al. 2017) and the guarded
existential rules (a.k.a. guarded TGDs) (Calı̀, Gottlob, and
Lukasiewicz 2012), our interest is the development of a
practical procedure for answering queries against the Horn
loosely guarded fragment (van Benthem 1997).
To retrieve information from OBDA systems, the main
querying mechanisms are (Boolean) conjunctive queries.
Given a Boolean conjunctive query (BCQ) q, a set Σ of rules
and a database D, checking whether Σ∪D |= q is equivalent
to checking whether Σ ∪ D ∪ ¬q |= ⊥, so that the problem
of answering BCQ can be reduced to deciding satisﬁability. Such BCQ answering problems can be recast as query
containment/entailment/evaluation problems in database research (Baget et al. 2011), constraint satisfaction problems
and homomorphism mapping problems in general AI research (Vardi 2000). Although ﬁnding answers for queries
is also an important problem, Boolean conjunctive query
answering is widely studied (Baget et al. 2011; Bárány,
Gottlob, and Otto 2010; Calı̀, Gottlob, and Kifer 2013;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3080

