The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Structured Output Learning with Conditional Generative Flows
You Lu

Bert Huang

Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
you.lu@vt.edu

Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
bhuang@vt.edu

2018) combine deep neural networks with graphical models, using the power of deep neural networks to extract highquality features and graphical models to model correlations
and dependencies among variables. The main drawback of
these approaches is that, due to the intractable likelihood,
they are difﬁcult to train. Training them requires the construction of surrogate objectives, or approximating the likelihood by using variational inference to infer latent variables.
Moreover, once the model is trained, inference and sampling
from CRFs require expensive iterative procedures (Koller
and Friedman 2009).
In this paper, we develop conditional generative ﬂows (cGlow) for structured output learning. Our model is a variant of Glow (Kingma and Dhariwal 2018), with additional
neural networks for capturing the relationship between input features and structured output variables. Compared to
most methods for structured output learning, c-Glow has the
unique advantage that it can directly model the conditional
distribution p(y|x) without restrictive assumptions (e.g.,
variables being fully connected (Krähenbühl and Koltun
2011)). We can train c-Glow by exploiting the fact that invertible ﬂows allow exact computation of log-likelihood, removing the need for surrogates or inference. Compared to
other methods using normalizing ﬂows (e.g., (Trippe and
Turner 2018; Kingma and Dhariwal 2018)), c-Glow’s output label y is conditioned on both complex input and a highdimensional tensor rather than a one-dimensional scalar. We
evaluate c-Glow on ﬁve structured prediction tasks: binary
segmentation, multi-class segmentation, color image denoising, depth reﬁnement, and image inpainting, ﬁnding that cGlow’s exact likelihood training is able to learn models that
efﬁciently predict structured outputs of comparable quality
to state-of-the-art deep structured prediction approaches.

Abstract
Traditional structured prediction models try to learn the conditional likelihood, i.e., p(y|x), to capture the relationship between the structured output y and the input features x. For
many models, computing the likelihood is intractable. These
models are therefore hard to train, requiring the use of surrogate objectives or variational inference to approximate likelihood. In this paper, we propose conditional Glow (c-Glow), a
conditional generative ﬂow for structured output learning. CGlow beneﬁts from the ability of ﬂow-based models to compute p(y|x) exactly and efﬁciently. Learning with c-Glow
does not require a surrogate objective or performing inference during training. Once trained, we can directly and efﬁciently generate conditional samples. We develop a samplebased prediction method, which can use this advantage to do
efﬁcient and effective inference. In our experiments, we test
c-Glow on ﬁve different tasks. C-Glow outperforms the stateof-the-art baselines in some tasks and predicts comparable
outputs in the other tasks. The results show that c-Glow is
versatile and is applicable to many different structured prediction problems.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction models are widely used in tasks such
as image segmentation (Nowozin and Lampert 2011) and sequence labeling (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira 2001). In
these structured output tasks, the goal is to model a mapping
from the input x to the high-dimensional structured output y.
In many such problems, it is also important to make diverse
predictions to capture the variability of plausible solutions
to the structured output problem (Sohn, Lee, and Yan 2015).
Many existing methods for structured output learning
use graphical models, such as conditional random ﬁelds
(CRFs) (Wainwright and Jordan 2008), and approximate
the conditional distribution p(y|x). Approximation is necessary because, for most graphical models, computing the
exact likelihood is intractable. Recently, deep structured
prediction models (Chen et al. 2015; Zheng et al. 2015;
Sohn, Lee, and Yan 2015; Wang, Fidler, and Urtasun 2016;
Belanger and McCallum 2016; Graber, Meshi, and Schwing

2

Related Work

There are two main topics of research related to our paper:
deep structured prediction and normalizing ﬂows. In this
section, we brieﬂy cover some of the most related literature.

2.1

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Deep Structured Models

One emerging strategy to construct deep structured models
is to combine deep neural networks with graphical models.
5005

