The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MIMAMO Net: Integrating Micro- and
Macro-Motion for Video Emotion Recognition
Didan Deng,1 Zhaokang Chen,1 Yuqian Zhou,2 Bertram Shi1
1

Neuromorphic Interactive System Laboratory, Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Kowloon, HK
2
Image Formation and Processing Group, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign , Champaign, IL, USA
{ddeng, zchenbc, eebert}@ust.hk, yuqian2@illinois.edu

Pantic 2010). Arousal refers to how active the emotion is.
Valence refers to how positive or negative the emotion is.
The Arousal-Valence continuous emotion system has been
applied to label a range of emotional datasets (Barros et al.
2018; Zafeiriou et al. 2017; Kossaiﬁ et al. 2017).
Micro- and macro- expressions are both important cues
to emotional state. According to (Shreve 2013), microexpressions are described as an involuntary facial expressions which often lasts between 1/25th to 1/3rd of a second
(roughly 2-10 frames). Macro-expressions are longer facial
expressions which typically last from 3/4th of a second to 2
seconds (roughly 24-60 frames).
Although macro-expression labels, e.g., Facial Action
Units (FAU) are often available, and can be recognized automatically (Zhou, Pi, and Shi 2017), there are few image
datasets labeled with micro-expressions. Nonetheless, we
would still like to utilize the information carried by these
tiny facial movements. Therefore, we deﬁne two broader
concepts: micro- and macro-motions. These include both facial movements highly correlated with affective states, i.e.,
micro- and macro-expressions, and those less correlated,
e.g., blinks. Ideally, the model can learn to extract and exploit highly correlated motion features, and to downweight
the less correlated motion features.
In existing deep learning models for recognizing spatialtemporal input, there are three common structures: the CNNRNN (Fan et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2018; Kim and Lee
2018), the C3D (3D CNN) (Fan et al. 2016; Yang et
al. 2018) and the Two-Stream Network (Pan et al. 2019;
Feng and Ren 2018). The CNN-RNN architecture takes advantage of both the transferred knowledge of a pretrained
CNN and the temporal modeling capability of the RNN. The
input features to the RNN are usually abstract and global
features represented by higher layers. It makes this architecture well suited to extract larger and more sustained changes
in facial appearance (i.e., macro-motion).The C3D combines information over both space and time using convolutional ﬁlters starting from the lowest layers. This enables it
to capture both macro- and micro-motion. However, it cannot incorporate transferred knowledge as conveniently as the
CNN-RNN.
The Two-Stream Network has been less well studied than

Abstract
Spatial-temporal feature learning is of vital importance for
video emotion recognition. Previous deep network structures
often focused on macro-motion which extends over long time
scales, e.g., on the order of seconds. We believe integrating structures capturing information about both micro- and
macro-motion will beneﬁt emotion prediction, because human perceive both micro- and macro-expressions. In this
paper, we propose to combine micro- and macro-motion
features to improve video emotion recognition with a twostream recurrent network, named MIMAMO (Micro-MacroMotion) Net. Speciﬁcally, smaller and shorter micro-motions
are analyzed by a two-stream network, while larger and more
sustained macro-motions can be well captured by a subsequent recurrent network. Assigning speciﬁc interpretations
to the roles of different parts of the network enables us
to make choice of parameters based on prior knowledge:
choices that turn out to be optimal. One of the important innovations in our model is the use of interframe phase differences rather than optical ﬂow as input to the temporal
stream. Compared with the optical ﬂow, phase differences
require less computation and are more robust to illumination changes. Our proposed network achieves state of the art
performance on two video emotion datasets, the OMG emotion dataset and the Aff-Wild dataset. The most signiﬁcant
gains are for arousal prediction, for which motion information is intuitively more informative. Source code is available
at https://github.com/wtomin/MIMAMO-Net.

Introduction
The goal of video emotion recognition is to recognize a
subject’s emotional state automatically based on videos of
their behaviour. Numerous studies in psychology and neuroscience have proposed ways to quantify human emotions. Seven basic emotion categories were ﬁrst proposed
by (Ekman and Friesen 1971): anger, fear, disgust, happiness, sadness, surprise, contempt. Even though the seven
basic emotion system has become quite popular for multiple
emotion recognition systems (Zhou and Shi 2017), people
have argued that this system might not be culturally universal (Jack et al. 2012). Alternatively, a continuous, dimensional Arousal-Valence space was proposed (Gunes and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2621

