The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Message Passing Attention Networks for Document Understanding
Giannis Nikolentzos,1 Antoine J.-P. Tixier,1 Michalis Vazirgiannis1,2
1

École Polytechnique
Athens University of Economics and Business
{nikolentzos, anti5662, mvazirg}@lix.polytechnique.fr
2

only have focused on the application of the MP framework
to representation learning on text. This paper proposes one
such application. More precisely, we represent documents
as word co-occurrence networks, and develop an expressive MP GNN tailored to document understanding, the Message Passing Attention network for Document understanding (MPAD). We also propose several hierarchical variants
of MPAD. Evaluation on 10 document classiﬁcation datasets
shows that our architectures learn representations that are
competitive with the state-of-the-art. Furthermore, ablation
experiments shed light on the impact of various architectural
choices.
In what follows, we ﬁrst provide some background about
the MP framework (sec. 2), thoroughly describe and explain MPAD (sec. 3), present our experimental framework
(sec. 4), report and interpret our results (sec. 5), and provide
a review of the relevant literature (sec. 6).

Abstract
Graph neural networks have recently emerged as a very effective framework for processing graph-structured data. These
models have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many
tasks. Most graph neural networks can be described in terms
of message passing, vertex update, and readout functions. In
this paper, we represent documents as word co-occurrence
networks and propose an application of the message passing
framework to NLP, the Message Passing Attention network
for Document understanding (MPAD). We also propose several hierarchical variants of MPAD. Experiments conducted
on 10 standard text classiﬁcation datasets show that our architectures are competitive with the state-of-the-art. Ablation
studies reveal further insights about the impact of the different components on performance. Code is publicly available
at: https://github.com/giannisnik/mpad.

1

Introduction

2

The concept of message passing over graphs has been
around for many years (Weisfeiler and Lehman 1968; Murphy, Weiss, and Jordan 1999), as well as that of graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gori, Monfardini, and Scarselli 2005;
Scarselli et al. 2008). However, GNNs have only recently
started to be closely investigated, following the advent of
deep learning. Some notable examples include (Duvenaud
et al. 2015; Battaglia et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016; Defferrard,
Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kearnes et al. 2016; Kipf
and Welling 2016; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Veličković et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018b). These approaches
are known as spectral. Their similarity with message passing
(MP) was observed by (Kipf and Welling 2016) and formalized by (Gilmer et al. 2017) and (Xu et al. 2018a).
The MP framework is based on the core idea of recursive neighborhood aggregation. That is, at every iteration,
the representation of each vertex is updated based on messages received from its neighbors. The majority of the spectral GNNs can be described in terms of the MP framework.
GNNs have been applied with great success to bioinformatics and social network data, for node classiﬁcation, link
prediction, and graph classiﬁcation. However, a few studies

Message Passing Neural Networks

(Gilmer et al. 2017) proposed a MP framework under which
many of the recently introduced GNNs can be reformulated1 . MP consists in an aggregation phase followed by a
combination phase (Xu et al. 2018a). More precisely, let
G = (V, E) be a graph, and let us consider v ∈ V . At
time t + 1, a message vector mt+1
is computed from the
v
representations of the neighbors N (v) of v:


mt+1
= AGGREGATEt+1 htw | w ∈ N (v)
(1)
v
of v is then computed by comThe new representation ht+1
v
bining its current feature vector htv with the message vector
mt+1
v :


ht+1
(2)
= COMBINEt+1 htv , mt+1
v
v
Messages are passed for T time steps. Each step is implemented by a different layer of the MP network. Hence, iterations correspond to network depth. The ﬁnal feature vector
hTv of v is based on messages propagated from all the nodes
in the subtree of height T rooted at v. It captures both the
1

Note that some GNNs, known as spatial, are not based on
MP (Niepert, Ahmed, and Kutzkov 2016; Nikolentzos et al. 2018;
Tixier et al. 2019).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8544

