The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Delay-Adaptive Distributed Stochastic Optimization
Zhaolin Ren,1 Zhengyuan Zhou,∗2,4 Linhai Qiu,3 Ajay Deshpande,4 Jayant Kalagnanam4
1

Harvard University, 2 New York University, 3 Google Inc., 4 IBM Research

workers asynchronously update a parameter in some shared
memory. Both architectures are vulnerable to delays in the
gradient computation. Such delays are of particular concern
in volunteer computing grids, where there is no upper bound
on the workers’ delay.

Abstract
In large-scale optimization problems, distributed asynchronous stochastic gradient descent (DASGD) is a commonly used algorithm. In most applications, there are often
a large number of computing nodes asynchronously computing gradient information. As such, the gradient information received at a given iteration is often stale. In the presence of such delays, which can be unbounded, the convergence of DASGD is uncertain. The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we propose a delay-adaptive variant of
DASGD where we adjust each iteration’s step-size based on
the size of the delay, and prove asymptotic convergence of
the algorithm on variationally coherent stochastic problems,
a class of functions which properly includes convex, quasiconvex and star-convex functions. Second, we extend the convergence results of standard DASGD, used usually for problems with bounded domains, to problems with unbounded domains. In this way, we extend the frontier of theoretical guarantees for distributed asynchronous optimization, and provide
new insights for practitioners working on large-scale optimization problems.

1

Related Work and Our Contributions
Our paper addresses the robustness of DASGD-type algorithms in the presence of large, unbounded delays resulting from either the master-slave or shared memory parallel
computing architectures. In distributed deterministic optimization, asynchronous gradient descent has been shown to
solve convex problems, even if delays scale sublinearly over
time (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 2003). For stochastic convex problems, recent results by ((Agarwal and Duchi 2011),
(Recht et al. 2011), (Chaturapruek, Duchi, and Ré 2015))
have derived convergence rates for DASGD when the delay is bounded. A delay-adaptive DASGD variant for convex problems was proposed in (Sra et al. 2015), where the
algorithm’s step-size depends on the actual delay received.
However, the authors of (Sra et al. 2015) assumed that the
delays are either bounded or have ﬁnite ﬁrst and second moments, whereas in many applications the delays might not be
bounded. An algorithm for problems with unbounded delays
for both convex and nonconvex problems was introduced in
(Peng et al. 2019). However, the proposed step-size in (Peng
et al. 2019) is not delay-adaptive, and the authors there assumed ﬁnite-mean i.i.d delays, while we make no distributional assumption. Beyond convexity, the class of variationally coherent (VC) problems, which properly includes
convex, quasi-convex, and star-convex objectives, was introduced in ((Zhou et al. 2017a), (Zhou et al. 2020a)), and subsequently generalized to multi-player game settings ((Zhou
et al. 2017c), (Zhou et al. 2017b), (Zhou et al. 2018a), (Mertikopoulos and Zhou 2019)). For VC problems on a bounded
domain, ((Zhou et al. 2018b), (Zhou et al. 2020b)) proved
that DASGD converges almost surely to a global minimizer,
even when the delays between gradient updates and requests
grow at a polynomial rate. For synchronous stochastic optimization of variationally-coherent-like problems with unbounded domains, (Lelong 2008) proposed a random truncation approach that achieves convergence.
Our main contributions are twofold: ﬁrst, we propose a
delay-adaptive variant of DASGD for VC problems whose
convergence is robust to any delay sequence from either
the master-slave or shared-memory architecture, going be-

Introduction

In recent years, rapid advances in computing infrastructures
have led to a signiﬁcant increase in the use of distributed
stochastic optimization. There has correspondingly been intensive work studying distributed stochastic optimization,
such as (Chaturapruek, Duchi, and Ré 2015), (Karakus et al.
2017), (Damaskinos et al. 2018), (Wu et al. 2018),(Assran
et al. 2018), (Cutkosky and Busa-Fekete 2018), (Koloskova,
Stich, and Jaggi 2019), (Yu and Jin 2019), (Xie, Koyejo, and
Gupta 2019).
Many optimization algorithms in distributed settings are
ﬁrst-order methods involving multiple computing nodes
working asynchronously to perform stochastic gradient
descent. For brevity, we will refer to such algorithms
as distributed asynchronous stochastic gradient descent
(DASGD) in this paper. Two common architectures on
which DASGD are deployed are 1) a “master-slave” architecture where each worker independently computes a noisy
gradient for the master node, and 2) a multiprocessor sharedmemory architecture, where there is no master node and
∗
This author gratefully acknowledges the support of the IBM
Goldstine Fellowship.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5503

