The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adaptive Quantitative Trading: An
Imitative Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach
Yang Liu,1 Qi Liu,1∗ Hongke Zhao,2 Zhen Pan,1 Chuanren Liu3
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, School of Data Science &
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
College of Management and Economics, Tianjin University
3
Department of Business Analytics and Statistics, University of Tennessee
{liuyang0, pzhen}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn, hongke@tju.edu.cn, cliu89@utk.edu
Abstract

In recent years, considerable efforts have been devoted to
developing AI techniques for ﬁnance research and applications. For instance, AI techniques (e.g., machine learning)
can help traders in quantitative trading (QT) by automating
two tasks: market condition recognition and trading strategies execution. However, existing methods in QT face challenges such as representing noisy high-frequent ﬁnancial data
and ﬁnding the balance between exploration and exploitation of the trading agent with AI techniques. To address the
challenges, we propose an adaptive trading model, namely
iRDPG, to automatically develop QT strategies by an intelligent trading agent. Our model is enhanced by deep reinforcement learning (DRL) and imitation learning techniques.
Speciﬁcally, considering the noisy ﬁnancial data, we formulate the QT process as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP). Also, we introduce imitation learning to leverage classical trading strategies useful to balance
between exploration and exploitation. For better simulation,
we train our trading agent in the real ﬁnancial market using
minute-frequent data. Experimental results demonstrate that
our model can extract robust market features and be adaptive
in different markets.

Figure 1: A diagram of Dual Thrust strategy comprised
of OHLC price and volumes chart, where trading signals
(down/up triangles) are formed once current price breaks
through the BuyLine (green line) /SellLine (red line).

the actual market states. In the ﬁeld of QT, technical analysis (Murphy 1999) is the most widely used method. Technical analysis aims at building technical indicators mainly
using charts of Opening-High-Low-Closing prices (OHLC)
and trading volumes. Dual Thrust strategy (Pruitt and Hill
2012) is a good example of technical analysis as shown in
Figure 1. However, these predeﬁned and handcraft technical
indicators are frequently criticized for their poor generalization capacity (Deng et al. 2016). For instance, an identical
technical strategy may perform differently in two similar ﬁnancial markets. Thus, this brings a big challenge to represent robust features directly from ﬁnancial data.
Machine learning approaches are helpful to improve the
generalization ability. Previous studies concentrate on price
trend prediction by approaches based on deep neural networks (Feng et al. 2019; Jin et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2017a;
Li et al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2017b). But price trend prediction
is not the only thing in QT, we also need well-designed trading strategies. As an area of machine learning, reinforcement
learning (RL) proposes a framework for sequential decisionmaking problems. The agent in RL learns a policy concerned
with how to take actions in an environment to maximize cumulative reward (Sutton and Barto 2018). It seems suitable
to build trading strategies by RL approaches. However, the

Introduction
In ﬁnancial security investment, quantitative trading (QT) is
characterized by its high degree of automation and continuity. With the assistance of computer technology, quantitative traders aggregate information and place orders more
and more efﬁciently. Instead of active judgments, quantitative traders can efﬁciently reduce irrational trading decisions
by trading programs. To date, quantitative hedge funds have
become the mainstream of security investment. To meet the
great demand for ﬁnancial innovation, leveraging machine
learning in QT is becoming a central topic of Fintech.
In real ﬁnancial market, unpredictable trading behaviors
and economic events lead to the noisy and non-stationary
ﬁnancial data. Security prices reﬂect little part of market information, which means that we can never directly observe
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2128

