The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DICR: AI Assisted, Adaptive Platform for Contract Review
Dan G. Tecuci, Ravi Palla, Hamid R. Motahari Nezhad,
Nishchal Ahuja, Alex Monteiro, Tigran Ishkhanov, Nigel Duffy

{dan.tecuci, ravi.k.palla, hamid.motahari, nishchal.ahuja, alex.monteiro, tigran.ishkhanov, nigel.p.duffy}@ey.com
EY AI Lab, Palo Alto, CA

rather then interpreting its contents. The closest commercial
product to what we have built is a contract review solution
from Lawgeex6 , but compared to DICR, this is domain and
contract type speciﬁc.
Our approach is novel in breaking down the problem of
document review into several steps: separating the documents into snippets, ﬁnding relevant snippets for a particular information need through classiﬁcation/ranking, and then
using value extraction and entity recognition to ﬁnd values
of interest from those snippets. It offers a more reliable extraction mechanism in cases where the direct value extractions and entity recognition fails. It is trainable and applicable to document review across domains.

Abstract
In the regular course of business, companies spend a lot of effort reading and interpreting documents, a highly manual process that involves tedious tasks, such as identifying dates and
names or locating the presence or absence of certain clauses
in a contract. Dealing with natural language is complex and
further complicated by the fact that these documents come
in various formats (scanned image, digital formats) and have
different degrees of internal structure (spreadsheets, invoices,
text documents). We present DICR, an end-to-end, modular,
and trainable system that automates the mundane aspects of
document review and allows humans to perform the validation. The system is able to speed up this work while increasing quality of information extracted, consistency, throughput, and decreasing time to decision. Extracted data can be
fed into other downstream applications (from dashboards to
Q&A and to report generation).

The System
We present DICR (“Document Intelligence for Contract Review”), an AI-based document review tool, developed for
contract review that combines classiﬁcation, ranking, and
entity recognition to speed up and increase consistency of
the contract review process. Under our approach the task of
document review is reformulated as presenting to the user
different document snippets based on their relevance to the
users’ information need. We have customized the application for review of contracts in the real estate domain and
identiﬁed two types of generic information needs: value extraction for various data elements (e.g. the date when a lease
contract starts, the amount of rent payable annually) and
classiﬁcation (e.g. whether the contract contains a termination clause). We adopt the user-in-the-loop paradigm and offer full control to the user over the output of the tool. The
UI supports this paradigm in two ways: highlighting values identiﬁed by the tool and offering the user the context
in order for her to make an informed judgement. DICR is
a generic document intelligence platform that can be customized and trained for reviewing other types of documents
(e.g. NDAs, purchase agreements, mortgages, etc.) in other
types of domains (e.g. labor law, ﬁnances).
The typical workﬂow of DICR consists of two phases: an
optional ofﬂine phase where a set of common data elements
for a speciﬁc domain (called “extraction proﬁle”) is deﬁned

Introduction
Documents are central to the functioning of companies. The
ability to read, understand and interpret business documents,
collectively referred to as “Document Intelligence”, is a critical and challenging application of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
in business. While a variety of research has advanced the
fundamentals of document understanding, the majority have
focused on documents found on the web which fail to capture the complexity of analysis and types of understanding
needed across business documents (Piskorski and Yangarber 2013). Recent interest in document understanding has
signiﬁcantly increased as evidenced by the availability of
commercial and open-source product offerings including:
IBM Watson1 , Microsoft Azure cognitive services2 , Amazon Textract 3 , Google document understanding4 , Prodigy5 .
The closest effort in scope is (Staar et al. 2018), but the
focus there is on the structure and layout of the document
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/services/discovery?topic=
discovery-sdu
2
https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/cognitive-services/
3
https://aws.amazon.com/textract/
4
https://cloud.google.com/solutions/document-understanding/
5
https://prodi.gy/

6

13638

https://www.lawgeex.com/

