The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Translucent Answer Predictions in Multi-Hop Reading Comprehension
G P Shrivatsa Bhargav,2* Michael Glass,1* Dinesh Garg,1 Shirish Shevade,2
Saswati Dana,1 Dinesh Khandelwal,1 L Venkata Subramaniam,1 Alﬁo Gliozzo1
*

Equal contribution
IBM Research AI, 2 Dept. of CSA, IISc, Bangalore
{mrglass, gliozzo}@us.ibm.com, {bhargavs, shirish}@iisc.ac.in, {garg.dinesh, sadana04, dikhand1, lvsubram}@in.ibm.com
1

Abstract

Question: Brown State Fishing Lake is in a county that has a
population of how many inhabitants ?
Context:
Passage 1: “Fishing Lake”
Fishing Lake is a lake in the Canadian province . . .
...
Passage 3: “Brown State Fishing Lake”
Brown State Fishing Lake (sometimes also known as Brown

Research on the task of Reading Comprehension style Question Answering (RCQA) has gained momentum in recent
years due to the emergence of human annotated datasets
and associated leaderboards, for example CoQA, HotpotQA,
SQuAD, TriviaQA, etc. While state-of-the-art has advanced
considerably, there is still ample opportunity to advance it further on some important variants of the RCQA task. In this paper, we propose a novel deep neural architecture, called TAP
(Translucent Answer Prediction), to identify answers and evidence (in the form of supporting facts) in an RCQA task
requiring multi-hop reasoning. TAP comprises two loosely
coupled networks – Local and Global Interaction eXtractor
(LoGIX) and Answer Predictor (AP). LoGIX predicts supporting facts, whereas AP consumes these predicted supporting facts to predict the answer span. The novel design
of LoGIX is inspired by two key design desiderata – local
context and global interaction– that we identiﬁed by analyzing examples of multi-hop RCQA task. The loose coupling between LoGIX and the AP reveals the set of sentences used by the AP in predicting an answer. Therefore,
answer predictions of TAP can be interpreted in a translucent manner. TAP offers state-of-the-art performance on the
HotpotQA (Yang et al. 2018) dataset – an apt dataset for
multi-hop RCQA task – as it occupies Rank-1 on its leaderboard (https://hotpotqa.github.io/) at the time
of submission.

1

State Fishing Lake And Wildlife Area) is a protected area in
Brown County, Kansas in the United States.
The lake is 62 acres in area and up to 13 feet deep. The area
was formerly known as Brown County State Park, and is 8
miles (13 km) east of Hiawatha, Kansas .
...
Passage 10: “Brown County, Kansas”
Brown County (county code BR) is a county located in
the northeast portion of the U.S. state of Kansas .
As of the 2010 census, the county population was 9,984 .
Its county seat and most populous city is Hiawatha . . .
Answer: 9,984

Figure 1: Output of the TAP model on a test example from
HotpotQA, demonstrating its effectiveness in capturing local context as well as global interaction among sentences
so as to identify supporting facts. The intensity of the highlight is proportional to the probability (predicted by our
model) of the sentence being a supporting fact.

Introduction

Natural language understanding has been one of the key
drivers responsible for advancing the ﬁeld of AI. To this
end, automated Question Answering (QA) has served as an
effective way of measuring the language understanding capabilities of AI systems. The ﬁeld of QA is vast and can
be classiﬁed along many different dimensions, including (i)
knowledge based (Unger et al. 2014) vs. text based (reading comprehension) (Joshi et al. 2017), (ii) extractive (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) vs. abstractive (Lai et al. 2017), (iii)
short (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) vs. long answers (Kwiatkowski
et al. 2019), (iv) single-hop (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) vs. multihop reasoning (Yang et al. 2018), etc. Our focus in this paper is on Reading Comprehension style Question Answering

(RCQA) task. Reading comprehension is the ability to answer questions over the supplied natural language passages,
where a passage comprises one or more paragraphs. Specifically, we focus on complex questions that require multi-hop
reasoning over facts spread across multiple passages.
Recently, there has been a surge in the research activities surrounding RCQA task, primarily due to the emergence of large-scale public datasets such as CoQA (Reddy,
Chen, and Manning 2019), HotpotQA (Yang et al. 2018),
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), TriviaQA (Joshi et al.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7700

