The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Tale of Two-Timescale Reinforcement
Learning with the Tightest Finite-Time Bound
Gal Dalal,1 Balázs Szörényi,2 Gugan Thoppe3∗
1

Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel; gald@technion.ac.il
2
Yahoo! Research, New York, NY, USA; szorenyi.balazs@gmail.com
3
Duke University, Durham, NC, USA; gugan.thoppe@gmail.com

(i)

where αn , βn ∈ R are stepsizes and Mn ∈ Rd denotes
noise. Further, hi : Rd × Rd → Rd has the form

Abstract
Policy evaluation in reinforcement learning is often conducted using two-timescale stochastic approximation, which
results in various gradient temporal difference methods such
as GTD(0), GTD2, and TDC. Here, we provide convergence
rate bounds for this suite of algorithms. Algorithms such as
these have two iterates, θn and wn , which are updated using two distinct stepsize sequences, αn and βn , respectively.
Assuming αn = n−α and βn = n−β with 1 > α >
β > 0, we show that, with high probability, the two iterates converge to their respective solutions θ∗ and w∗ at
rates given by θn − θ∗  = Õ(n−α/2 ) and wn − w∗  =
Õ(n−β/2 ); here, Õ hides logarithmic terms. Via comparable
lower bounds, we show that these bounds are, in fact, tight.
To the best of our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst ﬁnite-time analysis which achieves these rates. While it was known that the
two timescale components decouple asymptotically, our results depict this phenomenon more explicitly by showing that
it in fact happens from some ﬁnite time onwards. Lastly, compared to existing works, our result applies to a broader family
of stepsizes, including non-square summable ones.

1

hi (θ, w) = vi − Γi θ − Wi w

Introduction

Stochastic Approximation (SA) (Kushner and Yin 1997)
is the name given to algorithms useful for ﬁnding optimal
points or zeros of a function for which only noisy access is
available. This makes SA theory vital to machine learning
and, speciﬁcally, to Reinforcement Learning (RL). Here, we
obtain tight convergence rate estimates for the special class
of linear two-timescale SA, which involves two interleaved
update rules with distinct stepsize sequences. In the context
of RL, the analysis here applies to policy evaluation schemes
with function approximation.
A generic linear two-timescale SA has the form:
θn+1
wn+1

(1)

=

θn + αn [h1 (θn , wn ) + Mn+1 ] ,

(1)

=

(2)
wn + βn [h2 (θn , wn ) + Mn+1 ]

(2)

,

(3)

.
for a vector vi ∈ R and matrices Γi , Wi ∈ R
Within RL, this class of algorithms mainly concerns the
suite of gradient Temporal Difference (TD) methods, which
was introduced in (Sutton, Maei, and Szepesvári 2009) and
has gradually gained increasing attention since then. That
work presented a gradient descent variant of TD(0), called
GTD(0). As it supports off-policy learning, GTD(0) is advantageous over TD(0). More recently, additional variants
were introduced such as GTD2 and TDC (Sutton et al.
2009); while being better than TD(0), these are also faster
than GTD(0). The above gradient TD methods have been
shown to converge asymptotically in the case of linear
and non-linear function approximation (Sutton, Maei, and
Szepesvári 2009; Sutton et al. 2009; Bhatnagar et al. 2009).
Separately, there are also a few convergence rate results for
altered versions of the GTD family (Liu et al. 2015) and
sparsely-projected variants (Dalal et al. 2018b). Both works
apply projections to keep the iterates in a conﬁned region
around the solutions. However, in (Liu et al. 2015), the learning rates are set to a ﬁxed ratio which makes the altered algorithms single-timescale variants of the original ones.
To place our work in the landscape of the existing literature on generic two-timescale SA, we now brieﬂy review a few seminal papers. The ﬁrst well-known use of the
two-timescale idea is the Polyak-Ruppert averaging scheme
(Ruppert 1988; Polyak 1990). There, iterate averaging is
used to improve the convergence rate of a one-timescale
algorithm, which is especially beneﬁcial when the driving
matrices have poor conditioning. The general two-timecale
SA scheme is formulated in (Borkar 1997); this work provided conditions for convergence. Since then, relatively little
work has been published on the topic; the main results obtained so far include weak convergence and asymptotic convergence rates (Gerencsér 1997; Konda and Tsitsiklis 2004;
Mokkadem and Pelletier 2006), and stability (Lakshminarayanan and Bhatnagar 2017).
We now discuss two speciﬁc papers from the above list
that are the closest to our work. Denote by θ∗ and w∗
the respective solutions of (1) and (2); i.e., h1 (θ∗ , w∗ ) =
d

∗
Research supported by NSF grants DEB-1840223 and DMS
17-13012.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3701

d×d

