The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Experimental Design for Optimization of Orthogonal Projection Pursuit Models
Mojmı́r Mutný

Johannes Kirschner

Andreas Krause

ETH Zurich
MOJMIR . MUTNY @ INF. ETHZ . CH

ETH Zurich
JKIRSCHNER @ INF. ETHZ . CH

KRAUSEA @ ETHZ . CH

and computational efﬁciency on high dimensional domains.
We signiﬁcantly generalize this setup by allowing the additivity to occur in an unknown rotated coordinate system.
A Bayesian approach to estimate the rotation is to treat
the projection matrix as a hyper-parameter of a Gaussian
process model and maximize the evidence (marginalized likelihood) to determine a candidate rotation (Rasmussen and
Williams 2006). However, this approach has two drawbacks
that severely limit its performance in practice. First, the evidence is a non-convex function on the space of rotation
matrices, that can be heuristically optimized using manifold
optimization techniques (Edelman, Arias, and Smith 1999).
In practice we observed that this approach suffers from local
optima and obtaining a good solution is difﬁcult. Second, it
is a largely open problem how to pick the initial data set in
the ﬁrst place, yet importantly, the sample set determines the
quality of the solution signiﬁcantly.
In this work we present a principled two-stage algorithm
based on experimental design. We ﬁrst derive a design to
efﬁciently estimate the unknown rotation of the coordinate
system by estimating the Hessian of the black box function at
a single point with optimal experimental design. We control
the error in the estimate of the rotation by evaluating the function at carefully chosen points and consequently provably
de-correlate the parameters. Finally, we proceed to efﬁciently
optimize the de-correlated function by using a bandit algorithm designed for additive functions.

Abstract
Bayesian optimization and kernelized bandit algorithms are
widely used techniques for sequential black box function
optimization with applications in parameter tuning, control,
robotics among many others. To be effective in high dimensional settings, previous approaches make additional assumptions, for example on low-dimensional subspaces or an additive structure. In this work, we go beyond the additivity
assumption and use an orthogonal projection pursuit regression model, which strictly generalizes additive models. We
present a two-stage algorithm motivated by experimental design to ﬁrst decorrelate the additive components. Subsequently,
the bandit optimization beneﬁts from the statistically efﬁcient
additive model. Our method provably decorrelates the fully
additive model and achieves optimal sublinear simple regret
in terms of the number of function evaluations. To prove the
rotation recovery, we derive novel concentration inequalities
for linear regression on subspaces. In addition, we speciﬁcally address the issue of acquisition function optimization
and present two domain dependent efﬁcient algorithms. We
validate the algorithm numerically on synthetic as well as
real-world optimization problems.

1

ETH Zurich

Introduction

Experimental design (Chaloner and Verdinelli 1995) is a
branch of statistics for optimally acquiring information in
order to reduce uncertainty about a quantity of interest. The
related ﬁelds of kernelized bandit algorithms and Bayesian
optimization (Srinivas et al. 2010; Shahriari et al. 2016) seek
to adaptively query a noisy function in order to identify an
input with maximum value. Such a procedure can also be
viewed as an adaptive experimental design for the optimal
input. Bandit optimization and experimental design in general
have been successfully used in many applications such as
clinical trials (Lizotte 2008), parameter tuning (Kirschner et
al. 2019) and reinforcement learning (Gopalan, Mannor, and
Mansour 2014).
In this work, our objective is to maximize an unknown
function that is assumed to be additive up to a rotation, using
only noisy function evaluations. The additivity assumption
has been placed in previous work in order to gain statistical

Summary of Contributions
• We analyze a novel two stage bandit algorithm for estimating and optimizing the orthogonal projection pursuit
model, which generalizes additive models.
• We reduce the estimation of the rotation to linear regression on a subspace; and we derive novel concentration
inequalities for subspace estimation that are of independent interest. These allow us to carefully trade-off two
counteracting errors - the local approximation error and
the error due to noisy observations.
• We derive a sample complexity bound for simple regret
that is asymptotically optimal in the number of queried
points and scales polynomially in the dimension of the
input parameter.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10235

