The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neighborhood Cognition Consistent Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Hangyu Mao,1,2 Wulong Liu,2 Jianye Hao,3,2 Jun Luo2
Dong Li,2 Zhengchao Zhang,1 Jun Wang,4 Zhen Xiao1
1

Peking University, 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
Tianjin University, 4 University College London
{hy.mao, zhengchaozhang, xiaozhen}@pku.edu.cn
{liuwulong, haojianye, jun.luo1, lidong106}@huawei.com
jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk
3

Inspired by the above observations, we introduce neighborhood cognitive consistency into multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) to facilitate agent cooperations.
Compared to recent MARL methods that focus on designing global coordination mechanisms like centralized critic
(Lowe et al. 2017; Foerster et al. 2018; Mao et al. 2019),
joint value factorization (Sunehag et al. 2018; Rashid et
al. 2018; Son et al. 2019) and agent communication (Foerster et al. 2016; Sukhbaatar, Fergus, and others 2016;
Peng et al. 2017), the neighborhood cognitive consistency
takes an alternative but complementary approach of focusing on innovating value network design from a local perspective. The beneﬁt is that it can be easily combined with
existing MARL methods to facilitate large-scale agent cooperations. As examples, we propose Neighborhood Cognition
Consistent Q-learning and Actor-Critic for practical use.
Speciﬁcally, we take three steps to implement the neighborhood cognitive consistency. First, we cast a multi-agent
environment as a graph, and adopt graph convolutional network to extract a high-level representation from the joint observation of all neighboring agents. Second, we decompose
this high-level representation into an agent-speciﬁc cognitive representation and a neighborhood-speciﬁc cognitive
representation. Third, we assume that each neighborhood
has a true hidden cognitive variable, then all neighboring
agents learn to align their neighborhood-speciﬁc cognitive
representations with this true hidden cognitive variable by
variational inference. As a result, all neighboring agents will
eventually form consistent neighborhood cognitions.
Due to the consistency between neighborhood-speciﬁc
cognitions as well as the difference between agent-speciﬁc
cognitions, the neighboring agents can achieve coordinated
and still personalized policies based on the combination of
both cognitions. Meanwhile, since some agents belong to
multiple neighborhoods, they are able to act as a bridge for
all agents. Thus, our methods can facilitate the coordination
among a large number of agents at the whole team level.
We evaluate our methods on several challenging tasks.
Experiments show that they not only signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art MARL approaches, but also achieve
greater advantages as the environment complexity grows. In
addition, ablation studies and further analyses are provided

Abstract
Social psychology and real experiences show that cognitive
consistency plays an important role to keep human society
in order: if people have a more consistent cognition about
their environments, they are more likely to achieve better cooperation. Meanwhile, only cognitive consistency within a
neighborhood matters because humans only interact directly
with their neighbors. Inspired by these observations, we take
the ﬁrst step to introduce neighborhood cognitive consistency
(NCC) into multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). Our
NCC design is quite general and can be easily combined with
existing MARL methods. As examples, we propose neighborhood cognition consistent deep Q-learning and Actor-Critic
to facilitate large-scale multi-agent cooperations. Extensive
experiments on several challenging tasks (i.e., packet routing, wiﬁ conﬁguration and Google football player control)
justify the superior performance of our methods compared
with state-of-the-art MARL approaches.

Introduction
In social psychology, cognitive consistency theories show
that people usually seek to perceive the environment in a
simple and consistent way (Simon, Snow, and Read 2004;
Russo et al. 2008; Lakkaraju and Speed 2019). If the perceptions are inconsistent, people produce an uncomfortable
feeling (i.e., the cognitive dissonance), and they will change
behaviors to reduce this feeling by making their cognitions
consistent.
Naturally, this also applies to multi-agent systems (OroojlooyJadid and Hajinezhad 2019; Bear, Kagan, and Rand
2017; Corgnet, Espı́n, and Hernán-González 2015): agents
that maintain consistent cognitions about their environments
are crucial for achieving effective system-level cooperation.
In contrast, it is hard to imagine that the agents without consensuses on their situated environments can cooperate well.
Besides, the fact that agents only interact directly with their
neighbors with local perception indicates that maintaining
neighborhood cognitive consistency is usually sufﬁcient to
guarantee system-level cooperations.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7219

