The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fine-Grained Argument Unit Recognition and Classiﬁcation
Dietrich Trautmann,† Johannes Daxenberger,‡ Christian Stab,‡ Hinrich Schütze,† Iryna Gurevych‡
†

Center for Information and Language Processing (CIS), LMU Munich, Germany
Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab (UKP-TUDA), TU Darmstadt, Germany
dietrich@trautmann.me; inquiries@cislmu.org
http://www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de

‡

Abstract

Topic: Death Penalty

Prior work has commonly deﬁned argument retrieval from
heterogeneous document collections as a sentence-level classiﬁcation task. Consequently, argument retrieval suffers both
from low recall and from sentence segmentation errors making it difﬁcult for humans and machines to consume the arguments. In this work, we argue that the task should be performed on a more ﬁne-grained level of sequence labeling. For
this, we deﬁne the task as Argument Unit Recognition and
Classiﬁcation (AURC). We present a dataset of arguments
from heterogeneous sources annotated as spans of tokens
within a sentence, as well as with a corresponding stance. We
show that and how such difﬁcult argument annotations can be
effectively collected through crowdsourcing with high interannotator agreement. The new benchmark, AURC-8, contains
up to 15% more arguments per topic as compared to annotations on the sentence level. We identify a number of methods
targeted at AURC sequence labeling, achieving close to human performance on known domains. Further analysis also
reveals that, contrary to previous approaches, our methods are
more robust against sentence segmentation errors. We publicly release our code and the AURC-8 dataset.1

1

It does not deter crime and
CON

it is extremely expensive to administer .
CON

Topic: Gun Control
Yes , guns can be used for protection
CON

but laws are meant to protect us , too .
PRO

Figure 1: Annotation of argumentative spans and stance.
Each of the two sentences contains two arguments.

tative text (e.g., a student essay). In contrast, informationseeking AM aims to identify self-contained argumentative
statements relevant to the given topic from any source. The
goal of this kind of AM is to identify a broad and diverse set
of arguments, ideally reﬂecting different viewpoints and aspects of the topic of interest. Most approaches to automatic
discourse-level AM (Wyner et al. 2010; Stab and Gurevych
2014) rely on the claim-premise model, which refers to
the basic units of an argument as a controversial proposition (claim) and connected evidence (premise). The claimpremise model is the basis for the analysis of complex argumentative texts, which can be solved by AI-based automatic
methods with success (Kuribayashi et al. 2019).
The claim-premise model is, however, hardly applicable
to text that does not contain an explicit argumentative structure (i.e., the majority of textual data) and, thus, has not
been applied with much success to heterogeneous document
collections (Habernal and Gurevych 2017). Informationseeking AM, which allows to detect arguments in sources
that are not inherently argumentative, has been suggested as
a remedy to this problem. It solves the following task: given
a controversial claim (“topic”), detect supporting or opposing statements from (potentially) relevant sources. In this
context, an argument is usually deﬁned as a short text – or
span – providing evidence or reasoning about the topic, supporting or opposing it (Stab et al. 2018b). This can be seen
as a ﬂat version of the claim-premise model, where the topic

Introduction

Argumentation and reasoning are fundamental human skills.
They play a major role in education, daily conversations,
as well as in many professional contexts including journalism, politics and the law. Argumentative skills are trained,
for example, in the context of (public) debates, which are
an essential part of democratic societies. Argument mining (AM), i.e., the processing of argumentative structures
in natural language using automatic methods (Peldszus and
Stede 2013), has recently gained considerable attention in
the AI community (Cabrio and Villata 2018; Lippi and Torroni 2016; Nguyen and Litman 2018). AM requires sophisticated reasoning about controversial subject matters well
beyond mere syntactic or semantic understanding. In recent research on AM, two radically different paradigms have
evolved: closed-domain discourse-level AM seeks to identify the argumentative structure of a debate or an argumenc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/trtm/AURC
9048

