The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Incentivized Exploration for Multi-Armed Bandits under Reward Drift
Zhiyuan Liu∗

Huazheng Wang∗†

Fan Shen

Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado, Boulder
zhiyuan.liu@colorado.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
hw7ww@virginia.edu

Technology, Cybersecurity and Policy
University of Colorado, Boulder
fan.shen@colorado.edu

Kai Liu

Lijun Chen

Computer Science Division
Clemson University
kail@clemson.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado, Boulder
lijun.chen@colorado.edu
principal, who is also the player, strives to ﬁnd the optimal
tradeoff between exploration and exploitation and execute
it accordingly. When the principal and players are different
entities, misaligned interests between them need to be reconciled in order to balance exploration and exploitation in
an optimal manner.
Incentivized learning has been proposed for the MAB
problem to reconcile different interests between the principal and the players (Frazier et al. 2014; Mansour, Slivkins,
and Syrgkanis 2015; Wang and Huang 2018; Immorlica et
al. 2019). In order to incentivize exploration, the principal
provides certain compensation to the player so that s/he will
pull the arm other than the greedy choice that currently has
the best empirical reward. The goal of the principal is to
maximize the cumulative reward while minimizing the total compensation to the players.
However, existing incentivized MAB models (Han,
Kempe, and Qiang 2015; Wang and Huang 2018; Immorlica et al. 2018; Liu and Ho 2018; Hirnschall et al. 2018)
assume that the players provide unbiased stochastic feedback on reward1 even after they receive certain incentive
from the principal. This assumption does not always hold in
the real world scenarios: work based on industrial level experiments in (Martensen, Gronholdt, and Kristensen 2000;
Razak, Nirwanto, and Triatmanto 2016; Ehsani and Ehsani
2015) shows that the customers are inclined to give higher
evaluation (i.e., increased reward) with incentive such as discount and coupon. The compensation could even be the primary driver of customer satisfaction (Martensen, Gronholdt,
and Kristensen 2000; Lee and Lin 2005). This drift in reward
feedback may cause negative impact on the exploration and
exploitation tradeoff, e.g., a suboptimal arm is mistaken as
the optimal one because of the incentives and the players
will keep pulling it even after the compensation is removed.
This has been ignored in previous research.
In this paper, we aim to investigate the impact of drifted
reward feedback in the incentivized MAB problem. Specifically, we consider a general incentivized exploration algorithm where the player receives a compensation that is
the difference in reward between the principal’s choice and
the greedy choice, and provides biased feedback that is the

Abstract
We study incentivized exploration for the multi-armed bandit
(MAB) problem where the players receive compensation for
exploring arms other than the greedy choice and may provide
biased feedback on reward. We seek to understand the impact of this drifted reward feedback by analyzing the performance of three instantiations of the incentivized MAB algorithm: UCB, ε-Greedy, and Thompson Sampling. Our results
show that they all achieve O(log T ) regret and compensation under the drifted reward, and are therefore effective in
incentivizing exploration. Numerical examples are provided
to complement the theoretical analysis.

Introduction
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a classical model
for sequential decision making under uncertainty, and ﬁnds
applications in many real world systems such as recommender systems (Li et al. 2010; Bouneffouf, Bouzeghoub,
and Gançarski 2012), search engine systems (Radlinski,
Kleinberg, and Joachims 2008; Yue and Joachims 2009)
and cognitive radio networks (Gai, Krishnamachari, and Jain
2010), to just name a few. In the traditional MAB model, the
decision maker (the principal) who selects the arm to pull
and the action performers (the players) who actually pull the
arm are assumed to be the same entity. This is, however,
not true for several important real world applications where
the principal and players are different entities with different
interests. Take the Amazon product rating as an example:
Amazon (the principal) would like the customers (the players) to buy and try different products (arms) of certain type
in order to identify the best product (i.e., exploration), while
the customers are heavily inﬂuenced by the current ratings
on the products and behave myopically, i.e., select the product that currently has the highest rating (i.e., exploitation).
It is well known that such exploitation-only behavior can
be far from the optimal (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi 2012;
Sutton and Barto 2018). In the traditional MAB setting, the
∗

Equal Contribution
Huazheng Wang is supported by Bloomberg Data Science
Ph.D. Fellowship.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1

4981

We will use reward and feedback interchangeably in this paper

