The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Semi-Supervised Streaming Learning with Emerging New Labels
Yong-Nan Zhu, Yu-Feng Li∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{zhuyn, liyf}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

reality, the data collected in the stream are often in a semisupervised manner (Chapelle, Schölkopf, and Zien 2006;
Zhu, Goldberg, and Khot 2009), since it is often unavailable
to access the true labels for all instances in a data stream due
to realistic constraints such as the time, the labeling cost, etc.
To cope with this new yet realistic setting, in this paper we propose SEEN (SEmi-supervised streaming learning
with Emerging New labels) to address the dynamic semisupervised learning problems. The proposed method contains three main components: (1) a speciﬁc designed detector based on the features of instances to determine whether
an unlabeled instance belongs to the new class or known
classes; (2) a robust graph-based semi-supervised classiﬁer
that takes advantage of both labeled and unlabeled data to
make predictions on a new sample if it is likely to be part of
known classes; (3) a novel updating process which utilizes
the detected new class data to remodel both the detector and
the classiﬁer. The three parts collaborate to adapt the learned
model to the changing environment, and achieve satisfactory
outcomes.
Our main contributions are concluded as follows:
• The presented semi-supervised learning framework is capable of handling emerging new class in a dynamic data
stream where a few labeled instances are collected together with a large number of unlabeled instances.
• The model is learned without an initial large labeled training set and works naturally and reliably in streaming settings, even if there are only a few labeled data.
• Comprehensive experiments conducted on a number of
benchmark datasets validate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed method.
The rest of this paper starts with an introduction to related work. Then our proposal is presented, which is followed by extensive empirical justiﬁcation. The paper ends
with the section of the conclusion.

Abstract
In many real-world applications, the modeling environment is
usually dynamic and evolutionary, especially in a data stream
where emerging new class often happens. Great efforts have
been devoted to learning with novel concepts recently, which
are typically in a supervised setting with completely supervised initialization. However, the data collected in the stream
are often in a semi-supervised manner actually, which means
only a few of them are labeled while the great majority miss
ground-truth labels. Besides, new classes hidden in unlabeled
instances bring more challenges for the learning task. In this
paper, we tackle these issues by a new approach called SEEN
which consists of three major components: an effective novel
class detector based on clustering random trees, a robust classiﬁer for predictions on the known classes, and an efﬁcient
updating process that ensures the whole framework adapts to
the changing environment automatically. The classiﬁer produces known labels via label propagation that utilizes all labeled and part unlabeled data in the past which naturally describe the entire stream seen so far. Empirical studies on several datasets validate that the algorithm can accurately classify points on a dynamic stream with a small number of labeled examples and emerging new classes.

Introduction
In traditional machine learning, many advanced approaches
have been proposed based on the assumption that the learning environment is stationary. However, the learning environment is often dynamic in practical applications (Zhou
2016), especially when learning with a data stream. In
particular, during the data stream, novel classes may often emerge. For example, while mining news webpages, a
new hot topic often arises with time. Such new setting attracts much attention in recent years (Masud et al. 2011;
Haque, Khan, and Baron 2016; Mu et al. 2017).
Previous efforts on novel class typically work on a supervised setting which assumes that all the training data are
completely labeled except for the novel class. However, in

Related Work

∗

This research was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB1004300) and the NSFC (61772262). YuFeng Li is the corresponding author of this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Incremental learning requires the ﬂexible and efﬁcient adaptation of models to an open and dynamic environment, and
class-incremental learning (C-IL) (Zhou and Chen 2002;
Fink et al. 2006; Scheirer et al. 2012; Kuzborskij, Orabona,
7015

