The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

3D Crowd Counting via Multi-View Fusion with 3D Gaussian Kernels
Qi Zhang, Antoni B. Chan
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
Tat Chee 83, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong SAR, China
qzhang364-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

濃濗濗濠濩濧濝濣濢

Crowd counting has been studied for decades and a lot
of works have achieved good performance, especially the
DNNs-based density map estimation methods. Most existing
crowd counting works focus on single-view counting, while
few works have studied multi-view counting for large and
wide scenes, where multiple cameras are used. Recently, an
end-to-end multi-view crowd counting method called multiview multi-scale (MVMS) has been proposed, which fuses
multiple camera views using a CNN to predict a 2D scenelevel density map on the ground-plane. Unlike MVMS, we
propose to solve the multi-view crowd counting task through
3D feature fusion with 3D scene-level density maps, instead
of the 2D ground-plane ones. Compared to 2D fusion, the
3D fusion extracts more information of the people along zdimension (height), which helps to solve the scale variations
across multiple views. The 3D density maps still preserve the
2D density maps property that the sum is the count, while
also providing 3D information about the crowd density. We
also explore the projection consistency among the 3D prediction and the ground-truth in the 2D views to further enhance
the counting performance. The proposed method is tested on
3 multi-view counting datasets and achieves better or comparable counting performance to the state-of-the-art.

1

濃濗濗濠濩濧濝濣濢
激濣濫澔濦濙濧濣濠濩濨濝濣濢

濁濣濦濙澔
濤濙濣濤濠濙

濁濣濦濙澔
濤濙濣濤濠濙

濁濣濦濙澔濤濙濣濤濠濙

激濝濡濝濨濙濘澔濚濝濙濠濘澡濣濚澡濪濝濙濫

Figure 1: An example for the limitation of single-view
counting for large and wide scenes: limited ﬁeld-of-view,
low resolution and severe occlusion. This image is from the
ShanghaiTech dataset (Zhang, Li, and et al. 2015).

heavily or totally occluded. Under the 3 conditions, the current single-view counting methods are inaccurate, because
many people are miscounted due to limited ﬁeld-of-view,
low resolution and severe occlusion.
To address the aforementioned situations, multiple cameras should be deployed, and the multi-view information
should be fused to enhance the counting performance for
complicated scenes. A few works (Li, Huang, and Liu
2012; Ryan et al. 2014; Tang et al. 2014; Ge and Collins
2010) have considered multi-view counting. However, the
hand-crafted features and the foreground extraction steps
limit their performance. Recently, a CNN-based multi-view
counting method (Zhang and Chan 2019) was proposed,
which improved the counting performance on wide-area
scenes. In their paper, the multi-view information (cameraview density maps or feature maps) are projected to the same
2D plane in the 3D scene (at the height of a person), and
then fused to predict the 2D scene-level density maps on
the ground-plane. Several fusion methods are considered, including late and early fusion, and a multi-view multi-scale
early fusion model (MVMS), which handles both the interand intra-view scale variations.

Introduction

Single-view crowd counting has been studied for decades
and has achieved promising performance on the existing
counting datasets (Zhang, Li, and et al. 2015; Idrees et al.
2013; Zhang and et al. 2016; Chan, Liang, and Vasconcelos 2008; Chen et al. 2012; Idrees and et al. 2018). However, in real-world applications, there are several situations
where single-view counting cannot perform well (e.g., see
Fig. 1): 1) The scene is too wide (such as a park or a football
match stadium) where a single camera’s ﬁeld-of-view is limited and cannot cover the whole scene; 2) The scene is too
long (such as the underground train platform) where the people who are far away from the camera have very low resolution and the counting methods’ performance drops on these
people; 3) The scene contains a lot of obstacles, such as vehicles, building structures or etc., where many people are
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12837

