The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Asking the Right Questions to the Right
Users: Active Learning with Imperfect Oracles
Shayok Chakraborty
Department of Computer Science
Florida State University

a single instance in each iteration, which is annotated and
appended to the training set. This results in frequent model
updates and also cannot exploit the presence of multiple labeling oracles. In batch mode active learning (BMAL), the
learner queries batches of unlabeled samples and can leverage the availability of multiple labeling agents. Common applications of AL include computer vision (Chakraborty et
al. 2015), text mining (Tong and Koller 2001), spam ﬁltering (Sculley 2007) and bioinformatics (Osmanbeyoglu et al.
2010) among others.

Abstract
Active learning algorithms automatically identify the salient
and exemplar samples from large amounts of unlabeled data
and tremendously reduce human annotation effort in inducing a machine learning model. In a traditional active learning setup, the labeling oracles are assumed to be infallible,
that is, they always provide correct answers (in terms of class
labels) to the queried unlabeled instances. However, in realworld applications, oracles are often imperfect and provide
incorrect label annotations. Oracles also have diverse expertise and while they may be noisy, certain oracles may provide
accurate annotations to certain speciﬁc instances. In this paper, we propose a novel framework to address the challenging
problem of active learning in the presence of multiple imperfect oracles. We pose the optimal sample and oracle selection as a constrained optimization problem and derive a linear
programming relaxation to select a batch of (sample-oracle)
pairs, which can potentially augment maximal information to
the underlying classiﬁcation model. Our extensive empirical
studies on 9 challenging datasets (from a variety of application domains) corroborate the usefulness of our framework
over competing baselines.

Traditional active learning algorithms assume the labeling oracles to be infallible, i.e. they always provide correct
answers to the queried instances. This assumption may not
hold for several real-world applications, where we usually
have multiple labelers providing different qualities of annotation. For instance, with the advent of crowdsourcing platforms like the Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT), hundreds
of annotators are available over the Internet to provide varying degrees of noisy annotations. As another example, consider a medical image classiﬁcation application, where we
have expert doctors as well as novice residents providing
varying degrees of noisy labels. In such situations, some annotators may be more reliable (and hence more expensive)
than others; there may exist different prior knowledge about
annotators; more importantly, annotator effectiveness may
vary depending on the speciﬁc data instance considered.
This diversity among annotators has rendered typical supervised learning algorithms sub-optimal and has motivated the
development of algorithms that are annotator-aware (Urner,
Ben-David, and Shamir 2012).

Introduction
Supervised learning algorithms require a large amount of labeled data to induce a reliable model. However, while unlabeled data is cheap and easily available, obtaining class
labels requires extensive human effort, often from experts
with very limited availability. Thus, developing intelligent
learning algorithms under the constraint of weak human supervision has attracted signiﬁcant research attention. Active
Learning (AL) algorithms address this challenge by automatically identifying the salient and exemplar samples from
large amounts of unlabeled data. This tremendously reduces
human annotation effort as only a few samples, that are identiﬁed by the algorithm, need to be labeled manually. Further,
since the model gets trained on the highly informative samples from the underlying data population, it typically depicts
better generalization capability than a passive learner, where
training samples are obtained at random from the data population. In a serial query AL setting, the learner queries only

In this paper, we propose a novel framework to address
the problem of batch mode active learning (which queries
a batch of unlabeled samples simultaneously) in the presence of multiple imperfect labeling oracles. Our objective is
to select a batch of exemplar unlabeled samples and identify the optimal labeling oracle for each queried sample. We
pose the sample selection based on the uncertainty and redundancy criteria and the oracle selection based on the labeling cost and the error probability conditions. The active
sample and oracle selection problem is solved using a single optimization framework to select a batch of informative
(sample-oracle) pairs. By utilizing the presence of multiple

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3365

