The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Assessing Ethical Thinking about AI
Judy Goldsmith,1 Emanuelle Burton,2 David M. Dueber,1
Beth Goldstein,1 Shannon Sampson,1 Michael D. Toland1
1

2

University of Kentucky
University of Illinois at Chicago

must consider the individual, social, economic, political, and
environmental costs of the design, manufacture, and use of
the technology, while being able to make mindful judgments
on their own. The stakes are high, as AI professionals design
the machines, controllers and software for so many aspects
of our lives, including manufacturing, healthcare, entertainment, transportation, education, policing, and war.
Our students are grappling with technologies such as mass
surveillance, big data methods, social network analysis, neurologically controlled prostheses, robot caregivers, and selfdriving cars, just to name a few. Because these technologies are new and constantly emerging, and their impact on
the world is not fully understood, it is neither possible nor
useful for a CS ethics curriculum to try to offer students a
comprehensive account of the tech ethics landscape. Rather,
an effective curriculum in AI ethics must train its students
to describe for themselves, carefully and clearly, both emergent technologies and the aspects of life that they will affect.
Indeed, some of the most pressing ethical issues AI students
will confront will not initially appear to be ethical problems.
As new technologies and applications are developed, it will
fall to our students to identify, describe and address potential
ethical dilemmas that their colleagues may not recognize as
problems.
Particularly in a ﬁeld so future-oriented as AI, any normative judgments about how to design and implement these
technologies are likely to go awry if they are not founded
in clear-eyed and deliberate description. Accordingly, CS
ethics education (and AI ethics education in particular)
should not only develop the skills in students to be able
to analyze the ethical strengths and weaknesses of existing
computer technology but should empower them to imagine intended uses and possible ramiﬁcations of technology before it is released into the world. Furthermore, they
must have the capacity to reason through how they might
resolve a problem (Burton, Goldsmith, and Mattei 2018;
Goldsmith and Burton 2017; Quinn 2006).
In order to gauge the extent to which CS programs are
preparing students to meet these challenges, we need an assessment tool that can measure whether these components
are being transmitted to students effectively. Gathering this
information is more challenging than testing for students’

Abstract
As is evidenced by the associated AI, Ethics and Society conference, we now take as given the need for ethics education in
the AI and general CS curricula. The anticipated surge in AI
ethics education will force the ﬁeld to reckon with delineating and then evaluating learner outcomes to determine what
is working and improve what is not. We argue for a more
descriptive than normative focus of this ethics education, and
propose the development of assessments that can measure descriptive ethical thinking about AI. Such an assessment tool
for measuring ethical reasoning capacity in CS contexts must
be designed to produce reliable scores for which there is
established validity evidence concerning their interpretation
and use.

Advances in computer technology continue to change the
conditions of human life, and thus of ethics, for everyone.
Yet, computer scientists bear a particular responsibility in
this changing ethical landscape: what we build can create
new possibilities for kindness and justice. Or, what we build
can hinder them. Given that AI has had such an impact on
the ethical terrain we are still trying to ﬁgure out how to
teach AI ethics effectively. Concurrently, if we are to evaluate the quality of curricula, we need a clear deﬁnition of
effectiveness and then assessments that can produce valid
and reliable scores. Thus, we propose that the CS community should develop an assessment tool to measure students’
ethical reasoning and descriptive insight skills applied to
CS and, speciﬁcally, AI related issues. The new assessment
would be designed as a tool that could be used to evaluate
instruction geared towards teaching CS ethics.
We argue that a focus on effectiveness of AI ethics instruction is important and timely; today’s undergraduate CS
education is preparing tomorrow’s technical professionals.
AI professionals inevitably encounter ethical challenges of
some kind in the workplace. The ethical burden on responsible professionals in AI is especially pronounced. In striving
to design technology that supports ethical living and ethical social structures, these professionals are faced with profound and particular dilemmas that arise from the ubiquity
of computation in all aspects of modern work and life. They
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13525

