The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Efﬁcient Algorithm for Counting Markov Equivalent DAGs
Robert Ganian,1 Thekla Hamm,1 Topi Talvitie2
1

Vienna University of Technology, Austria, Email: rganian@gmail.com, thamm@ac.tuwien.ac.at
2
University of Helsinki, Finland, Email: topi.talvitie@helsinki.ﬁ

area of these exploration problems, because approaches to
the other problems typically reduce to them (Radhakrishnan,
Solus, and Uhler 2017; 2018). For this reason, various algorithms for sampling and counting DAGs in a Markov equivalence class have been proposed (Talvitie and Koivisto 2019;
He, Jia, and Yu 2015; Ghassami et al. 2019; He and Yu 2016;
Bernstein and Tetali 2017).
The problem of counting and sampling DAGs in an equivalence class efﬁciently and directly reduces to the restricted
case where the essential graph is an undirected chordal
graph1 (Gillispie and Perlman 2002). In this case, the DAGs
in the Markov equivalence class are exactly the acyclic orientations of the edges of the chordal graph which do not
contain an immorality, that is, a situation in which a vertex
has two parents that are not connected by an edge. For this
reason, the DAGs are known as moral acyclic orientations
(MAOs). We denote the problem of computing the number
of MAOs in chordal graphs as “#MAO”.

Abstract
We consider the problem of counting the number of DAGs
which are Markov-equivalent, i.e., which encode the same
conditional independencies between random variables. The
problem has been studied, among others, in the context of
causal discovery, and it is known that it reduces to counting
the number of so-called moral acyclic orientations of certain
undirected graphs, notably chordal graphs.
Our main empirical contribution is a new algorithm which
outperforms previously known exact algorithms for the considered problem by a signiﬁcant margin. On the theoretical
side, we show that our algorithm is guaranteed to run in polynomial time on a broad class of chordal graphs, including interval graphs.

1

Introduction

A key task in causal discovery concerns the learning of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) that encode the direct causal
relationships within a set of random variables of interest.
This task is complicated by the fact that different DAGs may
be Markov equivalent, which means that they can represent
exactly the same set of conditional independencies between
the random variables. Every Markov equivalence class of
DAGs can be uniquely represented by an essential graph,
which is a partially directed graph in which edges whose
directions are not ﬁxed by the class are represented as undirected edges (Andersson, Madigan, and Perlman 1997). If
we have only observational data from the joint distribution
of the random variables of interest, we can identify the essential graph, but not necessarily the correct DAG within the
equivalence class represented by the essential graph.
There has been extensive research devoted to exploring
the DAGs within a given equivalence class: for instance,
Maathuis, Kalisch and Bühlmann (2009) estimated causal
effects between pairs of variables when only the essential
graph is known, while Ghassami, Salehkaleybar, Kiyavash
and Bareinboim (2018) considered the problem of discovering the directions of as many undirected edges in the essential graph as possible using given number of interventional
experiments. The problems of counting and sampling DAGs
in a Markov equivalence class are particularly central in the

Related Work. In their previous work, He, Jia and
Yu (2015) formulated the so-called RootPicking algorithm
for #MAO: a recurrent procedure which branches over all
choices of the unique source vertex of a MAO, ﬁxes the
orientations of edges which are forced by the given choice
of the source, and proceeds on each connected component. RootPicking lies at the heart of the following algorithmic approaches for #MAO: He and Yu (2016) enhanced RootPicking algorithm by identifying and extracting
so-called core graphs to handle dense subinstances better.
Ghassami et al. (2019) showed that the root-picking algorithm admits a runtime upper bound of nΔ+O(1) on n-vertex
graphs of maximum degree Δ. Using dynamic programming on a structural decomposition of the graph, namely
its clique-tree, rather than building on RootPicking, Talvitie and Koivisto (2019) showed that if the size of the largest
clique in a chordal graph is k, one can count its MAOs in
O(2k k!k 2 n) time.
These counting methods can also be adapted to solve the
sampling problem such that after running the counting algorithm, we can obtain uniform samples from the set of MAOs
in polynomial time per sample by retracing the computation
that gave the number of MAOs. In particular, we can sam-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A graph is chordal if it admits a special tree-like representation
called a clique-tree.

10136

