The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Subset Selection by Pareto Optimization with Recombination
Chao Qian,1∗ Chao Bian,1 Chao Feng2
1

2

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
qianc@lamda.nju.edu.cn, chaobian12@gmail.com, chaofeng@mail.ustc.edu.cn

approximation guarantee, where γ is the submodularity ratio measuring how close f is to submodularity (Das and
Kempe 2011). Particularly, for submodular objective functions, γ = 1 and the approximation guarantee becomes
1 − 1/e, which is optimal, i.e., cannot be improved by any
polynomial-time algorithm (Nemhauser and Wolsey 1978).
Harshaw et al. (2019) have recently proved that the general
approximation guarantee of (1 − e−γ ) is also optimal.
Based on Pareto optimization, Qian et al. (2015) proposed
the POSS algorithm for subset selection. The idea is to reformulate subset selection as a bi-objective optimization problem maximizing the given objective and minimizing the subset size simultaneously, then solve the problem by a multiobjective EA (MOEA), and ﬁnally select the best solution
with size at most k from the generated solution set. It has
been shown that POSS can achieve the optimal polynomialtime approximation guarantee, 1 − e−γ , and can be signiﬁcantly better than the greedy algorithm in applications, e.g.,
unsupervised feature selection and sparse regression. Moreover, POSS is robust against uncertainties (Qian et al. 2017;
Roostapour et al. 2019), and easily distributed for large-scale
tasks (Qian et al. 2016; 2018; Qian 2019).
The optimization engine of POSS is the employed
MOEA, which iteratively reproduces new solutions for solving the reformulated bi-objective problem. For EAs, mutation and recombination (or called crossover) are two popular
operators for reproduction (Bäck 1996); the former changes
one solution randomly whereas the latter mixes up two or
more solutions. POSS applies mutation only and has performed well, while recombination, as a core feature of EAs,
may be helpful to further improve its performance.
In this paper, we propose the PORSS algorithm for subset selection by introducing recombination into POSS. Two
common recombination operators are considered: one-point
recombination and uniform recombination. In theory, we
prove that for subset selection with monotone objective
functions, PORSS can achieve the optimal polynomial-time
approximation guarantee, 1 − e−γ ; for one concrete example of subset selection, PORSS can be signiﬁcantly faster
than POSS to ﬁnd an optimal solution. We also conduct experiments on the applications of unsupervised feature selection and sparse regression with various real-world data sets,
showing that within the same running time, PORSS can almost always achieve better performance than POSS.

Abstract
Subset selection, i.e., to select a limited number of items
optimizing some given objective function, is a fundamental problem with various applications such as unsupervised
feature selection and sparse regression. By employing a
multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (EA) with mutation
only to optimize the given objective function and minimize
the number of selected items simultaneously, the recently
proposed POSS algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance for subset selection. In this paper, we propose the
PORSS algorithm by incorporating recombination, a characterizing feature of EAs, into POSS. We prove that PORSS can
achieve the optimal polynomial-time approximation guarantee as POSS when the objective function is monotone, and
can ﬁnd an optimal solution efﬁciently in some cases whereas
POSS cannot. Extensive experiments on unsupervised feature selection and sparse regression show the superiority of
PORSS over POSS. Our analysis also theoretically discloses
that recombination from diverse solutions can be more likely
than mutation alone to generate various variations, thereby
leading to better exploration; this may be of independent interest for understanding the inﬂuence of recombination.

Introduction
This paper considers a general problem, i.e., subset selection, which is to select a subset of size at most k from a
total set of n items for maximizing (or minimizing) some
given objective function f . This problem arises in various
real-world applications, such as maximum coverage (Feige
1998), sparse regression (Miller 2002), inﬂuence maximization (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003), sensor placement (Krause, Singh, and Guestrin 2008), document summarization (Lin and Bilmes 2011) and unsupervised feature
selection (Farahat, Ghodsi, and Kamel 2011), to name a few.
Subset selection is generally NP-hard, and much efforts
have been devoted to developing polynomial-time approximation algorithms. The greedy algorithm, which iteratively
selects one item with the largest marginal gain, has been
shown to be a good approximation solver. When the involved objective function f satisﬁes the monotone property, the greedy algorithm can achieve the (1 − e−γ )∗

This work was supported by the NSFC (61603367).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2408

