The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Measuring and Relieving the Over-Smoothing
Problem for Graph Neural Networks from the Topological View
Deli Chen,1 Yankai Lin,2 Wei Li,1 Peng Li,2 Jie Zhou,2 Xu Sun1
1

MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
2
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc., China
{chendeli, liweitj47, xusun}@pku.edu.cn, {yankailin, patrickpli, withtomzhou}@tencent.com

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved promising
performance on a wide range of graph-based tasks. Despite their success, one severe limitation of GNNs is the
over-smoothing issue (indistinguishable representations of
nodes in different classes). In this work, we present a systematic and quantitative study on the over-smoothing issue of GNNs. First, we introduce two quantitative metrics,
MAD and MADGap, to measure the smoothness and oversmoothness of the graph nodes representations, respectively.
Then, we verify that smoothing is the nature of GNNs and
the critical factor leading to over-smoothness is the low
information-to-noise ratio of the message received by the
nodes, which is partially determined by the graph topology. Finally, we propose two methods to alleviate the oversmoothing issue from the topological view: (1) MADReg
which adds a MADGap-based regularizer to the training objective; (2) AdaEdge which optimizes the graph topology
based on the model predictions. Extensive experiments on
7 widely-used graph datasets with 10 typical GNN models
show that the two proposed methods are effective for relieving the over-smoothing issue, thus improving the performance of various GNN models.

Figure 1: The prediction accuracy (Acc) and MADGap of
GCNs (Kipf and Welling 2017) on the CORA dataset. We
can observe a signiﬁcantly high correlation between the accuracy and MADGap in two different situations: (a) Different models: Results of GCNs with different number of layers; (b) Different training periods: Results after each epoch
in the 2-layer GCN. The Pearson correlation coefﬁcient is
shown in the title and ** means statistically signiﬁcant with
p < 0.01.
bringing in the over-smoothing problem of GNNs and ﬁnd
out a reasonable direction to alleviate it.
We ﬁrst propose a quantitative metric Mean Average Distance (MAD), which calculates the mean average distance
among node representations in the graph to measure the
smoothness of the graph (smoothness means similarity of
graph nodes representation in this paper). We observe that
the MAD values of various GNNs become smaller as the
number of GNN layers increases, which supports the argument that smoothing is the essential nature of GNNs. Hence,
the node interaction through the GNN message propagation would make their representations closer, and the whole
graph representation would inevitably become smoothing
when stacking multiple layers.
Furthermore, we argue that one key factor leading to the
over-smoothing issue is the over-mixing of information and
noise. The interaction message from other nodes may be either helpful information or harmful noise. For example, in
the node classiﬁcation task, intra-class interaction can bring
useful information, while inter-class interaction may lead
to indistinguishable representations across classes. To measure the quality of the received message by the nodes, we

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks form an effective framework for
learning graph representation, which have proven powerful
in various graph-based tasks (Yang, Cohen, and Salakhutdinov 2016; Veličković et al. 2018; Zitnik and Leskovec
2017). Despite their success in graph modeling, oversmoothing is a common issue faced by GNNs (Li, Han, and
Wu 2018; Zhou et al. 2018), which means that the representations of the graph nodes of different classes would become
indistinguishable when stacking multiple layers, which seriously hurts the model performance (e.g., classiﬁcation accuracy). However, there is limited study on explaining why
and how over-smoothing happens. In this work, we conduct
a systematic and quantitative study of the over-smoothing
issue of GNNs on 7 widely-used graph datasets with 10 typical GNN models, aiming to reveal what is the crucial factor
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3438

