The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Semantic Attachments for HTN Planning
Maurı́cio Cecı́lio Magnaguagno, Felipe Meneguzzi
School of Computer Science (FACIN)
Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS)
Porto Alegre - RS, Brazil
mauricio.magnaguagno@acad.pucrs.br, felipe.meneguzzi@pucrs.br

symbol using an external procedure, allowing the planner to
reason about numeric values from external functions.

Abstract
Hierarchical Task Networks (HTN) planning uses a decomposition process guided by domain knowledge to guide
search towards a planning task. While many HTN planners allow calls to external processes (e.g. to a simulator interface)
during the decomposition process, this is a computationally
expensive process, so planner implementations often use such
calls in an ad-hoc way using very specialized domain knowledge to limit the number of calls. Conversely, the classical
planners that are capable of using external calls (often called
semantic attachments) during planning are limited to generating a ﬁxed number of ground operators at problem grounding time. We formalize Semantic Attachments for HTN planning using semi coroutines, allowing such procedurally deﬁned predicates to link the planning process to custom uniﬁcations outside of the planner, such as numerical results from
a robotics simulator. The resulting planner then uses such
coroutines as part of its backtracking mechanism to search
through parallel dimensions of the state-space (e.g. through
numeric variables). We show empirically that our planner outperforms the state-of-the-art numeric planners in a number of
domains using minimal extra domain knowledge.

Most planners are limited to purely symbolic operations, lacking structures to optimize usage of continuous resources involving numeric values (Gerevini, Saetti, and Serina 2008). Unlike discrete logical symbols, numeric values
have an inﬁnite domain and are harder to compare both conceptually and implementationally, with cumbersome ad hoc
solutions for objects represented by several numeric values
(e.g. points or polygons) that must be handled and compared
as one. Planning descriptions usually simplify such complex
objects to symbolic values (e.g. p25 or poly2) that are easier to compare. Detailed numeric values are ignored during
planning or left to be decided later (Piotrowski et al. 2016),
which may force replanning (Şucan and Kavraki 2011). Instead of simplifying the description or doing multiple comparisons in the description itself, our goal is to exploit external formalisms orthogonal to the symbolic description.
To achieve that we build a mapping from symbols to objects generated as we query semantic attachments. Semantic attachments are used in classical planning (Dornhege
et al. 2009) to unify values analogously to predicates, and
their main advantage is that domain engineers need not discern between them and common predicates. Thus, we extend classical HTN planning algorithms and their formalism to support semantic attachment queries. While external
function calls map to functions deﬁned outside the HTN description, we deﬁne SAs as semi coroutines (Dahl, Dijkstra,
and Hoare 1972), subroutines that suspend and resume their
state, to iterate across zero or more values provided one at
a time by an external implementation, mitigating the potentially inﬁnite range of the external function.

Introduction
Planning in domains that require numerical variables, for example, to drive robots in the physical world, must represent
and search through a space deﬁned by real-valued functions
with a potentially inﬁnite domain, range, or both. This type
of numeric planning problem poses challenges in two ways.
First, the description formalisms (Fox and Long 2003) might
not make it easy to express the numeric functions and its
variables, resulting in a description process that is time consuming and error-prone for real-world domains (Strobel and
Kirsch 2014). Second, the planners that try to solve such
numeric problems must ﬁnd efﬁcient strategies to ﬁnd solutions through this type of state-space. Previous work on formalisms for domains with numeric values developed the Semantic Attachment (SA) construct (Dornhege et al. 2009) in
classical planning. Semantic attachments (Weyhrauch 1981)
describe the attachment of an interpretation to a predicate

Our contributions are threefold. First, we introduce SAs
for HTN planning to describe and efﬁciently evaluate external predicates at execution time. Second, we improve the
readability of domains and plans and simplify processing
external objects and structures using a symbol-object table.
Finally, we empirically compare the resulting HTN planner
with modern classical planners in a number of mixed symbolic/numeric domains showing substantial gains in speed
with minimal domain knowledge.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9933

