The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Augmenting the Power of (Partial) MaxSat Resolution with Extension∗
Javier Larrosa, Emma Rollon
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya,
Jordi Girona 1-3, Barcelona 08034
{larrosa, erollon}@cs.upc.edu

obtained efﬁciently otherwise, and solve the residual with
an off-the-shelf solver. We demonstrate this idea with the
soft PHP: The size of the original formula is O(m3 ) with
m being the number of holes. We show that a lower bound
of 1 can be extracted in O(m3 ) inference steps producing
a residual formula of size O(m4 ). We show experimentally
that the satisﬁability of the residual can be proved in time
linear on its size (i.e, O(m4 )).
Our work shares some similarities with the dual rail
encoding (Ignatiev, Morgado, and Marques-Silva 2017), a
method to refute unsatisﬁable SAT instances by transforming them into horn MaxSAT. Our approach can do similar SAT refutations (as we show when we address the
hard PHP) but it is more general since it can also compute
lower bounds, compute optimums and proof unsatisﬁability
in MaxSAT formulas.
Our approach also shares similarities with the notion of
soft arc consistency (Cooper et al. 2010) in the context of
Cost Networks where weights are soundly propagated and,
as we do in this paper, weights may be negative during the
process as long as they are positive at the end. The main difference is that MaxResE is a complete (possibly exponentially costly) method, while soft arc consistency is incomplete but polynomial method.

Abstract
The refutation power of SAT and MaxSAT resolution is challenged by problems like the soft and hard Pigeon Hole Problem PHP for which short refutations do not exist. In this paper
we augment the MaxSAT resolution proof system with an extension rule. The new proof system MaxResE is sound and
complete, and more powerful than plain MaxSAT resolution,
since it can refute the soft and hard PHP in polynomial time.
We show that MaxResE refutations actually subtract lower
bounds from the objective function encoded by the formulas.
The resulting formula is the residual after the lower bound extraction. We experimentally show that the residual of the soft
PHP (once its necessary cost of 1 has been efﬁciently subtracted with MaxResE) is a concise, easy to solve, satisﬁable
problem.

Introduction
The MaxSAT resolution proof system (Larrosa and Heras
2005; Bonet, Levy, and Manyà 2007; Larrosa, Heras, and
de Givry 2008) generalizes SAT resolution (Robinson 1965)
allowing it to reason with both hard and soft clauses. A refutation under this proof system corresponds to a subtraction
of a lower bound of the optimum from the formula. The remaining formula is called residual since it is what remains
after the extraction. Although MaxSAT is a more general
language than SAT, it is known that it does not improve over
problems such as the hard and soft Pigeon Hole Problems
PHP for which no short refutations exist.
In this paper we augment the MaxSAT resolution proof
system with an extension rule. Roughly, the new rule allows to reason in the realm of negative weights, which is not
possible using just resolution. We show that the new proof
system MaxResE is sound and complete. The potential of
MaxResE is demonstrated by the fact that it can produce
short refutations for the hard and soft PHP.
We conjecture that a potential application of MaxResE is
to extract from a formula lower bounds that would not be

Preliminaries
MaxSAT
In this paper we will denote boolean variables as x, p, q, . . ..
A literal is a boolean variable (positive literal) or its negation (negative literal) and a clause is a disjunction of literals.
We will denote (parts of) clauses as A, B, C, . . .. The empty
clause, noted , cannot be satisﬁed and will play a special
role in this paper. A weighted clause is a pair (C, w) where
C is a clause and w is its weight given as a positive natural.
The weight indicates the cost of falsifying it.
A MaxSAT formula F is a set of weighted clauses and
the (weighted) MaxSAT problem corresponds to ﬁnding the
truth assignment that minimizes the sum of weights of falsiﬁed weighted clauses. We will write M axSAT (F) to denote that minimum value.
MaxSAT formulas can be simpliﬁed using simple rules
such as the elimination of tautological clauses, or replacing

∗

This work was funded partially by the Spanish MINECO and
MICINN projects TIN2015-69175-C4-3-R and RTI2018-094403B-C33.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1561

