The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Accurate Temporal Action Proposal
Generation with Relation-Aware Pyramid Network
Jialin Gao,1∗ Zhixiang Shi,2∗ Guanshuo Wang,1 Jiani Li,2
Yufeng Yuan,2 Shiming Ge,3† Xi Zhou1,2
1

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
CloudWalk Technology Co., Ltd, China
3
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{shizhixiang, lijiani, yuanyufeng, zhouxi}@cloudwalk.cn, {jialin gao, guanshuo.wang}@sjtu.edu.cn, geshiming@iie.ac.cn
Abstract
Accurate temporal action proposals play an important role in
detecting actions from untrimmed videos. The existing approaches have difﬁculties in capturing global contextual information and simultaneously localizing actions with different durations. To this end, we propose a Relation-aware pyramid Network (RapNet) to generate highly accurate temporal action proposals. In RapNet, a novel relation-aware module is introduced to exploit bi-directional long-range relations
between local features for context distilling. This embedded
module enhances the RapNet in terms of its multi-granularity
temporal proposal generation ability, given predeﬁned anchor
boxes. We further introduce a two-stage adjustment scheme
to reﬁne the proposal boundaries and measure their conﬁdence in containing an action with snippet-level actionness.
Extensive experiments on the challenging ActivityNet and
THUMOS14 benchmarks demonstrate our RapNet generates
superior accurate proposals over the existing state-of-the-art
methods.

Figure 1: For action localization, two crucial issues lie in (a)
how to simultaneously localize action instances with various
durations, and (b) how to distill long-range context to capture informative contents for high precision boundaries. The
former can be solved by pyramid prediction and the latter
needs a novel context distilling module.

the difﬁculty in identifying action without long-term contextual information.
Several attempts have been made to overcome these drawbacks. Boundary sensitive network (BSN) (Lin et al. 2018)
identiﬁes each snippet to be either starting, ending or course
for generating proposals with various durations. Complementary Temporal Action Proposal (CTAP) (Gao, Chen, and
Nevatia 2018) alleviates the problem of missing contextual
information by combining the results with window-based
methods. However, they only consider the complementary
characteristics of these two types of methods, while do not
address their intrinsic difﬁculties.
In order to address difﬁculties in accurately localizing actions, we refer to the perception mechanism of human. Considering a complete action may last from a second to several minutes, humans prefer to skim though long instances
quickly while oversee short ones carefully in order to focus
on informative contents rather than backgrounds. To accurately discriminate the starting and ending of an action, we
humans usually relate the present to the long-range contextual information. These reveal two key factors relating to accurate temporal proposal generation: how to simultaneously
detect actions in multi-scales and how to distill long-range

Introduction
Temporal action proposal generation aims to propose candidate instances that probably contain an action from a long,
untrimmed video. Localizing human activities is of increasing importance as it brings about a wide variety of application in industry and serves as the basis in many research
areas, like action detection(Zhao et al. 2017), video summarization (Gong et al. 2014; Yao, Mei, and Rui 2016), captioning (Wang et al. 2018b; 2018a), etc.
Current methods are mainly divided into two categories:
sliding-windows and snippet-level actionness score. The
former (Shou, Wang, and Chang 2016; Shou et al. 2017)
slides several manually deﬁned windows to generate proposals with imprecise temporal boundaries and rank them
via a binary classiﬁer. Instead, the latter (Xiong et al. 2017;
Yuan et al. 2017) generates candidate instances with high
precision boundaries by actionness score grouping (Zhao et
al. 2017). But it has incorrect and omitted candidates due to
∗

Equal contribution
Shiming Ge is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10810

