The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weakly-Supervised Fine-Grained Event
Recognition on Social Media Texts for Disaster Management
Wenlin Yao,1 Cheng Zhang,2 Shiva Saravanan,∗3 Ruihong Huang,1 Ali Mostafavi2
2

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
Department of Civil Engineering, Texas A&M University 3 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
{wenlinyao, czhang}@tamu.edu, shivas@princeton.edu, huangrh@cse.tamu.edu, amostafavi@civil.tamu.edu

Abstract
People increasingly use social media to report emergencies,
seek help or share information during disasters, which makes
social networks an important tool for disaster management.
To meet these time-critical needs, we present a weakly supervised approach for rapidly building high-quality classiﬁers that label each individual Twitter message with ﬁnegrained event categories. Most importantly, we propose a
novel method to create high-quality labeled data in a timely
manner that automatically clusters tweets containing an event
keyword and asks a domain expert to disambiguate event
word senses and label clusters quickly. In addition, to process extremely noisy and often rather short user-generated
messages, we enrich tweet representations using preceding
context tweets and reply tweets in building event recognition classiﬁers. The evaluation on two hurricanes, Harvey and
Florence, shows that using only 1-2 person-hours of human
supervision, the rapidly trained weakly supervised classiﬁers
outperform supervised classiﬁers trained using more than ten
thousand annotated tweets created in over 50 person-hours.

Figure 1: Examples of three senses of the word “dead”

To facilitate disaster management, especially during the
time-critical disaster response phase, it is vital to build event
recognizers rapidly. However, the typical supervised learning paradigm requires a carefully labeled dataset that is normally created by asking human annotators to go through
a large number of data instances and label them one by
one, and the data labeling procedure usually takes days at
least. For fast deployment, we propose a novel data labeling
method and an overall weakly supervised learning approach
that quickly builds reliable ﬁne-grained event recognizers.
Speciﬁcally, to quickly label data, we explore the idea of
identifying several high-quality event keywords and populating the keywords in a large unlabeled tweet collection.
But, we quickly realize that it is essentially impossible to
ﬁnd an event keyword that is not ambiguous and has only
one meaning in social media. Taking the word “dead” for
example, in addition to the meaning of “losing life”, “dead”
is also frequently used to refer to phones being out of power
or a TV series “walking dead”, with example tweets shown
in Figure 1. It is a challenging problem because current automatic word sense disambiguation systems only achieve
mediocre performance and may not work well on tweets
with little in-domain training data, especially considering
that many word senses appearing in tweets may even not ap-

Introduction
Due to its convenience, people increasingly use social media
to report emergencies, provide real-time situation updates,
offer or seek help or share information during disasters. During the devastating hurricane Harvey for example, the local authorities and disaster responders as well as the general
public had frequently employed Twitter for real-time event
sensing, facilitating evacuation operations, or ﬁnding victims in need of help. Considering the large volume of social
media messages, it is necessary to achieve automatic recognition of life-threatening events based on individual messages for improving the use of social media during disasters.
This task is arguably more challenging than the well-studied
collection-based event detection task on social media that
often relies on detecting a burst of words over a collection
of messages, especially considering the unique challenges of
social media texts being extremely noisy and short.
∗
Work was done while Shiva Saravanan was a local high school
student and an intern in the NLP lab at Texas A&M University.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

532

