The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deciding Acceptance in Incomplete Argumentation Frameworks
Andreas Niskanen,1 Daniel Neugebauer,2 Matti Järvisalo,1 Jörg Rothe2
1 Helsinki Insitute for Information Technology HIIT, Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland
2 Institut für Informatik, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Germany

an impact on the computational complexity of acceptance
when compared to acceptance problems in AFs.
However, in their complexity analysis, Baumeister,
Neugebauer, and Rothe (2018) allowed for empty sets of acceptable arguments (extensions) or the non-existence of extensions, which may produce trivial answers to the skeptical
acceptance (SA) problem for certain semantics. In particular, it would be more meaningful to restrict the semantics
to nonempty extensions and to require the existence of at
least one extension for a “yes” answer to SA. While SA
indicates whether the target argument is among the bestaccepted arguments in the AF with respect to the given
semantics, the reﬁned variant E X SA—formally deﬁned as
SA with the additional condition that an extension exists—
indicates whether the target argument is actually and ultimately accepted in the IAF with respect to the semantics. To
address this, we consider nonempty versions of the conﬂictfreeness and admissibility properties, and formally study the
complexity of the variants of the more natural E X SA problem over IAFs.
Furthermore, algorithmic techniques for deciding acceptance in IAFs have not been thoroughly studied to date, and
there is no clear idea of whether the recent successes in
developing practical system implementations—often based
on harnessing the power of Boolean satisﬁability (SAT)
solvers—for reasoning about acceptance in AFs can be generalized to IAFs. In this work, we address this current shortcoming by developing the ﬁrst practical algorithms for deciding acceptance in IAFs.
In more detail, our contributions are the following.

Abstract
Expressing incomplete knowledge in abstract argumentation
frameworks (AFs) through incomplete AFs has recently received noticeable attention. However, algorithmic aspects
of deciding acceptance in incomplete AFs are still underdeveloped. We address this current shortcoming by developing algorithms for NP-hard and coNP-hard variants of
acceptance problems over incomplete AFs via harnessing
Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) solvers. Focusing on nonempty
conﬂict-free or admissible sets and on stable extensions, we
also provide new complexity results for a reﬁned variant
of skeptical acceptance in incomplete AFs, ranging from
polynomial-time computability to hardness for the second
level of the polynomial hierarchy. Furthermore, central to the
proposed SAT-based counterexample-guided abstraction reﬁnement approach for the second-level problem variants, we
establish conditions for redundant atomic changes to incomplete AFs from the perspective of preserving extensions. We
show empirically that the resulting SAT-based approach for
incomplete AFs scales at least as well as existing SAT-based
approaches to deciding acceptance in AFs.

1

Introduction

Abstract argumentation frameworks (AFs), as originally
proposed by Dung (1995), are today one of the most important and widely-studied formalisms in the ﬁeld of argumentation in AI. Recently, a natural generalization of AFs
to so-called incomplete argumentation frameworks (IAFs)
was proposed (Coste-Marquis et al. 2007; Baumeister et al.
2018). Modeling uncertainties in terms of the existence of
attacks and arguments, IAFs allow to represent structural
uncertainties which may arise from dynamic changes to an
AF, local views of a global AF, or uncertainties in the underlying knowledge base from which the AF is instantiated.
Considering universal and existential quantiﬁcation over the
uncertain parts of IAFs gives rise to the respective possible
and necessary generalizations of the central skeptical and
credulous acceptance problems in abstract argumentation.
As shown by Baumeister, Neugebauer, and Rothe (2018) via
an extensive complexity analysis, these generalizations have

• We present direct Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) encodings
for deciding necessary skeptical and possible credulous
acceptance in IAFs for semantics under which the problems are NP- or coNP-complete (Sect. 3).
• Highlighting potential issues with allowing the nonexistence of extensions in the earlier proposed acceptance
problems over IAFs, we propose novel problem variants
with the in-built requirement that the set of extensions
must be nonempty. We provide complexity results for
the new problem variants, ranging from polynomial-time
to second-level completeness in the polynomial hierarchy under conﬂict-free, admissible, and stable semantics

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2942

