The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Sparse Sharing Architectures for Multiple Tasks
Tianxiang Sun,∗ Yunfan Shao,∗ Xiaonan Li, Pengfei Liu, Hang Yan, Xipeng Qiu,† Xuanjing Huang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{txsun19, yfshao19, pﬂiu14, hyan19, xpqiu, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn, lixiaonan@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing deep multi-task learning models are based on
parameter sharing, such as hard sharing, hierarchical sharing,
and soft sharing. How choosing a suitable sharing mechanism
depends on the relations among the tasks, which is not easy
since it is difﬁcult to understand the underlying shared factors
among these tasks. In this paper, we propose a novel parameter sharing mechanism, named Sparse Sharing. Given multiple tasks, our approach automatically ﬁnds a sparse sharing
structure. We start with an over-parameterized base network,
from which each task extracts a subnetwork. The subnetworks of multiple tasks are partially overlapped and trained
in parallel. We show that both hard sharing and hierarchical sharing can be formulated as particular instances of the
sparse sharing framework. We conduct extensive experiments
on three sequence labeling tasks. Compared with single-task
models and three typical multi-task learning baselines, our
proposed approach achieves consistent improvement while
requiring fewer parameters.

Introduction
Deep multi-task learning models have achieved great success in computer vision (Misra et al. 2016; Zamir et al.
2018) and natural language processing (Collobert and Weston 2008; Luong et al. 2016; Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2017).
Multi-task learning utilizes task-speciﬁc knowledge contained in the training signals of related tasks to improve performance and generalization for each task (Caruana 1997).
Existing work often focuses on knowledge sharing across
tasks, which is typically achieved by parameter sharing.
Figure 1-(a)(b)(c) illustrate three common parameter sharing mechanisms: (a) hard sharing approaches stack the
task-speciﬁc layers on the top of the shared layers (Collobert and Weston 2008; Subramanian et al. 2018; Liu et
al. 2019b); (b) soft sharing approaches allow each task has
separate model and parameters, but each model can access the information inside other models (Misra et al. 2016;
Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2016; Ruder et al. 2019); (c) hierarchi-

(a) Hard sharing

(b) Soft sharing

(c) Hierarchical sharing

(d) Sparse sharing

Figure 1: Parameter sharing mechanisms. Orange circles
and lines represent shared neurons and weights respectively,
while circles and lines in blue, green, and purple represent
task-speciﬁc neurons and weights for three different tasks.

cal sharing approaches put different tasks at different network layers (Søgaard and Goldberg 2016; Hashimoto et al.
2017).
Despite their success, these approaches have some limitations. Hard sharing architectures force all tasks to share
the same hidden space, which limits its expressivity and
makes it difﬁcult to deal with loosely related tasks. Hierarchical sharing architectures only force part of the model to
be shared. Therefore task-speciﬁc modules are left with wiggle room to handle heterogeneous tasks. However, designing
an effective hierarchy is usually time-consuming. Soft sharing approaches make no assumptions about task relatedness
but need to train a model for each task, so are not parameter
efﬁcient.

∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Xipeng Qiu (xpqiu@fudan.edu.cn).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8936

