The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ParamE: Regarding Neural Network Parameters
as Relation Embeddings for Knowledge Graph Completion
Feihu Che,1,2 Dawei Zhang,1 Jianhua Tao,1,2,3 Mingyue Niu,1,2 Bocheng Zhao1,2
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
{chefeihu2017, niumingyue2017, zhaobocheng2015}@ia.ac.cn, {dawei.zhang, jhtao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
We study the task of learning entity and relation embeddings
in knowledge graphs for predicting missing links. Previous
translational models on link prediction make use of translational properties but lack enough expressiveness, while the
convolution neural network based model (ConvE) takes advantage of the great nonlinearity ﬁtting ability of neural networks but overlooks translational properties. In this paper,
we propose a new knowledge graph embedding model called
ParamE which can utilize the two advantages together. In
ParamE, head entity embeddings, relation embeddings and
tail entity embeddings are regarded as the input, parameters
and output of a neural network respectively. Since parameters in networks are effective in converting input to output, taking neural network parameters as relation embeddings
makes ParamE much more expressive and translational. In
addition, the entity and relation embeddings in ParamE are
from feature space and parameter space respectively, which
is in line with the essence that entities and relations are supposed to be mapped into two different spaces. We evaluate the performances of ParamE on standard FB15k-237 and
WN18RR datasets, and experiments show ParamE can signiﬁcantly outperform existing state-of-the-art models, such as
ConvE, SACN, RotatE and D4-STE/Gumbel.

Figure 1: A comparsion of ConvE and ParamE. In some neural network based models such as ConvE, head entity embeddings and relation embeddings are fed together into neural networks, which ignores translational properties of relations. In the ParamE model, we regard neural network parameters as relation embeddings, such that the ParamE can
make use of translational properties.

Introduction

One of the effective ways for link prediction is knowledge
graph embedding (Wang et al. 2017). The key idea is to map
entities and relations in KGs into vector spaces, such that the
score function of entities and relations for ground truth can
distinguish from false facts efﬁciently (Yang et al. 2014).
In the existing link prediction models, there are two
representative kinds of models: translational models and
the convolutional neural network (CNN) based model
(ConvE) (Dettmers et al. 2018). Translational models take
relations as transfer functions which convert head entities
to tail entities, such as TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), DistMul (Yang et al. 2014), ComplEx (Trouillon et al. 2016),
Rotate (Sun et al. 2019). They make full use of the translational properties of relations but they only utilize simple
operations like addition and multiplication, which limits the
translational ability of relations (Shang et al. 2019). ConvE
takes advantage of nonlinearity modeling ability of neural
networks and has stronger expresiveness ability. However,

Knowledge graphs(KGs) are composed of factual triplets,
where each triplet represents a relation between a head entity
and a tail entity. For example, a triple (Chatou, isLocatedIn,
France) represents a relation (isLocatedIn) between a head
entity (Chatou) and a tail entity(France). There are several
real-world knowledge graphs, such as Freebase (Bollacker et
al. 2008), Yago3 (Mahdisoltani, Biega, and Suchanek 2013),
and WordNet (Miller 1995). They enable many downstream
NLP tasks including information retrieval (Xiong, Power,
and Callan 2017) and dialogue management (He et al. 2017).
Due to the complexity of the real world, knowledge graphs
lack of many triplets (Das et al. 2017). Link prediction is
the task of predicting missing facts based on the existing
ones (Nguyen 2017).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2774

