The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Agent Actor-Critic
with Hierarchical Graph Attention Network
Heechang Ryu, Hayong Shin, Jinkyoo Park∗
Industrial & Systems Engineering, KAIST, Republic of Korea
{rhc93, hyshin, jinkyoo.park}@kaist.ac.kr

Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) combined with
deep neural networks has achieved human-level or higher
performances in challenging games (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016; 2017). The advances in RL and deep learning
have led great interests in MARL, hoping that it can resolve
complex and large scale problems. The majority of MARL
algorithms have focused on deriving decentralized policies
for conducting a collaborative task. For the collection of actions individually determined by decentralized policies to
be coordinated, it is important to impose consensus when
deriving the decentralized policies. To achieve this, under
the concept of centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE), MARL learns centralized critics for multiple agents and derives decentralized actors using partial
gradient from the centralized critics. Depending on the information available in the execution phase, CTDE approach
can be further categorized into “learning-for-consensus approach”, where each agent determines decentralized action
solely based on its local observation (Lowe et al. 2017;
Foerster et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Iqbal and Sha 2019),
and “learning-to-communicate approach”, where each agent
employs communication schemes (i.e., interchanges messages) during the execution phase (Sukhbaatar, Fergus, and
others 2016; Peng et al. 2017; Jiang and Lu 2018; Singh,
Jain, and Sukhbaatar 2019; Das et al. 2019).

Abstract
Most previous studies on multi-agent reinforcement learning
focus on deriving decentralized and cooperative policies to
maximize a common reward and rarely consider the transferability of trained policies to new tasks. This prevents such
policies from being applied to more complex multi-agent
tasks. To resolve these limitations, we propose a model that
conducts both representation learning for multiple agents using hierarchical graph attention network and policy learning
using multi-agent actor-critic. The hierarchical graph attention network is specially designed to model the hierarchical
relationships among multiple agents that either cooperate or
compete with each other to derive more advanced strategic
policies. Two attention networks, the inter-agent and intergroup attention layers, are used to effectively model individual and group level interactions, respectively. The two attention networks have been proven to facilitate the transfer of
learned policies to new tasks with different agent compositions and allow one to interpret the learned strategies. Empirically, we demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms
existing methods in several mixed cooperative and competitive tasks.

Introduction
In nature, the battle for dominance rights or desirable territories between individuals is a typical phenomenon (Smith
and Price 1973). Occasionally, individuals in the same group
cooperate to compete against enemy groups. They can gain
stronger immunity against predators (Ugelvig and Cremer
2007) or powerful forces to overpower preys (Powell and
Clark 2004). The cooperation and competition among agents
are also important modeling paradigms in various engineering systems, such as smart grids (Dall’Anese, Zhu,
and Giannakis 2013), logistics (Ying and Dayong 2005;
Cao et al. 2013), and distributed vehicles/robots (Corke,
Peterson, and Rus 2005; Fax and Murray 2004; Matignon
et al. 2012). To control such complex systems composed
of many interacting components, researchers have studied
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) for a long time.

Although a variety of MARL algorithms have been proposed, unresolved issues still exist in MARL when it is applied to realistic environments. First, in terms of the generality of the modeling framework, most models focus on
deriving pure cooperation or competition among multiple
agents by forcing all agents to seek a shared common reward rather than modeling the relationships among heterogeneous agents in a mixed cooperative-competitive task (issue in modeling ﬂexibility). In addition, the models are limited for modeling a large number of agents owing to the
curse of dimensionality in modeling centralized critics (issue
in scalability). This is connected with a more fundamental
limitation, in which the trained model cannot be transferred
to different tasks with different numbers of agents having
different goals (issue in transferability).

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

We herein propose a model, called Hierarchical graph
Attention-based Multi-Agent actor-critic (HAMA), that
7236

