The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁcient Neural Architecture Search via Proximal Iterations
Quanming Yao,1∗ Ju Xu,3∗ Wei-Wei Tu,1 Zhanxing Zhu2,3,4†
1

3

4Paradigm Inc, 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
Center for Data Science, Peking University, 4 Beijing Institute of Big Data Research (BIBDR)
{yaoquanming, tuweiwei}@4paradigm.com, {xuju, zhanxing.zhu}@pku.edu.cn

transferability of networks from small to large ones, NASNetA (Zoph et al. 2017) proposed to cut the networks into blocks
and then the search only needs to be carried within such a
block or cell. The identiﬁed cell is then used as a building
block to assemble large networks. Such two-stage search
strategy dramatically reduces the size of the search space,
and subsequently leads to the signiﬁcant speedup of various
previous search algorithms (e.g., evolution algorithm (Real et
al. 2018), greedy search (Liu et al. 2018), and reinforcement
learning (Zhong et al. 2018)).

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) attracts much research attention because of its ability to identify better architectures
than handcrafted ones. Recently, differentiable search methods
become the state-of-the-arts on NAS, which can obtain highperformance architectures in several days. However, they still
suffer from huge computation costs and inferior performance
due to the construction of the supernet. In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient NAS method based on proximal iterations
(denoted as NASP). Different from previous works, NASP
reformulates the search process as an optimization problem
with a discrete constraint on architectures and a regularizer on
model complexity. As the new objective is hard to solve, we
further propose an efﬁcient algorithm inspired by proximal iterations for optimization. In this way, NASP is not only much
faster than existing differentiable search methods, but also can
ﬁnd better architectures and balance the model complexity.
Finally, extensive experiments on various tasks demonstrate
that NASP can obtain high-performance architectures with
more than 10 times speedup over the state-of-the-arts.

1

Although the size of search space is reduced, the search
space is still discrete that is generally hard to be efﬁciently
searched (Parikh and Boyd 2013). More recent endeavors
focused on how to change the landscape of the search space
from a discrete to a differentiable one (Luo et al. 2018;
Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019; Xie et al. 2019). The beneﬁt
of such idea is that a differentiable space enables computation of gradient information, which could speed up the
convergence of underneath optimization algorithm. Various
techniques have been proposed, e.g., DARTS (Liu, Simonyan,
and Yang 2019) smooths design choices with softmax and
trains an ensemble of networks; SNAS (Xie et al. 2019)
enhances reinforcement learning with a smooth sampling
scheme. NAO (Luo et al. 2018) maps the search space into a
new differentiable space with an auto-encoder.

Introduction

Deep networks have been applied to many applications,
where proper architectures are extremely important to ensure
good performance. Recently, the neural architecture search
(NAS) (Zoph and Le 2017; Baker et al. 2017) has been developed as a promising approach to replace human experts
on designing architectures, which can ﬁnd networks with
fewer parameters and better performance (Yao et al. 2018;
Hutter, Kotthoff, and Vanschoren 2018). NASNet (Zoph and
Le 2017) is the pioneered work along this direction and it
models the design of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
as a multi-step decision problem and solves it with reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 1998).
However, since the search space is discrete and extremely
large, NASNet requires a month with hundreds of GPU to
obtain a satisfying architecture. Later, observing the good

Among all these works (Tab. 1), the state-of-the-art is
DARTS (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019) as it combines the
best of both worlds, i.e., fast gradient descent (differentiable
search space) within a cell (small search space). However, its
search efﬁciency and performance of identiﬁed architectures
are still not satisfying enough. As it maintains a supernet
during the search, from the computational perspective, all operations need to be forward and backward propagated during
gradient descent while only one operation will be selected.
From the perspective of performance, operations typically
correlate with each other (Xie et al. 2019), e.g., a 7x7’s convolution ﬁlter can cover a 3x3 one as a special case. When
updating a network’s weights, the ensemble constructed by
DARTS during the search may lead to inferior architecture being discovered. Moreover, as mentioned in (Xie et al. 2019),
DARTS is not complete (Tab. 1), i.e., the ﬁnal structure needs
to be re-identiﬁed after the search. This causes a bias between

∗
Q. Yao and J. Xu contribute equally, and the work was performed when J. Xu was an intern in 4Paradigm.
†
Zhanxing Zhu is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6664

