The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neural Cognitive Diagnosis for Intelligent Education Systems
Fei Wang,1 Qi Liu,1* Enhong Chen,1∗ Zhenya Huang,1
Yuying Chen,1 Yu Yin,1 Zai Huang,1 Shijin Wang2
1

Anhui Province Key Lab. of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
iFLYTEK Research
{wf314159, huangzhy, cyy33222, yxonic, huangzai}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {qiliuql, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn,
sjwang3@iﬂytek.com

In the literature, massive efforts have been devoted for
cognitive diagnosis, such as Deterministic Inputs, NoisyAnd gate model (DINA) (De La Torre 2009), Item Response
Theory (IRT) (Embretson and Reise 2013), Multidimensional IRT (MIRT) (Reckase 2009) and Matrix Factorization (MF) (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009). Despite achieving some effectiveness, these works rely on handcrafted interaction functions that just combine the multiplication of
student’s and exercise’s trait features linearly, such as logistic function (Embretson and Reise 2013) or inner product (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009), which may not be
sufﬁcient for capturing the complex relationship between
students and exercises (DiBello, Roussos, and Stout 2006).
Besides, the design of speciﬁc interaction functions is also
labor-intensive since it usually requires professional expertise. Therefore, it is urgent to ﬁnd an automatic way to learn
the complex interactions for cognitive diagnosis instead of
manually designing them.

Abstract
Cognitive diagnosis is a fundamental issue in intelligent education, which aims to discover the proﬁciency level of students on speciﬁc knowledge concepts. Existing approaches
usually mine linear interactions of student exercising process
by manual-designed function (e.g., logistic function), which
is not sufﬁcient for capturing complex relations between students and exercises. In this paper, we propose a general Neural Cognitive Diagnosis (NeuralCD) framework, which incorporates neural networks to learn the complex exercising interactions, for getting both accurate and interpretable diagnosis
results. Speciﬁcally, we project students and exercises to factor vectors and leverage multi neural layers for modeling their
interactions, where the monotonicity assumption is applied to
ensure the interpretability of both factors. Furthermore, we
propose two implementations of NeuralCD by specializing
the required concepts of each exercise, i.e., the NeuralCDM
with traditional Q-matrix and the improved NeuralCDM+ exploring the rich text content. Extensive experimental results
on real-world datasets show the effectiveness of NeuralCD
framework with both accuracy and interpretability.

1

In this paper, we address this issue in a principled way of
proposing a Neural Cognitive Diagnosis (NeuralCD) framework by incorporating neural networks to model complex
non-linear interactions. Although the capability of neural
networks to approximate continuous functions has been
proved in many domains, such as natural language processing (Zhang et al. 2018) and recommender systems (Song et
al. 2019), it is still highly nontrivial to adapt to cognitive diagnosis due to the following domain challenges. First, the
black-box nature of neural networks makes them difﬁcult to
get explainable diagnosis results. That is to say, it is difﬁcult to explicitly realize how much a student has mastered
a certain knowledge concept (e.g., Equation). Second, traditional models are designed manually with non-neural functions, which makes it hard for them to leverage exercise text
content. However, with neural network, it is worthy of ﬁnding ways to explore the rich information contained in exercise text content for cognitive diagnosis.

Introduction

Cognitive diagnosis is a necessary and fundamental task
in many real-world scenarios such as games (Chen and
Joachims 2016), medical diagnosis (Guo et al. 2017),
and education. Speciﬁcally, in intelligent education systems (Anderson et al. 2014; Burns et al. 2014), cognitive
diagnosis aims to discover the states of students in the learning process, such as their proﬁciencies on speciﬁc knowledge concepts (Liu et al. 2018). Figure 1 shows a toy example of cognitive diagnosis. Generally, students usually ﬁrst
choose to practice a set of exercises (e.g., e1 , · · · , e4 ) and
leave their responses (e.g., right or wrong). Then, our goal is
to infer their actual knowledge states on the corresponding
concepts (e.g., Trigonometric Function). In practice, these
diagnostic reports are necessary as they are the basis of further services, such as exercise recommendation and targeted
training (Kuh et al. 2011).

To address these challenges, we propose a NeuralCD
framework to approximate interactions between students
and exercises, yet preserving the explainability. We ﬁrst
project students and exercises to factor vectors and leverage multi-layers for modeling the complex interactions of
student answering exercises. To ensure the interpretability

∗

Corresponding Authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6153

