The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarial Cross-Domain Action Recognition with Co-Attention
Boxiao Pan,* Zhangjie Cao,* Ehsan Adeli, Juan Carlos Niebles
Stanford University
{bxpan, caozj, eadeli, jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu

Temporal Alignment
Source Video
Target Video

Abstract
Action recognition has been a widely studied topic with a
heavy focus on supervised learning involving sufﬁcient labeled videos. However, the problem of cross-domain action
recognition, where training and testing videos are drawn from
different underlying distributions, remains largely underexplored. Previous methods directly employ techniques for
cross-domain image recognition, which tend to suffer from
the severe temporal misalignment problem. This paper proposes a Temporal Co-attention Network (TCoN), which
matches the distributions of temporally aligned action features between source and target domains using a novel crossdomain co-attention mechanism. Experimental results on
three cross-domain action recognition datasets demonstrate
that TCoN improves both previous single-domain and crossdomain methods signiﬁcantly under the cross-domain setting.

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed temporal co-attention
mechanism. Since different video segments represent distinct action stages, we propose to align segments that have
similar semantic meanings. Key segment pairs that are more
similar (denoted by thicker arrows) are assigned higher coattention weights, thus contributing more during the crossdomain alignment stage. Here we show two samples with the
action Archery from HMDB51 (left) and UCF101 (right).

Introduction
Action recognition has long been studied in the computer vision community because of its wide range of applications in
sports (Soomro and Zamir 2014), healthcare (Ogbuabor and
La 2018), and surveillance systems (Ranasinghe, Al Machot, and Mayr 2016). Recently, motivated by the success of
deep convolution networks in tasks on still images, such as
image recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
He et al. 2016) and object detection (Girshick 2015; Ren et
al. 2015), various deep architectures (Wang et al. 2016; Tran
et al. 2015) have been proposed for video action recognition.
When large amounts of labeled videos are available, deep
learning methods can achieve state-of-the-art performance
on several benchmarks (Kay et al. 2017; Kuehne et al. 2011;
Soomro, Zamir, and Shah 2012).
Although current action recognition approaches achieve
promising results, they mostly assume that the testing data
follows the same distribution as the training data. Indeed,
the performance of these models degenerate signiﬁcantly
when applied to datasets with different distributions due to
domain shift. This greatly limits the application of current
action recognition models. An example of domain shift is illustrated in Fig. 1, in which the source video is from a movie

while the target video depicts a real-world scene. The challenge of domain shift motivates the problem of cross-domain
action recognition, where we have a target domain that consists of unlabeled videos and a source domain that consists
of labeled videos. The source domain is related to the target
domain but is drawn from a different distribution. Our goal
is to leverage the source domain to boost the performance of
action recognition models on the target domain.
The problem of cross-domain learning, also known as
domain adaptation, has been explored on still image applications such as image recognition (Long et al. 2015;
Ganin et al. 2017), object detection (Chen et al. 2018), and
semantic segmentation (Hoffman et al. 2017). For still image problems, source and target domains differ mostly on
appearance, and typical methods minimize a distribution
distance within a latent feature space. However, for action
recognition, source and target actions also differ temporally.
For example, actions may appear at different time steps or
last for different lengths in different domains. Thus, crossdomain action recognition requires matching action feature
distributions between domains both spatially and temporally. Current action recognition methods typically generate
features per-frame (Wang et al. 2016) or per-segment (Tran

* Equal contribution
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11815

