The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Segment-Then-Rank: Non-Factoid Question Answering on Instructional Videos
Kyungjae Lee,1∗ Nan Duan,2 Lei Ji,2,3 Jason Li,4 Seung-won Hwang1†
1

Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
4
STCA Multimedia Group, Microsoft, Beijing, China
{lkj0509, seungwonh}@yonsei.ac.kr, {nanduan, leiji, jasonli}@microsoft.com

Abstract

40%

ܴܽ‫݋݅ݐ‬

Answer length

We study the problem of non-factoid QA on instructional
videos. Existing work focuses either on visual or textual
modality of video content, to ﬁnd matching answers to the
question. However, neither is ﬂexible enough for our problem setting of non-factoid answers with varying lengths. Motivated by this, we propose a two-stage model: (a) multimodal
segmentation of video into span candidates and (b) lengthadaptive ranking of the candidates to the question. First, for
segmentation, we propose Segmenter for generating span candidates of diverse length, considering both textual and visual
modality. Second, for ranking, we propose Ranker to score
the candidates, dynamically combining the two models with
complementary strength for both short and long spans respectively. Experimental result demonstrates that our model
achieves state-of-the-art performance.

20%

0%

݈݁݊݃‫ ݄ݐ‬൑ 10

൑ 20

൑ 30

൑ 50

൑ 40

൑ 60

(a) Distribution of answer/video lengths in our dataset

0.90.9
Algo1

Algo2

൑ 20

൑ ݉ܽ‫ݔ‬

‫݁ݎ݋ܿݏ ͳܨ‬

0.80.8
0.70.7
0.60.6
0.50.5
݈݁݊݃‫ ݄ݐ‬൑ 5



1

Video length

൑ 10



൑ 15







(b) Performance of two SOTA models over answer lengths (details
in Section 4)

Introduction

Question Answering (QA) over videos is one of important problems in both NLP and computer vision ﬁelds.
Recently, with the creation of various datasets, such as
TVQA (Lei et al. 2018), TGIF-QA (Jang et al. 2017), and
MovieQA (Tapaswi et al. 2016), techniques for video-based
QA have been advanced rapidly. However, these datasets
commonly assume that the answer is a short text based on
concise facts (e.g., question “What is the color of the bird?”
can be answered by “White”), while users may want to ﬁnd
longer non-factoid answers to questions such as “how” and
“why” types. However, non-factoid QA on video contents,
has been relatively under-studied.
For non-factoid questions, existing works focus on document (Yin 2006) or video retrieval (Li et al. 2009; Nie et
al. 2011). Given a question, they aim to rank a relevant list
of documents or videos as results. However, returning the
entire document is too coarse-grained and requires users to
read the entire document. Instead, WikiPassageQA task (Cohen, Yang, and Croft 2018) uses pre-segmented paragraphs

Figure 1: Two challenges of our research.

in the text, to return a ﬁner-granular answer as the highestscoring paragraph. However, this approach cannot apply to
videos without clear semantic segmentations such as paragraphs in documents.
Inspired, we aim to extract a ﬁne-grained answer to nonfactoid questions, especially, “how-to” questions over instructional videos. Figure 2 illustrates an example, when
user poses a question “How to replace a battery from
galaxy?”; a desirable answer is annotated as a ﬁne-granular
span from 00:41 to 02:50 seconds.
For videos without pre-segmentation, a naive solution to
generate span candidates is “split-then-rank” (Cheng et al.
2016; Gao et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018), by splitting the video
into ﬁxed-size clips, then ranking each clip by their relevance to the question. However, there are two challenges left
unaddressed in this solution. First, it cannot support diverse
answer lengths, commonly observed for non-factoid QA, as
well as in our dataset. In Figure 1(a), we can observe that
the answer length varies in the range of 1 to 30 sentences.
Second, when ranking the candidates after segmentation, an

∗
This work was partially done during the ﬁrst author’s internship in MSR Asia and supported by MSR Asia grant
†
Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8147

