The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Systematically Exploring Associations among Multivariate Data
Lifeng Zhang
School of Information, Renmin University of China
59, Zhongguancun Street, Haidian
Beijing, P.R.China, 100872
l.zhang@ruc.edu.cn

variables, subset of x, and additive noise. f (·), gi (·) and hi (·)
denote the underlying function, main effect and interaction
effect respectively.
If f (·) is linear in which all gi (·) are linear and all hi (·) are
null, the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient should be a perfect
measure of how much ﬂuctuation in one variable can be
explained by another variable (R2 ) (Altman and Krzywinski
2015). If f (·) is nonlinear, the traditional correlation test is no
longer sufﬁcient. Developing concise and efﬁcient nonlinear
association detection methodologies has been a challenging
research and received wide attention for over a half century.
Some of the previous approaches have been developed
based on the theory of mutual information (MI) and partitioning (binning) techniques. A typical one is the maximal
information coefﬁcient (MIC), which is the state-of-the-art
association measure that has been extensively evaluated recently (Reshef et al. 2011; Reshef et al. 2018). This kind of
methods use partitioning as a means to apply MI on continuous random variables based on the idea that, if an association
exists between two variables, then a grid can be drawn on
the scatterplot that partitions the data to encapsulate that relationship. Similarly, Heller and Gorﬁne’s SDDP adopted
summation or maximization aggregation of the scores over
all partitions of a ﬁxed size to estimate the MI (Heller et al.
2016). In addition, other techniques, such as kernel density
estimation (KDE), k-nearest neighbor distances (kNN), and
nonlinear correlation information entropy (NICE), also can
be used to compute the score of MI as a dependence measure (Moon, Rajagopalan, and Lall 1995; Darbellay and Vajda 1999; Kraskov, Stogbauer, and Grassberger 2004; Wang,
Shen, and Zhang 2005).
Another method named distance correlation (dCor) has
a compact representation analogous to the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient, however is calculated based on certain Euclidean distances between sample elements (Székely, Rizzo,
and Bakirov 2007; Székely and Rizzo 2009). dCor can be
viewed as a special case of kernel based method (Sejdinovic
et al. 2013), which is a kind of more general statistic deﬁned
on reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (Gretton et al. 2008;
Gretton and Gyorﬁ 2010). Empirical studies (Reshef et al.
2015; Reshef et al. 2018) showed that dCor also achieved excellent performance in some situations. In order to construct

Abstract
Detecting relationships among multivariate data is often of
great importance in the analysis of high-dimensional data sets,
and has received growing attention for decades from both
academic and industrial ﬁelds. In this study, we propose a statistical tool named the neighbor correlation coefﬁcient (nCor),
which is based on a new idea that measures the local continuity of the reordered data points to quantify the strength of the
global association between variables. With sufﬁcient sample
size, the new method is able to capture a wide range of functional relationship, whether it is linear or nonlinear, bivariate
or multivariate, main effect or interaction. The score of nCor
roughly approximates the coefﬁcient of determination (R2 ) of
the data which implies the proportion of variance in one variable that is predictable from one or more other variables. On
this basis, three nCor based statistics are also proposed here to
further characterize the intra and inter structures of the associations from the aspects of nonlinearity, interaction effect, and
variable redundancy. The mechanisms of these measures are
proved in theory and demonstrated with numerical analyses.

Introduction
Identifying relationships among variables is one of the most
critical issues in data analysis and interpretation (Altman and
Krzywinski 2015) with a wide range of applications in diverse
ﬁelds from data science to neuroscience. Nowadays, however,
a large data set may contain a vast number of variable pairs
and combinations that are difﬁcult to be examined manually (Reshef et al. 2011). Association measures can be used
to quickly ﬁnd out the signiﬁcant associations scattered in
thousands or even millions of potential relationships without
modelling the relationships explicitly, and thereby provide
valuable knowledge and promising pointers for future study.
Consider a data sample {(x(t) , y(t) )|1≤t≤N } that is observed from an underlying functional relationship expressed
as follows.


gi (xi ) +
hi (xi ) + e
(1)
y = f (x) + e =
xi ∈x

xi ⊆x
M

where y∈R, x = (xi |1≤i≤M )∈R , e∈R, and M ≥2 respectively denote dependent variable, multiple independent
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6786

