The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hidden Trigger Backdoor Attacks
Aniruddha Saha, Akshayvarun Subramanya, Hamed Pirsiavash
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
{anisaha1, akshayv1, hpirsiav}@umbc.edu

It is shown that a pre-trained model can transfer easily to
other tasks using small training data. For instance, it is common practice to download a deep model pre-trained on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015) and also download some
images of interest from the web to ﬁnetune the model to
solve the problem in hand. Backdoor attacks are effective
at such applications since the attacker can leave some poisoned data on the web for the victims to download and use
in training. It is not easy to mitigate such attacks as in the
big data setting, it is difﬁcult to make sure that all the data is
collected from reliable sources.
The most well-known backdoor attack (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt,
and Garg 2017) develops poisoned data by pasting the trigger on the source data and changing their label to the target
category. Then, during ﬁne-tuning the model will associate
the trigger with the target category, and at the test time, the
model will predict the target category when the trigger is
presented by the attacker on an image from the source category. However, such attacks are not very practical as the
victim can identify them by visually inspecting the images
to ﬁnd the wrong label or the small trigger itself.
We propose hidden trigger attacks where the poisoned
data is labeled correctly and also does not contain any visible
trigger, hence, it is not easy for the victim to identify the poisoned data by visual inspection. Inspired by (Shafahi et al.
2018; Sabour et al. 2016), we optimize for poisoned images
that are close to target images in the pixel space and also
close to source images patched by the trigger in the feature
space. We label those poisoned images with the target category so visually are not identiﬁable. We show that the ﬁnetuned model associates the trigger with the target category
even though the model has never seen the trigger explicitly.
We also show that this attack can generalize to unseen images and random trigger locations. Fig. 1 shows our threat
model in detail.
We believe our proposed attack is more practical than the
previous backdoor attacks as in our case: (1) the victim does
not have an effective way of identifying poisoned data visually and (2) the trigger is kept truly secret by the attacker
and then revealed only at the test time, which might be late
to defend in many applications.
We perform various experiments along with ablation stud-

Abstract
With the success of deep learning algorithms in various domains, studying adversarial attacks to secure deep models
in real world applications has become an important research
topic. Backdoor attacks are a form of adversarial attacks on
deep networks where the attacker provides poisoned data to
the victim to train the model with, and then activates the attack by showing a speciﬁc small trigger pattern at the test
time. Most state-of-the-art backdoor attacks either provide
mislabeled poisoning data that is possible to identify by visual
inspection, reveal the trigger in the poisoned data, or use noise
to hide the trigger. We propose a novel form of backdoor attack where poisoned data look natural with correct labels and
also more importantly, the attacker hides the trigger in the
poisoned data and keeps the trigger secret until the test time.
We perform an extensive study on various image classiﬁcation settings and show that our attack can fool the model by
pasting the trigger at random locations on unseen images although the model performs well on clean data. We also show
that our proposed attack cannot be easily defended using a
state-of-the-art defense algorithm for backdoor attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great results in many domains
including computer vision. However, it has been shown to be
vulnerable in the presence of an adversary. The most wellknown adversarial attacks (Madry et al. 2017) are evasion
attacks where the attacker optimizes for a perturbation pattern to fool the deep model at test time (e.g, change the prediction from the correct category to a wrong one.)
Backdoor attacks are a different type of attack where the
adversary chooses a trigger (a small patch), develops some
poisoned data based on the trigger, and provides it to the
victim to train a deep model with. The trained deep model
will produce correct results on regular clean data, so the victim will not realize that the model is compromised. However, the model will mis-classify a source category image
as a target category when the attacker pastes the trigger on
the source image. As a popular example, the trigger can be
a small sticker on a trafﬁc sign that changes the prediction
from “stop sign” to “speed limit”.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11957

