The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Detecting Suspicious Timber Trades
Debanjan Datta,1 M. Raihanul Islam,1 Nathan Self,1 Amelia Meadows,2 John Simeone,2,4
Willow Outhwaite,3 Chen Hin Keong,3 Amy Smith,2 Linda Walker,2 Naren Ramakrishnan1
1

Virginia Tech, Arlington, Virginia, USA, 2 World Wildlife Fund, Washington DC, USA
3
TRAFFIC, Cambridge, UK, 4 Simeone Consulting LLC, Anchorage, Alaska, USA

Abstract
Open
Source
Data

Developing algorithms that identify potentially illegal trade
shipments is a non-trivial task, exacerbated by the size of
shipment data as well as the unavailability of positive training data. In collaboration with conservation organizations,
we develop a framework that incorporates machine learning
and domain knowledge to tackle this challenge. Modeling the
task as anomaly detection, we propose a simple and effective
embedding-based anomaly detection approach for categorical
data that provides better performance and scalability than the
current state-of-art, along with a negative sampling approach
that can efﬁciently train the proposed model. Additionally, we
show how our model aids the interpretability of results which
is crucial for the task. Domain knowledge, though sparse and
scattered across multiple open data sources, is ingested with
input of domain experts to create rules that highlight actionable results. The application framework demonstrates the applicability of our proposed approach on real world trade data.
An interface combined with the framework presents a complete system that can ingest, detect and aid in the analysis of
suspicious timber trades.

1

Trade
Data

Interface

Enrichment
+ Keyword
Extraction

Record-ID

+

Domain
Knowledge

+

Anomaly
Detection
Model

Application

Score

...

ID-1

score_1 abc

ID-2

score_2 def

   ID-3

score_3 xyz

   ID-4

score_4 pqr

Figure 1: System overview of the application framework.

mislabelling, fraud or pertain to high risk timber.
For our target users which are comprised of the government agencies, current approaches for detecting suspicious
transactions involve experts or analysts inspecting individual
trade records (bills of lading). They do not possess tools that
are speciﬁc to the timber trade or that use machine learning.
The size and complexity of trade data suggests an automated
approach that incorporates timber-speciﬁc domain knowledge and highlights potentially suspicious records which can
lead to further investigation or action by authorities. Domain
speciﬁc data sources about high risk timber species which
can be used to ﬁnd suspicious transactions are crucial but
scattered or incomplete and require enrichment and extraction with inputs from domain experts. While post-hoc analysis of a record may reveal whether a record was suspicious,
ground truth data are unavailable as of yet to train a model.
Anomaly detection algorithms have been applied for detecting fraudulent activities, with the intuition that they can
detect relatively infrequent records that do not conform to
usual patterns. While some previous approaches rely on statistical anomalies in terms of weight, volume or declared
dollar values, such numerical attributes are not available in
all cases, including ours. Unexpected co-occurrences are often present across attributes of transactions and it is assumed
that identiﬁcation of such anomalous patterns can detect suspicious transactions (Das and Schneider 2007). Examples of
such anomalies that might signify suspicious transactions include a shipper exporting goods they do not usually trade in,
or a consignee importing goods through a port without prior
precedence. Thus we formulate the given task as a problem
of unsupervised anomaly detection in categorical data, combined with ingestion, enrichment and application of domain
knowledge that detects suspicious timber trades (see Figure 1). Such frameworks do not exist currently and there is a

Introduction

International trade of wood and forest products is a major component of the global trade of renewable natural resources. While there is substantial legal trade involving timber products, illegal logging and trade of illegally sourced
wood products threatens ecosystems and livelihoods worldwide, deprives governments of revenues, and is often associated with other activities like corruption and illicit ﬁnancial
ﬂows (Lawson and MacFaul 2010). Timber that are at risk
of being illegally harvested or traded from entering the US
market are referred to as high risk timber.
Illegal logging is the third largest category of transnational crime with an annual retail value estimated to be between $52 and $157 billion as of May 2017. The United
States is the world’s largest importer of timber products by
value, totalling $51.5 billion in 2017 (22% of all global imports). Wiedenhoeft and others 2019 determined a signiﬁcant portion of retailers are involved in mislabelling or misrepresentation of timber species. Trade records are considered suspicious when they have a higher likelihood of item
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13248

