The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Convergence of Opinion Diffusion is PSPACE-Complete
Dmitry Chistikov,1 Grzegorz Lisowski,1 Mike Paterson,1 Paolo Turrini1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, United Kingdom
{d.chistikov, grzegorz.lisowski, m.s.paterson, p.turrini}@warwick.ac.uk

of opinions, the process might never terminate. This is the
case for synchronous threshold models. Clearly, any network
will converge for some initial input, for instance when your
agents already think the same to start with. However this is
not true in general.
The typical path taken to circumvent the issue is to restrict
the analysis to networks that always converge, as studied by
Grandi, Lorini, and Perrussel (2015), Bredereck and Elkind
(2017) and Botan, Grandi, and Perrussel (2019). Another is
to consider speciﬁc protocols which guarantee termination,
as done for instance by Auletta, Ferraioli, and Greco (2018):
they propose an opinion-revision protocol for agents who
disagree with a distinguished opinion.
Recently, Christoff and Grossi (2017) have provided a characterisation of networks in which termination of the thresholdbased opinion diffusion protocol is guaranteed. However, we
still do not know whether characterising convergent networks
is of any advantage for their algorithmic analysis, in other
words, whether we can have a characterisation that is easier
to check than actually running the protocol until converging
or looping in some way. Here, we settle this problem.

Abstract
We analyse opinion diffusion in social networks, where a ﬁnite
set of individuals is connected in a directed graph and each
simultaneously changes their opinion to that of the majority
of their inﬂuencers. We study the algorithmic properties of
the ﬁxed-point behaviour of such networks, showing that the
problem of establishing whether individuals converge to stable
opinions is PSPACE-complete.

Introduction
Social networks are a well established paradigm for the
computational analysis of real-world phenomena such as
disease spreading (Klovdahl 1985; Jackson 2010), product adoption (Apt and Markakis 2014; Apt, Markakis,
and Simon 2016) and opinion diffusion (Axelrod 1997;
Grandi, Lorini, and Perrussel 2015). They are typically modelled as directed graphs over a ﬁnite set of individuals possessing certain properties, such as opinions, which spread
through the network according to predeﬁned rules. For instance, protocols for the spread can be deﬁned as a function
of the inﬂuencers’ opinions.
In the plethora of social network models, threshold-based
ones are certainly the best known. There, agents adopt an
opinion if and only if it is shared by a given threshold of
the incoming connections. While these models have a long
standing tradition in the social sciences, originating from
Granovetter (1978), they have received revived attention in
artiﬁcial intelligence, including contributions of Ferraioli,
Goldberg, and Ventre (2016), Auletta et al. (2017) or Bilò,
Fanelli, and Moscardelli (2018). Notably, Auletta, Ferraioli,
and Greco have received the IJCAI 2018 Distinguished Paper
Award for a study of communication in threshold-based social
network models.
One of the major challenges associated with these models
is that convergence of the diffusion protocol is not guaranteed.
Imagine you would like to have your agents make a collective
decision and let them discuss ﬁrst, agreeing that they would
cast their vote once they have made up their mind. Depending
on the chosen diffusion protocol and the initial distribution

Our contribution. We study the convergence of opinion
diffusion in social networks, modelled as directed graphs
over a ﬁnite set of individuals, who simultaneously update
their opinions. They switch their opinions if and only if the
majority of their inﬂuencers disagrees with them. We look
at labelled networks, where individuals start with a binary
opinion, and study the problem of whether that network converges. We also look at unlabelled networks and consider the
problem of whether a labelling exists for which the network
does not converge — this problem concerns the structural aspect of opinion diffusion’s convergence. Our contribution
is two-fold: ﬁrstly, we present some classes of networks
which are guaranteed to converge, and secondly we show
that the problem of establishing whether a network converges
is PSPACE-complete even for the simplest of such protocols,
closing a gap in the literature. In fact, we show that any characterisation of such networks, including the one provided
by Christoff and Grossi (2017) cannot result in an efﬁcient
procedure for verifying the convergence of the considered
protocol (unless P=PSPACE).

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7103

