The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Rank3DGAN: Semantic Mesh Generation Using Relative Attributes
Yassir Saquil,* Qun-Ce Xu,∗ Yong-Liang Yang, Peter Hall
University of Bath, Bath, UK
{ys999, qx289, yy753, maspmh}@bath.ac.uk

Recently, Hamu et al. (2018) proposed to represent 3D
meshes using 2D multi-chart structure based on orbifold tutte
embedding (Maron et al. 2017). The basic idea is to cut the
mesh (or part of it) through landmark points on the surface,
then map it to a chart structure in 2D, and ﬁnally sample
a grid in 2D. This results in a tensor of image-like data,
which is both smooth and bijective. Moreover, the convolution operation is well-deﬁned and can be mapped back to the
original surface. Hence GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014) can
be trained based on multi-chart structure to generate charts
tensor, which implicitly represent a 3D mesh surface.
Inspired by the semantic image manipulation using RankCGAN (Saquil, Kim, and Hall 2018), our aim is to extend this
work to 3D mesh surfaces using the multi-chart structure
(Hamu et al. 2018), which enables us to provide a deep learning system that can generate 3D meshes while manipulating
some semantic attributes deﬁned by the user. The key characteristic of this approach is the addition of a ranking module
that can order 3D shapes via their multi-chart representation. Such a system is particularly useful to digital artists
and designers since they can set the semantic attributes using
pairwise comparisons in order to perform personalized 3D
shapes editing and exploration.
We evaluated our method on three types of datasets of
human bodies (HumanShape (Pishchulin et al. 2017)), birds
(reconstructed 3D shapes of CUB imagery data (Kanazawa
et al. 2018)), and human faces (Basel Face Model (Paysan et
al. 2009; Gerig et al. 2018)). Both quantitative and qualitative results show that: Our model can disentangle semantic
attributes while ensuring a coherent variation of high-quality
3D meshes thanks to the usage of multi-chart structure in
comparison to existing methods. Also, our model has important applications in mesh generation, editing, and transfer.
Our contributions are two-fold: 1) a novel conditional
generative model that can generate quality 3D meshes with
semantic attributes quantiﬁed by a ranking function; 2) an
end-to-end training scheme that only requires pairwise comparison of meshes instead of global annotation of the dataset.

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate a novel problem of using generative adversarial networks in the task of 3D shape generation
according to semantic attributes. Recent works map 3D shapes
into 2D parameter domain, which enables training Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) for 3D shape generation task.
We extend these architectures to the conditional setting, where
we generate 3D shapes with respect to subjective attributes
deﬁned by the user. Given pairwise comparisons of 3D shapes,
our model performs two tasks: it learns a generative model
with a controlled latent space, and a ranking function for the
3D shapes based on their multi-chart representation in 2D. The
capability of the model is demonstrated with experiments on
HumanShape, Basel Face Model and reconstructed 3D CUB
datasets. We also present various applications that beneﬁt from
our model, such as multi-attribute exploration, mesh editing,
and mesh attribute transfer.

Introduction
Building a generative model for 3D shapes has a wide variety of applications in computer vision and graphics, in both
research and industrial ﬁelds. For instance, we can design
a system for a computer animator so that he can manipulate 3D shapes not only based on low-level attributes such
as geometry, but also high-level semantic attributes such as
expressions for 3D faces or girth for 3D human bodies.
However, learning a generative model for ﬁne-grained quality 3D shapes remains a challenging problem. The current
state-of-the-art methods rely on representing the 3D shape
as a tensor data itself which begets many limitations. For
volumetric grid (i.e., voxel) representation (Choy et al. 2016;
Wu et al. 2016), surface details such as smoothness and continuity are lost due to limited resolution of voxel tensors. In
contrast, point cloud (Qi et al. 2017) representation is simple, but it lacks a regular structure to easily ﬁt into neural
networks and it does not model connectivity between points,
making 3D surface reconstruction a non-trival task. These
drawbacks hinder the extension of these methods to more
sophisticated tasks such as, semantic mesh manipulation.

Related work

* Equal contribution

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3D shape generative models Early works on 3D shape
synthesis relied on probabilistic inference methods. (Kaloger5586

