The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Parameterized Complexity of Envy-Free Resource Allocation in Social Networks
Eduard Eiben,1 Robert Ganian,2 Thekla Hamm,2 Sebastian Ordyniak3
1

Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK. Email: eduard.eiben@rhul.ac.uk
2
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Austria. Emails: rganian@gmail.com, thamm@ac.tuwien.ac.at
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Shefﬁeld, UK. Email: sordyniak@gmail.com

study two well-established notions of envy and resulting
variants of the problem:

Abstract
We consider the classical problem of allocating resources
among agents in an envy-free (and, where applicable, proportional) way. Recently, the basic model was enriched by
introducing the concept of a social network which allows to
capture situations where agents might not have full information about the allocation of all resources. We initiate the
study of the parameterized complexity of these resource allocation problems by considering natural parameters which
capture structural properties of the network and similarities
between agents and items. In particular, we show that even
very general fragments of the considered problems become
tractable as long as the social network has bounded treewidth
or bounded clique-width. We complement our results with
matching lower bounds which show that our algorithms cannot be substantially improved.

(1) in L OCALLY E NVY-F REE A LLOCATION (LEFA) each
agent a is satisﬁed if it does not envy any of its neighbors—
this models situations where agents do not know or care
about the total available amount of resources. This was studied, e.g., by Beynier et al. (2019) and Bredereck et al. (2018).
(2) in E NVY-F REE A LLOCATION (EFA) each agent must
not only be envy-free of its neighbors, but must also view its
allocated resources as being proportional to the total amount
of available resources. This variant is better suited to scenarios where an agent might not have access to full information
about which agent receives which resources, but knows what
all the resources are and expects to receive a fair share. EFA
was proposed and studied by Aziz et al. (2018).
Contribution. Unsurprisingly, both LEFA and EFA are
NP-complete, and in fact remain NP-complete even on
severely restricted instances (Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and
Niedermeier 2018). For example, the well-known PARTI TION P ROBLEM can be encoded by LEFA and EFA on
a complete bidirected social network with 2 agents using
the same valuation. LEFA and EFA generalize the classical envy-free resource allocation problems in the sense that
the envy-free resource allocation problem corresponds to the
setting in which the social network is complete. Similarly,
EFA on the social network with an empty edge set encodes
the problem of proportional resource allocation.
In this work, we employ the parameterized complexity
paradigm (Downey and Fellows 2013; Cygan et al. 2015;
Niedermeier 2006) to obtain new algorithms and lower
bounds for both of these problems. The core feature of the
parameterized paradigm is that instead of measuring the performance of algorithms merely in terms of the size of the input (n), one links this to certain properties of the input (captured by one or several numerical parameters, k). In turn,
this gives rise to two notions of tractability, both of which
correspond to polynomial-time tractability in the classical
setting:
• the class FPT contains all problems that can be solved in
time f (k)·nO(1) (for some computable function f ), while
• the (asymptotically less efﬁcient) class XP contains all
problems that can be solved in time nf (k) .

Introduction
Envy-freeness ranks among the most important fairness
requirements in the classical resource allocation problem of distributing indivisible items (resources) among
agents (Bouveret and Lang 2008; Bouveret, Chevaleyre,
and Maudet 2016). There has also been an extensive line
of works studying envy-freeness in a more general setting
where agents only directly compare themselves to a subset of other agents (Beynier et al. 2019; Aziz et al. 2018;
Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and Niedermeier 2018). For instance, employees in a company would only compare themselves and “envy” other employees that are at a comparable level to them in the company’s hierarchy. Another example is tied to the classical C AKE C UTTING problem (Abebe,
Kleinberg, and Parkes 2017; Bei, Qiao, and Zhang 2017),
where agents have preferences over different parts of a
“cake” (representing some desired goods)—in many cases,
agents may only have limited information about the pieces
of the cake distributed to other agents.
In line with the above, we consider the following problem:
given a set R of resources (or items), a set A of agents (each
with their own numerical valuation for each resource), and
a directed social network G representing “envy-relations”
between the agents, ﬁnd an allocation of resources that is
considered “envy-free” by each agent. More speciﬁcally we
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7135

