The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Framework for Measuring Information Asymmetry
Yakoub Salhi
CRIL, U. Artois & CNRS
F-62300 Lens, France
salhi@cril.fr

Stiglitz received the Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel in 2001.

Abstract
Information asymmetry occurs when an imbalance of knowledge exists between two parties, such as a buyer and a seller, a
regulator and an operator, and an employer and an employee.
It is a key concept in several domains, in particular, in economics. We propose in this work a general logic-based framework for measuring the information asymmetry between two
parties. A situation of information asymmetry is represented
by a knowledge base and a set of questions. We deﬁne the notion of information asymmetry measure through rationality
postulates. We further introduce a syntactic concept, called
minimal question subset (MQS), to take into consideration
the fact that answering some questions allows avoiding others. This concept is used for deﬁning rationality postulates
and measures. Finally, we propose a method for computing
the MQSes of a given situation of information asymmetry.

Since information asymmetry plays a key role in many
economic settings, deﬁning measures in this context has received considerable attention (e.g. (Glosten and Harris 1988;
Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara 2002; Chen, Goldstein, and
Jiang 2006; Armstrong, Balakrishnan, and Cohen 2012)).
However, to the best of our knowledge, no general framework for deﬁning such measures has been proposed in the
literature in the sense that the previous works concern very
speciﬁc questions in economics and our framework uses an
abstract formalism (a formal logic). The main purpose of
this work is to introduce a general logic-based framework
for measuring information asymmetry. The measures deﬁned through this framework are motivated by different applications. In particular, they can be used for selecting appropriate partner agents: less information asymmetry leads
to more appropriate partner agent. They can also be used for
better appraising products (e.g. in auctions) by taking into
account adverse selection: information asymmetry causes in
general erroneous price evaluation. In addition, these measures can be used in combination with methods for resolving
problems related to information asymmetry. Indeed, they allow one to detect situations where it is important to involve
methods that reduce the negative impact.

Introduction
Information asymmetry refers to situations of interactions
between two parties in which one has more relevant pieces
of information than another. This concept plays a central
role in explaining different important phenomena in several
domains, particularly in economics. It was originally introduced in Akerlof’s article: The Market for ’Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism (Akerlof 1970).
In particular, Akerlof explained in this article the negative
effect of information asymmetry on the quality of goods
by considering the example of the used car market. Intuitively, the fact that the buyers and the sellers of cars do
not have the same knowledge about the quality provides incentives to favor the cars of less than the average market
quality (adverse selection); the buyers tend to pay less and
the sellers are thereby conduced to reduce the quality of
the proposed cars. In order to resolve the problems caused
by information asymmetry, the most known approaches are
the method of signaling proposed by Spence (Spence 1973;
Connelly et al. 2011) and the method of screening proposed
by Stiglitz (Stiglitz 1975). For their works on information
asymmetry, George Akerlof, Michael Spence and Joseph E.

In our framework, classical propositional logic is used for
representing pieces of knowledge as well as questions. A
situation of information asymmetry, called in this paper IAinstance, is described through two sets of formulas representing respectively the pieces of knowledge and the questions. More precisely, the ﬁrst set represents the knowledge
state of one of the two involved parties, and the questions are
those that this party wants to answer knowing that the other
party has the answers. In this context, the notion of information asymmetry measure is deﬁned as a function that associates a non-negative numeric value to every IA-instance:
the greater the number returned by a measure, the greater
is the amount of information asymmetry. We provide postulates for measuring information asymmetry in order to characterize important rational aspects. In addition, we propose
different measures that illustrate different important points.
It is worth noting that our approach is similar in a sense to

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2983

