The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Protecting Geolocation Privacy of Photo Collections
Jinghan Yang, Ayan Chakrabarti, Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
Computer Science & Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis
{jinghan.yang, ayan, yvorobeychik}@wustl.edu

Abstract
People increasingly share personal information, including
their photos and photo collections, on social media. This information, however, can compromise individual privacy, particularly as social media platforms use it to infer detailed
models of user behavior, including tracking their location.
We consider the speciﬁc issue of location privacy as potentially revealed by posting photo collections, which facilitate
accurate geolocation with the help of deep learning methods
even in the absence of geotags. One means to limit associated inadvertent geolocation privacy disclosure is by carefully
pruning select photos from photo collections before these are
posted publicly. We study this problem formally as a combinatorial optimization problem in the context of geolocation
prediction facilitated by deep learning. We ﬁrst demonstrate
the complexity both by showing that a natural greedy algorithm can be arbitrarily bad and by proving that the problem
is NP-Hard. We then exhibit an important tractable special
case, as well as a more general approach based on mixedinteger linear programming. Through extensive experiments
on real photo collections, we demonstrate that our approaches
are indeed highly effective at preserving geolocation privacy.

1

Introduction

A person’s physical whereabouts—the city, state, or country they are in or have traveled to—is sensitive information
that many desire to keep private. With routine information
about everyday activities increasingly being shared online
and on social media, there is a heightened risk that such data
may unintentionally leak information about the geographic
location of individuals. For example, disclosure of a person’s current location or travel history to law-enforcement
agencies, hostile governments, employers, advertising companies, etc. could result in signiﬁcant real harms. In this
work, we speciﬁcally address the risk of geolocation privacy
from collections of photographs shared by users online.
The IM2GPS method (Hays and Efros 2008) was the ﬁrst
to demonstrate that, even without explicit embedded geotags, image content sometimes contains enough cues to allow accurate estimation of the location where the image was
taken. The accuracy of image geolocation algorithms has

Figure 1: Illustration of our problem and approach. This
photo collection has 16 photos, all taken in Barcelona, which
is also the correctly predicted location when all photos are
used (top left map). Greedily removing photos to ensure
that Barcelona is not among top-5 predicted locations corresponds to the selection highlighted in dashed green, and the
resulting top-5 predictions are on the top right map. Photos
chosen by our approach are identiﬁed by a red box, and the
result is shown on the lower map.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
524

