The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Intention Nets: Psychology-Inspired User
Choice Behavior Modeling for Next-Basket Prediction
Shoujin Wang,1 Liang Hu,2,3,∗ Yan Wang,1,∗ Quan Z. Sheng,1 Mehmet Orgun,1 Longbing Cao2
2

1
Department of Computing, Macquarie University
Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney
3
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology
{shoujin.wang, yan.wang}@mq.edu.au, rainmilk@gmail.com

b1

Abstract
Human behaviors are complex, which are often observed as a
sequence of heterogeneous actions. In this paper, we take user
choices for shopping baskets as a typical case to study the
complexity of user behaviors. Most of existing approaches often model user behaviors in a mechanical way, namely treating a user action sequence as homogeneous sequential data,
such as hourly temperatures, which fails to consider the complexity in user behaviors. In fact, users’ choices are driven by
certain underlying intentions (e.g., feeding the baby or relieving pain) according to Psychological theories. Moreover, the
durations of intentions to drive user actions are quite different; some of them may be persistent while others may be transient. According to Psychological theories, we develop a hierarchical framework to describe the goal, intentions and action
sequences, based on which, we design Intention Nets (IntNet). In IntNet, multiple Action Chain Nets are constructed
to model the user actions driven by different intentions, and a
specially designed Persistent-Transient Intention Unit models
the different intention durations. We apply the IntNet to nextbasket prediction, a recent challenging task in recommender
systems. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets show
the superiority of our Psychology-inspired model IntNet over
the state-of-the-art approaches.

b2

b3

Figure 1: An example of a sequence of three baskets
(b1 , b2 , b3 ). Traditional methods simply model the transitions between baskets ( dashed arrow lines) while Psychological research indicates user choices in baskets are
driven by different intentions accomplished by different action chains ( arrow lines of different colours).

some of them may drive a long persistent action chain containing more actions while others may drive a short one with
fewer actions. For example, as shown in Figure 1, baby feeding is a persistent intention which drives a long action chain
(red lines) to buy milk powder of different stages across the
whole basket sequence, while relieving pain is a transient intention driving a short one. Furthermore, the psychological
research (Carrera et al. 2012) has indicated that user behavior can be described as a hierarchical framework, where the
goal at the top level (e.g., ﬁlling shopping baskets) is driven
by multiple underlying intentions (e.g., feeding baby and relieving pain) and each intention results in a chain of relevant
choices across baskets with different durations.
However, most of existing next-basket prediction methods
(Quadrana et al. 2017; Guidotti et al. 2018) mechanically
model a user action sequence as homogeneous data points
in time series just like the hourly temperatures, without considering human’s heterogeneous intentions behind. For instance, the Markov chain-based (Rendle and et al. 2010)
and the recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Wan et al. 2015;
Yu et al. 2016) based methods are two current representative
approaches to model user basket sequences in this way. Such
mechanical treatment does not reﬂect the complexity and
heterogeneity of human behaviors in the decision-making
process (Chen, Lu, and Wang 2017; Hu et al. 2017). As a
result, these approaches have trouble in creating an in-depth
understanding of behaviors (including their heterogeneity
and intentions) and properly predicting a user’s next-basket
choices (Cao 2010; Wang, Hu, and Cao 2017).

Introduction
Human behaviors are full of complexity and uncertainty
(Cao 2015), and psychologists have been trying to understand the inﬂuential factors in the process of forming intentions and performing actions (Fishbein et al. 2000). For example, shopping a basket of products is a typical user behavior in daily life. In this paper, we take the next-basket
prediction as a representative problem to study the complexity of user behavior, where the sequences of user choices in
sequences of baskets correspond to user action sequences.
According to the psychological theory (Albarracin and
Wyer Jr 2000), user actions are driven by a set of heterogeneous intentions (e.g., feeding the baby and relieving pain in
basket b2 shown in Figure 1) to achieve certain goals. Moreover, the durations of intentions may be quite different, i.e.,
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6259

