The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Transferable Adversarial Examples via Ghost Networks
Yingwei Li,1 Song Bai,2 Yuyin Zhou,1 Cihang Xie,1 Zhishuai Zhang,1 Alan Yuille1
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 University of Oxford
yingwei.li@jhu.edu, {songbai.site, zhouyuyiner, cihangxie306, zhshuai.zhang, alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

Weak Transferbility

Abstract
Recent development of adversarial attacks has proven
that ensemble-based methods outperform traditional, nonensemble ones in black-box attack. However, as it is computationally prohibitive to acquire a family of diverse models,
these methods achieve inferior performance constrained by
the limited number of models to be ensembled.
In this paper, we propose Ghost Networks to improve the
transferability of adversarial examples. The critical principle
of ghost networks is to apply feature-level perturbations to
an existing model to potentially create a huge set of diverse
models. After that, models are subsequently fused by longitudinal ensemble. Extensive experimental results suggest that
the number of networks is essential for improving the transferability of adversarial examples, but it is less necessary to
independently train different networks and ensemble them in
an intensive aggregation way. Instead, our work can be used
as a computationally cheap and easily applied plug-in to improve adversarial approaches both in single-model and multimodel attack, compatible with residual and non-residual networks. By reproducing the NeurIPS 2017 adversarial competition, our method outperforms the No.1 attack submission
by a large margin, demonstrating its effectiveness and efﬁciency. Code is available at https://github.com/LiYingwei/
ghost-network.

Base Network

Angora: 91%

Angora : 82%
Generate
Strong Transferbility

M1

M2

...

MN

Ghost Networks
Angora: 91%

Strainer: 77%

Figure 1: An illustration of the capacity of the proposed
ghost networks in learning transferable adversarial examples. The base model is ResNet-50, which is used to generate adversarial examples and to generate ghost networks.
The evaluation is done on Inception v3.

Szegedy et al. 2014). Besides image classiﬁcation, adversarial examples also exist on other tasks (Xie et al. 2017;
Bai et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2019; Li et al.
2019).
Two attack settings are later developed, i.e., white-box
attack and black-box attack. In white-box attack, attackers
can access the model (Carlini and Wagner 2017b; Kurakin,
Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017a). By contrast, in black-box
attack, attackers cannot access the target model. A typical solution is to generate adversarial examples with strong
transferability (transferable adversarial examples).
The transferability of adversarial examples refers to the
property that the same input can successfully attack different
models (Szegedy et al. 2014). Taking advantage of the transferability, (Papernot, McDaniel, and Goodfellow 2016) develop a black-box (attackers cannot access the target model)
attack system by attacking a substitute model. (Liu et al.
2017) suggest attacking an ensemble of substitute models
could improve transferability. Based on (Liu et al. 2017) and
I-FGSM, several methods are developed to further improve
the transferability by smoothing gradient (Dong et al. 2018;

Introduction
In recent years, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
have greatly advanced performance in various vision tasks,
including image recognition (He et al. 2016b; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman
2015), object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Girshick 2015),
and semantic segmentation (Chen et al. 2018), etc.. However, it has been observed (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015) that adding human imperceptible perturbations to input image can cause CNNs to make
incorrect predictions even if the original image can be correctly classiﬁed. These intentionally generated images are
usually called adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017a;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11458

