The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Vector Quantization-Based Regularization for Autoencoders
Hanwei Wu,1,2 Markus Flierl1
1

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
2
Research Institutes of Sweden
Stockholm, Sweden
{hanwei, ﬂierl}@kth.se

to the latent representation (Alemi et al. 2018). On the other
hand, the VAE training is also susceptible to the so-called
“posterior collapse” phenomenon where a structured latent
representation is mostly ignored and the encoder maps the
input data to the latent representation in a “random” fashion
(Lucas et al. 2019). This is not favorable for downstream
applications since the latent representation loses its similarity
relation to the input data.

Abstract
Autoencoders and their variations provide unsupervised models for learning low-dimensional representations for downstream tasks. Without proper regularization, autoencoder models are susceptible to the overﬁtting problem and the so-called
posterior collapse phenomenon. In this paper, we introduce a
quantization-based regularizer in the bottleneck stage of autoencoder models to learn meaningful latent representations.
We combine both perspectives of Vector Quantized-Variational
AutoEncoders (VQ-VAE) and classical denoising regularization methods of neural networks. We interpret quantizers as
regularizers that constrain latent representations while fostering a similarity-preserving mapping at the encoder. Before
quantization, we impose noise on the latent codes and use a
Bayesian estimator to optimize the quantizer-based representation. The introduced bottleneck Bayesian estimator outputs
the posterior mean of the centroids to the decoder, and thus,
is performing soft quantization of the noisy latent codes. We
show that our proposed regularization method results in improved latent representations for both supervised learning and
clustering downstream tasks when compared to autoencoders
using other bottleneck structures.

Various regularization methods have been proposed to improve the latent representation learning for the VAE models.
(Higgins et al. 2017)(Burgess et al. 2018) enforce stronger
KL regularization on the latent representation in the bottleneck stage to constrain the transfer of information from data
to the learned representation. Denoising methods (Achille
and Soatto 2018)(Shu et al. 2018)(Im et al. 2017) encourage
the model to learn robust representations by artiﬁcially perturbing the training data. On the other hand, conventional
regularization methods may not solve the posterior collapse
problem. (Lucas et al. 2019) empirically shows that posterior
collapse is caused by the original marginal log-likelihood
objective of the model rather than the evidence lower bound
(ELBO). As a result, modifying the objective function ELBO
of VAE as (Higgins et al. 2017)(Burgess et al. 2018) may
have limited effects on preventing the posterior collapse. One
potential solution is the vector-quantized variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE) (van den Oord, Kavukcuoglu, and Vinyals
2017) model. Instead of regularizing the latent distribution,
VQ-VAE provides a latent representation based on a ﬁnite
number of centroids. Hence, the capability of the latent representation can be controlled by the number of used centroids
which guarantees that a certain amount of information is
preserved in the latent space.

Introduction
An important application of autoencoders and their variations
is the use of learned latent representations for downstream
tasks. In general, learning meaningful representations from
data is difﬁcult since the quality of learned representations is
usually not measured by the objective function of the model.
The reconstruction error criterion of vanilla autoencoders
may result in the model memorizing the data. The variational
autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2014) improves
the representation learning by enforcing stochastic bottleneck
representations using the reparameterization trick. The VAE
models further impose constraints on the latents by minimizing a Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the prior
and the approximate posterior of the latent distribution. However, the evidence lower bound (ELBO) training of VAE does
not necessarily result in meaningful latent representations as
the optimization cannot control the trade-off between the reconstruction error and the information transfer from the data

In this paper, we combine the perspectives of VQ-VAE and
noise-based approaches. We inject noise into the latent codes
before the quantization in the bottleneck stage. We assume
that the noisy observations are generated by a Gaussian mixture model where the means of the components is represented
by the centroids of the quantizer. To determine the input of
the autoencoder decoder, we use a Bayesian estimator and
obtain the posterior mean of the centroids. In other words,
we perform a soft quantization of the latent codes in contrast
to a hard assignment as used in vanilla VQ-VAE. Hence, we

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6380

