The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Facility Location Problem with Capacity
Constraints: Algorithmic and Mechanism Design Perspectives
Haris Aziz,1 Hau Chan,2 Barton E. Lee,1 Bo Li,3 Toby Walsh4
1

UNSW Sydney and Data61 CSIRO
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
4
TU Berlin, UNSW Sydney and Data61 CSIRO
haris.aziz@unsw.edu.au, hchan3@unl.edu, barton.e.lee@gmail.com, boli@cs.ox.ac.uk, tw@cse.unsw.edu.au
2

In the one-dimensional setting, our models could be used
to describe the setting of locating wastewater plants along
a river or distribution centres along a highway. There are
also various non-geographical settings that can be viewed
as one-dimensional facility location problems (e.g. choosing
the temperature for a classroom, or selecting a committee to
represent people with different political views). In addition,
there are settings where we can use the one-dimensional
problem to solve more complex problems (e.g. decomposing the 2-d rectilinear problem into a pair of 1-d problems).
The one-dimensional problem is also the starting point to
consider more complex metrics (e.g., trees and networks).
In FLP-CC, we have n agents located on the real line, and
we need to locate m facilities on the line to serve all the
agents1 . The ith
facility can serve up to ci agents. We asm
sume that n ≤ i=1 ci so that every agent can be served.
Each agent i is at location xi , and we suppose that the agents
are ordered so that x1 ≤ . . . ≤ xn . Given an agent j, let
aj ∈ {1, . . . , m} denote the facility that agent j is assigned
and let Ni denote the set of agents assigned to facility i, i.e.,
Ni := {j | aj = i}. A solution is a location yi for each
facility i, and an assignment of agents to facilities such that
the capacity constraint ci of each facility is not exceeded,
i.e., |Ni | ≤ ci for all i ∈ {1, . . . , m}. Accordingly, a solution is denoted by {(yj , Nj )}m
. We consider a utilitarian
n j=1
measure: the total cost, j=1 |xj − yaj |; and an egalitarian
measure: the maximum cost, maxj∈{1,...,n} |xj − yaj |. Our
goal is to locate facilities on the line and assign agents to
these facilities to minimize the total or maximum cost.
Contribution. Our main contributions are as follows.
Firstly, for FLP-CC, we provide algorithmic results identifying the complexity of the corresponding optimization problem (NP-hard) but also provide tractability results, via dynamic programs (DPs), for various restricted settings. Secondly, we explore the mechanism design challenges introduced by this new setting. We show that many mechanisms
which are considered desirable in uncapitated FLPs become
undesirable (with respect to strategyproofness and/or approximation ratio bounds) in FLP-CC. We introduce the in-

Abstract
We consider the facility location problem in the onedimensional setting where each facility can serve a limited
number of agents from the algorithmic and mechanism design
perspectives. From the algorithmic perspective, we prove that
the corresponding optimization problem, where the goal is to
locate facilities to minimize either the total cost to all agents
or the maximum cost of any agent is NP-hard. However, we
show that the problem is ﬁxed-parameter tractable, and the
optimal solution can be computed in polynomial time whenever the number of facilities is bounded, or when all facilities
have identical capacities. We then consider the problem from
a mechanism design perspective where the agents are strategic and need not reveal their true locations. We show that several natural mechanisms studied in the uncapacitated setting
either lose strategyproofness or a bound on the solution quality for the total or maximum cost objective. We then propose
new mechanisms that are strategyproof and achieve approximation guarantees that almost match the lower bounds.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the facility location problem with
capacity constraints (FLP-CC) from the algorithmic and
mechanism design perspectives. In this version of the facility
location problem, we have a set of agents and a set of facilities, where each agent is located somewhere on a line, and
each facility has a capacity limiting the number of agents it
can serve. From the algorithmic perspective, the locations of
the agents are publicly known, and we are interested in the
question of how to best locate the facilities to minimize the
total travel distance/cost or the maximum cost of the agents
to the located facilities. On the other hand, in our mechanism design setting, the locations of the agents are privately
known to the agents themselves, and our goal is to design
mechanisms that elicit the true locations of the agents and
locate the facilities to minimize the total or maximum cost
of the agents subject to the agents’ reported locations.
Our FLP-CC models many real-world problems. The
problems include locating schools, hospitals, warehouses,
and libraries, all of which actually face capacity constraints.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Our problem naturally generalizes to higher dimensions as
well as to non-Euclidean distance metrics.

1806

