The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Question Learning for Visual Question Answering
Chenyi Lei,1,2∗ Lei Wu,3∗ Dong Liu,1† Zhao Li,2 Guoxin Wang,2 Haihong Tang,2 Houqiang Li1
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Alibaba Group, 3 Zhejiang University
{chenyi.lcy, lizhao.lz}@alibaba-inc.com, shenhai1895@zju.edu.cn,
{dongeliu, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn, {xiaogong.wgx, piaoxue}@taobao.com

Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) raises a great challenge
for computer vision and natural language processing communities. Most of the existing approaches consider videoquestion pairs individually during training. However, we observe that there are usually multiple (either sequentially generated or not) questions for the target video in a VQA task,
and the questions themselves have abundant semantic relations. To explore these relations, we propose a new paradigm
for VQA termed Multi-Question Learning (MQL). Inspired
by the multi-task learning, MQL learns from multiple questions jointly together with their corresponding answers for a
target video sequence. The learned representations of videoquestion pairs are then more general to be transferred for new
questions. We further propose an effective VQA framework
and design a training procedure for MQL, where the speciﬁcally designed attention network models the relation between
input video and corresponding questions, enabling multiple
video-question pairs to be co-trained. Experimental results on
public datasets show the favorable performance of the proposed MQL-VQA framework compared to state-of-the-arts.

Q1: What is in the living room?
Q2: What is the color of the wall?
Q3: What is the person in the video doing?
Q4: Where is the pillow?
Q5: Is the person in the video sitting or lying?

Figure 1: An example of a video sequence with multiple
questions. There are abundant relations between the multiple questions themselves, either explicitly e.g. between Q3
and Q5, or more implicitly e.g. between Q1 and Q4.

studies explored the attention-based fusion of image/video
representations learned from deep convolutional neural network and question representations learned via the sequential
model (Anderson et al. 2018; Nguyen and Okatani 2018;
Yang et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2019; 2017b; Li et al. 2019;
Gao et al. 2019b), which made signiﬁcant progress in the
last few years. For example, (Anderson et al. 2018) proposed to combine bottom-up and top-down attention mechanism that enables attention to be estimated at the level of
objects and other salient image/video regions. Meanwhile,
some recent works also considered the modeling of answer
representations to enrich the multimodal understanding (Hu,
Chao, and Sha 2018; Bai et al. 2018). For instance, (Bai et
al. 2018) proposed a deep attention neural tensor network to
fuse the information of image-question-answer triplets. Although the existing works have achieved promising performance in VQA, it is still not clear whether they do actually
reason, or they reason in a human-comprehensible way (Bai
et al. 2018; Cadene et al. 2019).
One issue that was superﬁcially ignored in prior arts is
about the multiple questions for one video sequence. Indeed,
we observe that there are more and more VQA datasets (Jang
et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2016; Ranjay et al. 2016) containing

Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA), which is considered
as one of the highest goals of artiﬁcial intelligence, has
raised a great challenge for both computer vision and natural language processing communities. Speciﬁcally, VQA
is a task about automatically returning the relevant answer
to the given question with respect to the reference visual
content. Currently, for ease of evaluation, most of the researches (including this paper) focus on selecting answers
from given multiple choices. Producing answers in natural
language from scratch is deemed a much more difﬁcult task.
Most of the existing works considered the problem of
VQA as a multimodal understanding task, that is to combine
the visual cues based on image/video understanding with the
question based on natural language understanding and reasoning. With the development of attention mechanism, many
∗
Equal contribution. This work was done when Lei Wu was an
intern at Alibaba.
†
Dong Liu is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11328

