The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Justiﬁcation-Based Reliability in Machine Learning
Nurali Virani,∗ Naresh Iyer, Zhaoyuan Yang
GE Research
1Research Circle, Niskayuna, NY 12309
{nurali.virani, iyerna, zhaoyuan.yang}@ge.com

the model can be relied on to be accurate. A model with
very good average performance is still capable of causing irreparable damage due to the mistakes it makes on a single or
few predictions. In this paper, we present an analysis on the
reliability of individual predictions of a ML model.

Abstract
With the advent of Deep Learning, the ﬁeld of machine learning (ML) has surpassed human-level performance on diverse
classiﬁcation tasks. At the same time, there is a stark need to
characterize and quantify reliability of a model’s prediction
on individual samples. This is especially true in applications
of such models in safety-critical domains of industrial control and healthcare. To address this need, we link the question of reliability of a model’s individual prediction to the
epistemic uncertainty of the model’s prediction. More specifically, we extend the theory of Justiﬁed True Belief (JTB)
in epistemology, created to study the validity and limits of
human-acquired knowledge, towards characterizing the validity and limits of knowledge in supervised classiﬁers. We
present an analysis of neural network classiﬁers linking the
reliability of its prediction on a test input to characteristics
of the support gathered from the input and hidden layers of
the network. We hypothesize that the JTB analysis exposes
the epistemic uncertainty (or ignorance) of a model with respect to its inference, thereby allowing for the inference to
be only as strong as the justiﬁcation permits. We explore various forms of support (for e.g., k-nearest neighbors (k-NN)
and p -norm based) generated for an input, using the training data to construct a justiﬁcation for the prediction with
that input. Through experiments conducted on simulated and
real datasets, we demonstrate that our approach can provide
reliability for individual predictions and characterize regions
where such reliability cannot be ascertained.

We draw inspiration from epistemology, the theory of
knowledge, which deals with validity of methods used to
acquire knowledge. Speciﬁcally, we examine the applicability of Plato’s classical Justiﬁed True Belief (JTB) theory in
epistemology (Ichikawa and Steup 2001). The JTB theory of
knowledge is a classical theory that attempts to provide necessary and sufﬁcient conditions under which a person can
be said to know something. We extend this theory to ML
models by ﬁrstly positing that an individual prediction from
a model can be seen as a belief equivalent to “I believe input x is of class y”. Next, we propose that in order for such
belief to be considered as knowledge, an additional step of
constructing justiﬁcation for the belief is necessary. We explore formulations of JTB analysis by which ML models can
construct such justiﬁcations for their beliefs.
We contend that existing approaches conﬂate epistemic
uncertainty, which pertains to uncertainty due to information
that is absent, with aleatoric uncertainty, which pertains to
uncertainty arising from variability in the available information. JTB analysis tackles this fundamental confusion by not
relying on conﬁdence intervals for point-class assignments
to obtain prediction reliability, and by abstaining from making point-class predictions on inputs, if concrete evidence
for such assessment is absent. Some existing approaches
make use of thresholding on softmax layer values or distance from the decision hyperplane to abstain from making
a class assignment. These approaches fail to link prediction
reliability to the location of the sample in the overall input
space. It is becoming clearer based on recent work (Meng
and Chen 2017) that input regions, either close to the decision boundary or in regions of extrapolation, are particularly susceptible with regard to making unreliable predictions. We present a mechanism for characterizing regions in
input space as region of extrapolation (i.e., “I don’t know” or
IDK), region of confusion (i.e., “I may know” or IMK), and
region of trust (i.e., “I know” or IK). This novel mechanism
to construct justiﬁed belief with IK, IMK, and IDK directly

Introduction
Predictive and prescriptive models based on ML are at the
heart of the modern digital revolution. They are applied
across several domains, such as energy, ﬁnance, defense,
network security, and healthcare. These models often directly inﬂuence control actions or indirectly inﬂuence decisions through recommendations. In many scenarios, especially safety-critical ones, although the average performance
or accuracy of such models is important, the reliability of
the model on every individual prediction is equally critical.
By reliability, we mean the degree to which the result of
∗

All authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6078

