The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On the Generation of Medical Question-Answer Pairs
Sheng Shen,1 Yaliang Li,2 Nan Du,3 Xian Wu,3
Yusheng Xie, Shen Ge,3 Tao Yang,3 Kai Wang,3 Xingzheng Liang,3 Wei Fan3
3

1

University of California at Berkeley, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 Tencent
sheng.s@berkeley.edu, yaliang.li@alibaba-inc.com,
{ndu, kevinxwu, yushengxie, shenge, tytaoyang, ironswang, evelynliang, Davidwfan}@tencent.com

paucity of high-quality QA pairs since it can hardly learn a
good model from limited training data. Though (Roberts et
al. 2017; Pampari et al. 2018) aim to enrich the dataset itself,
but the efforts are still far from enough.
To tackle these difﬁculties, the generation of medical QA
pairs plays an indispensable role. By automatic generation
of high-quality medical QA pairs, external and professional
knowledge can be incorporated, and the size of training data
can be augmented. Therefore, we study this important task
of medical QA pair generation in this paper. To be more speciﬁc, we assume that each medical answer corresponds to a
distribution of valid questions, which should be constrained
on external medical knowledge. Following this assumption,
with more high-quality QA pairs generated based on the
same knowledge as original QA pairs, the latent distribution
of available medical QA pairs can be supplemented and thus
medical QA system could learn unbiased model easily.
However, the generation of new medical QA pairs based
on original ones is challenging: It is hard to simultaneously maintain the diversity and the validity of generated
question-answer pairs. Existing question-answer pair generation methods (Yang et al. 2017; Song et al. 2018) either
has external context to build upon or (Duan et al. 2017;
Du and Cardie 2018; Yang et al. 2017) focused more on the
word-level similarity, and it may generate lexically similar
question-answer pairs to the original ones. These generated
similar QA pairs are valid but of limited use for allowing the
system to answer questions involving new knowledge. On
the other hand, if more diversity in the discourse/sentence
level is promoted, validity might not be guaranteed.
To ensure the validity of the generated medical QA pairs,
we propose a retrieval and matching method to detect the key
information of QA pairs in an unsupervised way using unstructured text materials such as patients’ medical records,
textbooks, and research articles.
To promote the diversity of the generated medical QA
pairs while retaining validity, we propose two mechanisms
to incorporate structured, unstructured knowledge for QA
generation. We ﬁrst explore global phrase level diversity and
validity with a hierarchical Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE) framework, which models phrase level relationship in original medical QA pairs, and generates the
new pairs without breaking these relationships. We then propose a multi-pass decoder, in which all the local components

Abstract
Question answering (QA) has achieved promising progress
recently. However, answering a question in real-world scenarios like the medical domain is still challenging, due to the
requirement of external knowledge and the insufﬁcient quantity of high-quality training data. In the light of these challenges, we study the task of generating medical QA pairs
in this paper. With the insight that each medical question
can be considered as a sample from the latent distribution
of questions given answers, we propose an automated medical QA pair generation framework, consisting of an unsupervised key phrase detector that explores unstructured material for validity, and a generator that involves a multi-pass decoder to integrate structural knowledge for diversity. A series
of experiments have been conducted on a real-world dataset
collected from the National Medical Licensing Examination
of China. Both automatic evaluation and human annotation
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Further investigation shows that, by incorporating the generated
QA pairs for training, signiﬁcant improvement in terms of accuracy can be achieved for the examination QA system. 1

Introduction
Due to the remarkable breakthrough of deep learning and
natural language processing, question answering (QA) has
gained increasing popularity in the past few years. Among
QA’s broad application domains, medical QA is one of
the most appealing real-world application scenarios: People
tend to consult others about health-related issues on online
communities, which might be more affordable than visiting
doctors in resource-limited areas.
Although QA systems with deep learning methods have
achieved good performance, medical QA confronts particular difﬁculties against other domains. First, medical QA system requires highly accurate answers, and thus external and
professional knowledge gathered from various sources are
needed. Second, the size of available high-quality medical
QA pairs is limited, as the labeling process by medical experts is time-consuming and expensive. Therefore, the performance of medical QA system is further constrained by the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our full version paper with supplemented material is publicly
available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.00681.
8822

