The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

BOWL: Bayesian Optimization for Weight Learning in Probabilistic Soft Logic
Sriram Srinivasan

Golnoosh Farnadi

Lise Getoor

UC Santa Cruz
ssriniv9@ucsc.edu

Mila, Université de Montréal
farnadig@mila.quebec

UC Santa Cruz
getoor@ucsc.edu

search (Srinivasan et al. 2019), and social network analysis
(Farnadi et al. 2017).
Learning the weights of the rules is one of the key challenges for templated rule languages such as PSL, since the
weighted rules interact in complex ways and cannot be optimized independently. Because of their templated nature,
the weights, i.e., the parameters of the model, are used in
multiple places in the instantiated graphical model, and the
context varies depending on the other rules that have been
instantiated. In addition, the corresponding probability distribution is not easy to compute; speciﬁcally, computing the
normalization constant is often intractable.
Typically, the weights of the rules are learned through
maximizing some form of likelihood function (Bach et
al. 2013; Lowd and Domingos 2007; Singla and Domingos 2005; Kok and Domingos 2005; Chou et al. 2016;
Sarkhel et al. 2016; Das et al. 2016; Farabi, Sarkhel, and
Venugopal 2018). This is a well-motivated approach if the
downstream objective makes use of the probability density
function directly. However, the objective is to often improve
an external domain metric such as accuracy, F1 for classiﬁcation, or ROC for ranking. Several approaches address
this issue by augmenting the metric into a loss function and
solving a max-margin problem (Huynh and Mooney 2009;
2010; Bach et al. 2013). However, this does not directly optimize the desired metric but instead optimizes a surrogate
loss. Such approaches do not easily extend to new metrics as
they require deriving new losses, which may be non-convex
and hard to optimize.
In this paper, we introduce a Bayesian optimization
framework for ﬁnding the best weight conﬁguration in
PSL. The key advantage of our approach is that it directly optimizes the chosen domain performance metric and, unlike other approaches, does not require rederivation of the loss function for each metric. Our proposed approach, Bayesian optimization for weight learning (BOWL), is based on Gaussian process regression
(GPR) (Rasmussen and Williams 2005) in a Bayesian optimization (BO) (Mockus 1977) framework. BO is an effective approach for optimization of black-box functions (Lizotte et al. 2007; Martinez-Cantin et al. 2009; Srinivas et
al. 2012; Brochu, Brochu, and de Freitas 2010) and GPR
is a non-parametric Bayesian approach that is often used
to approximate arbitrary functions. GPRs have been used

Abstract
Probabilistic soft logic (PSL) is a statistical relational learning framework that represents complex relational models
with weighted ﬁrst-order logical rules. The weights of the
rules in PSL indicate their importance in the model and inﬂuence the effectiveness of the model on a given task. Existing weight learning approaches often attempt to learn a
set of weights that maximizes some function of data likelihood. However, this does not always translate to optimal
performance on a desired domain metric, such as accuracy
or F1 score. In this paper, we introduce a new weight learning approach called Bayesian optimization for weight learning (BOWL) based on Gaussian process regression that directly optimizes weights on a chosen domain performance
metric. The key to the success of our approach is a novel projection that captures the semantic distance between the possible weight conﬁgurations. Our experimental results show
that our proposed approach outperforms likelihood-based approaches and yields up to a 10% improvement across a variety
of performance metrics. Further, we performed experiments
to measure the scalability and robustness of our approach on
various realworld datasets.

1

Introduction

Statistical relational learning (SRL) frameworks (Richardson and Domingos 2006; De Raedt and Kersting 2011;
Getoor and Taskar 2007) combine the power of graphical
models with probabilistic programming to produce accurate
models on complex relational data. Probabilistic soft logic
(PSL) (Bach et al. 2017) is a recently developed SRL framework that makes use of weighted ﬁrst-order logical rules
to generate a special kind of Markov random ﬁeld (MRF)
called a hinge-loss Markov random ﬁeld (HL-MRF). Some
of the key distinguishing properties of PSL are, unlike other
SRL frameworks, random variables take continuous values
between 0 and 1 and the potential functions are deﬁned as
hinge losses (further details are given in Section 2.1). These
properties enable MAP inference in PSL to be cast as a convex optimization problem which makes inference in PSL
scalable. PSL has achieved state-of-the-art results in various
domains such as recommender systems (Kouki et al. 2017),
bioinformatics (Sridhar, Fakhraei, and Getoor 2016), natural language processing (Deng and Wiebe 2015), product
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10267

