The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fast and Deep Graph Neural Networks
Claudio Gallicchio, Alessio Micheli
Department of Computer Science, University of Pisa
Largo B. Pontecorvo, 3. 56127 Pisa, Italy
{gallicch, micheli}@di.unipi.it

make the embedding and subsequently the classiﬁcation
of the input hierarchical data. The main issue in extending such approaches to general graphs (cyclic/acyclic, directed/undirected) was the processing of cycles due to the
mutual dependencies occurring among the state variables
deﬁnitions represented in the neural recursive units. The earliest approaches for graphs were the Graph Neural Network
NN (GNN)(Scarselli et al. 2009) and the Neural Network for
Graphs (NN4G) (Micheli 2009). The GNN model is based
on a state transition system similar to the RecNN that allows cycles in the state computation, whereas the stability
of the recursive encoding process is guaranteed by resorting
to a contractive state dynamics (Banach theorem for ﬁxed
point), which in turn is obtained by imposing constraints to
the loss function (alternating learning and convergence of
the recursive dynamical system). In this approach, the context of each vertex is formed through graph diffusion during
the iteration to the convergence of state dynamics. Theoretical approximation capability and VC dimension of GNN
have been recently studied (Scarselli, Tsoi, and Hagenbuchner 2018).
The NN4G exploits the idea to treat the mutual dependencies among state variables managing them (architecturally)
through different layers. without the use of recursive units
(also providing an automatic divide et impera approach for
the architectural design). Instead of iterating at the same
layer, each vertex can take the context of the other vertices
computed in the previous layers, accessing progressively
to the entire graph context. Such idea for a compositional
embedding of vertices have been successively exploited in
many forms in the area of spatial approaches, or convolutional NN (CNN) for graphs, which all share the process
of traversing the graphs by neural units with weight sharing
(i.e. for CNN the weights are constrained to the neighbor
topology of all graph vertices instead of the 2D matrix), and
the construction through many layers moving to deep architectures (Micheli 2009; Zhang et al. 2018; Tran, Navarin,
and Sperduti 2018; Atwood and Towsley 2016; Niepert,
Ahmed, and Kutzkov 2016; Xu et al. 2018). There are
many other approaches in the ﬁeld, including spectral-based
NN approaches (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016) and kernel for graphs (Shervashidze et al. 2009; Ya-

Abstract
We address the efﬁciency issue for the construction of a deep
graph neural network (GNN). The approach exploits the idea
of representing each input graph as a ﬁxed point of a dynamical system (implemented through a recurrent neural network),
and leverages a deep architectural organization of the recurrent units. Efﬁciency is gained by many aspects, including the
use of small and very sparse networks, where the weights of
the recurrent units are left untrained under the stability condition introduced in this work. This can be viewed as a way to
study the intrinsic power of the architecture of a deep GNN,
and also to provide insights for the set-up of more complex
fully-trained models. Through experimental results, we show
that even without training of the recurrent connections, the architecture of small deep GNN is surprisingly able to achieve
or improve the state-of-the-art performance on a signiﬁcant
set of tasks in the ﬁeld of graphs classiﬁcation.

1

Introduction

Graphs are relevant data structures that provide an useful abstraction for many kind of real data, ranging from molecular
data to social and biological networks (just to mention the
most noteworthy cases), and for all the cases characterized
by data with relationships. The direct treatment of this kind
of data allows a Machine Learning (ML) system to consider
the vector patterns, which characterize the standard ﬂat domain, and the relationships among them, respecting in such a
way the inherent nature of the underlying structured domain.
It is not surprising, then, that there is a long tradition of
studies for the processing of structured data in ML, starting for the Neural Networks (NN) since the ’90s, up to
current increasing interest in the ﬁeld of deep learning for
graphs. Among the ﬁrst NN approaches we can mention the
Recursive Neural Network (RecNN) models for tree structured data in (Sperduti and Starita 1997; Frasconi, Gori, and
Sperduti 1998), and more recently in (Socher et al. 2011;
2013), which have been progressively extended to directed
acyclic graph (Micheli, Sona, and Sperduti 2004). Such approaches provided a neural implementation of a state transition system traversing the input structures in order to
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3898

