The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

REST: Performance Improvement of a Black
Box Model via RL-Based Spatial Transformation
Jae Myung Kim,* Hyungjin Kim,* Chanwoo Park,* Jungwoo Lee
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{goldkim92, hjkim, cpark}@cml.snu.ac.kr, junglee@snu.ac.kr

distribution. However, when the deep learning applications
are actually deployed in real-world settings, it is inevitable
to deal with real data generated from a different distribution from the training phase, and the performance cannot be guaranteed. As is the case with geometric variations caused by different poses, deformations, and viewpoints, it can be one of the major challenges that deep learning systems face in reality. To address this issue, several
studies have been reported in the literature(Xu et al. 2014;
Marcos, Volpi, and Tuia 2016; Follmann and Bottger 2018;
You et al. 2018; Worrall et al. 2017).
Apart from the issue of model performance on realworld data, automated decision-making systems are usually
opaque, which means we are not fully accessible to them.
The only thing we can observe is the input and the predicted
output of black box model. This raises a natural question
about the systems. How much should we trust the predictions of the black box system with the given input? Even
if we assume there is an indicator that tells us how much
we can trust, what actions should we take to obtain reliable
predictions if it tells us that the predicted result is highly uncertain?
For example, let us consider a car number recognition system. The embedded system outputs the predicted number
given a license plate. The predictions of the system are usually very accurate given the numbers with typical shapes.
However, a crumpled license plate by a car accident (e.g.
tilted number 7 written in the plate) would prevent the current system from recognizing the numbers accurately (e.g.
predicted as 1). The system would also have high uncertainty
in its prediction.
Motivated by the question above, this paper aims to spatially transform the input data to obtain the most reliable
predictions by applying the sequence of modiﬁed inputs to
the black-box model. If test data is not sampled from the
same distribution as the data used for training the black-box
model, the probability of false prediction increases. To improve accuracy and reliability of predictions, the test input
data should be transformed to follow the training data distribution of the black-box model. We refer to the transformation model as a transform learner. After the test data is modiﬁed by the transform learner, the black-box model maps the

Abstract
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNN) have become
a highly active area of research, and shown remarkable
achievements on a variety of computer vision tasks. DNNs,
however, are known to often make overconﬁdent yet incorrect predictions on out-of-distribution samples, which can
be a major obstacle to real-world deployments because the
training dataset is always limited compared to diverse realworld samples. Thus, it is fundamental to provide guarantees
of robustness to the distribution shift between training and
test time when we construct DNN models in practice. Moreover, in many cases, the deep learning models are deployed
as black boxes and the performance has been already optimized for a training dataset, thus changing the black box itself can lead to performance degradation. We here study the
robustness to the geometric transformations in a speciﬁc condition where the black-box image classiﬁer is given. We propose an additional learner, REinforcement Spatial Transform
learner (REST), that transforms the warped input data into
samples regarded as in-distribution by the black-box models. Our work aims to improve the robustness by adding a
REST module in front of any black boxes and training only
the REST module without retraining the original black box
model in an end-to-end manner, i.e. we try to convert the realworld data into training distribution which the performance of
the black-box model is best suited for. We use a conﬁdence
score that is obtained from the black-box model to determine
whether the transformed input is drawn from in-distribution.
We empirically show that our method has an advantage in
generalization to geometric transformations and sample efﬁciency.

Introduction
In the last few years, convolutional neural networks(CNNs)
have made great progress in visual recognition tasks such
as image classiﬁcation, object detection, and semantic segmentation(He et al. 2016; Redmon et al. 2016; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015). Although diverse CNN-based architectures have shown state-of-the-art performance in many
computer vision tasks, this result is based on the assumption that training and test data are drawn from the same
* Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11262

