The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Partial Multi-Label Learning with Label Distribution
Ning Xu, Yun-Peng Liu, Xin Geng∗
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{xning, yunpengliu, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Candidate labels

Abstract

house

Partial multi-label learning (PML) aims to learn from training examples each associated with a set of candidate labels,
among which only a subset are valid for the training example.
The common strategy to induce predictive model is trying to
disambiguate the candidate label set, such as identifying the
ground-truth label via utilizing the conﬁdence of each candidate label or estimating the noisy labels in the candidate label
sets. Nonetheless, these strategies ignore considering the essential label distribution corresponding to each instance since
the label distribution is not explicitly available in the training
set. In this paper, a new partial multi-label learning strategy
named P ML - LD is proposed to learn from partial multi-label
examples via label enhancement. Speciﬁcally, label distributions are recovered by leveraging the topological information
of the feature space and the correlations among the labels.
After that, a multi-class predictive model is learned by ﬁtting
a regularized multi-output regressor with the recovered label distributions. Experimental results on synthetic as well as
real-world datasets clearly validate the effectiveness of P ML LD for solving PML problems.

windmil
mountain
tree
pedestrian

Figure 1: An example of partial multi-label learning. In online object annotation, among the set of ﬁve candidate labels
given by the annotators, only three of them are valid ones (in
red) including house, mountain and tree.

predictor f : X → 2Y from D. Here, xi ∈ X is a qdimensional feature vector and Yi ⊆ Y is the set of candidate labels associated with xi . Partial multi-label learning takes the key assumption that the ground-truth labels
Yi ⊆ Y corresponding to xi reside in its candidate label set Yi , i.e. Yi ⊆ Yi , and therefore cannot be directly
accessed by the learning algorithm. Intuitively, the basic
strategy for coping with the PML problem is disambiguation, i.e. identifying the ground-truth labels from the candidate label sets. One recent attempt is utilizing the conﬁdence of each candidate label being the ground-truth one
(Xie and Huang 2018). Nonetheless, the conﬁdence scores
would be error-prone especially with the high proportion of
false positive labels since it ignores the irrelevance of the
non-candidate labels. Low-rank assumption is adopted to
identify the noisy labels for disambiguation (Yu et al. 2018;
Sun et al. 2019). For credible label elicitation techniques,
the ground-truth labels are identiﬁed from the candidate label set to make ﬁnal prediction on unseen instance (Fang and
Zhang 2019).
In order to handle the ambiguity in partial multi-label
learning, we can explicitly assign a description degree to
each label instead of disambiguation. The description dey
grees dxj of all the labels constitute a real-valued vector
called label distribution (Geng 2016), which describes the

Introduction
Partial multi-label learning deals with the problem where
each training example is associated with a set of candidate
labels, among which only a subset correspond to the groundtruth labels. In recent years, the need to learn from data with
partial multi-labels naturally arises in many real-world applications (Zhou 2018; Xie and Huang 2018). For instance,
in online object annotation (Figure 1), only some of the candidate labels given by the annotators are valid due to the
potential unreliable annotators. Partial multi-label learning
aims to induce a multi-label classiﬁer from PML training
examples, which can assign a set of proper labels for the
unseen instance.
Formally, let X = Rq be the q-dimensional feature space
and Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yc } be the output space with c possible class labels. Given the PML training set D = {(xi , Yi ) |
1 ≤ i ≤ m}, the task of PML is to induce a multi-label
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6510

