The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Visual Tactile Fusion Object Clustering
Tao Zhang,1,2 Yang Cong,1∗ Gan Sun,1,2† Qianqian Wang,3 Zhenming Ding4

State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences‡
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 Xidian University, 4 Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, USA
{zhangtaosia, congyang81, sungan1412}@gmail.com, qianqian174@foxmail.com, zd2@iu.edu
1

2

Abstract
Object clustering, aiming at grouping similar objects into one
cluster with an unsupervised strategy, has been extensivelystudied among various data-driven applications. However,
most existing state-of-the-art object clustering methods (e.g.,
single-view or multi-view clustering methods) only explore
visual information, while ignoring one of most important
sensing modalities, i.e., tactile information which can help
capture different object properties and further boost the performance of object clustering task. To effectively beneﬁt both
visual and tactile modalities for object clustering, in this paper, we propose a deep Auto-Encoder-like Non-negative Matrix Factorization framework for visual-tactile fusion clustering. Speciﬁcally, deep matrix factorization constrained by an
under-complete Auto-Encoder-like architecture is employed
to jointly learn hierarchical expression of visual-tactile fusion
data, and preserve the local structure of data generating distribution of visual and tactile modalities. Meanwhile, a graph
regularizer is introduced to capture the intrinsic relations of
data samples within each modality. Furthermore, we propose
a modality-level consensus regularizer to effectively align the
visual and tactile data in a common subspace in which the gap
between visual and tactile data is mitigated. For the model optimization, we present an efﬁcient alternating minimization
strategy to solve our proposed model. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on public datasets to verify the effectiveness of our framework.

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed visual-tactile fusion object clustering framework, where an under-complete
Auto-Encoder-like structure is used to preserve the local
structure of data generating distribution of visual and tactile modalities. With the consensus regularization, the gap
between visual and tactile modalities can be well mitigated.

RGB or Depth camera) or represented by different description methods (e.g., SURF, LBP or deep features). These
above methods have been successfully applied into statistics,
computer vision, biology or psychology (Wu et al. 2013;
Li, Kong, and Fu 2017; Li and Liu 2017; Liu et al. 2018;
Sun et al. 2019).
However, most existing object clustering works ignore
one of the important sensing modality, i.e., tactile information (e.g., hardness, force, and temperature), which casts a
light in compensating visual information on many practical manipulation tasks (Liu et al. 2016; Yuan et al. 2017).
For example, in the practical situation that a robot grasps
an apple, the visual information of the apple becomes unobservable due to the occlusion of a robot hand while the tactile information can be easily obtained. Some objects whose
appearance are visually similar can be hardly distinguished
via merely using visual information (e.g., ripe versus unripe
fruits). However, the ripe versus unripe fruits can be easily distinguished by tactile properties (e.g., hardness). Besides, some objects cannot be well distinguished only by either visual information or tactile information. For instance,

Introduction
Grouping a set of objects in an unsupervised way that objects in the same group (called a cluster) are more similar to each other than these in other groups (i.e., object
clustering) has attracted a lot attention in both academic
and industrial communities in the past decades. Most current object clustering works (Cao et al. 2015; Zhao, Ding,
and Fu 2017; Zhang et al. 2018a; 2018b; Yang et al. 2019;
Gan et al. 2020) aim at recognizing “similar behavior” based
on visual information captured by a visual camera (e.g.,
∗

The corresponding author is Prof. Yang Cong.
The author contributed equally to this work.
‡
This work is supported by NSFC (61821005, 61722311,
U1613214, 61533015), and LiaoNing Revitalization Talents Program(XLYC1807053).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10426

