The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GlobalTrack: A Simple and Strong Baseline for Long-Term Tracking
Lianghua Huang,1,2 Xin Zhao,1,2∗ Kaiqi Huang1,2,3
1

CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
huanglianghua2017@ia.ac.cn, {xzhao, kqhuang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
A key capability of a long-term tracker is to search for targets
in very large areas (typically the entire image) to handle possible target absences or tracking failures. However, currently
there is a lack of such a strong baseline for global instance
search. In this work, we aim to bridge this gap. Speciﬁcally,
we propose GlobalTrack, a pure global instance search based
tracker that makes no assumption on the temporal consistency
of the target’s positions and scales. GlobalTrack is developed
based on two-stage object detectors, and it is able to perform
full-image and multi-scale search of arbitrary instances with
only a single query as the guide. We further propose a crossquery loss to improve the robustness of our approach against
distractors. With no online learning, no punishment on position or scale changes, no scale smoothing and no trajectory reﬁnement, our pure global instance search based tracker
achieves comparable, sometimes much better performance
on four large-scale tracking benchmarks (i.e., 52.1% AUC
on LaSOT, 63.8% success rate on TLP, 60.3% MaxGM on
OxUvA and 75.4% normalized precision on TrackingNet),
compared to state-of-the-art approaches that typically require
complex post-processing. More importantly, our tracker runs
without cumulative errors, i.e., any type of temporary tracking failures will not affect its performance on future frames,
making it ideal for long-term tracking. We hope this work will
be a strong baseline for long-term tracking and will stimulate
future works in this area.

20

280

1780

30

1200

2040

50

520

3260

1

440

1350

GlobalTrack (Ours)

ATOM

SiamRPN++

DaSiam_LT

Figure 1: A comparison of our approach with state-of-theart trackers. ATOM (Danelljan et al. 2019), SiamRPN++ (Li
et al. 2019) and DaSiam LT (Zhu et al. 2018) work under the temporal consistency assumption that the target’s
state changes smoothly. However, as the ﬁgure shows, such
assumption does not necessarily hold. Under abrupt motion and temporary target absence, these trackers cannot locate the targets for long. Our approach GlobalTrack, a pure
global instance search based tracker, successfully handles
these challenges and provides robust tracking results.

Given an arbitrary, user-speciﬁed target in the ﬁrst frame, the
task of visual tracking is to locate it continuously in successive frames. Visual tracking has been widely used in many
ﬁelds such as surveillance, augmented reality, robotics and
video editing. Over the past decades, signiﬁcant progress
has been made in this area (Wu, Lim, and Yang 2015;
Valmadre et al. 2018; Huang, Zhao, and Huang 2018).
Most existing trackers work under a strong temporal
consistency assumption that the target’s position and scale
change smoothly. These approaches typically search within
a small window for the target and impose penalties on
large position and scale variations to limit the prediction
space (Bertinetto et al. 2016; Li et al. 2018; Huang, Zhao,

and Huang 2019; Danelljan et al. 2019). However, various
real-world challenges can break such assumption and cause
these approaches to fail. Figure 1 shows typical failure cases
of some state-of-the-art trackers, where under abrupt position and scale changes, target absences and temporary tracking failures, none of these approaches is able to consistently
locate the targets for long.
In this paper, we propose a baseline tracker that handles
these challenges using pure global instance search. The key
idea is to remove the locality assumption and enable the
tracker to search for the target at arbitrary positions and
scales, thereby avoiding cumulative errors during tracking.

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11037

