The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Schema-Guided Multi-Domain Dialogue State
Tracking with Graph Attention Neural Networks
Lu Chen, Boer Lv, Chi Wang, Su Zhu, Bowen Tan, Kai Yu∗
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
SpeechLab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{chenlusz, boerlv, wangchi16, paul2204, tanbowen, kai.yu}@sjtu.edu.cn

ods can be directly adapted to multi/mixed-domain conversations by replacing slots in a single domain with domainslot pairs (i.e. domain-speciﬁc slots) predeﬁned (Ramadan,
Budzianowski, and Gasic 2018; Gao et al. 2019; Wu et
al. 2019). Despite its simplicity, this approach for multidomain DST suffers from two major drawbacks: 1) Relations among domain-speciﬁc slots are not considered, e.g.,
hotel-price range and restaurant-price range are actually
the same and domain-independent. The slot relations may
also consist of whether two slots are from the same domain and whether two slots have the same value type (e.g.
location, day, date, time, number, bool etc.). 2) The approach extracts value for each slot independently, which may
fail to capture features from slot co-occurrences. For example, hotels with higher stars are usually more expensive
(price range). These may aggravate the data sparsity problem.
To tackle these challenges, we emphasize that DST models should incorporate slot relations and support information interactions among different slots. To consider relations
among domain-speciﬁc slots, we introduce schema graphs.
In the graph, each node is a slot, and each edge between
two slots means that they are from the same domain, or they
have the same value type. To encode the graph and make information interactions among different slots, we adopt graph
attention networks (GATs).
In this paper, we propose a schema-guided multi-domain
dialogue state tracker with GATs. It is elegant to utilize
GATs to extract schema information. Our approaches are
evaluated on MultiWOZ 2.0 and MultiWOZ 2.1 benchmarks
with extensive experiments. Contributions in this work are
summarized as:
• We are the ﬁrst to incorporate slot relations and model
slot interactions in multi-domain DST to the best of our
knowledge. This is also the ﬁrst time that graph neural
networks are exploited in DST.
• To fully encode the schema graph and dialogue context
(user and system utterances), graph attention matching
networks (GAMTs) are introduced in this paper, which
include internal and external attention mechanisms.
• To exploit previous states in conversations, a novel recurrent GAT (RGAT) is proposed with gated recurrent units

Abstract
Dialogue state tracking (DST) aims at estimating the current
dialogue state given all the preceding conversation. For multidomain DST, the data sparsity problem is also a major obstacle due to the increased number of state candidates. Existing approaches generally predict the value for each slot independently and do not consider slot relations, which may aggravate the data sparsity problem. In this paper, we propose
a Schema-guided multi-domain dialogue State Tracker with
graph attention networks (SST) that predicts dialogue states
from dialogue utterances and schema graphs which contain
slot relations in edges. We also introduce a graph attention
matching network to fuse information from utterances and
graphs, and a recurrent graph attention network to control
state updating. Experiment results show that our approach obtains new state-of-the-art performance on both MultiWOZ 2.0
and MultiWOZ 2.1 benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Dialogue state tracking (DST) is a key component in taskoriented dialogue systems which cover certain narrow domains, such as booking restaurant and travel planning. The
goal of DST is to extract user goals or intents hidden in
human-machine conversation and represent them as a compact dialogue state, i.e. a set of slots and their corresponding values. For example, as illustrated in Fig. 1, (slot, value)
pairs like (area, west) are extracted from the dialogue. Highqualiﬁed DST is essential for dialogue management (Young
et al. 2013; Yu et al. 2014), where dialogue state determines
the next machine action and system reply.
Recently, motivated by commercial applications like Apple Siri, Microsoft Cortana, Amazon Alexa, or Google Assistant, there is signiﬁcant interest in adding numerous domains to these dialogue systems. Therefore, multi-domain
based DST becomes crucial.
However, most traditional state tracking approaches focus on a single domain. They extract value for each slot
predeﬁned in the domain (Williams et al. 2013; Henderson, Thomson, and Williams 2014a; 2014b). These meth∗

Kai Yu is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7521

