The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Filling Conversation Ellipsis for Better Social Dialog Understanding
Xiyuan Zhang,1 Chengxi Li,1 Dian Yu,2 Samuel Davidson,2 Zhou Yu2
1

Zhejiang University, 2 University of California, Davis
{zhangxiyuan, chengxili}@zju.edu.cn, {diayu, ssdavidson, joyu}@ucdavis.edu

tem’s previous question instead of asking a new question.

Abstract
The phenomenon of ellipsis is prevalent in social conversations. Ellipsis increases the difﬁculty of a series of downstream language understanding tasks, such as dialog act prediction and semantic role labeling. We propose to resolve ellipsis through automatic sentence completion to improve language understanding. However, automatic ellipsis completion
can result in output which does not accurately reﬂect user intent. To address this issue, we propose a method which considers both the original utterance that has ellipsis and the automatically completed utterance in dialog act and semantic
role labeling tasks. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst complete user utterances to resolve ellipsis using an end-to-end pointer network model. We then train a prediction model using both utterances containing ellipsis and our automatically completed
utterances. Finally, we combine the prediction results from
these two utterances using a selection model that is guided
by expert knowledge. Our approach improves dialog act prediction and semantic role labeling by 1.3% and 2.5% in F1
score respectively in social conversations. We also present an
open-domain human-machine conversation dataset with manually completed user utterances and annotated semantic role
labeling after manual completion.

System Utterance

User Response
(original)

User Response
(completed)

If you got the
chance to ask the
director of that
movie one
question, what
would it be?

What’s up with
that scene at
the end.

I would ask
what’s up with
that scene at
the end.

Have you read any
other books by the
same author?

Okay. (Let’s
change
conversation.)

Okay I have
read any other
books by the
same author.

Table 1: Examples of original user utterance and automatically completed utterance. Italics represents the automatically completed portion. The utterance in parentheses is the
user utterance in the next turn.
A possible way to resolve semantic ambiguity caused by
ellipsis is to train a model that can automatically complete
sentences with ellipsis. However, automatic completion may
introduce errors that can lead to other misunderstandings
in downstream tasks. For example, automatically completed
utterances might repeat or miss some words. Automatically
completed utterances may even result in nonsensical sentences. As shown in Table 1, the user says “okay” and pauses
before saying “let’s change conversation”. Due to an ASR issue, the system ends the user’s turn during the pause. However, our automatic completion model might complete the
original “okay” to be “okay I have read any other books
by the same author”, which misleads the system that the
user is expressing agreement. To mitigate the impact of
such completion errors, we propose a hybrid framework that
considers both utterances with ellipsis and their automatically completed counterparts, Hybrid-ELlipsis-CoMPlete
(Hybrid-EL-CMP), to improve language understanding. We
evaluate the performance on two speciﬁc tasks: dialog act
prediction and semantic role labeling. We believe other understanding tasks such as syntactic and semantic parsing
could also leverage this framework. Hybrid-EL-CMP outperforms models which consider only the original utterances
or the automatically completed utterances, respectively.

Introduction
Ellipsis, in which a speaker omits words that are understood
from context, is a frequent phenomenon in human conversation. Although natural to humans, ellipsis poses a challenge for language understanding in spoken dialog systems.
We ﬁnd that among 2,000 sample utterances in the Alexa
Prize social conversations, about 50% of the utterances contain some degree of ellipsis. While humans are generally
able to resolve elided elements from context, it is difﬁcult
for chatbots to do the same. Ellipsis can negatively impact
the accuracy of language understanding in deployable social
chatbots. For example, Table 1 shows an example of a user
utterance with ellipsis. It is difﬁcult to tell whether “what’s
up with that scene at the end” is a question or an answer
to the previous question. However, if we complete the utterance considering the context, we obtain “I would ask what’s
up with that scene at the end”. It is then easy to understand
that the user is stating their opinion with respect to the sysc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9587

