The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Strategyproof Mechanisms for Friends and Enemies Games
Michele Flammini, Bojana Kodric, Giovanna Varricchio
Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy
{michele.ﬂammini, bojana.kodric, giovanna.varricchio}@gssi.it

(FHGs) (Aziz et al. 2019; Bilò et al. 2018). In ASHGs the
utility achieved by an agent in a coalition is the sum of the
values she gives to the single participants, and in FHGs the
same summand is divided by the size of her coalition. For a
clear picture of HGs, their subclasses, and the main investigates stability concepts, see (Aziz and Savani 2016).
Traditionally, in HGs and CFGs the focus has been
put onto the existence and efﬁciency of several solution
concepts, based either on individual (Bloch and Diamantoudi 2011; Feldman, Lewin-Eytan, and Naor 2015; Gairing and Savani 2019) or group deviations (Bogomolnaia
and Jackson 2002; Banerjee, Konishi, and Sönmez 2001;
Elkind and Wooldridge 2009; Gairing and Savani 2019;
Igarashi and Elkind 2016), Nash stability and core stability
being the main non-cooperative and cooperative notions, respectively. In this setting, given agents’ preferences, one can
compute an outcome, i.e., a partition of the agents, which
is stable, while trying to maximize the global happiness of
the participants, also called social welfare. However, while
most of the work in the literature implicitly assumes that
preferences are known in advance, agents may act strategically by misreporting them in order to achieve a better individual outcome. To avoid this situation, the mechanism design framework allows to split agents into coalitions in a way
such that they are incentivized to truthfully report their preferences (Nisan et al. 2007).
In such a setting, we focus on a subclass of HGs in which
agents have only either a positive or a negative opinion of the
others, considering them either friends or enemies. This type
of games, called Friends and Enemies Games, have been introduced by (Dimitrov et al. 2006), where two different types
of preference proﬁles are studied: Friends Appreciation (FA)
and Enemies Aversion (EA). Under FA, agents prefer coalitions with a higher number of friends. When the number of
friends is equal, they prefer a coalition with a smaller number of enemies. Conversely, under EA, agents always prefer
coalitions with a smaller number of enemies and, in case of
a tie, they prefer coalitions with a bigger number of friends.
Our aim is to design strategyproof mechanisms for both
FA and EA preference proﬁles, improving upon the previously proposed solutions to this problem (Dimitrov and
Sung 2004), both in terms of social welfare of the computed

Abstract
We investigate strategyproof mechanisms for Friends and Enemies Games, a subclass of Hedonic Games in which every
agent classiﬁes any other one as a friend or as an enemy. In
this setting, we consider the two classical scenarios proposed
in the literature, called Friends Appreciation (FA) and Enemies Aversion (EA). Roughly speaking, in the former each
agent gives priority to the number of friends in her coalition,
while in the latter to the number of enemies.
We provide strategyproof mechanisms for both settings.
More precisely, for FA we ﬁrst present a deterministic napproximation mechanism, and then show that a much better result can be accomplished by resorting to randomization. Namely, we provide a randomized mechanism whose
expected approximation ratio is 4, and arbitrarily close
√ to 4
with high probability. For EA, we give a simple (1 + 2)napproximation mechanism, and show that its performance
is asymptotically tight by proving that it is NP-hard to approximate the optimal solution within O(n1−ε ) for any ﬁxed
ε > 0.
Finally, we show how to extend our results in the presence of
neutrals, i.e., when agents can also be indifferent about other
agents, and we discuss anonymity.

Introduction
Hedonic Games (HGs), introduced by (Dreze and Greenberg 1980), are Coalitions Formation Games (CFGs) where
agents have hedonic preferences, i.e., the preference of each
agent depends only on the coalition she belongs to and not
on how the other agents aggregate.
HGs have been widely studied in the literature (see for instance (Aziz, Brandt, and Harrenstein 2013; Aziz, Brandt,
and Seedig 2013; Banerjee, Konishi, and Sönmez 2001;
Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002; Elkind and Wooldridge
2009; Elkind, Fanelli, and Flammini 2016; Gairing and
Savani 2019)). According to the assumptions made on
the preference proﬁles, we distinguish different subclasses, among others Additively Separable Hedonic Games
(ASHGs) (Banerjee, Konishi, and Sönmez 2001; Aziz,
Brandt, and Seedig 2011) and Fractional Hedonic Games
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1950

