The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Maximum Likelihood Embedding of Logistic Random Dot Product Graphs
Luke J. O’Connor

Muriel Medard

Soheil Feizi

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
415 Main St,
Cambridge, MA 02142
loconnor@broadinstitute.org

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave,
Cambridge, MA 02139
medard@mit.edu

University of Maryland
8125 Paint Branch Drive,
College Park, MD 20742
sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

is given by the eigenvectors of a normalized adjacency
matrix or Laplacian. A post-processing step, typically kmeans, is used to extract clusters from these eigenvectors
(Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2002; Von Luxburg 2007). Different matrix normalizations/transformations include Modularity (Girvan and Newman 2002), Laplacian (Mohar et
al. 1991), normalized Laplacian (Chung and Graham 1997;
Shi and Malik 2000; Rohe et al. 2011), and Bethe Hessian (Saade, Krzakala, and Zdeborová 2014). These methods are often characterized theoretically in the context of
the Stochastic Block Model (SBM) (Holland, Laskey, and
Leinhardt 1983), a simple and canonical model of community structure. Theoretical bounds on the detectability
of network structure for large networks have been established for stochastic block models (Decelle et al. 2011;
Mossel, Neeman, and Sly 2012; 2018; Massoulié 2014).
Several spectral methods have been shown to achieve this
recovery threshold (Saade, Krzakala, and Zdeborová 2014;
Krzakala et al. 2013; Newman 2006). Strong theoretical and
empirical results have also been obtained using SDP-based
(Amini, Levina, and others 2018; Hajek, Wu, and Xu 2016)
and Belief Propagation-based (Decelle et al. 2011) methods, which often have higher computational complexity than
spectral methods. A threshold has also been discovered for
perfect clustering, i.e. when community structure can be recovered with zero errors (Abbe, Bandeira, and Hall 2015;
Hajek, Wu, and Xu 2016).
An alternative approach to the clustering problem is to invoke a latent space model. Each node is assigned a latent
position vi , and the edges of the graph are drawn independently with probability pij = g(vi , vj ) for some g(·). Hoff
et al. (Hoff, Raftery, and Handcock 2002) considered two
latent space models, the ﬁrst of which was a distance model,
Pi,j = l(−||vi −vj ||−μ+βxij ), l(x) = 1/(1+exp(−x))
where edge probabilities depend on the Euclidean distance
between two nodes. xij is a ﬁxed covariate term, which
is not learned. Their second model is called a projection
model:
vi · vj
Pi,j = l(
+ βxij − μ).
(1)
||vj ||
Hoff et al. suggest to perform inference using an MCMC
approach over both models. Focusing on the distance model,

Abstract
A latent space model for a family of random graphs assigns real-valued vectors to nodes of the graph such that edge
probabilities are determined by latent positions. Latent space
models provide a natural statistical framework for graph visualizing and clustering. A latent space model of particular
interest is the Random Dot Product Graph (RDPG), which
can be ﬁt using an efﬁcient spectral method; however, this
method is based on a heuristic that can fail, even in simple
cases. Here, we consider a closely related latent space model,
the Logistic RDPG, which uses a logistic link function to map
from latent positions to edge likelihoods. Over this model,
we show that asymptotically exact maximum likelihood inference of latent position vectors can be achieved using an efﬁcient spectral method. Our method involves computing top
eigenvectors of a normalized adjacency matrix and scaling
eigenvectors using a regression step. The novel regression
scaling step is an essential part of the proposed method. In
simulations, we show that our proposed method is more accurate and more robust than common practices. We also show
the effectiveness of our approach over standard real networks
of the karate club and political blogs.

Introduction
Clustering over graphs is a classical problem with applications in systems biology, social sciences, and other ﬁelds
(Girvan and Newman 2002; Art, Sergiy, and others 2009;
Mishra et al. 2007; Lee, Hoehn-Weiss, and Karim 2016).
Although most formulations of the clustering problem are
NP-hard (Šı́ma and Schaeffer 2006), several approaches
have yielded useful approximate algorithms. The most wellstudied approach is spectral clustering. Most spectral methods are not based on a particular generative network model;
alternative, model-based approaches have also been proposed, using loopy belief propagation (Decelle et al. 2011),
variational Bayes (Airoldi et al. 2008), Gibbs sampling (Snijders and Nowicki 1997), and semideﬁnite programming
(Hajek, Wu, and Xu 2016; Amini, Levina, and others 2018).
Many spectral clustering methods are derived by proposing a discrete optimization problem, and relaxing it to
obtain a continuous, convex optimization whose solution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5289

