The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Age Progression and Regression with Spatial Attention Modules
Qi Li,1,2,3∗ Yunfan Liu,1,5∗ Zhenan Sun,1,2,4,5
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
3
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, CAS, Jiaozhou, Qingdao, China
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{qli, znsun}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, yunfan.liu@cripac.ia.ac.cn
0-3

Abstract
Age progression and regression refers to aesthetically rendering a given face image to present effects of face aging and
rejuvenation, respectively. Although numerous studies have
been conducted in this topic, there are two major problems:
1) multiple models are usually trained to simulate different
age mappings, and 2) the photo-realism of generated face images is heavily inﬂuenced by the variation of training images
in terms of pose, illumination, and background. To address
these issues, in this paper, we propose a framework based
on conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (cGANs) to
achieve age progression and regression simultaneously. Particularly, since face aging and rejuvenation are largely different in terms of image translation patterns, we model these
two processes using two separate generators, each dedicated
to one age changing process. In addition, we exploit spatial
attention mechanisms to limit image modiﬁcations to regions
closely related to age changes, so that images with high visual ﬁdelity could be synthesized for in-the-wild cases. Experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate the ability of our
model in synthesizing lifelike face images at desired ages
with personalized features well preserved, and keeping ageirrelevant regions unchanged.

4-11

12-17

18-29 30-40

41-55 56-65 66-80 81-116

Age Progression
Age Regression

Figure 1: Samples results of age progression and regression
generated by the proposed method. Red boxes indicate input
face images. Clearly, in the age regression process, common
patterns of facial appearance change are shared by different
subjects (e.g. bigger eyes and more smooth skin), and this is
also true for the age progression process (e.g. more wrinkles
and deeper laugh lines).

parametric anatomical models to describe face aging procedure. Burt et al. (Burt and Perrett 1995) studied visual cues
to age by using facial composites which blend shape and
color information from multiple faces. It is one of the early
works for face aging. O’Toole et al. (O’toole et al. 1997)
suggested that the distinctiveness of a face, which is deﬁned
as its distance from the average face in a 3D face space, is
related to facial age. Then Tiddeman et al. (Tiddeman, Burt,
and Perrett 2001) presented a wavelet based methods for
prototyping facial textures and then transformed it for different age groups. A craniofacial growth model that characterizes face aging effects was proposed in (Ramanathan and
Chellappa 2006). In the following, they further proposed a
two step approach towards face aging in adults (Ramanathan
and Chellappa 2008), which comprises a shape variation
model and a texture variation model.
With the success of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) in generating visually appealing images, many efforts have been made to solve age
progression and regression using GAN-based frameworks.
There have been two key research directions in age progression for GAN-based methods: single model synthesis and
multiple model synthesis. Single model synthesis refers to

Introduction
The target of age progression and regression is predicting
the appearance of a given face at different ages. An increased research activity in the area of facial aging simulation is recorded in the last two decades. Its applications
range from social security to digital entertainment, such as
cross-age identiﬁcation and face age editing. Despite the appealing practical value, the lack of labeled age data of the
same subject covering a large time span and the great change
in appearance over a long time interval collectively make age
progression and regression a difﬁcult problem.
Many approaches have been proposed to tackle this issue.
They can be roughly divided into two types: traditional face
aging methods and deep learning based face aging methods.
Traditional face aging methods utilize prototype images or
∗

Authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11378

