The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Visual Relationship Detection with Low
Rank Non-Negative Tensor Decomposition
Mohammed Haroon Dupty,∗ Zhen Zhang, Wee Sun Lee
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
{dmharoon, leews}@comp.nus.edu.sg, zhen@zzhang.org

Abstract
We address the problem of Visual Relationship Detection
(VRD) which aims to describe the relationships between pairs
of objects in the form of triplets of (subject, predicate, object). We observe that given a pair of bounding box proposals,
objects often participate in multiple relations implying the
distribution of triplets is multimodal. We leverage the strong
correlations within triplets to learn the joint distribution of
triplet variables conditioned on the image and the bounding
box proposals, doing away with the hitherto used independent
distribution of triplets. To make learning the triplet joint distribution feasible, we introduce a novel technique of learning
conditional triplet distributions in the form of their normalized low rank non-negative tensor decompositions. Normalized tensor decompositions take form of mixture distributions
of discrete variables and thus are able to capture multimodality. This allows us to efﬁciently learn higher order discrete
multimodal distributions and at the same time keep the parameter size manageable. We further model the probability of
selecting an object proposal pair and include a relation triplet
prior in our model. We show that each part of the model improves performance and the combination outperforms stateof-the-art score on the Visual Genome (VG) and Visual Relationship Detection (VRD) datasets.

Figure 1: Visual relationships are deﬁned with triplets of
(subject - predicate - object). Multiple predicates may exist
between a pair of box proposals suggesting the distribution
of triplets given box proposals is often multimodal. We represent this conditional triplet distribution as normalized low
rank tensor decomposition. This representation takes form
of mixture distribution of triplet variables thus capturing the
multimodality while being efﬁciently learnable.

the objects along with predicting the relationship that pairs
of objects participate in.
State-of-the-art methods for visual relationship detection
(Dai, Zhang, and Lin 2017; Xu et al. 2017; Liang, Lee, and
Xing 2017; Zhu and Jiang 2018) solve the problem in two
stages: an objects proposal stage that uses object detection to
propose a set of object bounding box proposals that may participate in relations within the image, and a relation recognition stage that outputs a set of possible relation triplets
given the set of bounding box proposals provided by the objects proposal stage. In this paper, we focus on the relation
recognition stage. Our main observation is that multiple relations often exist between a pair of box proposals in an image: for example, in Figure 1, the relations <person - next
to - horse>, <person - in front of - horse> and <person hold - horse> are all valid. This suggests that the distribution of triplets, given a pair of objects, is often multimodal
with multiple valid relations occurring between a pair of objects. Any learning model with a single separate output for
object and predicate classes cannot represent such a multimodal distribution.
In this work, we use a neural network to model the prob-

Introduction
Object detection is a central problem in computer vision.
Recent deep learning approaches (Ren et al. 2015; Girshick
et al. 2014) have made long strides in the task of object detection. However, real world images often involve multiple
objects that interact with each other. Much can be said about
the image if we can reason object interactions with each
other in addition to detection. Reasoning about the relationships objects participate in provides a powerful method for
capturing mid-level information that is useful for computer
vision tasks; for example, in image captioning, richer captions can be generated if objects as well as the relationships
between objects in the image is provided. The task of Visual Relationship Detection aims to recognize and localize
∗

corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10737

