The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improving Policies via Search in Cooperative Partially Observable Games
Adam Lerer

Hengyuan Hu

Jakob Foerster

Noam Brown

Facebook AI Research
alerer@fb.com

Facebook AI Research
hengyuan@fb.com

Facebook AI Research
jnf@fb.com

Facebook AI Research
noambrown@fb.com

Despite the importance of these cooperative settings to
real-world applications, most recent progress on AI in largescale games has been restricted to zero-sum settings where
agents compete against each other, typically rendering communication useless. Search has been a key component in
reaching professional-level performance in zero-sum games,
including backgammon (Tesauro 1994), chess (Campbell,
Hoane Jr, and Hsu 2002), Go (Silver et al. 2016; 2017;
2018), and poker (Moravčı́k et al. 2017; Brown and Sandholm 2017; 2019).
Inspired by the success of search techniques in these
zero-sum settings, in this paper we propose methods for
agents to conduct search given an agreed-upon ‘convention’ policy (which we call the blueprint policy) in cooperative partially observable games. We refer to these techniques collectively as Search for Partially Observing Teams
of Agents (SPARTA). In the ﬁrst method, a single agent performs search assuming all other agents play according to the
blueprint policy. This allows the search agent to treat the
known policy of other agents as part of the environment and
maintain beliefs about the hidden information based on others’ actions.
In the second method, multiple agents can perform search
simultaneously but must simulate the search procedure of
other agents in order to understand why they took the actions they did. We propose a modiﬁcation to the multi-agent
search procedure - retrospective belief updates - that allows
agents to fall back to the blueprint policy when it is too expensive to compute their beliefs, which can drastically reduce the amount of computation while allowing for multiagent search in most situations.
Going from just the blueprint policy, to single-agent
search, to multi-agent search each empirically improves performance at the cost of increased computation. Additionally,
we prove that SPARTA cannot result in a lower expected
value than the blueprint policy except for an error term that
decays in the number of Monte Carlo (MC) rollouts.
We test these techniques in Hanabi, which has been proposed as a new benchmark challenge problem for AI research (Bard et al. 2019). Hanabi is a popular fully cooperative, partially observable card game with limited communication. Most prior agents for Hanabi have been developed

Abstract
Recent superhuman results in games have largely been
achieved in a variety of zero-sum settings, such as Go and
Poker, in which agents need to compete against others. However, just like humans, real-world AI systems have to coordinate and communicate with other agents in cooperative partially observable environments as well. These settings commonly require participants to both interpret the actions of others and to act in a way that is informative when being interpreted. Those abilities are typically summarized as theory of
mind and are seen as crucial for social interactions. In this
paper we propose two different search techniques that can be
applied to improve an arbitrary agreed-upon policy in a cooperative partially observable game. The ﬁrst one, single-agent
search, effectively converts the problem into a single agent
setting by making all but one of the agents play according
to the agreed-upon policy. In contrast, in multi-agent search
all agents carry out the same common-knowledge search procedure whenever doing so is computationally feasible, and
fall back to playing according to the agreed-upon policy otherwise. We prove that these search procedures are theoretically guaranteed to at least maintain the original performance
of the agreed-upon policy (up to a bounded approximation
error). In the benchmark challenge problem of Hanabi, our
search technique greatly improves the performance of every
agent we tested and when applied to a policy trained using
RL achieves a new state-of-the-art score of 24.61 / 25 in the
game, compared to a previous-best of 24.08 / 25.

Introduction
Real-world situations such as driving require humans to coordinate with others in a partially-observable environment
with limited communication. In such environments, humans
have a mental model of how other agents will behave in different situations (theory of mind). This model allows them to
change their beliefs about the world based on why they think
an agent acted as they did, as well as predict how their own
actions will affect others’ future behavior. Together, these
capabilities allow humans to search for a good action to take
while accounting for the behavior of others.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7187

