The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Topic Enhanced Sentiment Spreading
Model in Social Networks Considering User Interest
Xiaobao Wang,1 Di Jin,1,∗ Katarzyna Musial,2 Jianwu Dang1,3
2

1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China,
Advanced Analytics Institute, School of Software, University of Technology Sydney, Australia,
3
School of Information Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Japan
{wxbxmt, jindi}@tju.edu.cn, katarzyna.musial-gabrys@uts.edu.au, jdang@jaist.ac.jp

Abstract
Existing methods

1

Tweet Topic distribution
User interest
Learn
Refine

User1

Predefine

User3

Mismatch

Emotion is a complex emotional state, which can affect our
physiology and psychology and lead to behavior changes.
The spreading process of emotions in the text-based social
networks is referred to as sentiment spreading. In this paper,
we study an interesting problem of sentiment spreading in
social networks. In particular, by employing a text-based social network (Twitter) , we try to unveil the correlation between users’ sentimental statuses and topic distributions embedded in the tweets, then to automatically learn the inﬂuence strength between linked users. Furthermore, we introduce user interest to reﬁne the inﬂuence strength. We develop
a uniﬁed probabilistic framework to formalize the problem
into a topic-enhanced sentiment spreading model. The model
can predict users’ sentimental statuses based on their historical emotional status, topic distributions in tweets and social
structures. Experiments on the Twitter dataset show that the
proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms several alternative
methods in predicting users’ sentimental status. We also discover an intriguing phenomenon that positive and negative
sentiment is more relevant to user interest than neutral ones.
Our method offers a new opportunity to understand the underlying mechanism of sentimental spreading in online social
networks.

User1

Learn

User3

User2

User2

Learn

Suggest

(a)

(b)
Tweet Topic distribution

Tweet Topic distribution

Figure 1: Example scenarios of topic enhanced sentiment
spreading. The arrows indicate the direction of sentiment
spreading and strength. (a) indicates the situation when
adding the topic enhanced mechanism directly into existing methods, and there exists a disparity between the information of network topologies and topic distributions of
user-generated content; (b) is our method that automatically
balance the effect of these two information and learn the
strength, reﬁned by the correlation between user3’s interest
and topic distribution of tweets posted by neighbors.

Introduction

Sentiment spreading is a process in which a person or
group inﬂuences the sentiment or behavior of another person
or group, which has attracted considerable research effort.
Information diffusion (Wang et al. 2014; 2015) offers a basic
condition for sentiment spreading. Several methods based
on information diffusion are proposed to study the process
of sentiment spreading. For example, (Zhao et al. 2014) proposed a model for sentiment contagion to spread two sentiments: positive and negative. (Wang et al. 2017) categorized
information cascades into ﬁne-grained classes and proposed
an emotion-based independent cascade model to study the
process of sentiment spreading. (Xiong et al. 2018) also proposed an emotional independent cascade model while considering the effect of heterogeneous social networks. These
methods use exclusively the information of network topologies (e.g., in-degree and out-degree) or user behaviors (e.g.,
retweeting and mention), to predeﬁne the inﬂuence strength
between linked users.

With the transformation in Web usage, from information
production to information consumption and sharing, numerous social media services, e.g., Facebook and Twitter,
have emerged. More and more people are willing to express
opinions of events or hot topics. The opinions contain subjects and sentiments, which could be spread by social networks (Guillory et al. 2011). (Kramer, Guillory, and Hancock 2014) found that emotional status can be transferred to
others via emotion contagion through a massive experiment
on Facebook. (Yang et al. 2016) also found that emotional
contagion occurs in image social networks. The contagion
process of emotions in text-based social networks is referred
to as sentiment spreading (Wang et al. 2017).
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
989

