The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

PulseSatellite: A Tool Using Human-AI Feedback
Loops for Satellite Image Analysis in Humanitarian Contexts
Tomaz Logar,1 Joseph Bullock,1,2 Edoardo Nemni,3 Lars Bromley,3
John A. Quinn,1 Miguel Luengo-Oroz1
1

United Nations Global Pulse 2 Institute for Data Science, Durham University 3 UNOSAT
{tomaz, miguel}@unglobalpulse.org

lend themselves to support with AI tools; however, each speciﬁc analysis scenario can have distinct features (such as a
certain type of shelter construction) which are not all feasible to handle with a single pre-trained system. Therefore,
the PulseSatellite system allows users to ﬁne-tune a hierarchy of models as shown in Figure 1, thus including expert
knowledge through a human-in-the-loop system. For example, the generic shelter detection model may be ﬁne tuned
progressively to a model specialized for desert terrain, then
to another which is speciﬁc to a different scenario (such as
the camp in Figure 2). Any of these models can then be used
as starting points for new scenarios. On-the-ﬂy evaluation
helps the analyst to determine whether the assessment quality is good enough for release, in which case detection results can be exported. These steps can all be carried out via
the web front end and with multiple remote collaborators.

Abstract
Humanitarian response to natural disasters and conﬂicts can
be assisted by satellite image analysis. In a humanitarian context, very speciﬁc satellite image analysis tasks must be done
accurately and in a timely manner to provide operational support. We present PulseSatellite, a collaborative satellite image analysis tool which leverages neural network models that
can be retrained on-the ﬂy and adapted to speciﬁc humanitarian contexts and geographies. We present two case studies,
in mapping shelters and ﬂoods respectively, that illustrate the
capabilities of PulseSatellite.

Introduction
When dealing with conﬂict and humanitarian crises, accurate and timely satellite image analysis is key to supporting
critical operations on the ground. Use cases include monitoring population displacement, settlement mapping, damage assessment, ﬁre detection associated with human rights
violations, damage to transportation networks, ﬂoods assessment or identifying direct impact of earthquakes, volcanoes,
cyclones and landslides (Lang et al. 2015). In these contexts,
automated processes providing vital information in decision
making must be carefully validated and tuned to maximal
performance since e.g. a false positive may be detrimental to
human life. While there exist several general purpose satellite image analysis tools, few are designed and optimized
for humanitarian use cases. PulseSatellite is a tool to analyze satellite imagery assisted by neural networks that seeks
to incorporate humans-in-the-loop at different stages in the
model inference process to enable optimal results and expert
validation in humanitarian contexts. The conceptual framework used to implement and deploy PulseSatellite has been
previously presented in (Quinn et al. 2018).

PulseSatellite Machine Learning Framework
PulseSatellite is designed to host a variety of specialised
models, ﬁne-tuned for different functionalities. Given that
each scenario may require different outputs, the tool must
be dynamic such that new models can be trained in realtime (as users provide feedback on detection results), and
easily adaptable to new situations. In this section we explore
a series of case studies demonstrating a cross-section of humanitarian contexts PulseSatellite is being used to tackle.

PulseSatellite Functionalities
The tool enables the performance of such speciﬁc humanitarian tasks as identifying and counting structures in refugee
settlements and rapid mapping ﬂooded areas after a natural
disaster. These tasks can be repetitive in nature, and hence

Figure 1: Detail of PulseSatellite showing a panel that allows
the selection of a trained network from a hierarchy of models
adapted to different use cases.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13628

