The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Variational Autoencoder with Deep
Embedding Model for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Peirong Ma, Xiao Hu*
School of mechanical and electrical engineering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China
mpr_666@163.com, huxiao@gzhu.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) is a challenging task
that aims to recognize not only unseen classes unavailable
during training, but also seen classes used at training stage.
It is achieved by transferring knowledge from seen classes
to unseen classes via a shared semantic space (e.g. attribute
space). Most existing GZSL methods usually learn a crossmodal mapping between the visual feature space and the
semantic space. However, the mapping model learned only
from the seen classes will produce an inherent bias when
used in the unseen classes. In order to tackle such a problem, this paper integrates a deep embedding network (DE)
and a modified variational autoencoder (VAE) into a novel
model (DE-VAE) to learn a latent space shared by both image features and class embeddings. Specifically, the proposed model firstly employs DE to learn the mapping from
the semantic space to the visual feature space, and then utilizes VAE to transform both original visual features and the
features obtained by the mapping into latent features. Finally, the latent features are used to train a softmax classifier.
Extensive experiments on four GZSL benchmark datasets
show that the proposed model significantly outperforms the
state of the arts.

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning techniques have developed
rapidly, partly thanks to the widespread availability of
large-scale labeled datasets. For example, in image classification, learning an excellent classification model always
requires a sufficiently large number of manually labeled
samples per category as a training set. However, the object
categories in reality follow a long-tailed distribution. For
some rare objects, only a limited number of labeled samples can be provided or even no samples available. In addition, new object categories may emerge dynamically. In
this case, the performance of the deep neural network is
significantly degraded. Therefore, how to train the classifi*Corresponding author
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11733

cation model with a limited number of labeled samples or
even no samples has attracted considerable interest in academia in recent years, which motivates the emergence of
few-shot learning (Fei-Fei, Fergus, and Perona 2006) and
zero-shot learning (ZSL) (Larochelle, Erhan, and Bengio
2008; Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009), respectively.
ZSL aims to identify novel (unseen) classes that do not
provide any training samples. In ZSL, the seen classes and
the unseen classes are taken to train and test, respectively.
However, the seen and unseen classes are completely different categories. The performance of ZSL depends entirely on the classification accuracy on the unseen classes, as
shown in Figure 1(a). Since the objects that need to be recognized in real scenario may come from the unseen classes
or from the seen classes instead of just from the unseen
classes, ZSL is extended to GZSL (Scheirer et al. 2013).
Like ZSL, only the seen classes are available while training
for GZSL. Unlike ZSL, GZSL classifies not only the unseen classes but also the seen classes, as shown in Figure
1(b). The performance of GZSL depends on the harmonic
mean of the seen and unseen classes’ classification accuracy. Therefore, GZSL is more realistic and challenging than
ZSL and this paper is dedicated to GZSL task. Since the
images of the unseen classes cannot be obtained during the
training phase, the semantic information, such as attributes
(Farhadi et al. 2009; Ferrari and Zisserman 2008), word
vectors (Mikolov et al. 2013) and sentence descriptions
(Reed et al. 2016), shared between the classes is usually
used to transfer knowledge from the seen classes to the
unseen classes for realizing the unseen classes recognition.
The semantic information is also called semantic embedding, class embedding or class prototype.
Most of the existing GZSL methods focus on building
an embedding model that first learns the mapping between
visual feature space and semantic space (Akata et al. 2013;
Frome et al. 2013; Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling
2014; Romera-Paredes and Torr 2015; Reed et al. 2016;
Zhang, Xiang, and Gong 2017; Sung et al. 2018; Wei et al.

