The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relational Prototypical Network for
Weakly Supervised Temporal Action Localization
Linjiang Huang,1,3 Yan Huang,1,3 Wanli Ouyang,4 Liang Wang1,2,3∗
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC)
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
University of Sydney
SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
linjiang.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au
hard background

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a weakly supervised temporal action
localization method on untrimmed videos based on prototypical networks. We observe two challenges posed by weakly
supervision, namely action-background separation and action
relation construction. Unlike the previous method, we propose to achieve action-background separation only by the
original videos. To achieve this, a clustering loss is adopted
to separate actions from backgrounds and learn intra-compact
features, which helps in detecting complete action instances.
Besides, a similarity weighting module is devised to further
separate actions from backgrounds. To effectively identify actions, we propose to construct relations among actions for
prototype learning. A GCN-based prototype embedding module is introduced to generate relational prototypes. Experiments on THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.2 datasets show that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

simple background

action

Feature

Prototype

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of the prototypical network. It represents each class as a prototype, distance is employed as the
measure of similarity between feature and prototype. (b) We
employ a clustering loss for pushing the features of actions
to the corresponding prototypes. Although the hard backgrounds, which are similar to actions, would be also pushed
to the prototype, it would not be as close as actions to the
prototype because of the dissimilarity.

Introduction

i.e., action-background separation. To alleviate this problem, many existing methods leverage auxiliary information
such as temporal attention weights (Nguyen et al. 2018;
Yuan et al. 2019) and hope the temporal attention weights
could focus on the foreground of actions.
However, since weakly supervised methods are usually
built upon classiﬁers, there is a contradiction between classiﬁcation and detection, that is classiﬁers always focus on discriminative snippets but detectors should discover the whole
action instance without omission (Zhong et al. 2018). To
tackle this problem, some methods force the models to focus on different parts of videos. Nevertheless, it is difﬁcult
to accurately distinguish actions from backgrounds for both
classiﬁer and attention module because of the complex backgrounds, and thus degenerates the performance. Recently,
Liu et al. (Liu, Jiang, and Wang 2019) propose to use pseudo
videos for further addressing this problem. They generate
pseudo videos by applying thresholding on the optical ﬂow
intensity and label them with a background class. However,
this process is time-consuming and may over-segment some
frames of actions into the pseudo videos.
Actually, we argue that it’s unnecessary to force the model
to focus on different parts of the video. If we can make the

Temporal action localization in videos has been applied in
various ﬁelds (Sun et al. 2015; Sultani, Chen, and Shah
2018). This task aims to localize action instances from
untrimmed videos in the temporal dimension. Most existing
methods are trained in a fully supervised way where framelevel annotations are provided. However, such a requirement
of frame-level annotations does not well suit real-world
applications since densely annotating large-scale videos is
expensive and time-consuming. Moreover, accurate framelevel annotation is challenging even for human beings, further increases the difﬁculty of annotation.
To address these difﬁculties, weakly supervised methods (Wang et al. 2017a; Nguyen et al. 2018; Paul, Roy,
and Roy-Chowdhury 2018) have been developed with only
video-level labels, which are much easier to manually annotate. Because of the lack of frame-level annotations, weakly
supervised methods may face two challenges. The ﬁrst
challenge is how to distinguish actions from backgrounds,
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11053

