The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ASAP: Adaptive Structure Aware Pooling
for Learning Hierarchical Graph Representations
Ekagra Ranjan,1∗ Soumya Sanyal,2 Partha Talukdar2
1

Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
2
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
ekagra.ranjan@gmail.com, {soumyasanyal, ppt}@iisc.ac.in

and Leskovec 2017). While some of the works focus on
learning node-level representations to perform tasks such
as node classiﬁcation (Kipf and Welling 2017; Veličković
et al. 2017) and link prediction (Schlichtkrull et al. 2017;
Vashishth et al. 2019), others focus on learning graph-level
representations for tasks like graph classiﬁcation (Bruna et
al. 2013; Henaff, Bruna, and LeCun 2015; Ying et al. 2018;
Gao and Ji 2019; Lee, Lee, and Kang 2019). In this paper,
we focus on graph-level representation learning for the task
of graph classiﬁcation.

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNN) have been shown to work effectively for modeling graph structured data to solve tasks
such as node classiﬁcation, link prediction and graph classiﬁcation. There has been some recent progress in deﬁning the
notion of pooling in graphs whereby the model tries to generate a graph level representation by downsampling and summarizing the information present in the nodes. Existing pooling methods either fail to effectively capture the graph substructure or do not easily scale to large graphs. In this work,
we propose ASAP (Adaptive Structure Aware Pooling), a
sparse and differentiable pooling method that addresses the
limitations of previous graph pooling architectures. ASAP
utilizes a novel self-attention network along with a modiﬁed
GNN formulation to capture the importance of each node in
a given graph. It also learns a sparse soft cluster assignment
for nodes at each layer to effectively pool the subgraphs to
form the pooled graph. Through extensive experiments on
multiple datasets and theoretical analysis, we motivate our
choice of the components used in ASAP. Our experimental
results show that combining existing GNN architectures with
ASAP leads to state-of-the-art results on multiple graph classiﬁcation benchmarks. ASAP has an average improvement of
4%, compared to current sparse hierarchical state-of-the-art
method. We make the source code of ASAP available to encourage reproducible research 1 .

1

Brieﬂy, the task of graph classiﬁcation involves predicting the label of an input graph by utilizing the given graph
structure and initial node-level representations. For example, given a molecule, the task could be to predict if it is
toxic. Current GNNs are inherently ﬂat and lack the capability of aggregating node information in a hierarchical manner. Such architectures rely on learning node representations through some GNN followed by aggregation
of the node information to generate the graph representation (Vinyals, Bengio, and Kudlur 2016; Li et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2018). But learning graph representations in a
hierarchical manner is important to capture local substructures that are present in graphs. For example, in an organic
molecule, a set of atoms together can act as a functional
group and play a vital role in determining the class of the
graph.

Introduction

To address this limitation, new pooling architectures have
been proposed where sets of nodes are recursively aggregated to form a cluster that represents a node in the pooled
graph, thus enabling hierarchical learning. DiffPool (Ying et
al. 2018) is a differentiable pooling operator that learns a soft
assignment matrix mapping each node to a set of clusters.
Since this assignment matrix is dense, it is not easily scalable
to large graphs (Cangea et al. 2018). Following that, TopK
(Gao and Ji 2019) is proposed which learns a scalar projection score for each node and selects the top k nodes. They
address the sparsity concerns of DiffPool but are unable to
capture the rich graph structure effectively. Recently, SAGPool (Lee, Lee, and Kang 2019), a TopK based architecture,
has been proposed which leverages self-attention network to
learn the node scores. Although local graph structure is used
for scoring nodes, it is still not used effectively in determin-

In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in developing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for graph structured data. CNNs have shown to be successful in tasks involving images (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
He et al. 2016) and text (Kim 2014). Unlike these regular grid data, arbitrary shaped graphs have rich information present in their graph structure. By inherently capturing such information through message propagation along
the edges of the graph, GNNs have proved to be more
effective for graphs (Gilmer et al. 2017; Hamilton, Ying,
∗

Research done during internship at Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/malllabiisc/ASAP
5470

