The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Diverse Stochastic Human-Action
Generators by Learning Smooth Latent Transitions
Zhenyi Wang,1 Ping Yu,1 Yang Zhao,1 Ruiyi Zhang,2 Yufan Zhou,1 Junsong Yuan,1
Changyou Chen1
1

State University of New York at Buffalo
2
Duke University
1
{zhenyiwa, pingyu, yzhao63, yufanzho, jsyuan, changyou}@buffalo.edu
2
ryzhang@cs.duke.edu


Abstract
Human-motion generation is a long-standing challenging task
due to the requirement of accurately modeling complex and
diverse dynamic patterns. Most existing methods adopt sequence models such as RNN to directly model transitions
in the original action space. Due to high dimensionality and
potential noise, such modeling of action transitions is particularly challenging. In this paper, we focus on skeleton-based
action generation and propose to model smooth and diverse
transitions on a latent space of action sequences with much
lower dimensionality. Conditioned on a latent sequence, actions are generated by a frame-wise decoder shared by all
latent action-poses. Speciﬁcally, an implicit RNN is deﬁned
to model smooth latent sequences, whose randomness (diversity) is controlled by noise from the input. Different from
standard action-prediction methods, our model can generate
action sequences from pure noise without any conditional action poses. Remarkably, it can also generate unseen actions
from mixed classes during training. Our model is learned with
a bi-directional generative-adversarial-net framework, which
can not only generate diverse action sequences of a particular class or mix classes, but also learns to classify action
sequences within the same model. Experimental results show
the superiority of our method in both diverse action-sequence
generation and classiﬁcation, relative to existing methods.

    
 


   







  





  


Figure 1: Generating sequences from pure noise, our model
can learn smooth latent-frame transitions via an implicit
LSTM-based RNN, which are then decoded to an action sequence via a shared decoder. The action sequence endows
a ﬂexible implicit distribution induced by the input noise.
Our model can not only generate actions whose class are
seen during training (e.g., throw, kick), but also can generate
actions of unseen mixed classes (e.g., throw+kick).

Skeleton-based human action generation can be categorized into action synthesis (also referred to generation) (Kovar, Gleicher, and Pighin 2002) and prediction. Action synthesis refers to synthesizing a whole action sequence from
scratch, with controllable label information; whereas action
prediction refers to predicting remaining action-poses given
a portion of seed frames. These two tasks are closely related, e.g., the latter can be considered as a conditional variant of the former. In general, however, action synthesis is
considered more challenging due to little input information
available. Existing action-prediction methods can be categorized into deterministic (Martinez, Black, and Romero 2017;
Judith Bütepage 2017; Wang et al. 2018b; Harvey and
Pal 2018) and stochastic (Barsoum, Kender, and Liu 2017;
Kundu, Gor, and Babu 2019; Habibie et al. 2017) approaches.
Predicted action sequences in deterministic approaches are
not associated with randomness. By contrast, stochastic approaches can induce probability distributions over predicted
sequences. In most cases, probabilistic approaches are preferable as they allow one to generate different action sequences
conditioned on the same context.

Introduction
Human-action generation is an important task for modeling dynamic behavior of human activities, with vast real
applications such as video synthesis (Wang et al. 2018a),
action classiﬁcation (Kim and Reiter 2017; Ke et al. 2017;
Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Liu et al. 2016; Shahroudy et
al. 2016; Du, Wang, and Wang 2015) and action prediction
(Martinez, Black, and Romero 2017; Wang et al. 2018b;
Barsoum, Kender, and Liu 2017). Directly generating human actions from scratch is particularly challenging due to
the complexity and high-dimensionality of natural scenes.
One promising workaround is to ﬁrst generate easier-to-dealwith skeleton-based action sequences, based on which natural sequence are then rendered. This paper thus focuses on
skeleton-based action-sequence generation.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12281

