The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GraphER: Token-Centric Entity
Resolution with Graph Convolutional Neural Networks∗
Bing Li,1 Wei Wang,1,2 Yifang Sun,1 Linhan Zhang,1 Muhammad Asif Ali,1 Yi Wang2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia
{bing.li, weiw, yifang.sun, muhammadasif.ali}@unsw.edu.au, linhan.zhang@student.unsw.edu.au
2
Dongguan University of Technology, China
wangyi@dgut.edu.cn

Table 1: An example of ER task.

Abstract
Entity resolution (ER) aims to identify entity records that refer to the same real-world entity, which is a critical problem
in data cleaning and integration. Most of the existing models
are attribute-centric, that is, matching entity pairs by comparing similarities of pre-aligned attributes, which require the
schemas of records to be identical and are too coarse-grained
to capture subtle key information within a single attribute. In
this paper, we propose a novel graph-based ER model GraphER. Our model is token-centric: the ﬁnal matching results
are generated by directly aggregating token-level comparison features, in which both the semantic and structural information has been softly embedded into token embeddings
by training an Entity Record Graph Convolutional Network
(ER-GCN). To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst
effort to do token-centric entity resolution with the help of
GCN in entity resolution task. Extensive experiments on two
real-world datasets demonstrate that our model stably outperforms state-of-the-art models.

Record
r1
Record
r2
r3

Google
T ITLE
microsoft powerpoint 2004 mac apple
Amazon
D ESCRIPTION
powerpoint 2004 mac by microsoft
powerpoint 2004 upgrade mac

M ANUFACTURER
-

P RICE
228.95

M ANUFACTURER
microsoft
microsoft

P RICE
229.99
109.99

crafted (Konda et al. 2016) or deep neural (Ebraheem et al.
2018; Mudgal et al. 2018) features, then learn a classiﬁer
(e.g., logistic regression, multilayer perceptron, etc.) to aggregate comparison results of all attributes to make ﬁnal ER
decisions. Recently, deep learning (DL) models have been
used to learn attribute representations, including RNN and
LSTM in conjunction with attention mechanism (Ebraheem
et al. 2018; Mudgal et al. 2018). These deep learning models
can capture semantic and syntactic information to better represent semantic similarity, especially for textual attributes.
Despite DL-based ER solutions have been proven successful in improving the general performance of ER
task (Mudgal et al. 2018), their attribute-centric paradigm
share some common drawbacks, which hinder them from
further performance improvement, as listed below:
i) Attribute representation causes semantic sparsity and
information dilution problem. The attribute representation
can only capture token-attribute relations while ignoring
record-attribute and more general token-record relations
which carry semantics that among different attributes, i.e.,
tokens in a same record but within different attributes could
also share a strong semantic correlation (e.g., “microsoft”
and “powerpoint” in r3 of Table 1). Another problem is information dilution. Since the granularity of an attribute is
coarse-grained, especially for descriptive textual attributes,
it is hard for few key tokens (e.g., “upgrade” in entity r3 of
Table 1) to show enough signiﬁcance in the whole sentence.
ii) Hard attribute alignment causes inﬂexible comparison.
The prerequisite for attribute comparison is that the schemas
of all records are identical, which is usually achieved by
an extra hard schema-mapping step (e.g., mapping T I TLE ↔D ESCRIPTION , M ANUFACTURE ↔M ANUFACTURE ,
and P RICE↔P RICE for the two tables in Table 1), error-

Introduction
Entity resolution (ER) (a.k.a., entity matching, record linkage, and duplicate record detection) aims at identifying entity records that refer to the same real-world entity from different data sources. Table 1 shows an example of ER task. In
Table 1, there are three records r1, r2 and r3 that are derived
from Amazon and Google dataset, respectively. An ER system needs to ﬁnd r1 and r2 refer to a same real-world entity,
while r3 does not.
Entity resolution is a fundamental problem in data cleaning and data integration (Dong and Srivastava 2013).
There are numerous applications of entity resolution such
as knowledge graph construction (Chen et al. 2015),
e-commerce (Gokhale et al. 2014), and data warehouses (Bhattacharya and Getoor 2007). The importance of
entity resolution has led to a substantial amount of research
over the past few decades. Currently machine learning (ML)
based solution has become the de-facto standard for ER task.
Given two entity records, typical ML-based ER approaches ﬁrst compare pre-aligned attributes on top of hand∗

B Li and W. Wang are the co-corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8172

