The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Reason: Leveraging Neural
Networks for Approximate DNF Counting
Ralph Abboud, İsmail İlkan Ceylan, Thomas Lukasiewicz
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
{ralph.abboud, ismail.ceylan, thomas.lukasiewicz}@cs.ox.ac.uk

are known to be #P-hard (Valiant 1979), and this computational complexity is a major bottleneck for solving largescale WMC instances.
To overcome this problem, two main paradigms have
been developed. The ﬁrst paradigm is knowledge compilation (Cadoli and Donini 1997; Selman and Kautz 1996),
which solves computationally difﬁcult problems by compiling them into a new representation (i.e., a target language),
where they can be subsequently solved efﬁciently. Following
compilation, exact inference in WMC can be done in linear
time (Darwiche and Marquis 2002). However, the compilation process can produce exponentially-sized problem representations (i.e., arithmetic circuits). Furthermore, knowledge compilation is not robust to changes: for every change
in the underlying model, the computationally demanding
knowledge compilation process needs to be repeated. As a
result, approaches based on knowledge compilation struggle
to scale to large and varying problem instances.
The second paradigm is approximate solving (Ermon et
al. 2013; Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2016; Meel, Shrotri,
and Vardi 2017), which provides approximations of the
model count as opposed to an exact solution. Loosening the
requirement for exactitude renders WMC more tractable, especially for #DNF counting, where approximate solving admits a fully polynomial randomized approximation scheme
(FPRAS) due to Karp, Luby, and Madras (1989), which we
denote KLM. KLM allows for faster estimation of #DNF
model counts, while also providing probabilistic guarantees on its approximations, and it is the state of the art for
weighted #DNF. Nonetheless, KLM runs in O(nm), where
n denotes the number of variables and m the number of
clauses of the input DNF formula. Hence, KLM struggles
to scale to real-world DNF formulas.
In this work, we propose Neural#DNF, an approach that
combines deep learning and approximate model counting
and enables fast weighted #DNF approximation. We ﬁrst
generate instances of weighted #DNF and solve them using KLM to produce training data. We then use a graph
neural network (GNN) to capture the symbolic structure
of DNF formulas and train our system. By construction,
Neural#DNF produces approximations in O(mw̄), where
w̄ denotes the average clause width. This reduces to just

Abstract
Weighted model counting (WMC) has emerged as a prevalent approach for probabilistic inference. In its most general
form, WMC is #P-hard. Weighted DNF counting (weighted
#DNF) is a special case, where approximations with probabilistic guarantees are obtained in O(nm), where n denotes
the number of variables, and m the number of clauses of the
input DNF, but this is not scalable in practice. In this paper,
we propose a neural model counting approach for weighted
#DNF that combines approximate model counting with deep
learning, and accurately approximates model counts in linear time when width is bounded. We conduct experiments to
validate our method, and show that our model learns and generalizes very well to large-scale #DNF instances.

1

Introduction

Propositional model counting (MC), or #SAT, is the task
of counting the number of satisfying assignments for a
given propositional formula (Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2009). Weighted model counting (WMC), or weighted
#SAT, additionally incorporates a weight function over the
set of all possible assignments. Offering an elegant formalism for encoding various probabilistic inference problems, WMC is a unifying approach for inference in a wide
range of probabilistic models. In particular, probabilistic
graphical models (Koller and Friedman 2009), probabilistic planning (Domshlak and Hoffmann 2007), probabilistic logic programming (De Raedt, Kimmig, and Toivonen
2007), probabilistic databases (Suciu et al. 2011), and probabilistic ontologies (Borgwardt, Ceylan, and Lukasiewicz
2017) can greatly beneﬁt from advances in WMC.
Two important special cases of WMC are weighted #CNF
and weighted #DNF, which require the input formula to be
in conjunctive normal form (CNF) and disjunctive normal
form (DNF), respectively. Inference in probabilistic graphical models typically reduces to solving weighted #CNF instances, while query evaluation in probabilistic databases
reduces to solving weighted #DNF instances (Suciu et al.
2011). However, both weighted #CNF and weighted #DNF
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3097

