The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Incorporate Structure Knowledge for Image Inpainting
Jie Yang,1,4,5 Zhiquan Qi,2,4,5,∗ Yong Shi2,3,4,5
1

School of Computer and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Economics and Management, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
College of Information Science and Technology, University of Nebraska at Omaha
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Research Center on Fictitious Economy and Data Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing 100190, China
yangjie181@mails.ucas.ac.cn, qizhiquan@foxmail.com, yshi@ucas.ac.cn
2

Abstract
This paper develops a multi-task learning framework that attempts to incorporate the image structure knowledge to assist image inpainting, which is not well explored in previous works. The primary idea is to train a shared generator
to simultaneously complete the corrupted image and corresponding structures — edge and gradient, thus implicitly encouraging the generator to exploit relevant structure knowledge while inpainting. In the meantime, we also introduce a
structure embedding scheme to explicitly embed the learned
structure features into the inpainting process, thus to provide
possible preconditions for image completion. Speciﬁcally, a
novel pyramid structure loss is proposed to supervise structure learning and embedding. Moreover, an attention mechanism is developed to further exploit the recurrent structures
and patterns in the image to reﬁne the generated structures
and contents. Through multi-task learning, structure embedding besides with attention, our framework takes advantage of
the structure knowledge and outperforms several state-of-theart methods on benchmark datasets quantitatively and qualitatively.

1

(a) Input

Introduction

Image inpainting aims at ﬁlling corrupted or replacing unwanted regions of images with plausible and ﬁne-detailed
contents, which is widely applied in ﬁelds of restoring damaged photographs, retouching pictures, et al.
Existing inpainting approaches can be roughly divided
into two groups: conventional and deep learning based approaches. Conventional inpainting approaches usually make
use of low-level features (e.g. color and texture descriptors)
hand-crafted from the incomplete input image and resort
to priors (e.g. smoothness and image statistics) or auxiliary data (e.g. external image databases). They either propagate low-level features from surroundings to the missing
regions following a diffusive process (Bertalmio et al. 2000;
Levin, Zomet, and Weiss 2003; Roth and Black 2005) or ﬁll
holes by searching and fusing similar patches from the same
image or external image databases (Hays and Efros 2008;
Barnes et al. 2009; Pritch, Kav-Venaki, and Peleg 2009;

(b) EG

(c) Ours

(d) GT

Figure 1: Our results compared with EG (Nazeri et al. 2019)
which exploits structure knowledge with a series-coupled
architecture and the ground truth (GT). [Best viewed with
zoom-in.]

He and Sun 2012). Without a high-level understanding of
the image contents and structures, conventional approaches
usually struggle to generate semantically meaningful content, especially when a large portion of an image is missing
or corrupted.
Deep learning-based approaches can understand the image content by automatically capturing the intrinsic hierarchical representations and generate high-level semantic
features to synthesize the missing contents, which generally outperform the conventional methods in the inpainting
task. Context Encoder proposed by Pathak et al.(2016) is the
ﬁrst attempt to exploit a deep convolution encoder-decoder
trained with an adversarial strategy for image inpainting.
The method produces semantic reasonable contents, but

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12605

