The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Convolutional Hierarchical Attention
Network for Query-Focused Video Summarization
Shuwen Xiao,1 Zhou Zhao,1∗ Zijian Zhang,1 Xiaohui Yan,2 Min Yang3
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
CBG Intelligent Engineering Dept., Huawei Technologies, China
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xiaoshuwen, zhaozhou, ckczzj}@zju.edu.com, yanxiaohui2@huawei.com, min.yang@siat.ac.cn

Abstract

Generic video summarization

Previous approaches for video summarization mainly concentrate on ﬁnding the most diverse and representative visual
contents as video summary without considering the user’s
preference. This paper addresses the task of query-focused
video summarization, which takes user’s query and a long
video as inputs and aims to generate a query-focused video
summary. In this paper, we consider the task as a problem
of computing similarity between video shots and query. To
this end, we propose a method, named Convolutional Hierarchical Attention Network (CHAN), which consists of two
parts: feature encoding network and query-relevance computing module. In the encoding network, we employ a convolutional network with local self-attention mechanism and
query-aware global attention mechanism to learns visual information of each shot. The encoded features will be sent
to query-relevance computing module to generate queryfocused video summary. Extensive experiments on the benchmark dataset demonstrate the competitive performance and
show the effectiveness of our approach.

(key frames / key shots)

Query:
Food, Sky
video

Query-focused video summarization

Figure 1: The goal of generic video summarization is to select a compact subset of frames or shots that remains the important information from the original video, while the task of
query-focused video summarization takes user’s query into
consideration and generate query-related video summaries.

Introduction
Recently, there is an emerging research direction in the task
of video summarization, which is query-focused video summarization (Sharghi, Laurel, and Gong 2017; Zhang et al.
2018; Vasudevan et al. 2017; Wei et al. 2018). Given a long
video and a user query which is some concepts, the goal of
query-focused video summarization is not only to remove
the redundant parts of the video, to ﬁnd key frame / shots in
the video, but also to pick out those segments that related to
the user’s query. It can be helpful in some scenarios such as
when a user wants to customize a brief summary from his
daily video logs.
Generic video summarization is to generate a compact
version of the original video by selecting the highlights of
the long video and eliminating the trivial content. Automated video summarization techniques are useful in many
domains, such as motion recognition, surveillance video
analysis, visual diary creation for personal lifelog videos,
and video previews of video sites. Besides, modules for

video summarization can also be implemented as an intermediate component to assist downstream tasks. As is
shown in ﬁgure 1, there are three differences between queryfocused video summarization and generic video summarization. Firstly, the video summary needs to take the subjectivity of users into account, as different user queries may
receive different video summaries. Secondly, trained video
summarizers cannot meet all the users’ preferences and the
performance evaluation is often to measure the temporal
overlap, makes it hard to capture the semantic similarity between summaries and original videos (Sharghi, Laurel, and
Gong 2017). Thirdly, the textual query will bring additional
semantic information to the task.
Recent researches on query-focused video summarization (Sharghi, Laurel, and Gong 2017; Zhang et al. 2018)
mainly consider the task as sequence labeling problem and

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12426

