The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Aggregation of Perspectives Using
the Constellations Approach to Probabilistic Argumentation
Anthony Hunter, Kawsar Noor
Department of Computer Science
University College London
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK
{anthony.hunter, kawsar.noor.15}@ucl.ac.uk
important if, for example, the agent wants to persuade the
other agent to accept a speciﬁc argument. In this kind of
scenario, the persuader has to make good choices of argument based on what arguments and attacks she thinks the
persuadee is aware of (Hunter and Thimm 2016).
Probabilistic approaches for modeling uncertainty in argumentation include the constellations approach and the
epistemic approach (Hunter 2013). The ﬁrst is based on
a probability distribution over the subgraphs of the argument graph ((Hunter 2012) which extends (Dung and Thang
2010) and (Li, Oren, and Norman 2011)), and this can be
used to represent the uncertainty over the topology of the
graph (i.e. whether a particular argument or attack appears
in the argument graph). The second is the epistemic approach which can be used to represent the degree to which
each argument is believed (Thimm 2012; Hunter 2013;
Hunter and Thimm 2017). A further approach is based on
labellings for arguments using in, out, and undecided, from
(Caminada and Gabbay 2009), augmented with off for denoting that the argument does not occur in the graph (Riveret
and Governatori 2016). A probability distribution over labellings gives a form of probabilistic argumentation that
overlaps with the constellations and epistemic approaches.
In this paper, we focus on the constellations approach,
and consider how we can automatically construct a probability distribution over a constellation of argument graphs.
For this, we will use perspectives (i.e. opinions) on what
the probability distribution should be. Consider for example a number of reviews on a product. Each review contains
some arguments that taken together indicate the overall sentiment that the writer has towards the product. Obviously,
an argument graph is not given by the writer, but the reader
may consider an implicit argument graph that includes the
writer’s arguments. So a question is then what is the implicit
argument graph? Since there is unlikely to be a single argument graph that would reﬂect all the reviews, we can harness
the constellations approach to represent the uncertainty over
the topology. Our approach is to provide a language for individual perspectives (represented by constraints on the extensions of the argument graph), and then provide methods
for taking a tuple of perspectives and obtaining a probability
distribution over a constellation of argument graphs.
To illustrate, we can consider reports on whether a particular drug treatment is good. There are websites such as

Abstract
In the constellations approach to probabilistic argumentation,
there is a probability distribution over the subgraphs of an
argument graph, and this can be used to represent the uncertainty in the structure of the argument graph. In this paper, we consider how we can construct this probability distribution from data. We provide a language for data based
on perspectives (opinions) on the structure of the graph, and
we introduce a framework (based on general properties and
some speciﬁc proposals) for aggregating these perspectives,
and as a result obtaining a probability distribution that best
reﬂects these perspectives. This can be used in applications
such as summarizing collections of online reviews and combining conﬂicting reports.

Introduction
Uncertainty can arise in argumentation for various reasons.
For an individual argument, there can be uncertainty in the
premises of the argument, or in whether the claim follows
from the premises. For instance, many arguments are enthymemes, which means that an argument might not explicitly present all its premises and/or claim. So when an argument is heard or read by someone, that recipient has to
decode the enthymeme to recover the intended argument.
There is therefore uncertainty in this decoding process as
the decoded argument could be different to the intended argument. So using enthymemes introduces uncertainty as to
the content of individual arguments, and uncertainty as to
whether one argument attacks another argument.
In a study on dialogical argumentation, participants were
asked to categorize relationships between arguments as one
of attack, support, dependent somehow, or unrelated, and the
results showed that whilst there was a good agreement between participants on the categorization for the majority of
pairs of arguments, there was a sizeable subset for which
there was some disagreement (Polberg and Hunter 2018).
Further uncertainty arises in dialogical argumentation.
When one agent is presenting an argument to another agent,
the agent presenting the argument is unsure what related arguments the intended recipient is aware of, and what beliefs
the intended recipient might have concerning those arguments. For the agent presenting the argument, this might be
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2846

