The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

D OC 2D IAL: A Framework for Dialogue Composition Grounded in Documents
Song Feng, Kshitij Fadnis, Q. Vera Liao, Luis A. Lastras
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center.
{sfeng, kpfadnis, lastrasl}@us.ibm.com, vera.liao@ibm.com

Abstract
We introduce D OC 2D IAL, an end-to-end framework for generating conversational data grounded in given documents. It
takes the documents as input and generates the pipelined
tasks for obtaining the annotations speciﬁcally for producing
the simulated dialog ﬂows. Then, the dialog ﬂows are used
to guide the collection of the utterances via the integrated
crowdsourcing tool. The outcomes include the human-human
dialogue data grounded in the given documents, as well as
various types of automatically or human labeled annotations
that help ensure the quality of the dialog data with the ﬂexibility to (re)composite dialogues. We expect such data can facilitate building automated dialogue agents for goal-oriented
tasks. We demonstrate D OC 2D IAL system with the various
domain documents for customer care.

document
processing

document
ﬁltering

document
segmentating

TextAuto
precondition
labeling

RelAuto
relation
labeling

dialog ﬂow
composing

TextAnno

RelAnno

DialAnno

DialAuto

Figure 1: An Overview of D OC 2D IAL Framework

vestigation with the following principles: 1) aiming to identify the document content that corresponds the solution to a
user’s request as well as the prerequisites speciﬁed. 2) the
generation of dialog ﬂows should be closely related to the
given documents without relying on heavily supervised or
handcrafted work. 3) the data tasks should be easy to scale
– feasible to crowdsourcing platforms and could be updated
with respect to changes in the documents.

Introduction
There has been growing interest in using automated dialogue
agents for domains such as customer care. However, one bottleneck is the lack of chat logs that show how the agents
use the given documents to assist end users. Meanwhile,
enterprises and organizations often own a large amount of
business documents that aim to address customers’ requests
Taken together, a promising solution is to build data for
training the machine assisted agents that could perform taskoriented dialogues supported by the business documents.
In task-oriented dialogues for customer care, a recurrent
theme is a diagnostic process – identifying the contextual
conditions to retrieve the most relevant solutions. Meanwhile, the business documents often contain similar information with prior conditions. For instance, the sample document in STEP 1 in Figure 3 contains the information for an
agent to use in the dialogue at STEP 2, where P (S) denotes
text spans labeled a precondition (solution). Thus, we hypothesize that an essential capability for a dialogue agent to
perform goal-oriented information retrieval tasks should be
able to recognize the preconditions and their associated solutions covered by the given documents and then use them
to carry out the diagnostic interactions. Towards this goal,
we introduce D OC 2D IAL, a novel end-to-end framework
for generating dialog ﬂows for collecting task-oriented dialogues grounded in the given documents. We guide our in-

In this work, we propose a pipeline of three interconnected tasks: (1)T EXTAUTO: labeling text spans as preconditions or solutions in a given documents; (2) R EL AUTO:
identifying the relation(s) between these preconditions or
solutions; (3)D IAL AUTO: simulating dialog ﬂows based on
the linked preconditions/solutions and applying them to
guide the collection of human generated utterances. The
system is also integrated with the annotation tools T EX TA NNO /R EL A NNO /D IAL A NNO with sophisticated quality
control features. For the dialogue collection D IAL A NNO, it
provides an asynchronized process that allows crowd workers to work on the creation and evaluation of individual turns
without the constraints of timing or having a dialog partner.
To our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst end-to-end pipeline
framework from extracting complex preconditions and solutions that present in the documents, to generating taskoriented dialogues that ﬁt different scenarios. The most
closely related work is ShARC (Saeidi et al. 2018) as it
shares similar goals. However, it is only on asking boolean
follow-up questions on precondition. Our work is also
largely related to conversational QA such as CoQA (Reddy,
Chen, and Manning 2019) and QuAC (Choi et al. 2018).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13604

