The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Simple and Efﬁcient Tensor Calculus
Sören Laue,1,2 Matthias Mitterreiter,1 Joachim Giesen1
1

Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
Ernst-Abbe-Platz 2
07743 Jena, Germany
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena
2
Data Assessment Solutions GmbH, Hannover

and JAX. However, the improvements are rather small and
the efﬁciency gap of up to three orders of magnitude still
persists.
On the other hand, the approach of (Laue, Mitterreiter, and
Giesen 2018) relies crucially on Ricci notation and therefore
cannot be incorporated into standard deep learning frameworks that use the simpler Einstein notation. Here, we remove
this obstacle and provide an efﬁcient tensor calculus in Einstein notation. Already the simple version of our approach is
as efﬁcient as the approach by (Laue, Mitterreiter, and Giesen
2018). We provide further improvements that lead to an even
better efﬁciency.
Ricci notation distinguishes between co- and contravariant
indices, that is, upper and lower indices. This distinction is
necessary in order to compute derivatives in a mathematical correct way. Consider for instance the simple expression
x Ax. If we want to compute the derivative of this expression with respect to the vector x, then, at some point, we face
the problem of computing the derivative of x . However, this
derivative in Ricci notation is the delta-tensor δij that cannot
be represented in linear algebra. Note, it is not the identity
matrix which is represented in Ricci notation as δji . Hence,
in order to represent the derivative in a mathematical correct
way, upper and lower indices are necessary. This problem has
its roots in mathematical tensor analysis, where tensors are
used for representing multilinear functions by their values
on a set of basis vectors. These values are stored in a tensor,
that is, a multi-dimensional array. Upper and lower indices
are used to distinguish between vector space and dual vector space components that transform differently under basis
changes. In the example expression, x is a vector while x
is a co-vector from the dual vector space.
In machine learning tensors are typically not used for
representing multi-linear functions, but simply as multidimensional arrays for storing data and parameters. Hence,
there is no need to distinguish different types of components.
Indices can just be used for accessing the different tensor
components. This is basically Einstein notation that is used
in all deep learning frameworks.
The contribution of this paper is an efﬁcient and coherent
method for computing tensor derivatives in Einstein notation together with a correctness proof. In reverse mode auto-

Abstract
Computing derivatives of tensor expressions, also known as
tensor calculus, is a fundamental task in machine learning. A
key concern is the efﬁciency of evaluating the expressions and
their derivatives that hinges on the representation of these expressions. Recently, an algorithm for computing higher order
derivatives of tensor expressions like Jacobians or Hessians
has been introduced that is a few orders of magnitude faster
than previous state-of-the-art approaches. Unfortunately, the
approach is based on Ricci notation and hence cannot be
incorporated into automatic differentiation frameworks like
TensorFlow, PyTorch, autograd, or JAX that use the simpler
Einstein notation. This leaves two options, to either change
the underlying tensor representation in these frameworks or to
develop a new, provably correct algorithm based on Einstein
notation. Obviously, the ﬁrst option is impractical. Hence, we
pursue the second option. Here, we show that using Ricci
notation is not necessary for an efﬁcient tensor calculus and
develop an equally efﬁcient method for the simpler Einstein
notation. It turns out that turning to Einstein notation enables
further improvements that lead to even better efﬁciency.

1

Introduction

Many problems in machine learning are naturally written
in terms of tensor expressions. Any algorithmic method for
computing derivatives of such expressions is called a tensor calculus. Standard automatic differentiation (deep learning) frameworks like TensorFlow (Abadi and others 2016),
PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2017), autograd (Maclaurin, Duvenaud, and Adams 2015), and JAX (Frostig, Johnson, and
Leary 2018) are very efﬁcient when computing derivatives of
scalar-valued functions. However, evaluating the derivatives
of non-scalar-valued functions, for instance, Jacobians or
Hessians, in these frameworks is up to three orders of magnitude slower than evaluating the derivatives that are computed
by the approach of (Laue, Mitterreiter, and Giesen 2018).
There have been some recent attempts to alleviate this lack
of efﬁciency by accelerating the underlying linear algebra
using automatic batching and optimizing the computational
graphs of the derivatives (XLA and TensorFlow teams 2017).
These improvements have been incorporated into TensorFlow
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4527

