The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Pyramid Attention Aggregation Network for
Semantic Segmentation of Surgical Instruments
Zhen-Liang Ni,1,2 Gui-Bin Bian,1,2∗ Guan-An Wang,1,2 Xiao-Hu Zhou,2
Zeng-Guang Hou,1,2,3 Hua-Bin Chen,1,2 Xiao-Liang Xie2
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
State Key Laboratory of Management and Control for Complex Systems
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing 100190, China
{nizhenliang2017, guibin.bian, wangguanan2015, xiaohu.zhou, zengguang.hou, chenhuabin2019, xiaoliang.xie}@ia.ac.cn
2

'DUN/LJKW

Abstract

%ULJKW/LJKW

Semantic segmentation of surgical instruments plays a critical role in computer-assisted surgery. However, specular reﬂection and scale variation of instruments are likely to occur
in the surgical environment, undesirably altering visual features of instruments, such as color and shape. These issues
make semantic segmentation of surgical instruments more
challenging. In this paper, a novel network, Pyramid Attention Aggregation Network, is proposed to aggregate multiscale attentive features for surgical instruments. It contains
two critical modules: Double Attention Module and Pyramid Upsampling Module. Speciﬁcally, the Double Attention
Module includes two attention blocks (i.e., position attention
block and channel attention block), which model semantic dependencies between positions and channels by capturing joint
semantic information and global contexts, respectively. The
attentive features generated by the Double Attention Module can distinguish target regions, contributing to solving the
specular reﬂection issue. Moreover, the Pyramid Upsampling
Module extracts local details and global contexts by aggregating multi-scale attentive features. It learns the shape and
size features of surgical instruments in different receptive
ﬁelds and thus addresses the scale variation issue. The proposed network achieves state-of-the-art performance on various datasets. It achieves a new record of 97.10% mean IOU
on Cata7. Besides, it comes ﬁrst in the MICCAI EndoVis
Challenge 2017 with 9.90% increase on mean IOU.

6FDOH%

6FDOH$

D 6SHFXODU5HIOHFWLRQ

E 6FDOH9DULDWLRQ

Figure 1: Difﬁculties in semantic segmentation for surgical instruments. (a) Specular Reﬂection: each column is the
same instrument but under different illustrations. As we can
see, under highlights, its appearance is white otherwise dark.
(b) Scale Variation: shape and size of the same instrument
are different due to poses and views.

Introduction
assessment of surgical skills, surgical report generation, and
surgical workﬂow optimization (Sarikaya, Corso, and Guru
2017). These applications can improve the safety of surgery
and reduce the workload of doctors, which is signiﬁcant for
clinical work.
However, semantic segmentation of surgical instruments
is very different from common segmentation tasks and faces
more difﬁculties. On the one hand, as shown in Figure 1(a),
surgery usually requires intense lighting conditions, which
leads to specular reﬂection and affects the appearance of
the surgical instruments. For example, the surgical instruments are more white when illuminated. On the other hand,
since the surgical instrument is constantly moving during the
surgery, its size and shape are always changing, which is
shown in Figure 1(b). These two problems make the seman-

In recent years, signiﬁcant progress has been witnessed in
minimally invasive robotic surgery and computer-assisted
microsurgery. Semantic segmentation of surgical instruments, whose goal is to segment instruments and identify
corresponding categories, plays an essential role in assisted
surgery (Sarikaya, Corso, and Guru 2017). By segmenting the surgical instruments and estimating their poses, the
navigation and control for surgical robots can be assisted.
Also, this technology can give real-time warnings during
surgery and reduce the risk of surgery. Furthermore, semantic segmentation of surgical instruments offers numerous automated solutions for post-surgery work, such as objective
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11782

