The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FPETS : Fully Parallel End-to-End Text-to-Speech System
Dabiao Ma,∗1 Zhiba Su,∗1 Wenxuan Wang,∗2 Yuhao Lu†1
1

Turing Robot Co.,Ltd. Beijing, China
{madabiao, suzhiba, luyuhao}@uzoo.cn
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen. Guangdong, China
wenxuanwang1@link.cuhk.edu.cn

different components, 3) reducing the need of feature engineering. However, without the annotation of duration information, end-to-end TTS systems have to learn the alignment
between text and audio frame.
Most competitive end-to-end TTS systems have an
encoder-decoder structure with attention mechanism, which
is signiﬁcantly helpful for alignment learning. Tacotron
(Wang et al. 2017) uses an autoregressive attention (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) structure to predict alignment, and uses CNNs and GRU (Cho et al. 2014) as encoder
and decoder, respectively. Tacotron2(Shen et al. 2018),
which is a combination of the modiﬁed Tacotron system and
WaveNet, also use an autoregressive attention. However, the
autoregressive structure greatly limits the inference speed in
the context of parallel computation. Deep voice 3 (Ping et
al. 2018) replaces RNNs with CNNs to speed up training
and inference. DCTTS (Tachibana, Uenoyama, and Aihara
2017) greatly speeds up the training of attention module by
introducing guided attention. But Deep Voice 3 and DCTTS
still have autoregressive structure. And those models also
suffer from serious error modes e.g. repeated words, mispronunciations, or skipped words (Ping et al. 2018).
Low time latency is required in real world application.
Autoregressive structures, however, greatly limit the inference speed in the context of parallel computation. (Ping et
al. 2018) claims that it is hard to learn alignment without
a autoregressive structure. So the question is how to design
a non-autoregressive structure that can perfectly determine
alignment?
In this paper, we propose a novel fully parallel endto-end TTS system (FPETS). Given input phonemes, our
model can predict all acoustic frames simultaneously rather
than autoregressively. Speciﬁcally, we follow the commonly
used encoder-decoder structure with attention mechanism
for alignment. But we replace autoregressive structures
with a recent proposed U-shaped convolutional structure
(UFANS)(Ma et al. 2018), which can be fully parallel and
has stronger representation ability. Our fully parallel alignment structure inference alignment relationship between all
phonemes and audio frames at once. Our novel trainable
position encoding method can utilize position information
better and two-step training strategy improves the alignment

Abstract
End-to-end Text-to-speech (TTS) system can greatly improve
the quality of synthesised speech. But it usually suffers form
high time latency due to its auto-regressive structure. And the
synthesised speech may also suffer from some error modes,
e.g. repeated words, mispronunciations, and skipped words.
In this paper, we propose a novel non-autoregressive, fully
parallel end-to-end TTS system (FPETS). It utilizes a new
alignment model and the recently proposed U-shape convolutional structure, UFANS. Different from RNN, UFANS
can capture long term information in a fully parallel manner. Trainable position encoding and two-step training strategy are used for learning better alignments. Experimental results show FPETS utilizes the power of parallel computation and reaches a signiﬁcant speed up of inference compared
with state-of-the-art end-to-end TTS systems. More speciﬁcally, FPETS is 600X faster than Tacotron2, 50X faster than
DCTTS and 10X faster than Deep Voice3. And FPETS can
generates audios with equal or better quality and fewer errors
comparing with other system. As far as we know, FPETS is
the ﬁrst end-to-end TTS system which is fully parallel.

Introduction
TTS systems aim to generate human-like speeches from
texts. End-to-end TTS system is a type of system that can
be trained on (text,audio) pairs without phoneme duration
annotation(Wang et al. 2017). It usually contains 2 components, an acoustic model and a vocoder. Acoustic model predicts acoustic intermediate features from texts. And vocoder,
e.g. Grifﬁn-Lim (Grifﬁn et al. 1984), WORLD (MORISE,
YOKOMORI, and OZAWA 2016), WaveNet (van den Oord
et al. 2016b), synthesizes speeches with generated acoustic
features.
The advantages of end-to-end TTS system are threefold:
1) reducing manual annotation cost and being able to utilize raw data, 2) preventing the error propagation between
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Dabiao Ma, Zhiba Su and Wenxuan Wang have equal contributions. Yuhao Lu is the corresponding author.
2
Codes and demos will be released at https://github.com/
suzhiba/Full-parallel 100x real time End2EndTTS
8457

