The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Discretizing Continuous Action Space for On-Policy Optimization
Yunhao Tang,1 Shipra Agrawal1∗
1

Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
{yt2541, sa3305}@columbia.edu

when M increases. However, a simple ﬁx is to represent the
joint distribution over discrete actions as factorized across
dimensions, so that the joint policy is still tractable. As prior
works have applied such discretization method in practice
(OpenAI, 2018; Jaśkowski et al., 2018), we aim to carry out a
systemic study of such straightforward discretization method
in simulated environments, and show how they improve upon
on-policy optimization baselines.
The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we introduce
backgrounds on on-policy optimization baselines (e.g. TRPO
and PPO) and related work. In Section 3, we introduce the
straightforward method of discretizing action space for continuous control, and analyze the properties of the resulting
policies as the number atomic actions K changes. In Section 4, we introduce stick-breaking parameterization (Khan
et al., 2012), an architecture that parameterizes the discrete
distributions while encoding the natural ordering between
discrete actions. In Section 5, through extensive experiments
we show how the discrete/ordinal policy improves upon current on-policy optimization baselines and related prior works,
especially on high-dimensional tasks with complex dynamics.

Abstract
In this work, we show that discretizing action space for continuous control is a simple yet powerful technique for on-policy
optimization. The explosion in the number of discrete actions
can be efﬁciently addressed by a policy with factorized distribution across action dimensions. We show that the discrete
policy achieves signiﬁcant performance gains with state-of-theart on-policy optimization algorithms (PPO, TRPO, ACKTR)
especially on high-dimensional tasks with complex dynamics. Additionally, we show that an ordinal parameterization
of the discrete distribution can introduce the inductive bias
that encodes the natural ordering between discrete actions.
This ordinal architecture further signiﬁcantly improves the
performance of PPO/TRPO.

Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), the action space of conventional control tasks are usually dichotomized into either discrete or continuous (Brockman et al., 2016). While discrete
action space is conducive to theoretical analysis, in the context of deep reinforcement learning, their application is limited to video game playing or board game (Mnih et al., 2013;
Silver et al., 2016). On the other hand, in simulated or real
life robotics control (Levine et al., 2016; Schulman et al.,
2015a), the action space is by design continuous. Continuous control typically requires more subtle treatments, since
a continuous range of control contains an inﬁnite number of
feasible actions and one must resort to parametric functions
for a compact representation of distributions over actions.
Can we retain the simplicity of discrete actions when solving continuous control tasks? A straightforward solution is to
discretize the continuous action space, i.e. we discretize the
continuous range of action into a ﬁnite set of atomic actions
and reduce the original task into a new task with a discrete
action space. A common argument against this approach is
that for an action space with M dimensions, discretizing K
atomic actions per dimension leads to M K combinations
of joint atomic actions, which quickly becomes intractable

Background
In the standard formulation of Reinforcement Learning (RL),
at time step t ≥ 0, an agent is in state st ∈ S, takes an
action at ∈ A, receives an instant reward rt = r(st , at ) ∈ R
and transitions to a next state st+1 ∼ p(·|st , at ) ∈ S. Let π :
S → P (A) be a policy, where P (A) is the set of distributions
over the action space A. The discounted
reward

∞ t cumulative
under policy π is J(π) = Eπ
γ
r
,
where
γ
∈
[0, 1)
t
t=0
is a discount factor. The objective of RL is to search for a
policy π that achieves the maximum cumulative reward π ∗ =
arg maxπ J(π). For convenience, under
 policy π we deﬁne
π
action
value
function
Q
(s,
a)
=
E
π J(π)|s0 = s, a0 =

π
a and value function V (s) = Eπ J(π)|s0 = s, a0 ∼
π(·|s0 ) . We also deﬁne the advantage function Aπ (s, a) =
Qπ (s, a) − V π (s). One common way to approximately ﬁnd
π ∗ is through direct policy search within a given policy class
πθ , θ ∈ Θ. The algorithm proceeds by iteratively updating
the policy parameter to search for higher performing policy.

∗
This research was supported in part by an Amazon Research
Award (ARA) and a Google Faculty Research Award.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5981

