The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hide-and-Tell: Learning to Bridge Photo Streams for Visual Storytelling
Yunjae Jung,1 Dahun Kim,1 Sanghyun Woo,1 Kyungsu Kim,2 Sungjin Kim,2 In So Kweon1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea
2
Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd (Samsung Research), Korea

Abstract
Visual storytelling is a task of creating a short story based on
photo streams. Unlike existing visual captioning, storytelling
aims to contain not only factual descriptions, but also humanlike narration and semantics. However, the VIST dataset consists only of a small, ﬁxed number of photos per story. Therefore, the main challenge of visual storytelling is to ﬁll in
the visual gap between photos with narrative and imaginative
story. In this paper, we propose to explicitly learn to imagine
a storyline that bridges the visual gap. During training, one or
more photos is randomly omitted from the input stack, and we
train the network to produce a full plausible story even with
missing photo(s). Furthermore, we propose for visual storytelling a hide-and-tell model, which is designed to learn nonlocal relations across the photo streams and to reﬁne and improve conventional RNN-based models. In experiments, we
show that our scheme of hide-and-tell, and the network design are indeed effective at storytelling, and that our model
outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods in automatic
metrics. Finally, we qualitatively show the learned ability to
interpolate storyline over visual gaps.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Generated Story: (a) The fans were excited for the game.
(b) There were many people there. (c) The lead singer
performed a great performance. (d) The game was very
intense. (e) This was a great game of the game.
Figure 1: Example of our hide-and-tell prediction. In this
example, our hide-and-tell network takes four valid images
and one black image. It is designed to learn contextual relations across the photo stream. Despite the hidden photo,
our predicted sentence (d) ”The game was very intense” is
semantically natural and plausible with the whole story context.

Introduction
Recent deep learning based approaches have shown promising results for vision-to-language problems (Vinyals et al.
2015; Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015; Donahue et al. 2015;
Yu et al. 2016; Pan et al. 2016; Gao et al. 2017) that require the generation of text descriptions from given images
or videos. Most existing methods have focused on giving
direct and factual descriptions of visual content. While this
is a promising ﬁrst step, it is still challenging for artiﬁcial
intelligence to connect vision with more naturalistic and
human-like language. One emerging task proposed to take
one step closer to human-level description is visual storytelling (Huang et al. 2016). Given a stream (set) of photos,
this method aims to create a narrative, evaluative and imaginative story based on semantic visual understanding. While
conventional visual descriptions are visually grounded, visual storytelling tries to describe contextual ﬂow and overall
situation across the photo stream, and so its output sentences
can contain words for objects that do not even appear in the

given image. Therefore, ﬁlling in the visual gap between the
given photos with a subjective and imaginative story is the
main challenge of visual storytelling.
In this paper, we propose to explicitly learn to imagine the
storyline that bridges the visual gap. To this end, we present
an auxiliary hide-and-tell training task to learn such ability.
As shown in Fig. 1, one or more photos in the input stack
are randomly masked during training. We train our model to
produce a full, plausible story even with a missing photo(s).
This image dropout in training encourages our model to describe what is happening in the given stream of photos, as
well as between the photos. Since this story imagination task
is an ill-posed problem, we follow curriculum learning, in
which we start with an original setting in the early steps,
and gradually increase the number of image dropout during
training.
Furthermore, we propose an imagination network that is

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11213

