The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Unsupervised Binary Coding
Networks for Multivariate Time Series Retrieval
Dixian Zhu,†∗ Dongjin Song,‡∗ Yuncong Chen,‡ Cristian Lumezanu,‡ Wei Cheng,‡ Bo Zong,‡
Jingchao Ni,‡ Takehiko Mizoguchi,‡ Tianbao Yang,† Haifeng Chen‡
†

University of Iowa, IA 52242, USA
NEC Laboratories America, Inc., NJ 08540, USA
†
{dixian-zhu, tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu, ‡ {dsong, yuncong, lume, weicheng, bzong, tmizoguchi, jni, haifeng}@nec-labs.com
‡

Abstract
Multivariate time series data are becoming increasingly ubiquitous in varies real-world applications such as smart city,
power plant monitoring, wearable devices, etc. Given the current time series segment, how to retrieve similar segments
within the historical data in an efﬁcient and effective manner is becoming increasingly important. As it can facilitate
underlying applications such as system status identiﬁcation,
anomaly detection, etc. Despite the fact that various binary
coding techniques can be applied to this task, few of them
are specially designed for multivariate time series data in
an unsupervised setting. To this end, we present Deep Unsupervised Binary Coding Networks (DUBCNs) to perform
multivariate time series retrieval. DUBCNs employ the Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) encoder-decoder framework to
capture the temporal dynamics within the input segment and
consist of three key components, i.e., a temporal encoding
mechanism to capture the temporal order of different segments within a mini-batch, a clustering loss on the hidden
feature space to capture the hidden feature structure, and an
adversarial loss based upon Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) to enhance the generalization capability of the generated binary codes. Thoroughly empirical studies on three
public datasets demonstrated that the proposed DUBCNs can
outperform state-of-the-art unsupervised binary coding techniques.

Figure 1: Multivariate time series retrieval task. A binary
vector is learned to represent each segment and the similarity
is measured with Hamming distance.

Since it is often difﬁcult to obtain the label information
of the historical data, we formulate it as an unsupervised
multivariate time series retrieval problem. Speciﬁcally, given
the current multivariate time series segment, i.e., a slice of
multivariate time series that lasts for a ﬁxed period of time,
we aim to ﬁnd similar time series segments in the historical
data (or database) as shown in Figure 1. An ideal solution to
this problem can facilitate underlying applications such as
system status identiﬁcation, anomaly detection, etc.
A naive solution for this problem is to measure the pairwise distance in the raw space based upon Euclidean distance (EU) or Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) (Berndt and
J. 1994; Rakthanmanon et al. 2012). This is usually computationally infeasible if the number and (or) the length of
time series are relatively large. As a result, a surrogate is
to obtain a compact representation of the multivariate time
series segments, and then use a distance measure (e.g., EU
or DTW) to retrieve relevant segments. Over the past few
decades, a number of approaches have been developed to denote a time series segment, e.g., Discrete Fourier Transform
(DCT) (Faloutsos, Ranganathan, and Manolopoulos 1994),
Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) (Chan and Fu 1999),
Piecewise Aggregate Approximation (PAA) (Keogh et al.
2001), etc. Most of these representations, however, are obtained based on human prior knowledge and hence could
be suboptimal for multivariate time series retrieval because

Introduction
Nowadays, multivariate time series data are increasingly collected in numerous real-world applications. For instance, in
a power plant (Prickett, Davies, and R. 2011), a large number of sensors can be employed to monitor the operation status in real-time. With a ﬁtness tracking device, a temporal
sequence of actions (Parkka et al. 2006), e.g., walking for 5
minutes, running for 1 hour, and sitting for 15 minutes, etc,
can be recorded and detected with related sensors. With the
huge amount of historical multivariate time series data, how
to interpret the current status becomes an important problem
to investigate.
∗
These two authors contributed equally to this work. Dongjin
Song is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1403

