The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A New Dataset and Boundary-Attention Semantic Segmentation for Face Parsing
Yinglu Liu, Hailin Shi, Hao Shen, Yue Si, Xiaobo Wang, Tao Mei
JD AI, Beijing, China
{liuyinglu1, shihailin, shenhao, siyue, wangxiaobo8, tmei}@jd.com

Abstract
Face parsing has recently attracted increasing interest due to
its numerous application potentials, such as facial make up
and facial image generation. In this paper, we make contributions on face parsing task from two aspects. First, we develop
a high-efﬁciency framework for pixel-level face parsing annotating and construct a new large-scale Landmark guided
face Parsing dataset (LaPa). It consists of more than 22,000
facial images with abundant variations in expression, pose
and occlusion, and each image of LaPa is provided with an
11-category pixel-level label map and 106-point landmarks.
The dataset is publicly accessible to the community for boosting the advance of face parsing.1 Second, a simple yet effective Boundary-Attention Semantic Segmentation (BASS)
method is proposed for face parsing, which contains a threebranch network with elaborately developed loss functions
to fully exploit the boundary information. Extensive experiments on our LaPa benchmark and the public Helen dataset
show the superiority of our proposed method.

Figure 1: Annotation examples of the proposed LaPa
dataset. It consists of more than 22,000 images with large
variations in pose, facial expression and occlusion. Each image is provided by 106-point landmarks and an 11-category
semantic label map. One can refer to the supplementary material for more examples.

Introduction
Face parsing, aiming to assign pixel-level semantic labels
for facial images, has attracted more and more attentions
due to its wide application potentials, such as facial make
up (Ou et al. 2016) and facial image synthesis (Zhang et al.
2018). In recent years, deep learning promotes the development of face related ﬁelds, such as face recognition (Sun
et al. 2014; Taigman et al. 2014; Schroff, Kalenichenko,
and Philbin 2015; Deng et al. 2019; Fu et al. 2019), face
detection (Zafeiriou, Zhang, and Zhang 2015; Zhang et al.
2017) and face alignment (Zhou et al. 2013; Wu et al. 2017;
Merget, Rock, and Rigoll 2018). However, the development
of face parsing remains slow. One of the major obstacle is
the lack of training data. As is well known, adequate training data is crucial for achieving good results by deep learning methods. However, there are few public datasets for face
parsing due to the difﬁculty and high cost of pixel-level annotation. By contrast, labeling a small number of predeﬁned

landmarks in a facial image is much easier, and it is a feasible way to utilize these landmarks to guide the face parsing annotation. Nevertheless, the public datasets for facial
landmark localization are limited either on the number of
training samples or the number of landmarks. Speciﬁcally,
most of public available datasets are annotated with less than
100 points, which are not enough to depict the shape of facial parts with ﬁne details. For example, the widely used 68point landmarks in 300W (Sagonas et al. 2013) describe the
eyebrow with only 5 points on the upper boundary while
leaving the lower boundary unmarked. The recent 98-point
landmarks in WFLW (Wu et al. 2018) do not cover the regions of nose wing. Needless to say other makeups such
as 21-point in AFLW (Koestinger et al. 2011) and 6-point
in AFW (Baltrusaitis, Robinson, and Morency 2013), they
could be applied for face geometric normalization but are
incompetent to represent boundaries of facial parts. The He-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/lucia123/lapa-dataset
11637

