The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Cross-Aligned Latent Embeddings for Zero-Shot Cross-Modal Retrieval
Kaiyi Lin,1 Xing Xu,1∗ Lianli Gao,1 Zheng Wang,1 Heng Tao Shen1
1

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China

Abstract
Zero-Shot Cross-Modal Retrieval (ZS-CMR) is an emerging
research hotspot that aims to retrieve data of new classes
across different modality data. It is challenging for not only
the heterogeneous distributions across different modalities,
but also the inconsistent semantics across seen and unseen
classes. A handful of recently proposed methods typically
borrow the idea from zero-shot learning, i.e., exploiting word
embeddings of class labels (i.e., class-embeddings) as common semantic space, and using generative adversarial network (GAN) to capture the underlying multimodal data structures, as well as strengthen relations between input data and
semantic space to generalize across seen and unseen classes.
In this paper, we propose a novel method termed Learning Cross-Aligned Latent Embeddings (LCALE) as an alternative to these GAN based methods for ZS-CMR. Unlike using the class-embeddings as the semantic space, our
method seeks for a shared low-dimensional latent space of input multimodal features and class-embeddings by modalityspeciﬁc variational autoencoders. Notably, we align the distributions learned from multimodal input features and from
class-embeddings to construct latent embeddings that contain the essential cross-modal correlation associated with
unseen classes. Effective cross-reconstruction and crossalignment criterions are further developed to preserve classdiscriminative information in latent space, which beneﬁts the
efﬁciency for retrieval and enable the knowledge transfer to
unseen classes. We evaluate our model using four benchmark datasets on image-text retrieval tasks and one largescale dataset on image-sketch retrieval tasks. The experimental results show that our method establishes the new state-ofthe-art performance for both tasks on all datasets.

1

Target Set (Test)

Source Set (Training)
A brown horse and a
tan calf in a pasture.
A brown horse …

A man on a plane is
smiling and looks
surprised.. …

tvmonitor
A hotel room has a
flat-screen TV and
sparse. …

horse

person

bus

A side view of a
passenger bus. The
bus has a red…

cow
lack and white cows
behind a fence.
Black…

A black and white dog
looking at the camera.
A black boxer dog …

One jet lands at an
airport while
another takes off
next to it. …

aeroplane
dog

A white limo is
parked on the side of
a street. …

car

Figure 1: A brief illustration of ZS-CMR, where the multimodal instances of the seen and unseen classes are disjoint.

challenge of cross-media retrieval is that the distributions
and representations of different media types are inconsistent, making it hard to measure the similarity between different modalities. A majority of existing approaches utilize the
training data from different modalities to learn a common
subspace representation that enables the retrieval by using a
suitable distance metric.
Most of existing cross-modal algorithms (Rasiwasia et al.
2010; Wang et al. 2017) consider that data from the same
set of classes are provided during training and testing (retrieval). However, this assumption cannot always hold in
real-world dynamic scenario where the database is enlarging
with data of new classes continuously. In the current pipeline
for cross-modal retrieval, to achieve a good retrieval performance, every time a new class is added to the database, the
current algorithms need to be re-trained from scratch, which
is computationally inefﬁcient. Therefore, we feel that the
generalizability of a model is crucial to unseen new classes.
To this end, this paper focuses on the zero-shot cross-modal
retrieval (ZS-CMR) problem. It aims to perform retrieval
across multiple modality data in the zero-shot setting, where
new categories are supported to retrieve only with limited
categories for training. A brief illustration of ZS-CMR is
shown in Fig. 1. Compared with traditional cross-modal retrieval, ZS-CMR is more challenging since it needs to handle
not only the heterogeneous distributions of different modal-

Introduction

With the explosive growth of multimedia data (e.g., texts,
images, videos and audios) in our daily life, cross-modal retrieval, which aims to support information retrieval across
different modality data, has become an important research
area. The typical retrieval scenarios include image-text retrieval (Deng et al. 2018; Peng et al. 2018) and imagesketch retrieval (Shen et al. 2018; Dey et al. 2019). The key
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11515

