The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Biologically Plausible Sequence Learning with Spiking Neural Networks
Zuozhu Liu,1,3 Thiparat Chotibut,2,3,∗ Christopher Hillar,4,5 Shaowei Lin3
1

Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, National University of Singapore,
2
Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Thailand,
3
Engineering Systems and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, 4 Awecom, Inc,
5
Redwood Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, University of California, Berkeley,
{lcowen.hn, *thiparatc, hillarmath}@gmail.com, shaowei lin@sutd.edu.sg

especially when viewed through the lens of a spiking neural
network (SNN). For example, variational inference and reinforcement learning unveil SNN architectures that perform
probabilistic inference consistent with STDP rules (Nessler
et al. 2013; Pecevski and Maass 2016; Rezende, Wierstra,
and Gerstner 2011). Learning-to-learn methods and Long
Short-Term Memory help identify a novel SNN architecture
with the capability to store long spatiotemporal sequences
of spikes during computation (Bellec et al. 2018). Moreover, building generative models of SNNs from experimental
time-series data of action potentials yields insights into the
network structure generating such spikes (Tyrcha et al. 2013;
Nasser, Marre, and Cessac 2013; Zeng et al. 2013).

Abstract
Motivated by the celebrated discrete-time model of nervous
activity outlined by McCulloch and Pitts in 1943, we propose
a novel continuous-time model, the McCulloch-Pitts network
(MPN), for sequence learning in spiking neural networks. Our
model has a local learning rule, such that the synaptic weight
updates depend only on the information directly accessible
by the synapse. By exploiting asymmetry in the connections
between binary neurons, we show that MPN can be trained to
robustly memorize multiple spatiotemporal patterns of binary
vectors, generalizing the ability of the symmetric Hopﬁeld
network to memorize static spatial patterns. In addition, we
demonstrate that the model can efﬁciently learn sequences of
binary pictures as well as generative models for experimental
neural spike-train data. Our learning rule is consistent with
spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP), thus providing a
theoretical ground for the systematic design of biologically
inspired networks with large and robust long-range sequence
storage capacity.

With the goal of building a biologically plausible generative model of SNNs from spatiotemporal patterns, such as
neural spike-train data, we propose a novel continuous-time
learning algorithm that is consistent with experimentally observed STDP. We deﬁne simple rules for updating states and
learning weights of a continuous-time SNN and demonstrate
that the expected synaptic changes given a pair of presynaptic
and postsynaptic spikes reproduce the STDP curve. As a consequence of our model, we show that the stochasticity of the
refractory period is an important ingredient for reproducing
STDP. Namely, by assuming that the time between the spiking of a neuron and its recovery is stochastic and follows an
exponential distribution, we prove that the expected increase
or decrease in synaptic weights follows STDP-like curves.

Introduction
Experimental evidence from neurobiology reveals that
changes in synaptic weights of some neurons depend on
the timing difference between presynaptic and postsynaptic
spikes (Markram and Sakmann 1995; Gerstner et al. 1996;
Bi and Poo 2001), a concept termed spike-timing-dependent
plasticity (STDP). While deep learning is tremendously successful in numerous machine learning tasks, its underlying
backpropagation learning algorithm is biologically implausible (Bengio et al. 2015). Recent works attempt to bridge this
gap by proposing STDP-consistent training rules for deep
learning (Bengio et al. 2015; 2017; Liu, Quek, and Lin 2018;
Scellier and Bengio 2017), with the hope of uncovering computationally efﬁcient learning algorithms inspired by biological brains. Thorough understanding of STDP-consistent
learning rules and their computing capabilities can also beneﬁt the design of modern bioinspired computing hardware
such as neuromorphic chips.
On the other hand, machine learning can assist in the
quest for understanding how brains perform computation,

In addition to its biological plausibility, our SNN model
is capable of learning sequences of binary vectors, or spatiotemporal patterns of spikes. In the deterministic limit, this
network, a McCulloch-Pitts network (McCulloch and Pitts
1943), is a generalization of the Hopﬁeld network that allows
asymmetric connections between fully-visible binary units.
As a result, deterministic dynamics in the state space can
converge to an attractor of period larger than one (a cycle),
as opposed to a ﬁxed-point corresponding to a static spatial
memory in the Hopﬁeld network. We demonstrate that the
network can be trained to memorize repeating sequences
of binary vectors and that the spatiotemporal memory is robust to perturbation. In particular, given an arbitrary initial
state of the spike pattern, the dynamics generated by the
trained network converge to a memorized cycle. Thus, the

∗

Correspondence to: thiparatc@gmail.com
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1316

