The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Private Bayesian Persuasion with Sequential Games
Andrea Celli,1 Stefano Coniglio,2 Nicola Gatti1
1

2

Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, Milan, Italy
University of Southampton, University Road SO17 1BJ, Southampton, United Kingdom
{andrea.celli, nicola.gatti}@polimi.it, s.coniglio@soton.ac.uk

in order to persuade the receiver to select a favorable action.
The model assumes that the sender commits to the selected
signaling scheme. This hypothesis is realistic in many settings where reputation and credibility are a key factor for
the long-term utility of the sender (Rayo and Segal 2010), as
well as whenever an automated signaling scheme either has
to abide by a contractual service agreement or it is enforced
by a trusted authority (Dughmi 2017).
The extension to the case with multiple receivers is of major interest, see, e.g., its applications to private-value auctions studied by Kaplan and Zamir (2000). In this setting, a
number of works assume a public signal model in which
all the receivers observe the same information (Dughmi,
Immorlica, and Roth 2014; Alonso and Câmara 2016;
Dughmi 2018). A more general setting is the private signal case, in which the sender may tailor receiver-speciﬁc
signals. Persuasion with private signals has been explored
only in very speciﬁc settings, such as two-agents two-action
games (Taneva 2019), unanimity elections (Bardhi and Guo
2018), voting with binary action spaces and binary states of
Nature (Wang 2013), and games with binary action spaces
and no inter-agent externalities (Babichenko and Barman
2016; Arieli and Babichenko 2016; Dughmi and Xu 2017).
As pointed out by Dughmi (2017), the problem of computing private signaling schemes in general multi-receiver settings still lacks a general algorithmic framework.
In this work, we make a further step in this direction and
consider a general model with the following key features: i)
it admits an arbitrary number of receivers’ actions and states
of Nature; ii) it allows inter-agent externalities; 1 iii) it models sequential interactions among receivers. The last point
constitutes the major difference from classical Bayesian persuasion models, which typically assume that the receivers
take their actions simultaneously (Dughmi 2017; Kamenica
2018) as, to the best of our knowledge, we address here the
multi-receiver case with sequential interactions among receivers for the ﬁrst time in the literature. As most of the realworld economic interactions take place sequentially, this allows for a greater modeling ﬂexibility which could be exploited in the context of, e.g., sequential auctions (Leme,

Abstract
We study an information-structure design problem (a.k.a. a
persuasion problem) with a single sender and multiple receivers with actions of a priori unknown types, independently
drawn from action-speciﬁc marginal probability distributions.
As in the standard Bayesian persuasion model, the sender has
access to additional information regarding the action types,
which she can exploit when committing to a (noisy) signaling scheme through which she sends a private signal to each
receiver. The novelty of our model is in considering the much
more expressive case in which the receivers interact in a sequential game with imperfect information, with utilities depending on the game outcome and the realized action types.
After formalizing the notions of ex ante and ex interim persuasiveness (which differ by the time at which the receivers
commit to following the sender’s signaling scheme), we investigate the continuous optimization problem of computing
a signaling scheme which maximizes the sender’s expected
revenue. We show that computing an optimal ex ante persuasive signaling scheme is NP-hard when there are three or
more receivers. Instead, in contrast with previous hardness results for ex interim persuasion, we show that, for games with
two receivers, an optimal ex ante persuasive signaling scheme
can be computed in polynomial time thanks to the novel algorithm we propose, based on the ellipsoid method.

Bayesian persuasion, introduced by Kamenica and
Gentzkow (2011), revolves around inﬂuencing the behavior of self-interested agents through the provision of payoffrelevant information. Differently from traditional mechanism design, where the designer inﬂuences the outcome
by providing tangible incentives, in Bayesian persuasion
the designer inﬂuences the outcome by deciding who gets
to know what (Bergemann and Morris 2016b). Real-world
applications are ubiquitous. For instance, this framework
has been recently applied to security problems (Rabinovich
et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2015; 2016), ﬁnancial-sector stress
testing (Goldstein and Leitner 2018), voting (Alonso and
Câmara 2016; Castiglioni, Celli, and Gatti 2019), and online advertisement (Badanidiyuru, Bhawalkar, and Xu 2018;
Emek et al. 2012).
The classical Bayesian persuasion framework comprises a
single sender and a single receiver. The sender, who has access to some private information, designs a signaling scheme

1

When there are inter-agent externalities, the utility of a receiver is determined by the state of Nature, her action, and (crucially) the actions selected by all the other receivers.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1886

