The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Effective Data Augmentation with Multi-Domain Learning GANs
Shin’ya Yamaguchi,1 Sekitoshi Kanai,1,2 Takeharu Eda1
1

NTT Software Innovation Center
2
Keio University
Tokyo, Japan
{shinya.yamaguchi.mw, sekitoshi.kanai.fu, takeharu.eda.bx}@hco.ntt.co.jp

one of the main obstacles in the entire deployment of deep
models since it requires a lot of time and high costs.

Abstract
For deep learning applications, the massive data development (e.g., collecting, labeling), which is an essential process
in building practical applications, still incurs seriously high
costs. In this work, we propose an effective data augmentation
method based on generative adversarial networks (GANs),
called Domain Fusion. Our key idea is to import the knowledge contained in an outer dataset to a target model by using a multi-domain learning GAN. The multi-domain learning GAN simultaneously learns the outer and target dataset
and generates new samples for the target tasks. The simultaneous learning process makes GANs generate the target samples with high ﬁdelity and variety. As a result, we can obtain accurate models for the target tasks by using these generated samples even if we only have an extremely low volume target dataset. We experimentally evaluate the advantages of Domain Fusion in image classiﬁcation tasks on 3 target datasets: CIFAR-100, FGVC-Aircraft, and Indoor Scene
Recognition. When trained on each target dataset reduced
the samples to 5,000 images, Domain Fusion achieves better classiﬁcation accuracy than the data augmentation using
ﬁne-tuned GANs. Furthermore, we show that Domain Fusion
improves the quality of generated samples, and the improvements can contribute to higher accuracy.

One of the most common techniques to alleviate the costs
of labeled data developments is data augmentation (DA). To
improve the performance of the target task (e.g., classiﬁcation or regression), DA ampliﬁes the variation of existing
labeled data (target data) by adding small transformations
(e.g., random expansion, ﬂip, and rotation). Since DA improves the performance despite its simplicity and has no dependency on network architectures, it is widely applied to
many applications (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Ko et al. 2015). However, when we train target models on
low-volume datasets, the improvements by DA is limited because DA is designed to transform an existing sample into a
slightly modiﬁed sample. In other words, DA does not generate truly unseen data, which have information not included
in the data to be transformed. For example, in image recognition, DA is not able to transform running-horse images into
sitting-horse images. Therefore, the beneﬁt of DA is limited
when we only have low-volume datasets.
Several methods (Tran et al. 2017; Zheng, Zheng, and
Yang 2017; Calimeri et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2018; Antoniou, Storkey, and Edwards 2018) have been presented to
overcome the limitation of DA by applying generative adversarial networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al. (2014)). GANs
generate various and realistic data samples by learning data
distributions; they can generate unseen samples from the
learned distributions. The existing methods employ this ability and use the generated samples as additional input for the
target task. Although these GAN-based methods succeed at
improving the target performance, they assume that there is
a sufﬁcient volume of data for training GANs. In fact, in the
case of low volume data, the generated samples have less
ﬁdelity and variety and can degrade the target performance
(Wang et al. 2018; Shmelkov, Schmid, and Alahari 2018).
This is because low volume data has insufﬁcient knowledge,
and thus, we need to utilize supplementary knowledge for
training GANs. To train GANs with low-volume target data,
Wang et al. (2018) proposed Transferring GANs (TGANs)
which incorporate a ﬁne-tuning technique into GANs. However, Wang et al. experimentally show TGANs do not improve the generating performance very well when we have

Introduction
Deep learning models have demonstrated state-of-the-art
performance in various tasks using high dimensional data
such as computer vision (Real et al. 2019), speech recognition (Zeyer et al. 2018), and natural language processing
(Vaswani et al. 2017). These models achieve the high performance by optimizing their millions of parameters through
the training on labeled data. Since the models can easily
overﬁt the small data due to the enormous parameters, the
generalization performance tends to be in proportion to the
size of labeled data. In fact, Sun et al. (2017) experimentally
showed that the test performance on vision tasks could be
improved logarithmically with the labeled data size. To obtain higher performance of deep models, we must develop as
many labeled data as possible by collecting data and attaching labels. However, developing the labeled data becomes
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6566

