The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph Transformer for Graph-to-Sequence Learning∗
Deng Cai, Wai Lam
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
thisisjcykcd@gmail.com, wlam@se.cuhk.edu.hk

The boy wants the girl to believe him.

Abstract

want-01

The dominant graph-to-sequence transduction models employ graph neural networks for graph representation learning,
where the structural information is reﬂected by the receptive
ﬁeld of neurons. Unlike graph neural networks that restrict
the information exchange between immediate neighborhood,
we propose a new model, known as Graph Transformer, that
uses explicit relation encoding and allows direct communication between two distant nodes. It provides a more efﬁcient
way for global graph structure modeling. Experiments on the
applications of text generation from Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) and syntax-based neural machine translation show the superiority of our proposed model. Speciﬁcally,
our model achieves 27.4 BLEU on LDC2015E86 and 29.7
BLEU on LDC2017T10 for AMR-to-text generation, outperforming the state-of-the-art results by up to 2.2 points. On
the syntax-based translation tasks, our model establishes new
single-model state-of-the-art BLEU scores, 21.3 for Englishto-German and 14.1 for English-to-Czech, improving over
the existing best results, including ensembles, by over 1
BLEU.

want-01

ARG1

ARG1
ARG0

believe-01
ARG0

girl

ARG0

believe-01

ARG1

boy

ARG0

ARG1

boy

girl

Figure 1: An AMR graph (left) for the reference sentence
“The boy wants the girl to believe him.” and the corresponding Levi graph (right).
While early work uses statistical methods or neural models after the linearization of graphs, graph neural networks
(GNNs) have been ﬁrmly established as the state-of-theart approaches for this task (Damonte and Cohen 2019;
Guo et al. 2019). GNNs typically compute the representation of each node iteratively based on those of its adjacent nodes. This inherently local propagation nature precludes efﬁcient global communication, which becomes critical at larger graph sizes, as the distance between two nodes
exceeds the number of stacked layers. For instance, for
two nodes staying L hops away, at least L layers will be
needed in order to capture their dependencies. Furthermore,
even if two distant nodes are reachable, the information
may also be disrupted in the long journey (Xu et al. 2018;
Guo et al. 2019).
To address the above problems, we propose a new model,
known as Graph Transformer, which relies entirely on the
multi-head attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017) to
draw global dependencies.1 Different to GNNs, the Graph
Transformer allows modeling of dependencies between any
two nodes without regard to their distance in the input graph.
One undesirable consequence is that it essentially treats any

Introduction
Graphical structure plays an important role in natural language processing (NLP), they often serve as the central formalism for representing syntax, semantics, and knowledge.
For example, most syntactic representations (e.g., dependency relation) are tree-based while most whole-sentence
semantic representation frameworks (e.g., Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) (Banarescu et al. 2013)) encode
sentence meaning as directed acyclic graphs. A range of
NLP applications can be framed as the process of graphto-sequence learning. For instance, text generation may involve realizing a semantic graph into a surface form (Liu
et al. 2015) and syntactic machine translation incorporates
source-side syntax information for improving translation
quality (Bastings et al. 2017). Fig. 1 gives an example of
AMR-to-text generation.
∗

The work described in this paper is substantially supported by
a grant from the Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, China (Project Code: 14204418).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We note that the name Graph Transformer was used in a recent
work (Koncel-Kedziorski et al. 2019). However, it merely focuses
on the relations between directly connected nodes as other graph
neural networks.

7464

