The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Time2Graph: Revisiting Time
Series Modeling with Dynamic Shapelets
Ziqiang Cheng,† Yang Yang,†∗ Wei Wang,‡ Wenjie Hu,† Yueting Zhuang,† Guojie Song§
†

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
‡
State Grid Huzhou Power Supply Co. Ltd, China
§
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Ministry of Education, Peking University

which is reﬂected in two respects. First, the same shapelet appearing at different time slices may have a range of different
impacts. For instance, in the scenario of detecting electricity theft, low electricity consumption in summer or winter
is more suspicious than it is in spring, as refrigeration or
heating equipments costs more electrical power. Second, determining the ways in which shapelets evolve is vital to a full
understanding of a time series. In fact, shapelets with small
values at a particular time can hardly distinguish an electricity
thief from a normal user who indeed regularly consumes a
low level of electricity. An alternative method would involve
identifying users who once had high electricity consumption
shapelets but suddenly consumes very few electrical power
for a while. In other words, an important clue here is how
shapelets evolve over time. We refer to the subsequences of
a time series that are able to reﬂect its representativeness at
different time slices as time-aware shapelets.

Abstract
Time series modeling has attracted extensive research efforts;
however, achieving both reliable efﬁciency and interpretability from a uniﬁed model still remains a challenging problem.
Among the literature, shapelets offer interpretable and explanatory insights in the classiﬁcation tasks, while most existing
works ignore the differing representative power at different
time slices, as well as (more importantly) the evolution pattern
of shapelets. In this paper, we propose to extract time-aware
shapelets by designing a two-level timing factor. Moreover,
we deﬁne and construct the shapelet evolution graph, which
captures how shapelets evolve over time and can be incorporated into the time series embeddings by graph embedding
algorithms. To validate whether the representations obtained
in this way can be applied effectively in various scenarios, we
conduct experiments based on three public time series datasets,
and two real-world datasets from different domains. Experimental results clearly show the improvements achieved by our
approach compared with 16 state-of-the-art baselines.

1

There are several challenges involved in modeling the dynamics of shapelets. First, how can time-aware shapelets
be deﬁned, and then, be extracted? Traditional algorithms
generate a set of static time series subsequences as candidates, then select subsequences with the most discriminatory power according to certain criterion (Lines et al. 2012).
However, dynamic shapelets have not been well deﬁned yet,
and the criterion used before are often not differentiable
if parameterized timing weights are added. To the best of
our knowledge, the question of how time-aware shapelets
might be extracted remains open. Second, how can the evolutions of shapelets be captured? One possible solution would
be to explore the shapelet sequences, which consist of ordered shapelets assigned to each segment of the time series. However, as each segment may be assigned by several
shapelets with different probabilities, enumerating all possible shapelet sequences is quite time-consuming, where the
time complexity is O(mK ) (m is the number of segments
and K is the number of shapelets). A more reliable solution
would be to construct a transition matrix (graph) whereby
each element (edge) represents the probability of a shapelet
appearing after another, but how to construct and analyze
such matrix (graph) reasonably is nontrivial. Third, how can
the evolution patterns of shapelets for modeling the given
time series be utilized? Inspired by the recent success of

Introduction

Time series modeling aims to discover the temporal relationships within chronologically arranged data. The key issue here is how to extract the representative features of
a time series. A large part of previous frameworks range
from classical feature engineering and representation learning to deep learning based models. While these methods
have achieved good performance (Malhotra et al. 2016;
Johnson et al. 2016), they have also been subject to criticism regarding their lack of interpretability. On the other
hand, shapelets, the time series subsequences that are representative of a class (Ye and Keogh 2011), can offer directly interpretable and explanatory insights in the classiﬁcation scenario, and shapelet-based models have proven to be
promising in various practical domains (Ye and Keogh 2009;
Xing, Pei, and Yu 2012; Lines et al. 2012; Rakthanmanon
and Keogh 2013; Grabocka et al. 2014; Hills et al. 2014;
Bostrom and Bagnall 2017).
Existing efforts have mainly considered shapelets as static.
However, in the real world, shapelets are often dynamic,
∗

Corresponding author: Yang Yang, yangya@zju.edu.cn
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3617

