The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fast Nonparametric Estimation of Class
Proportions in the Positive-Unlabeled Classiﬁcation Setting
Daniel Zeiberg, Shantanu Jain, Predrag Radivojac
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, U.S.A.

prevalence of natural, physical or social phenomena or in
business to characterize the userbase and can therefore be
an integral part of knowledge generation and decision support. However, class prior estimation also has instrumental
value in machine learning research as a key component in
the development and evaluation of classiﬁcation models in
the PU setting (Elkan and Noto 2008; Ward et al. 2009;
Menon et al. 2015; Jain, White, and Radivojac 2016; 2017).
Following Elkan and Noto (2008), we will refer to the
models developed to discriminate between positive and negative examples as traditional classiﬁers and the models that
discriminate between positive and unlabeled examples as
nontraditional classiﬁers. Surprisingly, an optimal nontraditional model is simultaneously an optimal traditional model
for a broad class of loss functions and performance measures, including classiﬁcation accuracy and the area under
the ROC curve (Reid and Williamson 2010). However, the
task of approximating posterior distributions is substantially
more difﬁcult and requires estimation of class priors in the
set of unlabeled examples in order to transform a nontraditional classiﬁer into a traditional classiﬁer (Ward et al. 2009;
Jain, White, and Radivojac 2016).
Another task requiring knowledge of class priors is accurate estimation of classiﬁcation performance. Even in the
cases where optimal traditional and nontraditional classiﬁers are equivalent, the true traditional performance can
wildly differ from its nontraditional estimates (Jain, White,
and Radivojac 2017; Ramola, Jain, and Radivojac 2019). It
has been recently shown that many true performance measures can be recovered if one has well-estimated class priors (Menon et al. 2015; Jain, White, and Radivojac 2017;
Ramola, Jain, and Radivojac 2019). Furthermore, certain
performance metrics, such as balanced error rate and the
Matthews correlation, permit optimal thresholding of the
raw prediction scores based solely on nontraditional evaluation, whereas metrics such as error rate and F1 score do not
guarantee optimal performance (Ramola, Jain, and Radivojac 2019). The latter group of metrics, together with sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and precision, require class prior estimation
for the thresholding task.
Nonparametric estimation of mixing proportions in the
PU setting has been actively researched. Important directions include (non)identiﬁability results (Ward et al. 2009;
Scott and Blanchard 2009; Blanchard, Lee, and Scott 2010;

Abstract
Estimating class proportions has emerged as an important direction in positive-unlabeled learning. Well-estimated class
priors are key to accurate approximation of posterior distributions and are necessary for the recovery of true classiﬁcation
performance. While signiﬁcant progress has been made in the
past decade, there remains a need for accurate strategies that
scale to big data. Motivated by this need, we propose an intuitive and fast nonparametric algorithm to estimate class proportions. Unlike any of the previous methods, our algorithm
uses a sampling strategy to repeatedly (1) draw an example
from the set of positives, (2) record the minimum distance to
any of the unlabeled examples, and (3) remove the nearest
unlabeled example. We show that the point of sharp increase
in the recorded distances corresponds to the desired proportion of positives in the unlabeled set and train a deep neural
network to identify that point. Our distance-based algorithm
is evaluated on forty datasets and compared to all currently
available methods. We provide evidence that this new approach results in the most accurate performance and can be
readily used on large datasets.

Introduction
Positive-unlabeled, or PU learning, has emerged as an active and important area of machine learning research (Denis
1998; Denis, Gilleron, and Letouzey 2005; du Plessis, Niu,
and Sugiyama 2014; Hsieh, Natarajan, and Dhillon 2015;
Chang et al. 2016). It generally refers to a binary classiﬁcation setting where learning discriminators between positive and negative examples is based on the data that contain
positively labeled examples and a set of unlabeled examples
that contain an unknown mix of positives and negatives. The
PU framework is well-suited to open world problems and
is common in science and commerce. Typical applications
are found in molecular biology, medicine, social networks,
text mining, online advertising, etc. (Liu et al. 2003; Lee and
Liu 2003; Yu, Han, and Chang 2004; Elkan and Noto 2008;
Ward et al. 2009).
The focus of this work is on the positive-unlabeled setting and the problem of estimating fractions of positive and
negative examples, or class priors, in unlabeled data. Such
a task is often considered in sciences to understand the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6729

