The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

EAC-Net: Efﬁcient and Accurate
Convolutional Network for Video Recognition
Bowei Jin, Zhuo Xu
iFLYTEK Research, Suzhou, China
{bwjin, zhuoxu}@iﬂytek.com

For video classiﬁcation task, recent popular architectures
can be divided into two categories based on whether there
is spatio-temporal fusion procedure. Two-stream 2D CNN
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) as the representative for
architectures without spatio-temporal fusion, capturing appearance and temporal information from RGB and optical
ﬂow inputs, which has turned out to be effective for video
classiﬁcation. 3D CNN (Ji et al. 2012; Tran et al. 2015) is
the representative for models with spatio-temporal modeling, which have been experiencing rapid development since
Kinetics dataset (Kay et al. 2017) available. Several recent
works focus on modeling appearance information and interframe relations through separate branches within a spatiotemporal module (Zhou et al. 2018b; Qiu, Yao, and Mei
2017; Wang et al. 2018a) for empowering the representation
for video tasks. Moreover, several other methods seek to alleviate training complexity of 3D kernels via factorization to
facilitate learning of spatio-temporal information (Sun et al.
2015; Xie et al. 2018; Tran et al. 2018).
Most recent approaches focus their mind on how to learn
expressive spatio-temporal representation for video classiﬁcation task but all suffer the problem of heavy computation
cost during inference. One factor leading to this problem
is that extension of 2D CNN by integrating spatio-temporal
modules usually results in large additional computation. Another factor is that most high-performance approaches tend
to test on many clips, each of which is densely sampled from
a raw video, and whole inference time becomes to multiply
the time of once forward of a clip. Therefore, in practical
use, studying approaches with better trade-off between accuracy and computation cost is very signiﬁcant.
Given the aforementioned concerns, we propose our
EAC-Net framework as one solution to the problem of tradeoff between computation cost and performance. We designed MGTE block for temporal modeling, which consists
of two branch, one is temporal max pooling which summarizes the responses between consecutive features and makes
the temporal relation encoding become invariant to small
changes. Another branch encodes the temporal relations of
neighbor frames by temporal convolutions and then reﬁned
via a gate layer controlled by motion information. Inserting
MGTE blocks into 2D CNNs makes the short-term spatio-

Abstract
Research for computation-efﬁcient video understanding is of
great importance to real-world deployment. However, most
of high-performance approaches are too computationally expensive for practical application. Though several efﬁciency
oriented works are proposed, they inevitably suffer degradation of performance in terms of accuracy. In this paper, we
explore a new architecture EAC-Net, enjoying both high efﬁciency and high performance. Speciﬁcally, we propose Motion Guided Temporal Encode (MGTE) blocks for temporal modeling, which exploits motion information and temporal relations among neighbor frames. EAC-Net is then
constructed by inserting multiple MGTE blocks to common
2D CNNs. Furthermore, we proposed Atrous Temporal Encode (ATE) block for capturing long-term temporal relations
at multiple time scales for further enhancing representation
power of EAC-Net. Through experiments on Kinetics, our
EAC-Nets achieved better results than TSM models with
fewer FLOPs. With same 2D backbones, EAC-Nets outperformed Non-Local I3D counterparts by achieving higher accuracy with only about 7× fewer FLOPs. On SomethingSomething-V1 dataset, EAC-Net achieved 47% top-1 accuracy with 70G FLOPs which is 0.9% more accurate and 8×
less FLOPs than that of Non-Local I3D+GCN.

Introduction
Along with recent outstanding performance achieved by
CNNs for image domains, such as semantic segmentation
(Li et al. 2017; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Zhang
et al. 2018) object detection (Liu et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2015)
and classiﬁcation (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al.
2016; Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018), the use of CNNs has been
expanding signiﬁcantly in other ﬁelds of computer vision.
In particular, a variety of CNN based methods have been
proposed for the tasks of video recognition, and have obtained better performance to methods by traditional handcrafted features (Laptev 2005; Laptev et al. 2008; Scovanner, Ali, and Shah 2007; Wang and Schmid 2013). Compared with still image classiﬁcation, video recognition is a
much more challenging task due to its higher dimensional
and more complicated input signals.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11149

