The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Graph Auto-Encoder for Haplotype
Assembly and Viral Quasispecies Reconstruction
Ziqi Ke, Haris Vikalo
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
ziqike@utexas.edu, hvikalo@ece.utexas.edu

limited lengths of reads and presence of sequencing errors
(Hashemi, Zhu, and Vikalo 2018). Particularly difﬁcult is
the assembly of haplotypes in polyploids, organisms with
chromosomes organized in k-tuples with k > 2, where deep
coverage is typically required to achieve desired accuracy.
This implies high cost and often renders existing haplotype
assembly techniques practically infeasible (Motazedi et al.
2018).
A closely related problem to haplotype assembly is that
of reconstructing viral communities. RNA viruses such as
HCV, HIV, and Ebola, are characterized by high mutation
rates which give rise to communities of viral genomes, the
so-called viral quasispecies. Determining genetic diversity
of a virus is essential for the understanding of its origin and
mutation patterns, and the development of effective drug
treatments. Reconstructing viral quasispecies (i.e., viral haplotypes, as we refer to them for convenience) is even more
challenging than haplotype assembly (Ahn, Ke, and Vikalo
2018) since the number of constituent strains in a community
is typically unknown, and its spectra (i.e., strain frequencies)
non-uniform.
Existing methods often approach haplotype assembly as
the task of grouping sequencing reads according to their
chromosomal origin into as many clusters as there are chromosomes. Separation of reads into clusters is rendered challenging by their limited lengths and the presence of sequencing errors (Hashemi, Zhu, and Vikalo 2018); such artifacts
create ambiguities regarding the origin of the reads. The
vast majority of existing haplotype assembly methods attempt to remove the aforementioned ambiguity by altering or
even discarding the data, leading to minimum SNP removal
(Lancia et al. 2001), maximum fragments cut (Duitama et
al. 2010), and minimum error correction (MEC) score (Lippert et al. 2002) optimization criteria. Majority of haplotype
assembly methods developed in recent years are focused
on optimizing the MEC score, i.e., determining the smallest possible number of nucleotides in sequencing reads that
should be altered such that the resulting dataset is consistent with having originated from k haplotypes (k denotes the
ploidy of an organism) (Xie et al. 2016; Pisanti et al. 2015;
Kuleshov 2014; Patterson et al. 2015). These include the
branch-and-bound scheme (Wang et al. 2005), an integer

Abstract
Reconstructing components of a genomic mixture from data
obtained by means of DNA sequencing is a challenging problem encountered in a variety of applications including single
individual haplotyping and studies of viral communities. Highthroughput DNA sequencing platforms oversample mixture
components to provide massive amounts of reads whose relative positions can be determined by mapping the reads to a
known reference genome; assembly of the components, however, requires discovery of the reads’ origin – an NP-hard
problem that the existing methods struggle to solve with the
required level of accuracy. In this paper, we present a learning
framework based on a graph auto-encoder designed to exploit
structural properties of sequencing data. The algorithm is a
neural network which essentially trains to ignore sequencing
errors and infers the posterior probabilities of the origin of
sequencing reads. Mixture components are then reconstructed
by ﬁnding consensus of the reads determined to originate from
the same genomic component. Results on realistic synthetic
as well as experimental data demonstrate that the proposed
framework reliably assembles haplotypes and reconstructs
viral communities, often signiﬁcantly outperforming state-ofthe-art techniques. Source codes, datasets and supplementary
document are available at https://github.com/WuLoli/GAEseq.

1

Introduction

Genetic makeup of a biological sample, inferred by means of
DNA sequencing, will help determine an individual’s susceptibility to a broad range of chronic and acute diseases, support
the discovery of new pharmaceutical products, and personalize and improve the delivery of health care. However, before
the promises of personalized medicine come to fruition, efﬁcient methods for accurate inference of genetic variations
from massive DNA sequencing data must be devised.
Information about variations in an individual genome is
provided by haplotypes, ordered lists of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) on the individual’s chromosomes
(Schwartz 2010). High-throughput DNA sequencing technologies generate massive amounts of reads that sample an
individual genome and thus enable studies of genetic variations (Schwartz 2010; Clark 2004; Sabeti et al. 2002). Haplotype reconstruction, however, remains challenging due to
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

719

This work was funded in part by the NSF grant CCF 1618427.

