The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cross-Modality Attention with Semantic
Graph Embedding for Multi-Label Classiﬁcation
Renchun You,1∗ Zhiyao Guo,2∗ Lei Cui,3∗ Xiang Long,1 Yingze Bao,1 Shilei Wen1†
1
Baidu VIS
Computer Science Department, Xiamen University, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
{yourenchun, longxiang, wenshilei}@baidu.com, {guozhiyao45, baoyingze}@gmail.com, cuil19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

usually provides poor performance, since the semantic dependencies among multiple labels are ignored, which are especially important for multi-label classiﬁcation. Therefore, a
number of prior works aim to capture the label relations by
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). However, these methods do not model the explicit relationships between semantic labels and image regions, thus they lack the capacity of
sufﬁcient exploitation of the spatial dependency in images.
An alternative solution for MLIC is to introduce object detection techniques. Some methods (Wei et al. 2014;
Zhang et al. 2018; Hao et al. 2016) extract region proposals using extra bounding box annotations, which are much
more expensive to label than simple image level annotations. Many other methods (Wang et al. 2017; Zhu et al.
2017) apply attention mechanism to automatically focus on
the regions of interest. However, the attentional regions are
learned only with image-level supervision, which lacks explicit semantic guidance.
To address above issues, we argue that an effective model
for multi-label classiﬁcation should reach two capacities: (1)
capturing semantic dependencies among multiple labels in
terms of spatial context; (2) locating regions of interest with
more semantic guidance.
In this paper, we propose a novel cross-modality attention network associated with graph embedding, so as to
simultaneously search for discriminative regions and label spatial semantic dependencies. Firstly, we introduce
a novel Adjacency-based Similarity Graph Embedding
(ASGE) method which captures the rich semantic relations
between labels. Secondly, the learned label embedding will
guide the generation of attentional regions in terms of crossmodality guidance, which is referred to as Cross-modality
Attention (CMA) in this paper. Compared with traditional
self-attention methods, our attention explicitly introduces
the rich label semantic relations. Beneﬁting from the CMA
mechanism, our attentional regions are more meaningful and
discriminative. Therefore they capture more useful information while suppressing the noise or background information
for classiﬁcation. Furthermore, the spatial context dependencies of labels will be captured, which further improve
the performance in MLIC.
The major contributions of this paper are brieﬂy summa-

Abstract
Multi-label image and video classiﬁcation are fundamental
yet challenging tasks in computer vision. The main challenges lie in capturing spatial or temporal dependencies between labels and discovering the locations of discriminative
features for each class. In order to overcome these challenges,
we propose to use cross-modality attention with semantic
graph embedding for multi-label classiﬁcation. Based on the
constructed label graph, we propose an adjacency-based similarity graph embedding method to learn semantic label embeddings, which explicitly exploit label relationships. Then
our novel cross-modality attention maps are generated with
the guidance of learned label embeddings. Experiments on
two multi-label image classiﬁcation datasets (MS-COCO and
NUS-WIDE) show our method outperforms other existing
state-of-the-arts. In addition, we validate our method on a
large multi-label video classiﬁcation dataset (YouTube-8M
Segments) and the evaluation results demonstrate the generalization capability of our method.

1

Introduction

Multi-label image classiﬁcation (MLIC) and multi-label
video classiﬁcation (MLVC) are important tasks in computer
vision, where the goal is to predict a set of categories present
in an image or a video. Compared with single-label classiﬁcation (e.g. assigns one label to an image or video), multilabel classiﬁcation is more useful in many applications such
as internet search, security surveillance, robotics, etc. Since
MLIC and MLVC are very similar tasks, in the following
technical discussion we will mainly focus on MLIC, whose
conclusions can be migrated to MLVC naturally.
Recently, single-label image classiﬁcation has achieved
great success thanks to the evolution of deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) (He et al. 2016; Huang et al.
2017; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al. 2016).
Single-label image classiﬁcation can be naively extended to
MLIC tasks by treating the problem as a series of singlelabel classiﬁcation tasks. However, such naive extension
∗

These authors share ﬁrst authroship.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12709

