The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Potential Passenger Flow Prediction:
A Novel Study for Urban Transportation Development
Yongshun Gong,1 Zhibin Li,1 Jian Zhang,1 Wei Liu,1 Jinfeng Yi2
1

Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
2
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
{yongshun.gong, zhibin.li}@student.uts.edu.au; {jian.zhang, wei.liu}@uts.edu.au; yijinfeng@jd.com

Abstract
Recently, practical applications for passenger ﬂow prediction
have brought many beneﬁts to urban transportation development. With the development of urbanization, a real-world
demand from transportation managers is to construct a new
metro station in one city area that never planned before. Authorities are interested in the picture of the future volume
of commuters before constructing a new station, and estimate how would it affect other areas. In this paper, this speciﬁc problem is termed as potential passenger ﬂow (PPF)
prediction, which is a novel and important study connected
with urban computing and intelligent transportation systems.
For example, an accurate PPF predictor can provide invaluable knowledge to designers, such as the advice of station
scales and inﬂuences on other areas, etc. To address this problem, we propose a multi-view localized correlation learning
method. The core idea of our strategy is to learn the passenger ﬂow correlations between the target areas and their localized areas with adaptive-weight. To improve the prediction
accuracy, other domain knowledge is involved via a multiview learning process. We conduct intensive experiments to
evaluate the effectiveness of our method with real-world ofﬁcial transportation datasets. The results demonstrate that our
method can achieve excellent performance compared with
other available baselines. Besides, our method can provide
an effective solution to the cold-start problem in the recommender system as well, which proved by its outperformed experimental results.

Figure 1: The example of PPF prediction problem. We aim
to forecast the passenger ﬂows of target areas (e.g., a6 , a7 ,
a9 ) across the entire city network.

With the growth of intelligent transportation systems, passenger ﬂow prediction models concentrate on discovering
the volume of crowds and mobility patterns that best serve
people’s daily life (Pan et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019).
Recent advances in passenger ﬂow prediction are focusing mainly on next time interval ﬂow conditions with time
evolves (Gong et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2015). If a brand-new
metro station is inserted into the original metro network,
existing predictors have to collect a large amount of latest transactional data to ensure normal operation. However,
a real-world requirement from transportation authorities is

that they want to obtain the potential passenger ﬂows (PPF)
of a planned city area in advance (i.e., before constructing
a station in this area). It is signiﬁcant for the urban trafﬁc
development and transportation management, as it can provide insights for the site selection of stations and analysis of
passenger movement patterns, as well as give the potential
crowd warning.
In the PPF prediction task, concentrating solely on the entrance and exit potential ﬂows does not provide adequate information, authorities also desperately want to master the
distribution of predicted PPF, i.e., forecast the number of
potential passengers moving to different destinations. It is
utmost important to ﬁnd how will the new station affect
other areas. For instance, Figure 1 illustrates an example
of the PPF prediction problem. A city region is partitioned
into nine areas1 , six of them have metro stations (termed as
known areas), and three have not constructed yet (termed as
target areas). The right part of Figure 1 presents an origindestination (OD) matrix (each row point is the origin area
and column points are destinations), e.g., F (a1 , a3 ) = 130
indicates that there are 130 passengers departure from a1
and are going to the a3 . PPF task aims to make an accurate

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We use grids for clear and simple illustration, the real partition
standard is explained in the section of data description.

Introduction

4020

