The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Syntactically Look-Ahead Attention Network for Sentence Compression
Hidetaka Kamigaito, Manabu Okumura
Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
kamigaito@lr.pi.titech.ac.jp, oku@pi.titech.ac.jp

Their model learns dependency trees and compresses sentences jointly to avoid the effect of parsing errors. This improvement enables their model to compress a sentence while
preserving the important words and its ﬂuency.
However, since their method focuses only on parent
words, important child words of the currently decoded word
would be lost in compressed sentences. That is, in Seq2Seq
models, because the decoder unidirectionally compresses
sentences, it cannot usually explicitly capture the relationships between decoded words and unseen words which will
be decoded in the future time steps. As the result, to avoid
producing ungrammatical sentences, the decoder sometimes
drops important words in compressing sentences. To solve
the problem, we need to track both parent and child words
to capture unseen important words that will be decoded in
the future time steps.
Fig.1 shows an example of sentence compression1 that
needs to track both parent and child words. Since the input sentence mentions the export of the plane between two
countries, we have to retain the name of the plane, import
country and export country in the compressed sentence.
When the decoder reads “Japan”, it should recursively
track both the parent and child words of “Japan”. Then, it
can decide to retain “hold” that is the parent of “Japan” and
the syntactic head of the sentence. By retaining “hold” in the
compressed sentence, it can also retain “Japan”, “and” and
“India” because these are the child and grandchild of “hold”
(the top case in Fig.1).
When the decoder reads “hold”, it should ﬁnd the important phrase “Japan’s export” by recursively tracking child
words from “hold”. The tracking also supports the decoder
for retaining “talks” and “on” to produce grammatical compression (the middle case).
When the decoder reads “export”, it should track child
words to ﬁnd the important phrase “US2 rescue plane” and
retain “of” for producing grammatical compression (the bottom case).
Note that a decoder that tracks only parent words cannot
ﬁnd the important phrases or produce grammatical compres-

Abstract
Sentence compression is the task of compressing a long
sentence into a short one by deleting redundant words. In
sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) based models, the decoder
unidirectionally decides to retain or delete words. Thus, it
cannot usually explicitly capture the relationships between
decoded words and unseen words that will be decoded in
the future time steps. Therefore, to avoid generating ungrammatical sentences, the decoder sometimes drops important
words in compressing sentences. To solve this problem, we
propose a novel Seq2Seq model, syntactically look-ahead attention network (SLAHAN), that can generate informative
summaries by explicitly tracking both dependency parent and
child words during decoding and capturing important words
that will be decoded in the future. The results of the automatic evaluation on the Google sentence compression dataset
showed that SLAHAN achieved the best kept-token-basedF1, ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L scores of 85.5,
79.3, 71.3 and 79.1, respectively. SLAHAN also improved
the summarization performance on longer sentences. Furthermore, in the human evaluation, SLAHAN improved informativeness without losing readability.

Introduction
Sentence compression is the task of producing a shorter sentence by deleting words in the input sentence while preserving its grammaticality and important information. To
compress a sentence so that it is still grammatical, tree
trimming methods (Jing 2000; Knight and Marcu 2000;
Berg-Kirkpatrick, Gillick, and Klein 2011; Filippova and
Altun 2013) have been utilized. However, these methods
often suffer from parsing errors. As an alternative, Filippova et al. (2015) proposed a method based on sequenceto-sequence (Seq2Seq) models that do not rely on parse
trees but produce ﬂuent compression. However, the vanilla
Seq2Seq model has a problem that it is not so good for compressing longer sentences.
To solve the problem, Kamigaito et al. (2018) expanded
Seq2Seq models to capture the relationships between longdistance words through recursively tracking dependency
parents from a word with their recursive attention module.

1

This sentence actually belongs to the test set of the Google
sentence compression dataset (https://github.com/google-researchdatasets/sentence-compression).

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8050

