The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dynamical System Inspired Adaptive Time
Stepping Controller for Residual Network Families
Yibo Yang,1,2,∗ Jianlong Wu,2,3,∗ Hongyang Li,2 Xia Li,2,4 Tiancheng Shen,1,2 Zhouchen Lin2,5,†
1

Center for Data Science, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
5
Samsung Research China – Beijing (SRC-B)
{ibo, jlwu1992, lhy ustb, ethanlee, tianchengshen, zlin}@pku.edu.cn
theories and techniques in differential equations (E 2017;
Haber and Ruthotto 2017).
In (E 2017), it is noted that the Euler method for ordinary differential equations (ODEs) has the same formulation
as ResNet iterative updates, and ResNet is viewed as a discrete dynamical system. In this way, the parameter learning
in neural networks is translated into its continuous counterpart as an optimal control problem (Chen et al. 2018;
Li and Hao 2018; Li et al. 2017; Behrmann, Duvenaud, and
Jacobsen 2019). Based on the Euler method, some studies introduce multi-step or higher-oder discretization (Lu
et al. 2018; He et al. 2019), and fractional optimal control
(Jia et al. 2019) to construct more powerful network structures for different tasks. Other studies analyze the stability
of residual networks and propose more stable and robust
structures (Haber and Ruthotto 2017; Chang et al. 2018a;
Ruthotto and Haber 2018; Haber et al. 2019).
An appropriate time stepping for discretization methods
of ODEs is crucial for the stability and efﬁciency (Ascher
and Petzold 1998). A small step size is able to render an accurate solution, but requires more steps for a ﬁxed evolution
time. Chang et al. adopt a multi-level strategy to adjust the
time step size for ResNet training (Chang et al. 2018b). In
a recent study, a small step size is suggested for more stable and robust ResNets (Zhang et al. 2019). However, an
overly small step size would smooth the feature learning.
From a dynamical system view, the evolution time for network with a ﬁxed depth and a small step size is too short for
the system to evolve from the initial state to the ﬁnal linearly
separable state. In numerical methods for ODEs, adaptive
time stepping strategies, such as the Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg
(RKF) method (Hairer, Nørsett, and Wanner 1991) as shown
in Figure 1, are able to attain a good trade-off between stability and cost. Can we also design an adaptive time stepping
for ResNets to ensure both stability and performance?
In this study, we analyze the effects of time stepping on
the stability and performance of residual networks, and point
out that each step size should be aware of previous steps
and the weight parameters in the current step. We develop
an adaptive controller, which connects different steps as an
LSTM, and takes the parameters of each step as input, to
output a set of coefﬁcients that decide the current step size.

Abstract
The correspondence between residual networks and dynamical systems motivates researchers to unravel the physics of
ResNets with well-developed tools in numeral methods of
ODE systems. The Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg method is an adaptive time stepping that renders a good trade-off between the
stability and efﬁciency. Can we also have an adaptive time
stepping for ResNets to ensure both stability and performance? In this study, we analyze the effects of time stepping
on the Euler method and ResNets. We establish a stability
condition for ResNets with step sizes and weight parameters,
and point out the effects of step sizes on the stability and performance. Inspired by our analyses, we develop an adaptive
time stepping controller that is dependent on the parameters
of the current step, and aware of previous steps. The controller is jointly optimized with the network training so that
variable step sizes and evolution time can be adaptively adjusted. We conduct experiments on ImageNet and CIFAR to
demonstrate the effectiveness. It is shown that our proposed
method is able to improve both stability and accuracy without
introducing additional overhead in inference phase.

Introduction
Currently, the structure of neural network is mainly developed by hand-crafted design (Simonyan and Zisserman
2015; Szegedy et al. 2015) or neural architecture searching
(Baker et al. 2017). A theoretical guidance is still lacking for
understanding deep network behaviors. One of the most successful architectures, residual network (ResNet) (He et al.
2016), introduces identity mappings to enable training a very
deep model. ResNets are also used as the base model for a
series of computer vision tasks such as scene segmentation
(Chen et al. 2017), and action recognition (Tran et al. 2018).
Despite the huge success, the understanding of ResNets is
mainly supported by empirical analyses and experimental
evidences, other than some attempts from an optimization
view (Li et al. 2018). Recently, the connection between
ResNet and dynamical system has inspired researchers to
unravel the physics of residual networks using the rich
∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6648

