The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

3D Single-Person Concurrent Activity Detection Using Stacked Relation Network
Yi Wei,1∗ Wenbo Li,2∗ Yanbo Fan,3 Linghan Xu,4 Ming-Ching Chang,1 Siwei Lyu1
1

University at Albany, State University of New York, USA
2
Samsung Research America AI Center, USA
3
Tencent AI Laboratory, China, 4 Tianjin University, China
{ywei2, mchang2, slyu}@albany.edu, wenbo.li1@samsung.com, fanyanbo0124@gmail.com, linghanxu@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
We aim to detect real-world concurrent activities performed
by a single person from a streaming 3D skeleton sequence.
Different from most existing works that deal with concurrent activities performed by multiple persons that are seldom
correlated, we focus on concurrent activities that are spatiotemporally or causally correlated and performed by a single
person. For the sake of generalization, we propose an approach based on a decompositional design to learn a dedicated feature representation for each activity class. To address the scalability issue, we further extend the class-level
decompositional design to the postural-primitive level, such
that each class-wise representation does not need to be extracted by independent backbones, but through a dedicated
weighted aggregation of a shared pool of postural primitives. There are multiple interdependent instances deriving
from each decomposition. Thus, we propose Stacked Relation Networks (SRN), with a specialized relation network for
each decomposition, so as to enhance the expressiveness of
instance-wise representations via the inter-instance relationship modeling. SRN achieves state-of-the-art performance
on a public dataset and a newly collected dataset. The relation weights within SRN are interpretable among the activity contexts. The new dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/weiyi1991/UA Concurrent/

1

Figure 1: Samples of single-person concurrent activities.

appearance features with 3D skeletal data (Wang et al. 2012;
Yu, Liu, and Yuan 2014). However, the last issue of complexity of body movement has not been well addressed. Most
existing 3D skeleton based activity recognition methods
(Gao et al. 2018; Hu, Cui, and Yu 2018; Ke et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2018; Liu, Akhtar, and Mian 2017; Shi et al. 2018;
Weng et al. 2019; Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Zhang et al.
2018) are developed for trimmed activity sequences and limited by the assumption that one subject can only perform one
activity at a time.
This one-activity-at-a-time assumption is indeed problematic in the reality, as one person usually performs multiple activities concurrently. In this work, we aim to address
the problem of detecting single-person concurrent activities (see Figure 1) from streaming 3D skeleton sequences.
In our setting, representing a speciﬁc body motion with a
uniﬁed ﬁxed-size feature representation is not a good solution due to two generalization issues. (i) It is hard to make
a uniﬁed ﬁxed-size representation ﬂexible enough to accommodate an indeﬁnite number of concurrent activities.
(ii) The combinations of concurrent activities at the test
stage might be different from those at the training stage,
for which the uniﬁed representation learned in training will
become inadequate. To this end, we choose a decompositional design to represent each activity class with a dedicated representation. An intuitive implementation of such
a decompositional design is to extract dedicated class-wise
features using separate branches of the model. However,
this approach suffers from the scalability issue, as the number of classes can increase arbitrarily in general. To address this scalability issue, we employ a shared backbone

Introduction

Human activity detection is an important problem in computer vision with many practical applications such as video
surveillance, human computer interaction, smart home, etc.
There are several issues hindering the practical applicability of activity detection algorithms, including a large variety of scenes (e.g, background, viewpoint, distance and
illumination), diversity in human-object interactions (i.e,
similar motions may appear in different activities regarding different objects), and complexity of body movement
(i.e, human ego motion is usually multi-purpose and temporally or causally correlated). Among these issues, the variety of scenes can be handled by disentangling human motions from the environment using 3D human skeletal key
points (Aggarwal and Xia 2014). The diversity in humanobject interactions is often addressed by integrating image
∗

Authors contributed equally
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12329

