The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

How Should an Agent Practice?
Janarthanan Rajendran, Richard Lewis, Vivek Veeriah, Honglak Lee, Satinder Singh
University of Michigan
{rjana, rickl, vveeriah, baveja}@umich.edu, honglak@eecs.umich.edu

tivations in animals and humans (Oudeyer and Kaplan 2009;
Schmidhuber 2010) and sometimes based on heuristics such
as learning diverse skills (Gupta et al. 2018). The optimal
rewards framework (Singh et al. 2010) provides a general
meta-optimization formulation of intrinsic reward design,
and has served as the basis for algorithms that discover good
intrinsic rewards; we discuss this further in Related Work.

Abstract
We present a method for learning intrinsic reward functions
to drive the learning of an agent during periods of practice in
which extrinsic task rewards are not available. During practice, the environment may differ from the one available for
training and evaluation with extrinsic rewards. We refer to
this setup of alternating periods of practice and objective evaluation as practice-match, drawing an analogy to regimes of
skill acquisition common for humans in sports and games.
The agent must effectively use periods in the practice environment so that performance improves during matches. In
the proposed method the intrinsic practice reward is learned
through a meta-gradient approach that adapts the practice reward parameters to reduce the extrinsic match reward loss
computed from matches. We illustrate the method on a simple
grid world, and evaluate it in two games in which the practice
environment differs from match: Pong with practice against
a wall without an opponent, and PacMan with practice in a
maze without ghosts. The results show gains from learning in
practice in addition to match periods over learning in matches
only.

In this work we address the challenges imposed by settings where a learning agent faces extended periods of
no evaluation in which an extrinsic reward is unavailable
and where the environment may differ from that of objective evaluation when extrinsic reward is available. We refer to such settings as practice-match, drawing an analogy
to regimes of skill acquisition typical for humans in sports
and games. For example, in team sports such as basketball
it is common to practice skills such as dribbling and shooting in the absence of other players, and in sports such as
tennis it is common to practice skills in environments other
than a full court. In such settings, during practice, the agent
must behave in the absence of the main match reward (e.g.,
winning games against opponents), but in such a way that
performance on the future matches (deﬁned by the extrinsic rewards during match) improves. Examples of practicematch settings beyond sports include an ofﬁce robot using the evening after ofﬁce-hours to practice for day-time
tasks (match), household robotic assistants using free-time
to practice, task-speciﬁc dialogue agents using down-time to
practice with human-trainers or using opportunities for lowstakes on-line conversation practice, and multi-agent teams
using down-time to practice coordination strategies.

Introduction
There are many applications of reinforcement learning (RL)
in which the natural formulation of the reward function gives
rise to difﬁcult computational challenges, or in which the reward itself is unavailable for extended periods of time or is
difﬁcult to specify. These include settings with very sparse
or delayed reward, multiple tasks or goals, reward uncertainty, and learning in the absence of reward or in advance
of unknown future reward. A range of approaches address
these challenges through reward design, providing intrinsic
rewards to the agent that augment or replace the objective
or extrinsic reward. The aim is to provide useful and proximal learning signals that drive behavior and learning in a
way that improves performance on the main objective of
interest (Ng, Harada, and Russell 1999; Barto, Singh, and
Chentanez 2004; Singh et al. 2010). These intrinsic rewards
are often hand-engineered, and based on either task-speciﬁc
reward features developed from domain analysis, or taskgeneral reward features, sometimes inspired by intrinsic mo-

We focus on the question of how an agent should practice
given a practice environment in a setting of alternating periods of practice and match. We formulate this problem as one
of discovering good practice rewards. Our primary contribution is a method that learns intrinsic reward functions for
practice that improve the match policy during practice. The
method uses meta-gradients to adapt the intrinsic practice reward parameters to reduce the extrinsic loss computed from
matches. Our results show gains from learning in practice
in addition to match periods over the performance achieved
from learning in matches only.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5454

