The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

InstaNAS: Instance-Aware Neural Architecture Search
An-Chieh Cheng,1∗ Chieh Hubert Lin,1∗ Da-Cheng Juan,2 Wei Wei,2 Min Sun1,3,4
1
National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
Google Research, Mountain View, USA, 3 Appier Inc., Taiwan
4
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare, Taiwan
{accheng.tw, hubert052702}@gmail.com, sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw,
{dacheng, wewei}@google.com
2

Abstract

Search Space

Conventional Neural Architecture Search (NAS) aims at ﬁnding a single architecture that achieves the best performance,
which usually optimizes task related learning objectives such
as accuracy. However, a single architecture may not be representative enough for the whole dataset with high diversity and variety. Intuitively, electing domain-expert architectures that are proﬁcient in domain-speciﬁc features can further beneﬁt architecture related objectives such as latency. In
this paper, we propose InstaNAS—an instance-aware NAS
framework—that employs a controller trained to search for a
“distribution of architectures” instead of a single architecture;
This allows the model to use sophisticated architectures for
the difﬁcult samples, which usually comes with large architecture related cost, and shallow architectures for those easy
samples. During the inference phase, the controller assigns
each of the unseen input samples with a domain expert architecture that can achieve high accuracy with customized inference costs. Experiments within a search space inspired by
MobileNetV2 show InstaNAS can achieve up to 48.8% latency reduction without compromising accuracy on a series
of datasets against MobileNetV2.

1

InstaNAS

100%

~

# Instances (%)

NAS

20%
0%
0.14

InstaNAS
NAS

0.15

0.16

0.17

0.18

Architecture Latency (s)

0.19

Figure 1: InstaNAS searches for a distribution of architectures instead of a single one from conventional NAS. We
showcase a distribution of architecture latencies found by
InstaNAS for CIFAR-10. The InstaNAS controller assigns
each input instance to a domain expert architecture, which
provides customized latency for different domains of data.

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has become an effective and promising approach to automate the design of deep
learning models. It aims at ﬁnding the optimal model architectures based on their performances on evaluation metrics
such as accuracy (Zoph and Le 2017). One popular way to
implement NAS is to employ reinforcement learning (RL)
that trains an RNN controller (or “agent”) to learn a search
policy within a pre-deﬁned search space. In each iteration of
the search process, a set of child architectures are sampled
from the policy, and evaluate performance on the target task.
The performance is then used as the reward to encourage
the agent to prioritize child architectures that can achieve
a higher expected reward. In the end, a single architecture
with a maximum reward will be selected and trained to be
the ﬁnal solution of the task.

Although a single architecture searched using NAS seems
to be sufﬁcient to optimize task related metrics such as accuracy, its performance is largely constrained in architecture related metrics such as latency and energy. For example in a multi-objective setting where both accuracy and latency are concerned, NAS is constrained to come up with
a single model to explore the trade-off between accuracy
and latency for all samples. In practice, however, difﬁcult
samples require complicated and usually high latency architectures whereas easy samples work well with shallow and
fast architectures. This inspires us to develop InstaNAS, a
NAS framework which searches for a distribution of architectures instead of a single one. Each architecture within the
ﬁnal distribution is an expert of one or multiple speciﬁc domains, such as different difﬁculty, texture, content style and
speedy inference. For each sample, the controller is trained

∗

indicates equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3577

