The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Nonlinear Mixup: Out-Of-Manifold Data Augmentation for Text Classiﬁcation
Hongyu Guo
National Research Council Canada
1200 Montreal Road, Ottawa, ON., K1A 0R6
hongyu.guo@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca

regularizers, Mixup constrains the model on the input space
beyond the data manifold. Through linearly interpolating
random data sample pairs and their training targets in onehot representation, Mixup generates a synthetic set of examples with soft-labels as the training targets and use these
out-of-manifold examples to regularize the deep models.
Research has shown that Mixup and its variants (Zhang et
al. 2018; Guo, Mao, and Zhang 2019b) can dramatically
improve the predictive accuracy of the current art of deep
neural networks. Despite its demonstrated effectiveness, the
power of Mixup is still limited by its linear nature. That is,
Mixup requires a convex combination of the inputs as well as
the modeling targets of a sample pair, and thus signiﬁcantly
limits the space of its synthetic samples, and consequently
its regularization effect on the training of the deep models.

Abstract
Data augmentation with Mixup (Zhang et al. 2018) has shown
to be an effective model regularizer for current art deep
classiﬁcation networks. It generates out-of-manifold samples
through linearly interpolating inputs and their corresponding
labels of random sample pairs. Despite its great successes,
Mixup requires convex combination of the inputs as well as
the modeling targets of a sample pair, thus signiﬁcantly limits
the space of its synthetic samples and consequently its regularization effect. To cope with this limitation, we propose
”nonlinear Mixup”. Unlike Mixup where the input and label pairs share the same, linear, scalar mixing policy, our approach embraces nonlinear interpolation policy for both the
input and label pairs, where the mixing policy for the labels is
adaptively learned based on the mixed input. Experiments on
benchmark sentence classiﬁcation datasets indicate that our
approach signiﬁcantly improves upon Mixup. Our empirical
studies also show that the out-of-manifold samples generated
by our strategy encourage training samples in each class to
form a tight representation cluster that is far from others.

In this paper, we propose nonlinear Mixup to address the
aforementioned limitation in Mixup. Unlike existing Mixup
methods (Zhang et al. 2018; Guo, Mao, and Zhang 2019b;
Verma et al. 2018) where the input pairs and label pairs share
the same linear, scalar mixing policy, our approach enables
nonlinear interpolation policy in the form of a matrix to interpolate both the input pairs and label pairs, where the mixing policy for the former differs from the latter. The nonlinear mixing here signiﬁcantly expands the synthetic sample
space for Mixup. Consider a pair of random samples in a 2D
training set. Mixup always creates synthetic samples along
the straight line between the pair. On the other hand, the nonlinear Mixup gives each dimension of the input pair an independent mixing policy, thus allowing mixed samples spread
into a wide region between the two sample points (illustrated
in Figure 1). In addition, our nonlinear Mixup enables the
mixing policy for the labels to be adaptively learned based
on the resulting mixed input. This allows the mixed samples to be relocated during training in order to alleviate the
manifold intrusion issue. This problem occurs when a mixed
example collides with a real example in the data manifold,
but is given a soft label that is different from the label of the
real example, resulting in under-ﬁtting and degradation of
the model performance (Guo, Mao, and Zhang 2019b).

Introduction
Despite their profound successes in many challenging realworld applications such as image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), speech recognition (Graves,
Mohamed, and Hinton 2013), and machine translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014), deep learning models typically embrace high modeling freedom with a very
large number of parameters. Such extremely high modeling
capability models thus require effective regularization techniques to power the models to avoid overﬁtting and to generalize well. To this end, many regularizers for deep models have been introduced, including weight decay (Hanson
and Pratt 1988), dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), stochastic
depth (Huang et al. 2016), batch normalization (Ioffe and
Szegedy 2015), and data augmentation schemes (Simard et
al. 1998; Lecun et al. 1998), amongst many others.
A recently proposed such technique, Mixup (Zhang
et al. 2018), is a simple and yet very effective, dataaugmentation based regularizer for enhancing the performance of deep classiﬁcation models. Unlike conventional

Experiments on ﬁve benchmark sentence classiﬁcation
datasets indicate that our nonlinear Mixup strategy signiﬁcantly outperforms Mixup and its variants in terms of pre-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4044

