The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Attention Based Data Hiding with Generative Adversarial Networks
Chong Yu1
1

NVIDIA Corporation
No.5709 Shenjiang Road, No.26 Qiuyue Road
Shanghai, China 201210
dxxzdxxz@126.com, chongy@nvidia.com

Abstract
Recently, the generative adversarial network is the hotspot in
research and industrial areas. Its application on data generation is the most common usage. In this paper, we propose the
novel end-to-end framework to extend its application to data
hiding area. The discriminative model simulates the detection
process, which can help us understand the sensitivity of the
cover image to semantic changes. The generative model is to
generate the target image which is aligned with the original
cover image. An attention model is introduced to generate
the attention mask. This mask can help to generate a better
target image without perturbation of the spotlight. The introduction of cycle discriminative model and inconsistent loss
can help to enhance the quality of the generated target image
in the iterative training process. The training dataset is mixed
with intact images and attacked images. The mix training process can further improve robustness. Through the qualitative,
quantitative experiments and analysis, this novel framework
shows compelling performance and advantages over the current state-of-the-art methods in data hiding applications.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 1: Illustration of data hiding performance on the
world-renowned art paintings. (a,e) Original version of The
Starry Night painted by Van Gogh and The Rose Arches by
Monet. (b,f) Data hiding version of The Starry Night and
The Rose Arches. (c,g) Emblem of Netherland and France as
the hidden images. (d,h) Residual difference between original and data hiding versions. (We multiply the residuals with
constant value 10 to emphasize the difference.)

In the information era, a large amount of data is shared
through the Internet at every moment. The barrier of accessing data is much lower, which leads to more potential violations of data security, privacy, copyright, etc. Data
hiding technologies are widely used to solve the aforementioned problems in secret communication (Holub, Fridrich,
and Denemark 2014), digital watermarking (Yu 2016), cryptography (El Hossaini et al. 2016), etc. While some attack
methods (Shi et al. 2017) pose the threat to data hiding technologies.
In Figure 1, can you easily differentiate between Van
Gogh’s paintings in (a) and (b)? Or Monet’s paintings in (e)
and (f)? Actually, the images in (a) and (e) are the original
version of drawing masters’ works. Images in (b) and (f) are
data hiding version generated by our method. The hidden
images are emblems of painters’ nations: Netherland and
France. The embedded info is kept imperceptible to ensure
there is no inﬂuence on the audience to appreciate paintings
from the ﬁdelity aspect.
In this paper, we propose an Attention Based Data Hiding
framework with Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN),

and use ABDH as the acronym to represent the method in
this paper. The ultimate goal of data hiding is making hidden data imperceptible to the detector. So adversarial relation always exists in data hiding applications. ABDH combines the evaluation metrics of secure data hiding with the
advantages in the latest GAN principle, and integrates the
counterparts into a single framework. The attention mechanism is introduced to further guide ABDH to ﬁnd the inconspicuous areas of cover images, which is suitable for hiding
secret data. With the ﬁne-tuning adversarial training process,
ABDH can iteratively learn to robustly hide data in cover
images or videos in an end-to-end manner.
The main contribution of our work includes:
• ABDH is general for data hiding applications. It can apply
to steganography and watermarking applications.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• ABDH simulates the hidden data detection process with
1120

