The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Enhancing Pointer Network for Sentence
Ordering with Pairwise Ordering Predictions
Yongjing Yin,1∗ Fandong Meng,2 Jinsong Su,1† Yubin Ge,3 Linfeng Song,4 Jie Zhou,2 Jiebo Luo5
3

1
Xiamen University, China, 2 Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA, 4 TencentAI Lab, Bellevue, USA, 5 University of Rochester, USA
yinyongjing@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {fandongmeng, jiezhou}@tencent.com, jssu@xmu.edu.cn, yubinge2@illinois.edu,
freesunshine0316@gmail.com, jluo@cs.rochester.edu

‫ݔ‬ସ Ȁ‫ݔ‬ଷ Ȁ‫ݔ‬ହ ǫ

Abstract
Dominant sentence ordering models use a pointer network
decoder to generate ordering sequences in a left-to-right fashion. However, such a decoder only exploits the noisy leftside encoded context, which is insufﬁcient to ensure correct sentence ordering. To address this deﬁciency, we propose to enhance the pointer network decoder by using two
pairwise ordering prediction modules: The FUTURE module predicts the relative orientations of other unordered sentences with respect to the candidate sentence, and the HISTORY module measures the local coherence between several
(e.g., 2) previously ordered sentences and the candidate sentence, without the inﬂuence of noisy left-side context. Using the pointer mechanism, we then incorporate this dynamically generated information into the decoder as a supplement to the left-side context for better predictions. On several commonly-used datasets, our model signiﬁcantly outperforms other baselines, achieving the state-of-the-art performance. Further analyses verify that pairwise ordering predictions indeed provide extra useful context as expected, leading to better sentence ordering. We also evaluate our sentence ordering models on a downstream task, multi-document
summarization, and the summaries reordered by our model
achieve the best coherence scores. Our code is available at
https://github.com/DeepLearnXMU/Pairwise.git.

࢙૝

࢙૚

࢙૛

࢙૜

࢙૞
ࢎࢊ૚

Paragraph Encoder
‫ݔ‬ସ

‫ݔ‬ଵ

‫ݔ‬ଶ

‫ݔ‬ଷ

ࢎࢊ૛

ࢎࢊ૜

‫ݔ‬ହ

濷
Decoder

՜

࢙૚

࢙૛

Figure 1: The model with a pointer network decoder. s∗ denotes the semantic vector representation of sentence x∗ , produced by the encoder.
properties that cause text coherence, which can be exploited
to generate coherent texts for other tasks.
Recently, inspired by the success of deep learning, neural
network based models have been proposed, where representative work includes Window network (Li and Hovy 2014),
pairwise models (Agrawal et al. 2016; Li and Jurafsky
2017), and pointer network (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly
2015) decoder based models (Gong et al. 2016; Logeswaran,
Lee, and Radev 2018; Cui et al. 2018; Wang and Wan 2019;
Yin et al. 2019). Particularly, the last kind of models attracts much attention due to its state-of-the-art performance
(Wang and Wan 2019; Yin et al. 2019). As shown in Figure 1, the pointer network decoder is based on a simpliﬁed attention model, which ﬁrst updates the current hidden state with the previously pointed sentence representation as the input, and then applies this state to produce the
attention distribution over the unordered input sentences. It
has been proven suitable for dealing with sorting the elements of a given set (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015;
Vinyals, Bengio, and Kudlur 2015), and thus become a standard component in dominant sentence ordering models.
Despite its success, there still exists a serious drawback.
Due to its autoregressive structure that produces the ordering
sequence in a left-to-right fashion, it only exploits the noisy
left-side encoded context while ignoring other useful information. Speciﬁcally, the ordering information between the

Introduction
Modeling text coherence is an essential problem in natural
language processing (NLP) as evidenced by its signiﬁcance
on several downstream NLP tasks (Barzilay, Elhadad, and
McKeown 2002; Bollegala, Okazaki, and Ishizuka 2006;
Konstas and Lapata 2012; Galanis, Lampouras, and Androutsopoulos 2012; Nallapati, Zhai, and Zhou 2012; Nayeem and Chali 2017). As one subtask of coherence modeling, sentence ordering (Barzilay and Lapata 2008) aims to
learn such a coherence structure by reconstructing a coherent paragraph from an unordered set of sentences. By learning to order sentences, the model is able to identify crucial
∗
This work was conducted at Pattern Recognition Center,
WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China
†
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9482

