The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Story Realization: Expanding Plot Events into Sentences
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Ethan Tien, Wesley Cheung,
Zhaochen Luo, William Ma, Lara J. Martin, Mark O. Riedl
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
{raj.ammanabrolu, etien, wcheung8, zluo, wma61, ljmartin, riedl}@gatech.edu

for explicit domain modeling beyond providing a corpus
of example stories. The primary pitfall of neural language
model approaches for story generation is that the space of
stories that can be generated is huge, which in turn, implies
that, in a textual story corpora, any given sentence will likely
only be seen once.
Martin et al. (2018) propose the use of a semantic abstraction called an event, reducing the sparsity in a dataset that
comes from an abundance of unique sentences. They deﬁne
an event to be a unit of a story that creates a change in the
story world’s state. Technically, an event is a tuple containing a subject, verb, direct object, and some additional disambiguation token(s).
The event representation enables the decomposition of
the plot generation task into two sub-problems: event-toevent and event-to-sentence. Event-to-event is broadly the
problem of generating the sequence of events that together
comprise a plot. Models used to address this problem are
also responsible for maintaining plot coherence and consistency. Once new events are generated, however, they are still
not human-readable. Thus the second sub-problem, eventto-sentence, focuses on transforming these events into natural language sentences.
Martin et al. (2017; 2018) further propose that this latter,
event-to-sentence problem can be thought of as a translation
task—translating from the language of events into natural
language. We ﬁnd, however, that the sequence-to-sequence
LSTM networks (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) that they
used frequently ignore the input event and only generate text
based on the original corpus, overwriting the plot-based decisions made during event-to-event. There are two contributing factors. Firstly, event-to-event models tend to produce
previously-unseen events, which, when fed into the eventto-sentence model result in unpredictable behavior. A basic
sequence-to-sequence model is unable to learn how to map
these unseen events to sentences. Secondly, sentences are
often only seen once in the entire corpus. Despite the conversion into events, the sparsity of the data means that each
event is still likely seen a limited number of times. For these
reasons, we framed the event-to-sentence task as guided language generation, using a generated event as a guide.
The contributions of this paper are twofold. We present an

Abstract
Neural network based approaches to automated story plot
generation attempt to learn how to generate novel plots from
a corpus of natural language plot summaries. Prior work has
shown that a semantic abstraction of sentences called events
improves neural plot generation and and allows one to decompose the problem into: (1) the generation of a sequence
of events (event-to-event) and (2) the transformation of these
events into natural language sentences (event-to-sentence).
However, typical neural language generation approaches to
event-to-sentence can ignore the event details and produce
grammatically-correct but semantically-unrelated sentences.
We present an ensemble-based model that generates natural
language guided by events. We provide results—including a
human subjects study—for a full end-to-end automated story
generation system showing that our method generates more
coherent and plausible stories than baseline approaches 1 .

1

Introduction

Automated story plot generation is the problem of creating a sequence of main plot points for a story in a given
domain. Generated plots must remain consistent across the
entire story, preserve long-term dependencies, and make
use of commonsense and schematic knowledge (Wiseman,
Shieber, and Rush 2017). Early work focused on symbolic planning and case-based reasoning (Meehan 1977;
Turner and Dyer 1986; Lebowitz 1987; Pérez y Pérez and
Sharples 2001; Gervás et al. 2005; Porteous and Cavazza
2009; Riedl and Young 2010; Ware and Young 2011; Farrell, Ware, and Baker 2019) at the expense of manuallyengineering world domain knowledge.
In contrast, neural-based approaches to story and plot generation train a neural language model on a corpus of stories to predict the next character, word, or sentence in a
sequence based on a history of tokens (Jain et al. 2017;
Clark, Ji, and Smith 2018; Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018;
Martin et al. 2018; Peng et al. 2018; Roemmele 2018). The
advantage of neural-based approaches is that there is no need
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code to reproduce our experiments is available at https://
github.com/rajammanabrolu/StoryRealization
7375

