The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Atari-HEAD: Atari Human Eye-Tracking and Demonstration Dataset
Ruohan Zhang,1* Calen Walshe,2 Zhuode Liu,1 Lin Guan,1 Karl S. Muller,2
Jake A. Whritner,2 Luxin Zhang,3 Mary M. Hayhoe,2 Dana H. Ballard1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin
2
Center for Perceptual Systems, University of Texas at Austin
3
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
*
zharu@utexas.edu

from states to actions–that maximizes long-term cumulative
reward. The policy can be learned through trial and error
(RL) or from an expert’s demonstration (IL). A major issue
of RL is its sample inefﬁciency and human demonstration
has been shown to speed up learning (Silver et al. 2016;
Hester et al. 2018; de la Cruz, Du, and Taylor 2018;
Zhang et al. 2019).
However, IL results are difﬁcult to reproduce since researchers often collect their own human demonstration data.
During this process, many factors are uncontrolled – such
as individual expertise, experimental setup, data collection
tools, dataset size, and experimenter bias. A publicly available dataset would greatly reduce data collection efforts and
allow algorithms to be compared with the same standard.
Another concern with IL is the quality of the demonstration
data. For supervised IL approaches like behavior cloning,
learning from sub-optimal demonstration can result in poor
performance. Therefore the quality of human demonstration
must be ensured.
Visual perception is a key challenge in modern RL and
IL research due to a high-dimensional state space (e.g., raw
images) as input. Humans face the same problem when performing all kinds of visuomotor tasks in daily life. One intelligent mechanism that has evolved in humans, but has not
yet been fully developed for machines, is visual attention –
the ability to identify, process, and respond to a reduced set
of important features of visual input. This powerful feature
extraction mechanism, if learned by AIs, could make learning more efﬁcient.
Human overt attention is revealed by eye movements
(gaze). In complex tasks, human eye movements are used
by the visual system to a) identify structures in the environment that are critical for solving the task and b) exploit those structures by moving the high resolution part
of the visual ﬁeld (fovea) to those locations via eye movements. Considerable evidence has shown that human gaze
can be considered as an overt behavioral signal that encodes
a wealth of information about both the motivation behind
an action and the anticipated reward of an action (Hayhoe and Ballard 2005; 2014; Johnson et al. 2014). Recent
work has also proposed learning visual attention models
from human gaze as an intermediate step towards learning

Abstract
Large-scale public datasets have been shown to beneﬁt research in multiple areas of modern artiﬁcial intelligence. For
decision-making research that requires human data, highquality datasets serve as important benchmarks to facilitate
the development of new methods by providing a common reproducible standard. Many human decision-making tasks require visual attention to obtain high levels of performance.
Therefore, measuring eye movements can provide a rich
source of information about the strategies that humans use
to solve decision-making tasks. Here, we provide a largescale, high-quality dataset of human actions with simultaneously recorded eye movements while humans play Atari
video games. The dataset consists of 117 hours of gameplay
data from a diverse set of 20 games, with 8 million action
demonstrations and 328 million gaze samples. We introduce a
novel form of gameplay, in which the human plays in a semiframe-by-frame manner. This leads to near-optimal game decisions and game scores that are comparable or better than
known human records. We demonstrate the usefulness of the
dataset through two simple applications: predicting human
gaze and imitating human demonstrated actions. The quality
of the data leads to promising results in both tasks. Moreover, using a learned human gaze model to inform imitation
learning leads to an 115% increase in game performance. We
interpret these results as highlighting the importance of incorporating human visual attention in models of decision making and demonstrating the value of the current dataset to the
research community. We hope that the scale and quality of
this dataset can provide more opportunities to researchers in
the areas of visual attention, imitation learning, and reinforcement learning.

Introduction
In modern machine learning, large-scale datasets such as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) have played an important role
in driving research progress. These datasets provide standardized benchmarks that ensure a fair comparison between
algorithms. Recently, imitation learning (IL) and reinforcement learning (RL) have achieved great success in training learning agents to solve sequential decision tasks. The
goal for the learning agents is to learn a policy–a mapping
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6811

