The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Realistic Face Reenactment via Self-Supervised Disentangling of Identity and Pose
Xianfang Zeng,∗ Yusu Pan,∗ Mengmeng Wang, Jiangning Zhang, Yong Liu†
Institute of Cyber-Systems and Control, Zhejiang University, China
{zzlongjuanfeng, corenel, mengmengwang, 186368}@zju.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent works have shown how realistic talking face images
can be obtained under the supervision of geometry guidance,
e.g., facial landmark or boundary. To alleviate the demand
for manual annotations, in this paper, we propose a novel
self-supervised hybrid model (DAE-GAN) that learns how
to reenact face naturally given large amounts of unlabeled
videos. Our approach combines two deforming autoencoders
with the latest advances in the conditional generation. On the
one hand, we adopt the deforming autoencoder to disentangle identity and pose representations. A strong prior in talking face videos is that each frame can be encoded as two
parts: one for video-speciﬁc identity and the other for various
poses. Inspired by that, we utilize a multi-frame deforming
autoencoder to learn a pose-invariant embedded face for each
video. Meanwhile, a multi-scale deforming autoencoder is
proposed to extract pose-related information for each frame.
On the other hand, the conditional generator allows for enhancing ﬁne details and overall reality. It leverages the disentangled features to generate photo-realistic and pose-alike
face images. We evaluate our model on VoxCeleb1 and RaFD
dataset. Experiment results demonstrate the superior quality
of reenacted images and the ﬂexibility of transferring facial
movements between identities.

1

Figure 1: The face reenactment results of our self-supervised
disentangling method. We use the target frames (in the ﬁrst
row) to puppeteer source images (in the ﬁrst column) into
desired poses. Such animation can be performed at both the
same and different identities.

video (Zhu et al. 2017). The second aspect is the low tolerance of the human visual system for minor mistakes in generated images. Some hardly captured defects like local blur
or unnatural expression will signiﬁcantly reduce the reality
of synthesized pictures.
Several methods have been proposed to overcome the
challenges, including the classical parametric models and
data-driven learning frameworks. Parametric 3D face models (Blanz, Vetter, and others 1999) can provide a fullycontrollable representation for manipulating a predeﬁned
face. Nevertheless, those models usually are unable to capture all subtle movements of the human face without delicate
designs. On the other hand, beneﬁting from recent remarkable advances in image generation (Goodfellow et al. 2014;
Park et al. 2019), data-driven frameworks (Wu et al. 2018;
Zakharov et al. 2019) have performed extremely realistic
face reenactment with geometry guidance, e.g., facial landmark/boundary (Guo et al. 2019). However, the premise of
such approaches is the numerous manual annotations of facial landmark, which is expensive and time-consuming.
To alleviate the demand for adequate and accurate annotations, we propose a hybrid model (DAE-GAN) for reenacting talking faces in a self-supervised manner. Only with
the assumption of the availability of talking face videos, our
model can learn to puppeteer a source face given a driving

Introduction

Face reenactment aims at transferring facial movements
and expressions from one driving video to another source
face/video. Such ability holds promise to an abundance of
applications like face editing, movie making, video conferencing and augmented reality. This task is known to be
challenging for two main reasons. Firstly, under the uncontrolled condition, the appearance of the monocular face is
determined by several coupled factors such as identity, pose,
expression and reﬂection, etc. This intrinsically entangled
characteristic makes it hard to transfer a particular attribute
between faces. For example, identity-related features like
face outline in the source image are usually changed during the process of mimicking facial movements in a driving
∗

Equal contribution. Names are in alphabetical order.
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12757

