The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generative Attention Networks for Multi-Agent Behavioral Modeling
Guangyu Li,1 Bo Jiang,2 Hao Zhu,3 Zhengping Che,2 Yan Liu1∗
1

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, US
2
AI Labs, Didi Chuxing, Beijing, China
3
Peking University, Beijing, China
{guangyul, yanliu.cs}@usc.edu, hzhu1998@pku.edu.cn,
{scottjiangbo, chezhengping}@didiglobal.com

Abstract
Understanding and modeling behavior of multi-agent systems
is a central step for artiﬁcial intelligence. Here we present a
deep generative model which captures behavior generating
process of multi-agent systems, supports accurate predictions
and inference, infers how agents interact in a complex system,
as well as identiﬁes agent groups and interaction types. Built
upon advances in deep generative models and a novel attention mechanism, our model can learn interactions in highly
heterogeneous systems with linear complexity in the number
of agents. We apply this model to three multi-agent systems
in different domains and evaluate performance on a diverse
set of tasks including behavior prediction, interaction analysis
and system identiﬁcation. Experimental results demonstrate
its ability to model multi-agent systems, yielding improved
performance over competitive baselines. We also show the
model can successfully identify agent groups and interaction
types in these systems. Our model offers new opportunities to
predict complex multi-agent behaviors and takes a step forward in understanding interactions in multi-agent systems.

Light Ball

Hard Spring

Pedestrian

Pedestrian-Bicycle

Soft Spring

Defense
Offense

Collaboration

Medium Ball

Hostility

Bicycle

Bicycle-Bicycle

Heavy Ball

No Spring

Ball

Player-Ball

Car

Pedestrian-Car

(a) Spring-Ball

(b) Basketball

(c) Campus Trafﬁc

Figure 1: Illustration of three multi-agent systems, including
agent groups and interaction types.

Interaction Complexity
To model interactions explicitly, one suffers the complexity of O(N d ) where N is the
number of agents and d is the typical interaction clique size,
which makes it computationally unmanageable to model a
large amount of agents or high order interactions.
Interaction Structure Although the interaction structure
can be pre-deﬁned in some simple systems, e.g., springsystems in physics, most real-world multi-agent systems
come with unknown and evolving interaction structure.
Imagining in an open area in the university campus, the
number of agents changes frequently, and the interaction
between two pedestrians may disappear quickly after they
passed by each other. Such unknown and evolving properties require a model to handle interaction adaptively.
Heterogeneity
In a multi-agent system, agents usually
come from groups with different behavior styles, and interactions among them may also have inherently different
types. Considering in a basketball game, players are switching between offense and defense frequently. Interactions between players also come with two types, namely collaboration and hostility. To truly approximate behavior generating
process, one should be able to identify such agent groups
and interaction types from system observations.
Pioneering work in multi-agent behavior modeling has
tackled some of the above challenges. Interactions within
the crowd of pedestrians have been modeled implicitly with
pooling mechanisms in (Alahi et al. 2016; Gupta et al. 2018;

Introduction
Multi-agent systems are widespread in many real-world
applications, including autonomous vehicles, multi-player
games, etc. Approximating the behavior generating process
of multi-agent systems from observations is essential for behavior prediction, system identiﬁcation, simulation and general machine intelligence.
Unlike other machine learning domains such as computer
vision and natural language processing, multi-agent systems
are usually modeled in terms of agents and their interactions,
given the explicit factorization within these systems. In some
cases, interactions themselves play a key role in understanding multi-agent behavior. No matter playing football, or coordinating to take turns with other trafﬁc participants at busy
intersections, the behavior of each agent is heavily affected
by other participants’ behaviors. However, modeling behavior generating process and inferring interactions in multiagent systems is challenging due to inherent properties in
the following aspects.
∗

First two authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7195

