The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fast and Robust Face-to-Parameter
Translation for Game Character Auto-Creation
Tianyang Shi,1 Zhengxia Zou,2 Yi Yuan,1∗ Changjie Fan1
1

NetEase Fuxi AI Lab
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{shitianyang, yuanyi, fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com, zzhengxi@umich.edu
2

Abstract

3OD\HU¶V,QWHUIDFH

With the rapid development of Role-Playing Games (RPGs),
players are now allowed to edit the facial appearance of their
in-game characters with their preferences rather than using
default templates. This paper proposes a game character autocreation framework that generates in-game characters according to a player’s input face photo. Different from the previous
methods that are designed based on neural style transfer or
monocular 3D face reconstruction, we re-formulate the character auto-creation process in a different point of view: by
predicting a large set of physically meaningful facial parameters under a self-supervised learning paradigm. Instead of
updating facial parameters iteratively at the input end of the
renderer as suggested by previous methods, which are timeconsuming, we introduce a facial parameter translator so that
the creation can be done efﬁciently through a single forward
propagation from the face embeddings to parameters, with a
considerable 1000x computational speedup. Despite its high
efﬁciency, the interactivity is preserved in our method where
users are allowed to optionally ﬁne-tune the facial parameters on our creation according to their needs. Our approach
also shows better robustness than previous methods, especially for those photos with head-pose variance. Comparison
results and ablation analysis on seven public face veriﬁcation
datasets suggest the effectiveness of our method.

D ,QSXWSKRWR

E *HQHUDWHGLQJDPH
FKDUDFWHU

F *HQHUDWHGIDFLDO
SDUDPHWHUV HGLWDEOH

G ,QSXWZLWKSRVHFKDQJHV

H 2XUUHVXOW

I 5HVXOWRI6KLet al.

Figure 1: We propose a new method to generate in-game
character of the players according to their input face photo.
Our method is three magnitudes faster than the previous
method (Shi et al. 2019) and shows better robustness (especially for pose changes).

the character customization process turns out to be laborious
and time-consuming. To create an in-game character with a
desired facial appearance (e.g. a pop star or the players themselves), most players need to spend several hours by manually adjusting hundreds of parameters, even after considerable practice. In this paper, we study an interesting problem, i.e. how to automatically generate in-game characters
according to a player’s face photo.
In computer vision, efforts have been made in generating
3D faces based on single input face photo, where some representative methods include the 3DMM (Blanz and Vetter
1999) and 3DMM-CNN (Tran et al. 2017), etc. However,
these methods are difﬁcult to be applied in-game environments. This is because most of the above methods are built
based on “morphable face models” (Blanz and Vetter 1999)
while the faces in most RPGs are rendered by “bone-driven
face models”. There is a huge gap between the two different
type of face models due to their different rendering mode,

Introduction
The character customization system in many role-playing
games (RPGs) provides an interactive interface where players can create their in-game characters according to their
preferences. To improve players’ immersion and interactivity, character customization systems in RPGs are becoming more and more sophisticated. In many modern RPGs,
e.g., “Grand Theft Auto Online1 ”, “Dark Souls III2 ”, and
“Justice3 ”, players are now allowed to precisely manipulate
speciﬁc part of their characters, e.g., the corner of the eye,
the wing of the nose, hairstyles, and makeups. As a result,
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.rockstargames.com/GTAOnline
2
https://www.darksouls.jp
3
https://n.163.com
1733

