The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

RIS-GAN: Explore Residual and Illumination with
Generative Adversarial Networks for Shadow Removal
Ling Zhang,1 Chengjiang Long,2∗ Xiaolong Zhang,1 Chunxia Xiao3∗
1

Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China
2
Kitware Inc. Clifton Park, NY, USA
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
{zhling, xiaolong.zhang}@wust.edu.cn, chengjiang.long@kitware.com, cxxiao@whu.edu.cn

al. 2019), and learning-based methods (Gryka, Terry, and
Brostow 2015; Wang et al. 2018a; Le et al. 2018) have been
developed to solve this challenging problem. Different from
traditional methods that highly rely on some prior knowledge (e.g., constant illumination and gradients) and often
bring obvious artifacts on the shadow boundaries, learningbased methods especially recent deep learning methods like
(Hu et al. 2018) and (Sidorov 2019) have achieved some advances. However, the effectiveness of these methods highly
depends on the training dataset and the designed network
architectures. When the training set is insufﬁcient or the network model is deﬁcient, they are insufﬁcient to produce desired shadow detection masks and shadow-removal images.
Also, most of existing deep learning methods just focus on
shadow itself, without well exploring other extra information like residual and illumination for shadow removal.

Abstract
Residual images and illumination estimation have been
proved very helpful in image enhancement. In this paper, we
propose a general and novel framework RIS-GAN which explores residual and illumination with Generative Adversarial Networks for shadow removal. Combined with the coarse
shadow-removal image, the estimated negative residual images and inverse illumination maps can be used to generate indirect shadow-removal images to reﬁne the coarse
shadow-removal result to the ﬁne shadow-free image in a
coarse-to-ﬁne fashion. Three discriminators are designed to
distinguish whether the predicted negative residual images,
shadow-removal images, and the inverse illumination maps
are real or fake jointly compared with the corresponding
ground-truth information. To our best knowledge, we are the
ﬁrst one to explore residual and illumination for shadow removal. We evaluate our proposed method on two benchmark
datasets, i.e., SRD and ISTD, and the extensive experiments
demonstrate that our proposed method achieves the superior
performance to state-of-the-arts, although we have no particular shadow-aware components designed in our generators.

In this paper, we propose a general framework RISGAN to explore both residual and illumination with Generative Adversarial Networks for shadow removal, unlike
Sidorov’s AngularGAN (Sidorov 2019) which just introduces an illumniation-based angular loss without estimating illumination color or illumination color map. As illustrated in Figure 1, our RIS-GAN consists of four generators in the encoder-decoder structure and three discriminators. Such four generators are designed to generate negative
residual images, intermediate shadow-removal images, inverse illumination maps, and reﬁned shadow-removal images. In principle, unlike the existing deep learning methods (Qu et al. 2017; Hu et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2018) which
are designed particular for shadow-removal, any kinds of
encoder-decoder structures can be used as our generators.

Introduction
Shadow is a ubiquitous natural phenomenon, which is appeared when the light is partial or complete blocked, bringing down the accuracy and effectiveness of some computer vision tasks, such as target tracking, object detection and recognition(Mikic et al. 2000; Long et al. 2014;
Cucchiara et al. 2002; Hua et al. 2013; Long and Hua 2015;
2017; Hua et al. 2018; Luo et al. 2019), image segmentation
and intrinsic image decomposition (Li and Snavely 2018).
Therefore, it is necessary to conduct shadow removal to improve the visual effect of image and video editing, such as
ﬁlm and television post-editing. However, it is still a very
challenging problem to remove shadow in complex scenes
due to illumination change, texture variation, and other environmental factors.
A variety of existing works including traditional methods(Shor and Lischinski 2008; Xiao et al. 2013a; Zhang et

For the residual generator, we follow the idea of negative residual (Fu et al. 2017) and let the generator take a
shadow image to generate a negative residual for detecting shadow area and recover a shadow-lighter or shadowfree image by applying a element-wise addition with the input shadow image indirectly. For the illumination generator,
we design it based on the Retinex model (Fu et al. 2016;
Guo, Li, and Ling 2016; Wang et al. 2019) where the
ground-truth shadow-free image can be considered as a reﬂectance image, and the shadow image is the observed image. The output of the illumination generator is a inverse

∗
This work was co-supervised by Chengjiang Long and
Chunxia Xiao.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12829

