The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Transfer Reinforcement Learning Using Output-Gated Working Memory
Arthur S. Williams

Joshua L. Phillips

Center for Computational Science
Middle Tennessee State University
Murfreesboro, TN, USA
asw3x@mtmail.mtsu.edu

Department of Computer Science
Middle Tennessee State University
Murfreesboro, TN, USA
Joshua.Phillips@mtsu.edu

(e.g. throwing a football) is used to improve learning performance on a target task (e.g. throwing a baseball).

Abstract
Transfer learning allows for knowledge to generalize across
tasks, resulting in increased learning speed and/or performance. These tasks must have commonalities that allow for
knowledge to be transferred. The main goal of transfer learning in the reinforcement learning domain is to train and learn
on one or more source tasks in order to learn a target task
that exhibits better performance than if transfer was not used
(Taylor and Stone 2009). Furthermore, the use of outputgated neural network models of working memory has been
shown to increase generalization for supervised learning tasks
(Kriete and Noelle 2011; Kriete et al. 2013). We propose
that working memory-based generalization plays a signiﬁcant role in a model’s ability to transfer knowledge successfully across tasks. Thus, we extended the Holographic Working Memory Toolkit (HWMtk) (Dubois and Phillips 2017;
Phillips and Noelle 2005) to utilize the generalization beneﬁts
of output gating within a working memory system. Finally,
the model’s utility was tested on a temporally extended, partially observable 5x5 2D grid-world maze task that required
the agent to learn 3 tasks over the duration of the training period. The results indicate that the addition of output gating
increases the initial learning performance of an agent in target tasks and decreases the learning time required to reach a
ﬁxed performance threshold.

Output gating is a mechanism for controlling how knowledge retained in upstream neural processes inﬂuence downstream cognitive processes in computational cognitive neuroscience models, and has been utilized to improve generalization performance within tasks (Kriete and Noelle 2011;
Kriete et al. 2013). These models are based on established interactions between the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and
mesolimbic dopamine system. Each PFC stripe (assumed
anatomical unit of storage) has the implied ability to allow or disallow maintained representations to ﬂow both inside as well as outside of the PFC via input and output gating, respectively. It has been observed in a generalization
task that the addition of an output gate markedly improved
generalization (Kriete and Noelle 2011). Also, in that same
task it was shown that as the action space size increased,
the model’s generalization disparity between having an output gate and not having one became more pronounced. This
suggests that as we increase task difﬁculty, the output gate’s
utility as it pertains to generalization also increases.

Introduction

The n-task learning algorithm (nTL) (Phillips and Jovanovich 2018) extended temporal difference (TD) learning
models (Barto and Sutton 1998; Sutton 1988) by utilizing
abstract representations to generate multiple policies allowing for dynamic task switching. While nTL learns multiple,
disparate tasks, its metrics do not show transfer across tasks.
Here we propose a novel approach to the transfer learning
problem that utilizes the generalization beneﬁts of output
gating coupled with the ﬂexibility of the HWMtk (Dubois
and Phillips 2017; Phillips and Noelle 2005), a working
memory framework based on the putative interactions between the PFC and basal ganglia. The updated model’s utility was tested on several variations of a temporally extended,
partially observable 5×5 2D grid-world maze task which
aim to demonstrate generalization (or lack thereof) across
tasks. We anticipate the output gating approach to be critical
to success.

We take for granted our ability to adapt and respond appropriately to novel stimuli while performing a task. Similarly,
it is also routine for humans to use knowledge gained from
prior tasks in order to speed up the learning for new tasks.
For example, imagine trying to throw a baseball for the ﬁrst
time. Even though a person might have never thrown a baseball, they can still use prior knowledge of “throwing” and
transfer that information to the current task of throwing a
baseball. Furthermore, if a person was unable to transfer
knowledge across these two task, they would be relegated to
relearning the process of “throwing” due to the novel context
presented by the baseball. This example presents a common
transfer reinforcement learning problem where a source task
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1324

