The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DefogGAN: Predicting Hidden Information in the
StarCraft Fog of War with Generative Adversarial Nets
Yonghyun Jeong, Hyunjin Choi, Byoungjip Kim, Youngjune Gwon
Samsung SDS

Observed

Abstract

Ground Truth

Replay 2

Replay 1

We propose DefogGAN, a generative approach to the problem of inferring state information hidden in the fog of war for
real-time strategy (RTS) games. Given a partially observed
state, DefogGAN generates defogged images of a game as
predictive information. Such information can lead to create
a strategic agent for the game. DefogGAN is a conditional
GAN variant featuring pyramidal reconstruction loss to optimize on multiple feature resolution scales. We have validated
DefogGAN empirically using a large dataset of professional
StarCraft replays. Our results indicate that DefogGAN can
predict the enemy buildings and combat units as accurately as
professional players do and achieves a superior performance
among state-of-the-art defoggers.

Ours

Figure 1: Comparison of DefogGAN prediction to ground
truth. Friendly and enemy units are represented as green and
red in the map (black). The unobserved enemy units are predicted by DefogGAN.

Introduction
The success of AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016) has brought
a signiﬁcant attention for artiﬁcial intelligence in games
(game AI). Agents trained by deep reinforcement learning have demonstrated hands-down victories over expert
human players in classic games such as Chess (Silver et
al. 2018), Go (Silver et al. 2016), and Atari (Mnih et al.
2013). With more complex setting, real-time strategy (RTS)
games serve a means to evaluate state-of-the-art learning algorithms. Game AI today opens up new opportunities and
challenges for machine learning. The beneﬁts of developing game AI are widespread beyond gaming applications.
The exploration to adopt an intelligent agent in science (e.g.,
predicting protein folding in organic chemistry (Evans et al.
2018)) and enterprise business service (e.g., chatbots (Satu,
Parvez, and Shamim-Al-Mamun 2015)) is making to enter a
new era for game AI.
In this paper, we describe DefogGAN that takes a generative approach to compensate imperfect information presented to a gamer due to the fog of war. We use StarCraft, an
RTS game featuring three well-balanced races for a gamer to
choose and build substantially different playing styles and
strategies. StarCraft remains a popular E-sport after more
than two decades of the original release. In a daunting aim
for our game AI to conquer highly-skilled human players,
we train our DefogGAN with more than 30,000 episodes of
expert and professional human replays. Such aim has been

notoriously difﬁcult for StarCraft whose long withstanding
popularity has compounded a broad range of adept game tactics in addition to micro-control techniques (Ontanón et al.
2013) widespread in the E-sport scenes and Battle.net.
The fog of war refers to the lack of vision and information
on an area without a friendly unit around it, including all regions that have been previously explored but left unattended
currently. Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) (Monahan 1982) best describes the fog of war
problem. In general, POMDP gives a practical formulation
for most real-world problems characterized by having many
unobserved variables. For game AI, solving a partial observation problem is essential to improving its performance. In
fact, many existing approaches to design intelligent game AI
often suffer from the partial observation problem (Xu et al.
2018). Recently, generative models are used to alleviate the
uncertainty of partial observations. The agent’s performance
is enhanced from taking advantage of the (predictive) results
obtained through a generative model (Synnaeve et al. 2018;
Kahng et al. 2018). The generative approach, however, cannot fully match highly skillful scouting techniques of a topnotch professional human player.
StarCraft provides a great platform to study complex
POMDP problems related to game AI. We set up DefogGAN to accurately predict the state of an opponent hidden

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4296

