The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dynamic Malware Analysis with Feature Engineering and Feature Learning
Zhaoqi Zhang,∗ Panpan Qi,∗ Wei Wang
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
{zhaoqi.zhang, qipanpan}@u.nus.edu, wangwei@comp.nus.edu.sg

2005). However, the signature-based static analysis might be
vulnerable to code obfuscation (Rhode, Burnap, and Jones
2018; Gibert et al. 2018) or inadequate to detect new (“zeroday”) malware (Vinod et al. 2009). In contrast, dynamic
analysis algorithms execute each software in an isolated environment (e.g., a sandbox) to collect its run-time behaviour
information. By using behaviour information, dynamic analysis exerts a higher detection rate and is more robust than
static analysis (Damodaran et al. 2017). In this paper, we
focus on dynamic analysis.

Abstract
Dynamic malware analysis executes the program in an isolated environment and monitors its run-time behaviour (e.g.
system API calls) for malware detection. This technique has
been proven to be effective against various code obfuscation
techniques and newly released (“zero-day”) malware. However, existing works typically only consider the API name
while ignoring the arguments, or require complex feature engineering operations and expert knowledge to process the arguments. In this paper, we propose a novel and low-cost feature extraction approach, and an effective deep neural network architecture for accurate and fast malware detection.
Speciﬁcally, the feature representation approach utilizes a
feature hashing trick to encode the API call arguments associated with the API name. The deep neural network architecture applies multiple Gated-CNNs (convolutional neural networks) to transform the extracted features of each API
call. The outputs are further processed through bidirectional
LSTM (long-short term memory networks) to learn the sequential correlation among API calls. Experiments show that
our solution outperforms baselines signiﬁcantly on a large
real dataset. Valuable insights about feature engineering and
architecture design are derived from the ablation study.

1

Among behaviour information, the system API call sequence is the most popular data source as it captures all the
operations (including network access, ﬁle manipulation operations, etc.) executed by the software. Each API call in the
sequence contains two important parts, the API name and
the arguments. Each API may have zero or multiple arguments, each of which is represented as a name-value pair.
To process behaviour information, a lot of feature engineering methods are proposed. For example, if we consider the
API name as a string, then the most N (e.g., 1000) frequent
n-gram features can be extracted (n = 1, 2, · · ·) from the sequence. However, it is non-trivial to extract the features from
the arguments of heterogeneous types, including strings, integers, addresses, etc.

Introduction

Cybersecurity imposes substantial economic cost all over
the world. A report (CEA 2018) from the United States government estimates that costs by malicious cyber activities in
the U.S. economy lay between $57 billion and $109 billion
in 2016. Malicious software (or malware) is one of the major cybersecurity threats that evolves rapidly. It is reported
that more than 120 million new malware samples are being discovered every year (AV-TEST 2017). Therefore, the
development of malware detection techniques is urgent and
necessary.
Researchers have been working on malware detection for
decades. The mainstream solutions include static analysis
and dynamic analysis. Static analysis methods scan the binary byte-streams of the software to create signatures, such
as printable strings, n-gram, instructions, etc (Kruegel et al.

Recently, researchers have applied deep learning models to dynamic analysis. Deep learning models like convolutional neural network (CNN) and recurrent neural network (RNN) can learn features from the sequential data directly without feature engineering. Nonetheless, the data of
traditional deep learning applications like computer vision
and natural language processing is homogeneous, e.g., images (or text). It is still challenging to process the heterogeneous API arguments using deep learning models. Therefore, most existing approaches ignore the arguments. There
are a few approaches (Tian et al. 2010; Fang et al. 2017;
Agrawal et al. 2018) leveraging API arguments. However,
these approaches either treat all arguments as strings (Tian
et al. 2010; Agrawal et al. 2018) or only consider the
statistical information of arguments (Ahmed et al. 2009;
Tian et al. 2010; Islam et al. 2013). They consequently cannot fully exploit the heterogeneous information from different types of arguments.

∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1210

