The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On the Max-Min Fair Stochastic Allocation of Indivisible Goods
Yasushi Kawase,1,2 Hanna Sumita3
1

Tokyo Institute of Technology 2 RIKEN AIP Center
3
Tokyo Metropolitan University
kawase.y.ab@m.titech.ac.jp, sumita@tmu.ac.jp

Fair allocation of resources and goods to agents has been
a fundamental problem in economic theory over several
decades. Recently, a means to ﬁnd a fair allocation of indivisible goods has received considerable attention in algorithmic game theory, artiﬁcial intelligence, and optimization
theory (Brandt et al. 2016; Rothe 2016). A motivation is that
several practical applications, such as matching courses and
allocating jobs to machines, naturally entail fair allocation of
indivisible goods. Therefore, there is vast literature addressing many types of settings. In particular, there exist several
notions of “fairness”; envy-freeness, max-min fairness, proportionality, max-min share guarantee, etc. exist.
Throughout this paper, we denote the sets of indivisible
goods and agents by E and N , respectively. Each agent i ∈
N has a utility function ui : 2E → Z+ that assigns a value
to each set of goods. When each agent i ∈ N wins a set Xi
of goods, the utility of agent i is ui (Xi ). An allocation is a
subpartition of goods. Among notions of fairness, we mainly
focus on max-min fairness. A max-min allocation is deﬁned

as one that maximizes the Egalitarian-Social-Welfare (ESW)
mini∈N ui (Xi ) (Golovin 2005). This makes the least happy
agent as happy as possible.
The goal of this study is to solve the problem of ﬁnding a
stochastic max-min allocation of indivisible goods. We term
this problem MaxESW. A stochastic allocation is a probability distribution on deterministic allocations. In other words,
an allocation algorithm uses a lottery to choose a deterministic allocation and distribute the set of goods to each agent.
We say that a stochastic allocation satisﬁes the max-min fairness when the minimum expected utility is maximized.1
Regarding motivation, many studies have mentioned that
as far as in existing notions, a fair allocation may not exist,
or even if exists, there is still room for consideration as to
whether it is fair in practice. Consider allocating one good
to two agents with positive utilities. As the good is indivisible, either agent can receive it. For max-min allocations, the
minimum utility is always zero, and hence any allocation
can be fair. However, this is unsatisfactory in practice. Even
in this situation, we would like to select either agent in a fair
manner.
Stochastic allocation may shed light on the aforementioned difﬁculty, at least from an ex ante perspective. In the
aforementioned case, an algorithm chooses an allocation to
either agent with some probability. See also Example 1 in
Preliminaries. A lottery can also be interpreted as a fraction
of allocation when we repeatedly allocate goods, such as
time slots for car sharing during one week. We would like to
remark that a stochastic allocation of indivisible goods cannot be naturally interpreted as a deterministic allocation of
divisible goods in general. For example, suppose that there
are two indivisible goods E = {a, b}, and one agent with
the utility u(S) = min{|S|, 1}. The expected utility of allocating {a} or {b} uniformly at random is 1, while the expected utility of allocating {a, b} or the empty set uniformly
at random is 1/2. When we assume that the goods are divisible, natural interpretations of both allocations are the same,
namely allocating each good in the ratio of the half. From
this fractional allocation, we cannot uniquely determine a
corresponding stochastic allocation.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The minimum expected utility is not the expectation of the
minimum utility.

Abstract
We study the problem of fairly allocating a set of indivisible
goods to risk-neutral agents in a stochastic setting. We propose an (approximation) algorithm to ﬁnd a stochastic allocation that maximizes the minimum utility among the agents.
The algorithm runs by repeatedly ﬁnding an (approximate)
allocation to maximize the total virtual utility of the agents.
This implies that the problem is solvable in polynomial time
when the utilities are gross-substitutes (which is a subclass
of submodular). When the utilities are submodular, we can
ﬁnd a (1 − 1/e)-approximate solution for the problem and
this is best possible unless P=NP. We also extend the problem where a stochastic allocation must satisfy the (ex ante)
envy-freeness. Under this condition, we demonstrate that the
problem is NP-hard even when every agent has an additive
utility with a matroid constraint (which is a subclass of grosssubstitutes). Furthermore, we propose a polynomial-time algorithm for the setting with a restriction that the matroid constraint is common to all agents.

Introduction

2070

