The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Maximum Margin Multi-Dimensional Classiﬁcation
Bin-Bin Jia,1,2,3 Min-Ling Zhang1,3,4∗
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Lanzhou University of Technology, Lanzhou 730050, China
3
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
4
Collaborative Innovation Center of Wireless Communications Technology, China
{jiabb, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn
2

spaces. Here, each class space Cj (1 ≤ j ≤ q) consists
of Kj possible class labels, i.e., Cj = {cj1 , cj2 , . . . , cjKj },
among which only one is relevant to the example. Furthermore, let D = {(xi , yi ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ N } be the MDC training set with N training examples, where xi ∈ X is a ddimensional feature vector and yi = [yi1 , yi2 , . . . , yiq ] ∈
Y is the associated class vector, each of which is one possible value in the corresponding class space, i.e., yij ∈ Cj .
Then, the task of multi-dimensional classiﬁcation is to induce a predictive function f : X → Y from D which can
assign a proper class vector f (x) ∈ Y for the unseen instance x.
To accomplish the task of learning from MDC examples,
the most intuitive strategy is to induce a number of independent multi-class classiﬁers, one per class space. However, this strategy completely ignores potential dependencies among class variables which would impact the generalization performance of induced predictive model. Therefore, most existing approaches try to model class dependencies in different ways, such as specifying chaining order over
class variables (Zaragoza et al. 2011; Read, Martino, and Luengo 2014), assuming directed acyclic graph (DAG) structure over class variables (Bielza, Li, and Larrañaga 2011;
Batal, Hong, and Hauskrecht 2013; Zhu, Liu, and Jiang
2016; Bolt and van der Gaag 2017; Gil-Begue, Larrañaga,
and Bielza 2018; Benjumeda, Bielza, and Larrañaga 2018),
and partitioning class variables into groups (Read, Bielza,
and Larrañaga 2014), etc.
To derive margin-based techniques for multi-dimensional
classiﬁcation, the major difﬁculty lies in that the modeling
outputs from different class spaces are not directly comparable. In this paper, we make a ﬁrst attempt to adapt maximum
margin technique for multi-dimensional classiﬁcation, and
propose a novel approach named M3 M DC, i.e., MaxiMum
Margin for Multi-Dimensional Classiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally,
based on one-vs-one decomposition within each class space,
the multi-dimensional classiﬁcation models are optimized
by maximizing classiﬁcation margin on individual class
variable and regularizing model relationship across class
variables. The resulting convex formulation is solved with
alternating optimization admitting QP or closed-form solution in either alternating step. Comparative studies against

Abstract
Multi-dimensional classiﬁcation (MDC) assumes heterogenous class spaces for each example, where class variables
from different class spaces characterize semantics of the example along different dimensions. Due to the heterogeneity of class spaces, the major difﬁculty in designing marginbased MDC techniques lies in that the modeling outputs from
different class spaces are not comparable to each other. In
this paper, a ﬁrst attempt towards maximum margin multidimensional classiﬁcation is investigated. Following the onevs-one decomposition within each class space, the resulting models are optimized by leveraging classiﬁcation margin
maximization on individual class variable and model relationship regularization across class variables. We derive convex
formulation for the maximum margin MDC problem, which
can be tackled with alternating optimization admitting QP or
closed-form solution in either alternating step. Experimental
studies over real-world MDC data sets clearly validate effectiveness of the proposed maximum margin MDC techniques.

Introduction
In multi-dimensional classiﬁcation, each training example
is represented by a single instance while associated with
multiple class variables (Read, Bielza, and Larrañaga 2014;
Ma and Chen 2018; Jia and Zhang 2019). Here, each class
variable corresponds to one speciﬁc class space which characterizes the semantics of an object along one dimension.
Many real-world problems can be naturally formalized under MDC frameworks (Rodrı́guez et al. 2012; Borchani et
al. 2013; Sagarna et al. 2014; Seraﬁno et al. 2015). For
example, a news document can be characterized from the
topic dimension (with possible classes sports, politics, social, Sci&Tech, etc.), from the mood dimension (with possible classes good news, neutral news, bad news), and from
the zone dimension (with possible classes domestic, intra/inter-continental, etc.).
Formally speaking, let X = Rd be the d-dimensional input (feature) space and Y = C1 ×C2 ×· · ·×Cq be the output
space which corresponds to the Cartesian product of q class
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4312

