The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Pay Your Trip for Trafﬁc Congestion:
Dynamic Pricing in Trafﬁc-Aware Road Networks
Lisi Chen,1,2 Shuo Shang,1∗ Bin Yao,3 Jing Li2
1
UESTC, China
Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UAE
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{chenlisi.cs, jedi.shang}@gmail.com, yaobin@sjtu.edu.cn, jing.li@inceptioniai.org
2

Abstract
Pricing is essential in optimizing transportation resource allocation. Congestion pricing is widely used to reduce urban trafﬁc congestion. We propose and investigate a novel
Dynamic Pricing Strategy (DPS) to price travelers’ trips in
intelligent transportation platforms (e.g., DiDi, Lyft, Uber).
The trips are charged according to their “congestion contributions” to global urban trafﬁc systems. The dynamic pricing
strategy retrieves a matching between n travelers’ trips and
the potential travel routes (each trip has k potential routes) to
minimize the global trafﬁc congestion. We believe that DPS
holds the potential to beneﬁt society and the environment,
such as reducing trafﬁc congestion and enabling smarter and
greener transportation. The DPS problem is challenging due
to its high computation complexity (there exist kn matching possibilities). We develop an efﬁcient and effective approximate matching algorithm based on local search, as well
as pruning techniques to further enhance the matching efﬁciency. The accuracy and efﬁciency of the dynamic pricing strategy are veriﬁed by extensive experiments on real
datasets.

User 3
1st route
(߬1)
User 2

2nd route
(߬2)

1st route
(߬1)

congestion

1st route
(߬1)

2nd route
(߬2)

User 1
2nd route
(߬2)

Figure 1: Trips and potential routes

simply focus on “removing vehicles from hot areas”, but
have nothing to do with “balancing the global trafﬁc load”,
which may lead to trafﬁc congestion in other areas.
In this light, we propose and investigate a novel Dynamic
Pricing Strategy (DPS) in trafﬁc-aware road networks. Assume that n travelers are planning their trips at the same
time, and each trip may have k potential routes to connect
the source and destination (e.g., the fastest route, the cheapest route, the greenest route, unobstructed routes). The trips
are charged according to their “congestion contributions” to
global urban trafﬁc systems, and the DPS problem ﬁnds a
matching between n travelers’ trips and the potential travel
routes to minimize the global trafﬁc congestion. We believe
that DPS holds the potential to beneﬁt society and the environment, such as optimizing transportation resource allocation and enabling smarter and greener transportation.
An example is shown in Figure 1. Three users (u1 ,u2 , and
u3 ) are planning their trips (n=3). The source and destination of a trip are denoted by circle and star, respectively.
Each trip (user) has two potential routes (k=2), which are
denoted by τ1 and τ2 . So we have 23 possible route matchings in total. One of the matching is: u1 → τ1 , u2 → τ1 , and
u3 → τ1 . However, this matching may aggravate the trafﬁc congestion in the road segment denoted by the red dot-

Introduction
With the trend towards urbanization and the rapid development of urban transportation, trafﬁc congestion becomes
a huge problem for many major cities. For vehicles, trafﬁc congestion means slower speeds, longer trip times, and
increased vehicular queueing. For society and the environment, trafﬁc congestion means more energy and money consumption, and increased greenhouse-gas emission and air
pollution. How to reduce trafﬁc congestion is the main problem faced by the governments in many countries.
Pricing plays an essential role in optimizing transportation resource allocation. Nowadays, congestion pricing is
widely used to reduce trafﬁc congestion. For example, in
Singapore, congestion pricing is introduced for vehicles entering the center business area in peak hours (e.g., 18:00–
19:30), while in London, Stockholm, and Milan, congestion
pricing is charged for almost the whole day (e.g., 07:00–
19:00) in the central area. However, these pricing strategies
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
582

