The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Loss-Based Attention for Deep Multiple Instance Learning
Xiaoshuang Shi,1 Fuyong Xing,2 Yuanpu Xie,1 Zizhao Zhang,1 Lei Cui,3 Lin Yang1
1

University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
University of Colorado Denver, Denver, CO, USA
3
Northwestern University, Xi’an, China
{xsshi2015, shampool, zizhaozhang}@uﬂ.edu,
fuyong.xing@ucdenver.edu, cuilei1989@163.com, lin.yang@bme.uﬂ.edu
2

The main goal of MIL is to learn a classiﬁcation model
with training bag labels in order to predict a test bag label. An additional challenge task is to interpret the significance of each instance for bag classiﬁcation. Numerous algorithms have been applied to MIL, and they can be roughly
classiﬁed into three paradigms (Amores 2013): bag-space,
instance-space and embedded-space. Bag-space paradigm
(Cheplygina, Tax, and Loog 2015) treats each bag as a whole
and exploits their relations for classiﬁcation. Instance-space
paradigm (Ramon and De Raedt 2000) trains instance-level
classiﬁers and aggregates their responses for bag classiﬁcation. Embedded-space paradigm (Andrews, Tsochantaridis,
and Hofmann 2003) (Chen, Bi, and Wang 2006) ﬁrst embeds
all instances in one bag into a compact low-dimensional representation and then feeds it to a bag-level classiﬁer. Among
these three paradigms, only instance-space paradigm (Ramon and De Raedt 2000) (Zhang, Platt, and Viola 2006)
is able to interpret the contribution of each instance to bag
classiﬁcation. Unfortunately, instance-space paradigm often
exhibits inferior performance to the other paradigms (Kandemir and Hamprecht 2015).

Abstract
Although attention mechanisms have been widely used in
deep learning for many tasks, they are rarely utilized to solve
multiple instance learning (MIL) problems, where only a general category label is given for multiple instances contained
in one bag. Additionally, previous deep MIL methods ﬁrstly
utilize the attention mechanism to learn instance weights and
then employ a fully connected layer to predict the bag label, so that the bag prediction is largely determined by the
effectiveness of learned instance weights. To alleviate this issue, in this paper, we propose a novel loss based attention
mechanism, which simultaneously learns instance weights
and predictions, and bag predictions for deep multiple instance learning. Speciﬁcally, it calculates instance weights
based on the loss function, e.g. softmax+cross-entropy, and
shares the parameters with the fully connected layer, which
is to predict instance and bag predictions. Additionally, a
regularization term consisting of learned weights and crossentropy functions is utilized to boost the recall of instances,
and a consistency cost is used to smooth the training process of neural networks for boosting the model generalization performance. Extensive experiments on multiple types
of benchmark databases demonstrate that the proposed attention mechanism is a general, effective and efﬁcient framework, which can achieve superior bag and image classiﬁcation performance over other state-of-the-art MIL methods,
with obtaining higher instance precision and recall than previous attention mechanisms. Source codes are available on
https://github.com/xsshi2015/Loss-Attention.

In oder to interpret the signiﬁcance of instances and meanwhile achieve desired bag classiﬁcation accuracy, several attention based MIL algorithms (Pappas and Popescu-Belis
2017) (Ilse, Tomczak, and Welling 2018) embed attention
mechanisms into neural networks to learn instance weights
and classify bags. These algorithms usually introduce auxiliary layers to learn instance weights and then utilize another
fully connected layer to produce bag predictions, and thus
the bag prediction is largely determined by the effectiveness of learned instance weights. Unfortunately, the attention mechanism often assigns a large weight to the instance,
which has a different label from that of the bag, thereby misleading the network and decreasing its performance on bag
prediction and instance interpretation.

Introduction
Multiple instance learning is a signiﬁcant research topic in
machine learning and computer vision communities, and it
has been widely used in many real-world applications, such
as image categorization or retrieval, gene expression, face
detection and medical imaging (Wei and Zhou 2016) (Wang
et al. 2018) (Hou et al. 2016) (Shi et al. 2017) (Shi et al.
2018) , where only a general statement of the category is
given for multiple instances (Ilse, Tomczak, and Welling
2018), e.g. one bag contains tens or hundreds of instances,
while it is usually described by a single bag label and there
is no label information associated with instances.

To alleviate this issue, in this paper, we propose a novel
loss based attention mechanism, which connects the attention mechanism with the loss function to simultaneously
learn instance weights and predictions, and bag predictions.
To the best of our knowledge, the proposed method is the
ﬁrst work to directly connect the attention mechanism with
the loss function for multiple instance learning. The major

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5742

