The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Joint Parsing and Generation for Abstractive Summarization
Kaiqiang Song,1 Logan Lebanoff,1 Qipeng Guo2
Xipeng Qiu,2 Xiangyang Xue,2 Chen Li,3 Dong Yu,3 Fei Liu1
1

Computer Science Department, University of Central Florida
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, 3 Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA
{kqsong, loganlebanoff}@knights.ucf.edu, {qpguo16, xpqiu, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn,
{ailabchenli, dyu}@tencent.com, feiliu@cs.ucf.edu
2

Abstract
Sentences produced by abstractive summarization systems
can be ungrammatical and fail to preserve the original meanings, despite being locally ﬂuent. In this paper we propose to
remedy this problem by jointly generating a sentence and its
syntactic dependency parse while performing abstraction. If
generating a word can introduce an erroneous relation to the
summary, the behavior must be discouraged. The proposed
method thus holds promise for producing grammatical sentences and encouraging the summary to stay true-to-original.
Our contributions of this work are twofold. First, we present
a novel neural architecture for abstractive summarization that
combines a sequential decoder with a tree-based decoder in a
synchronized manner to generate a summary sentence and its
syntactic parse. Secondly, we describe a novel human evaluation protocol to assess if, and to what extent, a summary remains true to its original meanings. We evaluate our method
on a number of summarization datasets and demonstrate competitive results against strong baselines.

Source

Today, because of a CNN story and the generosity of
donors from around the world, Kekula wears scrubs
bearing the emblem of the Emory University ...

Summ.

CNN story and generosity of donors from around the world,
Kekula wears scrubs ...

Source

In its propaganda, ISIS has been using Abu Ghraib and
other cases of Western abuse to legitimize its current
actions in Iraq as the latest episodes ...

Summ.

In its propaganda, ISIS is being used by the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria ...

Source

Both state and foreign investments in Vietnam’s agriculture
have been not sufﬁcient enough, while local farmers have
to pay fees to contribute to building rural roads ...

Summ.

Vietnam’s agriculture not sufﬁcient enough

Table 1: Example summaries generated by neural abstractive
summarizers. They are manually re-cased for readability.

This is a non-trivial task, as the method must tightly couple
summarization and parsing algorithms, which are two signiﬁcant branches of NLP. A joint model for generating summary sentences and parse trees can be more appealing than
a pipeline method. The latter may suffer from error propagation, e.g., an ill-formed summary sentence can lead to more
parsing errors. Further, a joint method mimics the human behavior, e.g., an editor writes a summary and makes corrections instantly as the text is written. She needs not to ﬁnish
the whole summary in order to correct errors. A method that
incrementally produces a summary sentence and its syntactic parse aligns with this observation.
Our proposed joint model seeks to transform the source
sequence to a linearized parse tree of the summary sequence.
The model seamlessly integrates a shift-reduce dependency
parser into a summarization system employing the encoderdecoder architecture. A “SHIFT” operation leads the summarizer to generate a new word by copying it from the source
text or choosing a word from the vocabulary; whereas a
“REDUCE” operation adds a dependency arc between words
of the partial summary. The challenge of this task is to construct effective representations that support both tasks, as
they require different contextual representations. We propose to couple a sequential decoder for predicting new summary words and a tree-based decoder for predicting dependency arcs, and ensure both decoders work in a synchronized
fashion. We also introduce an important addition making use

Introduction
It is crucial for a summary to not only condense the source
text but also render itself grammatical. Without grammatical sentences, a summary can be ineffective, because human
brain derives meaning from the sentence as a whole rather
than individual words. Abstractive summarization has made
considerable recent progress (See, Liu, and Manning 2017;
Chen and Bansal 2018; Kryscinski et al. 2018). Nonetheless,
studies suggest that system summaries remain imperfect. A
summary sentence can be ungrammatical and fail to convey
the intended meaning, despite its local ﬂuency (Song, Zhao,
and Liu 2018; Lebanoff et al. 2019a). In Table 1, we show
example abstractive summaries produced by neural abstractive summarizers. The ﬁrst summary has failed to conform
to grammar and other summaries changed the original meanings. These summaries not only mislead the reader but also
hinder the applicability of summarization techniques in realworld scenarios.
In this paper, we attempt to remedy this problem by introducing a new architecture to jointly generate a summary sentence and its syntactic parse, while performing abstraction.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8894

