The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Self-Supervised Learning for Generalizable Out-of-Distribution Detection
Sina Mohseni,1,2 Mandar Pitale,2 JBS Yadawa,2 Zhangyang Wang1
1

Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
2
NVIDIA, Santa Clara, CA
{sina.mohseni, atlaswang}@tamu.edu, {mpitale, jyadawa}@nvidia.com

Our paper proposes a new technique to improve model
reliability by adding OOD detector functions (with minimal architectural changes) to the model, to discriminate
OOD samples in multiple reject classes without sacriﬁcing the normal (i.e., in-distribution) classiﬁcation performance. Our high level idea is to simultaneously train indistribution classiﬁers and out-of-distribution detectors in
one network. Speciﬁcally, we use additional nodes as reject
functions in the last layer of our neural network. We use a
self-supervised approach to train reject functions with free
unlabeled OOD samples and the classiﬁer functions with a
labeled in-distribution training set.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method
through extensive comparisons with state-of-the-art techniques, across different datasets. We show that:
• Our method learns to generalize nicely on unseen OOD
distributions. In particular, learning such generalizable
OOD features is important for the detection robustness
when a mixed of unseen distributions are present.
• Different from existing methods (Liang, Li, and Srikant
2017; Lee et al. 2018), our method does not need tuning
with a sub-sample of the targeted OOD set, and therefore
can use any “free” unlabeled OOD set for training.
• Our method can also beneﬁt in-distribution classiﬁcation accuracy, via rejecting ambiguous samples near the
boundaries of the training set distribution.

Abstract
The real-world deployment of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) in safety-critical applications such as autonomous
vehicles needs to address a variety of DNNs’ vulnerabilities,
one of which being detecting and rejecting out-of-distribution
outliers that might result in unpredictable fatal errors. We propose a new technique relying on self-supervision for generalizable out-of-distribution (OOD) feature learning and rejecting those samples at the inference time. Our technique does
not need to pre-know the distribution of targeted OOD samples and incur no extra overheads compared to other methods. We perform multiple image classiﬁcation experiments
and observe our technique to perform favorably against stateof-the-art OOD detection methods. Interestingly, we witness
that our method also reduces in-distribution classiﬁcation risk
via rejecting samples near the boundaries of the training set
distribution.

Introduction
The real-world deployment of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) in safety-critical applications, such as autonomous
vehicles, calls for improving resiliency of DNNs for variety
of vulnerabilities in these algorithms. Improving algorithm
robustness for real-world scenarios calls for multi-fold efforts in network architecture design (Wang et al. 2017) and
post-evaluation (Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019). There has
recently been increasing attention to real-world challenge
of out-of-distribution (OOD) sample errors. By quantifying model or data uncertainty and rejecting predictions of
high uncertainty during inference (Kendall and Gal 2017),
one can improve dependability of (already trained) probabilistic models in open-world scenarios. Current research on
out-of-distribution detection are taking different directions,
including detection based on model conﬁdence (Liang, Li,
and Srikant 2017), employing ensemble techniques (Vyas et
al. 2018), learning DNN features (Lee et al. 2018) or using
reconstruction scores (Pidhorskyi, Almohsen, and Doretto
2018) and recently self-supervised algorithms (Golan and
El-Yaniv 2018; Hendrycks et al. 2019).

Related Work
Earlier work in deep learning presents solutions such as deep
ensembles (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017)
and uncertainty estimation (Gal and Ghahramani 2016) to
improve the dependability of machine learning solutions in
real-world tasks. Despite their effectiveness, they carry signiﬁcant extra computation and latency costs. (Geifman and
El-Yaniv 2017) presents a simpler selective classiﬁcation
approach, and SelectiveNet (Geifman and El-Yaniv 2019)
further proposes threshold on model prediction probability
and selectively classify inputs below the desired classiﬁcation risk. They show selective classiﬁcation can improve
model prediction’s reliability by allowing the user to set a
desired misclassiﬁcation error-risk in trade-off with the test

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5216

