The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DGCN: Dynamic Graph Convolutional
Network for Efﬁcient Multi-Person Pose Estimation
Zhongwei Qiu,1,2∗ Kai Qiu,3 Jianlong Fu,3 Dongmei Fu1,2
1

School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
Beijing Engineering Research Center of Industrial Spectrum Imaging
3
Microsoft Research Asia
qiuzhongwei@xs.ustb.edu.cn, {kaqiu, jianf}@microsoft.com, fdm ustb@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract
Right
Shoulder

Multi-person pose estimation aims to detect human keypoints
from images with multiple persons. Bottom-up methods for
multi-person pose estimation have attracted extensive attention, owing to the good balance between efﬁciency and accuracy. Recent bottom-up methods usually follow the principle
of keypoints localization and grouping, where relations between keypoints are the keys to group keypoints. These relations spontaneously construct a graph of keypoints, where
the edges represent the relations between two nodes (i.e.,
keypoints). Existing bottom-up methods mainly deﬁne relations by empirically picking out edges from this graph, while
omitting edges that may contain useful semantic relations.
In this paper, we propose a novel Dynamic Graph Convolutional Module (DGCM) to model rich relations in the keypoints graph. Speciﬁcally, we take into account all relations
(all edges of the graph) and construct dynamic graphs to tolerate large variations of human pose. The DGCM is quite
lightweight, which allows it to be stacked like a pyramid architecture and learn structural relations from multi-level features. Our network with single DGCM based on ResNet-50
achieves relative gains of 3.2% and 4.8% over state-of-the-art
bottom-up methods on COCO keypoints and MPII dataset,
respectively.

Neck

Right
shoulder

Neck
Left
Shoulder

Right
elbow
Right
Elbow

Hand-Crafted Graph

Pelvis

Dynamic Graph

Figure 1: Illustration of the hand-crafted graph and a dynamic graph generated by our model. Left: the hand-crafted
graph where each edge represents a physical relationship
between two keypoints. Right: a dynamic graph which can
model rich relations. Take the right shoulder for example.
The hand-crafted graph only models the relations with the
neck and right elbow. The dynamic graph can further model
the relations with left shoulder and pelvis, which is more robust to occlusion or complex actions. [Best viewed in color].

Introduction

Wei 2018; Sun et al. 2019; Qiu et al. 2019) and bottomup (Cao et al. 2017; Kreiss, Bertoni, and Alahi 2019;
Papandreou et al. 2018) manners. The former ﬁrst detect humans with bounding boxes and then perform single-person
pose estimation for each bounding box. The latter directly
localize all keypoints from multi-instances and then group
keypoints into persons. Bottom-up pose estimation methods
attract increasing attention, especially in the industry community, owing to the good balance between efﬁciency and
accuracy.
Since bottom-up methods are box-free, human contextual
relations are the keys to identify the keypoints belonging to
one instance and distinguish different instances. These relations spontaneously construct a graph, which consists of
nodes (keypoints) and edges (relations between keypoints).
These edges are extensively used to group keypoints into
persons. However, recent bottom-up methods mainly deﬁne
relations by picking out edges from this graph with hand-

Multi-person human pose estimation aims to recognize human keypoints from images, which usually involve multiple persons. An efﬁcient and accurate human pose estimation approach can beneﬁt extensive real-life applications,
including activity recognition (Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018),
human-computer interaction, virtual or augmented reality,
AI Coach(Wang et al. 2019), and so on. Although large
progress has been seen in recent years, the challenges of
large variations in occlusion, truncation, and viewpoints remain.
Two mainstream approaches are prevalent in the ﬁeld of
multi-person pose estimation, including top-down (Newell,
Yang, and Deng 2016; Chen et al. 2018; Xiao, Wu, and
∗
This work was done when Zhongwei Qiu conducted internship
at Microsoft Research Asia.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11924

