The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Gated Fully Fusion for Semantic Segmentation
Xiangtai Li,1 Houlong Zhao,2 Lei Han,3 Yunhai Tong,1 Shaohua Tan,1 Kuiyuan Yang2
1

School of EECS, Peking University 2 DeepMotion 3 Tecent AI Lab
{lxtpku, yhtong}@pku.edu.cn, tan@cis.pku.edu.cn
{houlongzhao, kuiyuanyang}@deepmotion.ai
leihan.cs@gmail.com

Abstract
Semantic segmentation generates comprehensive understanding of scenes through densely predicting the category for each
pixel. High-level features from Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks already demonstrate their effectiveness in semantic
segmentation tasks, however the coarse resolution of highlevel features often leads to inferior results for small/thin objects where detailed information is important. It is natural
to consider importing low level features to compensate for
the lost detailed information in high-level features. Unfortunately, simply combining multi-level features suffers from the
semantic gap among them. In this paper, we propose a new
architecture, named Gated Fully Fusion(GFF), to selectively
fuse features from multiple levels using gates in a fully connected way. Speciﬁcally, features at each level are enhanced
by higher-level features with stronger semantics and lowerlevel features with more details, and gates are used to control
the propagation of useful information which signiﬁcantly reduces the noises during fusion. We achieve the state of the art
results on four challenging scene parsing datasets including
Cityscapes, Pascal Context, COCO-stuff and ADE20K.

Figure 1: Illustration of challenges in semantic segmentation. (a), Input Image. (b), Ground Truth. (c), PSPNet result.
(d), Our result. Our method performs much better on small
patterns such as distant poles and trafﬁc lights.
high-level feature maps are distributed in two ends in a ConvNet.
To get a feature map that is both high-resolution and highlevel, which is not readily available in a ConvNet, it is natural to consider fusing high-level feature maps from top layers and high-resolution feature maps from bottom layers.
These feature maps are with different properties, that highlevel feature map can correctly predict most of the pixels on
large patterns in a coarse manner, which is widely used in the
current semantic segmentation approaches, while low-level
feature maps can only predict few pixels on small patterns.
Thus, simply combining high-level feature maps and
high-resolution feature maps will drown useful information
in massive useless information, and cannot reach an informative high-level and high-resolution feature map. Therefore, an advanced fusion mechanism is required to collect information selectively from different feature maps. To
achieve this, we propose Gated Fully Fusion (GFF) which
uses gating mechanism, a kind of operation commonly used
for information extraction from time series, to pixelwisely
measure the usefulness of each feature vector, and control information propagation through gates accordingly. The
principle of the gate at each layer is designed to either send

Introduction
Semantic segmentation densely predicts the semantic category for every pixel in an image, such comprehensive image understanding is valuable for many vision-based applications such as medical image analysis (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015), remote sensing (Kampffmeyer, Salberg, and Jenssen 2016) and autonomous driving (Xu et al.
2017). However, precisely predicting label for every pixel is
challenging as illustrated in Fig. 1, since pixels can be from
tiny or large objects, far or near objects, and inside object or
object boundary.
As a semantic prediction problem, the basic task of semantic segmentation is to generate high-level representation
for each pixel, i.e., a high-level and high-resolution feature
map. Given the ability of ConvNets in learning high-level
representation from data, semantic segmentation has made
much progress by leveraging such high-level representation.
However, high-level representation from ConvNets is generated along lowering the resolution, thus high-resolution and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11418

