The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TextNAS: A Neural Architecture Search Space Tailored for Text Representation
∗

∗

∗ †

Yujing Wang,1,2, Yaming Yang,1, Yiren Chen,2, , Jing Bai,1 Ce Zhang3,
†
†
Guinan Su,4, Xiaoyu Kou,2, Yunhai Tong,2 Mao Yang,1 Lidong Zhou1

†

1

2

Microsoft Research Asia
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
3
ETH Zürich, 4 University of Science and Technology of China
{yujwang, yayaming, jbai, maoyang, lidongz}@microsoft.com
{yrchen92, kouxiaoyu, yhtong}@pku.edu.cn
ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch, sa517299@mail.ustc.edu.cn
NAS to different applications. First, it is prohibitive to search
for all kinds of possibilities thoroughly, even when advanced
search algorithms (for example, gradient-based, evolution,
reinforcement learning, etc.) are utilized; Second, when the
search space is extra-large, the NAS algorithm may select a
neural architecture that overﬁts to both training and validation
data. Thus, we argue that the search space is an indispensable
human prior which deserves more investigation in different
applications.
In this paper, we propose TextNAS, a novel search space
customized for text representation. The search space is designed based on the following motivations and ﬁndings:

Abstract
Learning text representation is crucial for text classiﬁcation
and other language related tasks. There are a diverse set of text
representation networks in the literature, and how to ﬁnd the
optimal one is a non-trivial problem. Recently, the emerging
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) techniques have demonstrated good potential to solve the problem. Nevertheless, most
of the existing works of NAS focus on the search algorithms
and pay little attention to the search space. In this paper, we
argue that the search space is also an important human prior to
the success of NAS in different applications. Thus, we propose
a novel search space tailored for text representation. Through
automatic search, the discovered network architecture outperforms state-of-the-art models on various public datasets on
text classiﬁcation and natural language inference tasks. Furthermore, some of the design principles found in the automatic
network agree well with human intuition.

• It is beneﬁcial to explore the customized solution of
layer mixture. It is well-known that different layers are
beneﬁcial from different perspectives. CNN is good at
learning local feature combinations (analogies to n-grams),
RNN specializes in sequential modeling, and Transformer
(Vaswani et al. 2017) is able to capture long-distance dependencies directly. There are some evidences demonstrating the potential of layer mixture, for instance, C-LSTM
(Zhou et al. 2015) utilizes CNN to extract a sequence of
higher-level phrase representation and then feeds the CNN
output to another RNN layer to produce the ultimate sentence embedding vectors.

Introduction
Neural network models have demonstrated their superiority
in many natural language tasks such as text classiﬁcation,
machine translation and reading comprehension. One of the
core problems of natural language processing is to design a
network architecture that effectively captures the syntax and
semantics incorporated in texts. Contrary to the computer
vision domain where CNN is predominant, the state-of-theart neural networks for text representation are much more
diverse, including CNN (Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015),
RNN (Liu et al. 2015), hybrid model of CNN+RNN (Zhou et
al. 2015; Tang, Qin, and Liu 2015) and Transformer (Vaswani
et al. 2017), etc. Nevertheless, how to ﬁnd the optimal text
representation network is still an unsettled problem in the
literature.
Recently, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) techniques
have opened up a new opportunity for customized architecture design. Existing works of NAS mainly focus on the study
of search algorithms and put little emphasis on the search
space. However, there remain several challenges for applying

• The macro search space is a better choice for text representation Most previous works of NAS prefer micro
search space (Zoph et al. 2017) as they work well on
image-related tasks. However, according to a preliminary
experiment (showed in Table 1), we demonstrate that the
macro search space is better than the micro one in the text
classiﬁcation scenario. This shows the necessity of leveraging customized search spaces for different applications.
• The search space should support multi-path ensembles. One limitation of existing macro search space is
that it only embodies single-path neural networks. However, multi-path ensemble is a common design principle in
manual networks, e.g., InceptionV4 (Szegedy et al. 2017).
Intuitively, different categories of layers act as distinct feature extractors, an ensemble of which provides potentially
better representation for the sentence.

∗

Equal Contribution
The work was done when the authors visited MSRA
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

The TextNAS search space consists of a mixture of con9242

