The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Real-Time Object Tracking via Meta-Learning:
Efﬁcient Model Adaptation and One-Shot Channel Pruning
Ilchae Jung,1,2 Kihyun You,1 Hyeonwoo Noh,1,2 Minsu Cho,1 Bohyung Han2
1
Computer Vision Lab., POSTECH, Korea
Computer Vision Lab. ECE, & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
{chey0313, kihyun13, shgusdngogo, mscho}@postech.ac.kr, bhhan@snu.ac.kr
2

tracking algorithms. In the context of object tracking based
on deep neural networks, an episode corresponds to a realization of object tracking based on a parameterized model
for a video sequence. The execution of an episode is computationally expensive and time-consuming, which makes it
difﬁcult to incorporate meta-learning into object tracking because it requires optimization over a large number of learning episodes. Meta-Tracker (Park and Berg 2018) circumvents this issue by simulating a tracking episode within a
single frame. However, in this approach, meta-learning is
limited to initializing the deep neural network for target appearance modeling at the ﬁrst frame, where ground-truth target annotation is available. This is because Meta-Tracker relies only on the accurate ground-truth for meta-learning, although tracking after the ﬁrst frame involves model adaptation based on estimated targets from the previous frames.
We introduce a novel meta-learning framework for object tracking, which focuses on fast model adaptation. In
particular, our approach simulates the model adaptation by
dividing it into the following two distinct cases: (1) initial
adaptation, where the model is optimized for the one-shot
target ground-truth at the ﬁrst frame and (2) online adaptation, where the model is updated using the tracked targets in
previous frames. Such a ﬁne-grained simulation enables to
capture distinct properties of two cases and allows the metalearned model to generalize better. In our meta-learning for
object tracking, we evaluate the learning algorithm in terms
of its expected accuracy over various situations by simulating diverse challenging scenarios with hard examples. Moreover, we develop a one-shot channel pruning technique via
meta-learning based on a single ground-truth target annotation at the ﬁrst frame. Our main contributions are threefold:

Abstract
We propose a novel meta-learning framework for real-time
object tracking with efﬁcient model adaptation and channel
pruning. Given an object tracker, our framework learns to
ﬁne-tune its model parameters in only a few gradient-descent
iterations during tracking while pruning its network channels
using the target ground-truth at the ﬁrst frame. Such a learning problem is formulated as a meta-learning task, where a
meta-tracker is trained by updating its meta-parameters for
initial weights, learning rates, and pruning masks through
carefully designed tracking simulations. The integrated metatracker greatly improves tracking performance by accelerating the convergence of online learning and reducing the
cost of feature computation. Experimental evaluation on the
standard datasets demonstrates its outstanding accuracy and
speed compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep neural networks have drastically
improved visual object tracking technology. By learning
strong representations of target and background using convolutional neural networks, many algorithms (Nam and Han
2016; Nam, Baek, and Han 2016; Han, Sim, and Adam
2017; Danelljan et al. 2016; 2017a) have achieved a significant performance gain. Based on the success, recent methods (Danelljan et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019; Huang, Lucey,
and Ramanan 2017; Fan and Ling 2017; Zhu et al. 2018;
Jung et al. 2018) have further advanced network architectures and training techniques for better accuracy and speed.
Such manual design choices, however, often result a suboptimal solution in a limited exploration space eventually.
Meta-learning (Santoro et al. 2016; Andrychowicz et al.
2016; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017) automates the optimization procedure of a learning problem through the evaluation over a large number of episodes. It facilitates exploring
a large hypothesis space and ﬁtting a learning algorithm for
a particular set of tasks. Considering that an object tracking
algorithm aims to learn a parameterized target appearance
model specialized for individual video sequences, it is natural to adopt meta-learning for the effective optimization in

• We propose a meta-learning framework for object tracking, which efﬁciently optimizes network parameters for
target appearance through sophisticated simulation and
test of tracking episodes in meta-training.
• We introduce a one-shot network pruning technique
via meta-learning, which enables to learn target-speciﬁc
model compression based on only a single ground-truth
annotation available at the ﬁrst frame.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We demonstrate that our meta-tracker leads to signiﬁcant
11205

