The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bounded Incentives in Manipulating the Probabilistic Serial Rule
Zihe Wang,1 Zhide Wei,2 Jie Zhang3
1

2

Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, China. wang.zihe@mail.shufe.edu.cn
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, China. zhidewei@pku.edu.cn
3
Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, U.K. jie.zhang@soton.ac.uk

have been investigated, including Probabilistic Serial (Bogomolnaia and Moulin 2001; Katta and Sethuraman 2006;
Bhalgat, Chakrabarty, and Khanna 2011; Bogomolnaia and
Heo 2012; Eric Budish 2013; Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez
2013), Random Priority (Abdulkadiroglu and Sönmez 1998;
Svensson 1999; Aziz, Brandt, and Brill 2013; Christodoulou
et al. 2016), and Competitive Equilibrium from Equal Incomes (CEEI) (Budish 2011). In the indivisible goods setting, the Top Trading Cycles (TTC) method is well-studied
and generalized to investigate various problems. In particular, Abdulkadiroglu and Sönmez (1998) proposed an adaptation of the TTC method and established an equivalence between the adapted mechanism and Random Priority. Kesten
(2009) proposed several extensions of these popular mechanisms and presented an equivalence result between those
mechanisms in terms of economic efﬁciency.

Abstract
The Probabilistic Serial mechanism is well-known for its desirable fairness and efﬁciency properties. It is one of the most
prominent protocols for the random assignment problem.
However, Probabilistic Serial is not incentive-compatible,
thereby these desirable properties only hold for the agents’
declared preferences, rather than their genuine preferences.
A substantial utility gain through strategic behaviors would
trigger self-interested agents to manipulate the mechanism
and would subvert the very foundation of adopting the mechanism in practice. In this paper, we characterize the extent to
which an individual agent can increase its utility by strategic
manipulation. We show that the incentive ratio of the mechanism is 32 . That is, no agent can misreport its preferences such
that its utility becomes more than 1.5 times of what it is when
reports truthfully. This ratio is a worst-case guarantee by allowing an agent to have complete information about other
agents’ reports and to ﬁgure out the best response strategy
even if it is computationally intractable in general. To complement this worst-case study, we further evaluate an agent’s
utility gain on average by experiments. The experiments show
that an agent’ incentive in manipulating the rule is very limited. These results shed some light on the robustness of Probabilistic Serial against strategic manipulation, which is one
step further than knowing that it is not incentive-compatible.

There are various desired properties one would like these
mechanisms to fulﬁll, especially when considering to deploy
them in practice. In terms of efﬁciency, an allocation Pareto
improves another if each agent has at least the same utility
in the ﬁrst, and there is at least one agent where the utility
is greater than that of the second. An allocation is Pareto
efﬁcient if there is no allocation which Pareto improves it.
In terms of fairness, an allocation is envy-free if no agent
prefers another agent’s allocation to its own. An allocation
is proportional if each of the n agents receives at least 1/n of
the resources by its own subjective valuation. Also, a mechanism is anonymous if agents with precisely the same valuation functions must have the same probabilities of receiving each item; a mechanism is nonbossy if an agent cannot
change other agents’ allocation without changing its own allocation. Incentive-compatibility is an important property in
understanding the role that strategic behavior can play. A
mechanism is manipulable if an agent can misreport its preferences and improve its utility. A mechanism that is not manipulable is incentive-compatible (a.k.a., truthful).

Introduction
Resource allocation is a fundamental and widely applicable area within AI and computer science. The random assignment problem is central in the resource allocation area,
which has wide applications in allocating workers to shifts,
houses to people, dormitories to students, ramp and hangars
to airlines, and chores to cleaning staff. In the problem, there
are a set of agents and a set of items. The agents participate
in a mechanism by reporting their private preferences over
the items. The mechanism then assigns items to agents, according to a pre-deﬁned allocation rule.
The random assignment problem, which is also known
as the one-sided matching problem, was introduced in
(Hylland and Zeckhauser 1979) and has been studied extensively ever since. Over the years, several mechanisms

Truthfulness, in a sense, is on top of the properties mentioned above. For example, Pareto efﬁciency is deﬁned in
regard to the declared preferences of the agents, rather than
their genuine preferences. Without the truthfulness property,
an agent has little or strong incentive to manipulate in a
mechanism and could potentially cause signiﬁcant welfare

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2276

