The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Knowledge-Aware Attentional Reasoning Network for Recommendation
Qiannan Zhu,1,2 Xiaofei Zhou,∗1,2 Jia Wu,3 Jianlong Tan,1,2 Li Guo1,2
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
{zhuqiannan, zhouxiaofei}@iie.ac.cn, Jia.Wu@mq.edu.au

Abstract

History Click Sequence

te
ec

1
Interact

James
Cameron

Titantic

ecto

rOf

cto

2

3
Ant-Man and
the Wasp

Piranha 2:
The Spawing
Genre

Ge
nre
Romance

Avengers:
Endgame

rOf

r
Di

ire

Jark

IsDir

IsD

Knowledge-graph-aware recommendation systems have increasingly attracted attention in both industry and academic
recently. Many existing knowledge-aware recommendation
methods have achieved better performance, which usually
perform recommendation by reasoning on the paths between
users and items in knowledge graphs. However, they ignore
the users’ personal clicked history sequences that can better reﬂect users’ preferences within a period of time for recommendation. In this paper, we propose a knowledge-aware
attentional reasoning network KARN that incorporates the
users’ clicked history sequences and path connectivity between users and items for recommendation. The proposed
KARN not only develops an attention-based RNN to capture the user’s history interests from the user’s clicked history
sequences, but also a hierarchical attentional neural network
to reason on paths between users and items for inferring the
potential user intents on items. Based on both user’s history
interest and potential intent, KARN can predict the clicking
probability of the user with respective to a candidate item.
We conduct experiment on Amazon review dataset, and the
experimental results demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of our proposed KARN model.

y
dB

Horror
Gen
re
e
nr
Ge

Adventure

Genre

Aliens

Figure 1: An example of knowledge-graph-aware recommendation in movie domain. The user’s history click sequences are incorporated for more precise recommendation.

A large number of efforts have been done for making personalized recommendation, which roughly can be categorized collaborative ﬁltering (CF) based methods (Das et al.
2007; Xue et al. 2017), content based methods (IJntema et al.
2010; Zhang, Liu, and Gulla 2018) and hybrid methods (Li
et al. 2011). These works analyze and process various content data such as users’ proﬁle, ratings, reviews, and items’s
attributes for personalized recommendation. Factually, numerous of structural information implied in these data can
be used for modeling recommendation mechanism. In recent years, incorporating knowledge graphs into recommendation becomes very popular. The heterogeneous multi-type
user behaviors and the item knowledge can be integrated into
an uniﬁed graph structure, which has shown great potential
in boosting the explainability of recommendation systems.
Among the knowledge-aware recommendation methods, the embedding-based (Wang et al. 2018b) and pathbased (Wang et al. 2019) recommendation have successfully achieved promising recommendation performance.
Importantly, the path fashion methods can better provide the ability of explainability for recommendation by
searching the connectivity information of users and items
in KGs. Giving an example of movie recommendation
in Figure 1. From the path (Jark, Interact, Titantic) ⇒

Introduction
Recently knowledge graphs (KGs) have made signiﬁcant
contributions on many ﬁelds, such as recommendation system (Zhang et al. 2018), question answering system (He et
al. 2014) and information extraction (Cao et al. 2018), etc.
KGs are directed heterogeneous graphs that represent nodes
as entities and edges as relations. Numerous structured data
are stored in KGs, where (h, r, t) denotes the relation r links
the head entity h and tail entity t. Focusing on recommendation ﬁeld, the user-item knowledge graphs provide the
rich knowledge of users, items, and the relationships among
them. For instance, the facts of the user-item interaction
are organized in the form of triplets like (James Cameron,
IsDirectorOf, Aliens), which represents James Cameron is
the director of the movie Aliens.
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6999

