The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DeepAlerts: Deep Learning Based Multi-Horizon
Alerts for Clinical Deterioration on Oncology Hospital Wards
Dingwen Li,1 Patrick G Lyons,2 Chenyang Lu,1 Marin Kollef2
1

Washington University in St. Louis, McKelvey School of Engineering
2
Washington University in St. Louis, School of Medicine
{dingwenli, plyons, lu, kollefm}@wustl.edu

and treatment complications (Lyons et al. 2019). Since deterioration is often presaged by abnormal vital signs or test
results hours before clinical decompensation (Churpek et al.
2012), which is often unrecognized (J R de Bie et al. 2019),
electronic health record (EHR)-based risk prediction models have been designed to identify these patients during windows of potentially preventable instability, facilitating early
interventions to prevent or mitigate adverse events (Churpek
et al. 2014; Subbe et al. 2001). However, despite the promise
of these early warning systems (EWS), they have not consistently improved patient outcomes (Bedoya et al. 2019),
which may be related to limitations in predictive accuracy,
discrimination, model calibration and the time horizon of the
impending clinical deterioration event.

Abstract
Machine learning and data mining techniques are increasingly being applied to electronic health record (EHR) data to
discover underlying patterns and make predictions for clinical
use. For instance, these data may be evaluated to predict clinical deterioration events such as cardiopulmonary arrest or
escalation of care to the intensive care unit (ICU). In clinical
practice, early warning systems with multiple time horizons
could indicate different levels of urgency, allowing clinicians
to make decisions regarding triage, testing, and interventions
for patients at risk of poor outcomes. These different horizon
alerts are related and have intrinsic dependencies, which elicit
multi-task learning. In this paper, we investigate approaches
to properly train deep multi-task models for predicting clinical deterioration events via generating multi-horizon alerts
for hospitalized patients outside the ICU, with particular application to oncology patients. Prior knowledge is used as a
regularization to exploit the positive effects from the task relatedness. Simultaneously, we propose task-speciﬁc loss balancing to reduce the negative effects when optimizing the
joint loss function of deep multi-task models. In addition, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of the feature-generating techniques from prediction outcome interpretation. To evaluate
the model performance of predicting multi-horizon deterioration alerts in a real world scenario, we apply our approaches
to the EHR data from 20,700 hospitalizations of adult oncology patients. These patients’ baseline high-risk status provides a unique opportunity: the application of an accurate
model to an enriched population could produce improved
positive predictive value and reduce false positive alerts. With
our dataset, the model applying all proposed learning techniques achieves the best performance compared with common models previously developed for clinical deterioration
warning.

Machine learning methods have been more widely applied to solve clinical event prediction problems with the
advent of massive EHR data. Deep learning, in particular,
has the potential to achieve superior predicting accuracy for
large datasets. In our study of predicting clinical deterioration for oncology patients, the multi-horizon alerts (i.e.,
6 hours, 24 hours, and 48 hours prior to an event) provide different levels of urgency to allow clinicians to better plan interventions in advance. Based on the fact that the
multi-horizon alerts are all predicting the same type of deterioration events across different (but related) time horizons, the predictive models for the alerts can have similar structure and intrinsic relatedness. This motivates us
to effectively learn the multi-horizon alerts model simultaneously via multi-task learning. Multi-task learning utilizes the task relatedness to improve the prediction accuracy by jointly learning a shared model for multiple prediction tasks. For example, multi-task learning and its variants are used to predict clinical outcomes from multiple
diseases (Nori et al. 2015). They are also widely used
to discover the characteristic patterns of clinical physiology data, namely clinical phenotyping (Liu et al. 2015;
Che et al. 2015). While deep multi-task models have thousands or even millions of parameters to learn, the models
need to be trained properly to simultaneously achieve optimal performance for all the tasks. In this paper, we explore
two technical approaches based on a deep multi-task learning framework that can utilize the tasks’ intrinsic charac-

Introduction
Hospital inpatients are at high risk for clinical instability (Escobar and dellinger 2016): about 4% of ward encounters involve transfer to the intensive care unit (ICU) or
death (Kipnis et al. 2016; Churpek et al. 2014). A recent
study found that this risk is over 9% among oncology inpatients, who also have unique risk factors, such as cancer type
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
743

