The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Automatic Veriﬁcation of Liveness Properties in the Situation Calculus
Jian Li, Yongmei Liu∗
Dept. of Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
lijian77@mail3.sysu.edu.cn, ymliu@mail.sysu.edu.cn

veniently represented by basic action theories in the situation calculus (Reiter 2001).
There have been some works on automated veriﬁcation
of safety properties in the situation calculus. For example,
Li, Fan, and Liu (2013) investigated automatic veriﬁcation
and discovery of state constraints. Li and Liu (2015) and
Mo, Li, and Liu (2016) explored automatic veriﬁcation of
partial correctness of Golog programs via discovery of loop
invariants.
There has been mainly one work on automated veriﬁcation of liveness properties in the situation calculus. Lin
(2008) proposed a method to verify if a goal is achievable in
a set of initial states under an action theory. They introduced
a notion of reduction between sets of states, and showed that
if the set of the initial states can be reduced to one of its
subsets, then the problem is equivalent to checking whether
the goal is achievable in every initial state of the subset.
However, their method depends on the restrictions that the
preconditions and effects of the actions can be speciﬁed by
quantiﬁer-free formulas, and all the variables in the goal are
existentially quantiﬁed.
There are also works on automated veriﬁcation of more
general temporal properties in the situation calculus. Claßen
and Lakemeyer (2008) proposed a method to verify temporal properties of nonterminating Golog programs based on
ﬁxed-point computation and regression. Claßen (2018) reported an implementation of this method. However, in the
experiments, each domain has a bounded number of objects. De Giacomo, Lespérance, and Pearce (2010) proposed
a method to verify ATL-like properties of situation calculus
game structures. Kmiec and Lespérance (2014) presented an
evaluation-based implementation of this method for complete initial state theories. De Giacomo, Lespérance, and
Patrizi (2016) investigated bounded action theories: such a
theory entails that, in every situation, the number of object
tuples in the extension of any ﬂuent is bounded by a given
constant. They showed that the veriﬁcation of a ﬁrst-order
variant of μ-calculus is decidable for such theories.
In this paper, we consider the following theorem-proving
problem: given an action theory and a goal, check whether
the goal is achievable in every model of the action theory.
We make the assumption that there are ﬁnitely many non-

Abstract
In dynamic systems, liveness properties concern whether
something good will eventually happen. Examples of liveness
properties are termination of programs and goal achievability. In this paper, we consider the following theorem-proving
problem: given an action theory and a goal, check whether
the goal is achievable in every model of the action theory.
We make the assumption that there are ﬁnitely many nonnumber objects. We propose to use mathematical induction
to address this problem: we identify a natural number feature
and prove by mathematical induction that for any values of
the feature, the goal is achievable. Both the basis and induction steps are veriﬁed using ﬁrst-order theorem provers. We
propose a simple method to identify potential features which
are the number of objects satisfying a certain formula by generating small models of the action theory and calling a classical planner to achieve the goal. We also propose to regress
the goal via different actions and then verify whether the resulting goals are achievable. We implemented the proposed
method and experimented with the blocks world domain and
a number of other domains from the literature. Experimental
results showed that most goals can be veriﬁed within a reasonable amount of time.

Introduction
Two kinds of important properties for dynamic systems are
safety and liveness properties. Safety properties mean that
something bad will never happen. Examples of safety properties are state constraints and partial correctness of programs. On the other hand, liveness properties state that
something good will eventually happen. Examples of liveness properties are termination of programs and goal achievability. Model checking (Clarke et al. 1999) techniques and
tools can be efﬁciently used to verify whether a single dynamic system has certain safety or liveness properties. However, when it comes to verify if a class of possibly inﬁnite
many dynamic systems with similar structures have certain
properties, theorem-proving techniques have to be used. A
class of dynamic systems with similar structures can be con∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2886

