The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Domain Conditioned Adaptation Network
Shuang Li,1 Chi Harold Liu,1 Qiuxia Lin,1 Binhui Xie,1 Zhengming Ding,2 Gao Huang,3
Jian Tang4,5
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
Department of Computer, Information and Technology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, USA
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China, 4 AI Labs, Didi Chuxing, China
5
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Syracuse University, USA
{shuangli, chiliu, linqiuxia, binhuixie}@bit.edu.cn, zd2@iu.edu, gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn, jtang02@syr.edu
Abstract

Tremendous research efforts have been made to thrive deep
domain adaptation (DA) by seeking domain-invariant features. Most existing deep DA models only focus on aligning feature representations of task-speciﬁc layers across domains while integrating a totally shared convolutional architecture for source and target. However, we argue that such
strongly-shared convolutional layers might be harmful for
domain-speciﬁc feature learning when source and target data
distribution differs to a large extent. In this paper, we relax
a shared-convnets assumption made by previous DA methods and propose a Domain Conditioned Adaptation Network
(DCAN), which aims to excite distinct convolutional channels
with a domain conditioned channel attention mechanism. As
a result, the critical low-level domain-dependent knowledge
could be explored appropriately. As far as we know, this is
the ﬁrst work to explore the domain-wise convolutional channel activation for deep DA networks. Moreover, to effectively
align high-level feature distributions across two domains, we
further deploy domain conditioned feature correction blocks
after task-speciﬁc layers, which will explicitly correct the
domain discrepancy. Extensive experiments on three crossdomain benchmarks demonstrate the proposed approach outperforms existing methods by a large margin, especially on
very tough cross-domain learning tasks.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1: Attention visualization of the last convolutional
layer of different models on the task Ar→Rw of OfﬁceHome. Column (a) shows two randomly-chosen target images from classes “curtains” and “eraser”. Column (e) is
obtained by the network trained with target ground-truth labels. (b), (c) and (d) represent attention maps of source-only
model, DCAN w/o and w/ the proposed domain conditioned
channel attention mechanism, respectively.

Chen et al. 2019) and adversarial losses (Tzeng et al. 2017;
Pei et al. 2018; Long et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019a). However, they all assume the convolutional layers are universal
across different domains in capturing general low-level features based on the analysis of AlexNet (Yosinski et al. 2014).
Unfortunately, more challenging cross-domain tasks require much deeper neural networks to achieve promising
performance. In this scenario, sharing the totally same convolutional layers in domain adaptation would cause two issues. First, for tough visual cross-domain tasks, there exists
a large discrepancy between the visual patterns for the two
domains, i.e., Amazon images with clean background and
daily life images with complex background. In this case, it is
improper to still assume all the ﬁlters in each convolutional
layer are similarly activated across different domains. When
source and target totally share the same convolutional layers, they would fail to capture domain-informative features
in low-level stage. Second, only deploying domain discrepancy penalty terms or adversarial losses on the top layers
may be less effective, since the gradients of the loss modiﬁcations at the task-speciﬁc layers will be decayed via backpropagation scheme. As a result, the shared convolutional

Introduction
Domain adaptation (DA) (Pan and Yang 2010) has been witnessed as a promising technique to transfer knowledge from
a well-labeled and related source domain to assist the target
learning (Baktashmotlagh et al. 2013; Donahue et al. 2014;
Sun and Saenko 2016; Zhuo et al. 2019). Previous DA methods generally aim to align domain distributions by either
reweighting instances (Chen, Weinberger, and Blitzer 2011)
or learning domain-invariant features (Ghifary et al. 2017).
Most recently, deep domain adaptation has been proposed
to exploit the powerful feature extraction ability of convolutional neural networks, where they mainly deploy two
kinds of strategies to align cross-domain features in the top
task-speciﬁc fully-connected layers, i.e., discrepancy losses
(Long et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2019b; Peng et al. 2018;
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11386

