The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Heterogeneous Transfer Learning with Weighted Instance-Correspondence Data
Yuwei He,1 Xiaoming Jin,1∗ Guiguang Ding,1 Yuchen Guo,1,2∗
Jungong Han,3 Jiyong Zhang,4 Sicheng Zhao5
1

1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
School of Software, 2 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
WMG Data Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
4
School of Automation, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
5
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley, USA
hyw16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xmjin, dinggg}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
{yuchen.w.guo, jungonghan77, schzhao}@gmail.com, jzhang@hdu.edu.cn
:GXMKZ*USGOT

9U[XIK*USGOT

Abstract

濜濖澳濗濴瀇濴

Instance-correspondence (IC) data are potent resources for
heterogeneous transfer learning (HeTL) due to the capability
of bridging the source and the target domains at the instancelevel. To this end, people tend to use machine-generated IC
data, because manually establishing IC data is expensive and
primitive. However, existing IC data machine generators are
not perfect and always produce the data that are not of high
quality, thus hampering the performance of domain adaption. In this paper, instead of improving the IC data generator, which might not be an optimal way, we accept the
fact that data quality variation does exist but ﬁnd a better
way to use the data. Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel heterogeneous transfer learning method named Transfer Learning
with Weighted Correspondence (TLWC), which utilizes IC
data to adapt the source domain to the target domain. Rather
than treating IC data equally, TLWC can assign solid weights
to each IC data pair depending on the quality of the data.
We conduct extensive experiments on HeTL datasets and the
state-of-the-art results verify the effectiveness of TLWC.

濠濸瀇濴激濿濸濴瀅瀁濸瀅

/)=KOMNZY;VJGZOTM

濠濸瀇濴激濿濸濴瀅瀁濸瀅

:XGTYLUXSGZOUT;VJGZOTM

:XGTYLUXSGZOUT

;TRGHKRKJ9U[XIK*USGOT*GZG
;TRGHKRKJ:GXMKZ*USGOT*GZG
2GHKRKJ9U[XIK*USGOT*GZG
2GHKRKJ:GXMKZ*USGOT*GZG

Introduction

6XKJOIZKJ:GXMKZ*USGOT*GZG

Transfer learning or domain adaptation builds machine
learners that can be generalized across different domains,
and is capable of leveraging rich label information from the
source domain to the target domain. Transfer learning can
effectively ease the manual effort of labeling data for the
target domain (Pan and Yang 2010).
Different from homogeneous transfer learning (HoTL),
where the source and the target domain share the same feature space, heterogeneous transfer learning (HeTL) allows
the data in two domains to be represented with different feature spaces (Weiss, Khoshgoftaar, and Wang 2016). Therefore, how to unify the feature spaces of the two domains is a
bottleneck of HeTL.
For HeTL, instance-correspondence (IC) data are valuable mediums to unify the feature spaces (i.e. a document
presented both in English and French) (Zhu et al. 2011;
Zhou et al. 2014). These data can be utilized to either

Figure 1: Framework of TLWC. IC data points sizes are proportional to their weights.

establish a common feature space (Xiao and Guo 2013;
Zhou et al. 2015; 2016) for the two domains or learn a feature transformation that maps data from one domain to another (Zhou et al. 2014; Guntuku et al. 2016; Wang, Cui, and
Zhu 2018). Existing HeTL methods unify the two domains
by matching marginal distributions at the domain-level or
conditional distributions at the category-level. Provided with
IC data, HeTL methods can undoubtedly unify domains better because they can bridge two domains at the instancelevel.
Manually establishing IC data is primitive and expensive. Therefore, machine-generated data can be a substitute. Taking Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks as
examples, the IC documents can be generated with Machine

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4099

