The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Apprenticeship Learning via Frank-Wolfe
Tom Zahavy, Alon Cohen, Haim Kaplan, Yishay Mansour
Google Research, Tel Aviv

(2004), who proposed a novel framework for AL. In this setting, the reward function (while unknown to the apprentice)
equals to a linear combination of a set of known features.
More speciﬁcally, there is a weight vector w. The rewards
are associated with states, and each state s has a feature vector φ(s), and its reward is φ(s) · w. The expected return of
a policy π is V π = Φ(π) · w, where Φ(π) is the feature expectation under policy π. The expert demonstrates a set of
trajectories that are used to estimate the feature expectations
of its policy πE , denoted by ΦE  Φ(πE ). The goal is to
ﬁnd a policy ψ, whose feature expectations are close to this
estimate, and hence will have a similar return with respect
to any weight vector w.
Abbeel and Ng (2004) suggested two algorithms to solve
this problem, one that is based on a maximum margin solver
and a simpler projection algorithm. The algorithm starts
with an arbitrary policy π0 and computes its feature expectation Φ(π0 ). At step t they deﬁne a reward function
using weight vector wt = ΦE − Φ̄t−1 and ﬁnd the policy πt that maximizes it, where Φ̄t is a convex combination of feature
texpectations of previous (deterministic) policies Φ̄t = j=1 αj Φ(πj ). They show that in order to get
that Φ̄T − ΦE  ≤ , it sufﬁces to run the algorithm for
k
k
T = O( (1−γ)
2 2 log( (1−γ) )) iterations.
Another type of algorithms, based on online convex optimization, was proposed by Syed and Schapire (2008). In
this approach, AL is posed as a two-player zero-sum game.
In each round the “reward player” plays a no-regret algorithm and the “policy player” plays the best response, i.e., it
plays the policy πt that maximizes the reward at time t. The
algorithm runs for T steps and returns a mixed policy ψ that
assigns probability 1/T to each policy πt , t = 1, . . . , T .
Syed and Schapire (2008) proved that their scheme is
faster by a factor of k and requires only T = O(log(k)/(1 −
γ)2 2 ) iterations. This improvement is closely related to the
analysis of the mirror descent algorithm (MDA, Nemirovsky
and Yudin (1983)). That is, by choosing the norm of the
space (and projecting w.r.t this norm), a dimension-free rate
of convergence (up to logarithmic factor) is achieved. The
results in (Syed and Schapire 2008) use a speciﬁc instance
of MDA where the optimization set is the simplex and distances are measured w.r.t  · 1 . This version of MDA is

Abstract
We consider the applications of the Frank-Wolfe (FW) algorithm for Apprenticeship Learning (AL). In this setting, we
are given a Markov Decision Process (MDP) without an explicit reward function. Instead, we observe an expert that acts
according to some policy, and the goal is to ﬁnd a policy
whose feature expectations are closest to those of the expert
policy. We formulate this problem as ﬁnding the projection of
the feature expectations of the expert on the feature expectations polytope – the convex hull of the feature expectations of
all the deterministic policies in the MDP. We show that this
formulation is equivalent to the AL objective and that solving this problem using the FW algorithm is equivalent wellknown Projection method of Abbeel and Ng (2004). This insight allows us to analyze AL with tools from convex optimization literature and derive tighter convergence bounds on
AL. Speciﬁcally, we show that a variation of the FW method
that is based on taking “away steps” achieves a linear rate of
convergence when applied to AL and that a stochastic version of the FW algorithm can be used to avoid precise estimation of feature expectations. We also experimentally show
that this version outperforms the FW baseline. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that shows linear convergence rates for AL.

1

Introduction

We consider sequential decision making in the Markov decision process (MDP) formalism. Given an MDP, the optimal
policy and its value function are characterized by the Bellman equations and can be computed via value or policy iteration. This makes the MDP model useful in problems where
we can specify the MDP model (states, actions, reward, transitions) appropriately. However, in many real-world problems, it is often hard to deﬁne a reward function, such that
the optimal policy with respect to this reward produces the
desired behavior.
In Apprenticeship Learning (AL), instead of manually
tweaking the reward to produce the desired behavior, the
idea is to observe and mimic an expert. The literature on AL
is quite vast and dates back to the work of Abbeel and Ng
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6720

