The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MOSS: End-to-End Dialog System Framework with Modular Supervision
Weixin Liang,∗1,3 Youzhi Tian,∗1,2 Chengcai Chen,4 Zhou Yu3
1

Zhejiang University, 2 University of California, Davis,
Stanford University, 4 Xiaoi Robot Technology Co., Ltd
{victor liang, 3150101340}@zju.edu.cn, arlenecc@xiaoi.com, joyu@ucdavis.edu
3

dialog act to natural language. However, each module in
such traditional modular system is independently optimized.
Therefore, it is difﬁcult to update each module whenever
new training data come. For example, when the natural language understanding module is retrained with new data, all
the other modules that depend on it become sub-optimal due
to the fact that they were trained on the output distributions
of the older version of the module.

Abstract
A major bottleneck in training end-to-end task-oriented dialog system is the lack of data. To utilize limited training data
more efﬁciently, we propose Modular Supervision Network
(MOSS), an encoder-decoder training framework that could
incorporate supervision from various intermediate dialog system modules including natural language understanding, dialog state tracking, dialog policy learning and natural language
generation. With only 60% of the training data, MOSS-all
(i.e., MOSS with supervision from all four dialog modules)
outperforms state-of-the-art models on CamRest676. Moreover, introducing modular supervision has even bigger beneﬁts when the dialog task has a more complex dialog state and
action space. With only 40% of the training data, MOSS-all
outperforms the state-of-the-art model on a complex laptop
network trouble shooting dataset, LaptopNetwork, that we introduced. LaptopNetwork consists of conversations between
real customers and customer service agents in Chinese. Moreover, MOSS framework can accommodate dialogs that have
supervision from different dialog modules at both framework
level and model level. Therefore, MOSS is extremely ﬂexible
to update in real-world deployment.

To combine the beneﬁts from both modular and end-toend systems, we propose to follow the idea of modular systems by injecting rich supervision from each dialog module
in an end-to-end trainable framework. Under MOSS framework, dialog modules such as natural language understanding, dialog state tracking, dialog policy learning and natural language generation share an encoder but have their
own decoders. Decoders of different modules are connected
through hidden states rather than symbolic outputs. Then all
the modules can be optimized jointly to avoid error propagation and model mismatch. In addition, since MOSS produces
output from individual modules during testing, we can easily
locate the error by checking the modular output.
MOSS is also a ﬂexible framework that can be used in a
plug-and-play fashion by removing supervision from some
modules. The plug-and-play feature offers options at two
levels to enable full utilization of all available annotations.
At framework level, for example, if the data do not have
natural language understanding supervision, we can create
a new instance (model) of MOSS framework by removing
the natural language understanding module in MOSS. As a
general rule of thumb, the more supervision the model has,
the better the performance is, and potentially the less number
of dialogs are required to reach good performance. Our results show that, MOSS-all (MOSS with supervision from all
four dialog modules) on only 60% of the training data outperforms state-of-the-art models on CamRest676 including
TSCP (Lei et al. 2018). At model level, we could patch the
performance of an individual module of a speciﬁc model by
adding incompletely annotated training dialogs. For example, we observe a large performance improvement of natural
language generation on MOSS-all with 60% of the training
data when we add the additional 40% training dialogs in raw
format (i.e., without any annotations).

Introduction
Most current end-to-end generative dialog models require
thousands of annotated dialogs to train a simple information
request task (Lei et al. 2018). It is difﬁcult and time consuming to collect human-human dialogs (Serban et al. 2015).
Due to the task constraints, it is even impossible to collect
a large number of dialogs. In contrast, traditional modular
framework (Williams and Young 2007) requires less training data (Lowe et al. 2017). Traditional modular framework
is a pipeline of the following four functional modules developed independently: a natural language understanding module that maps the user utterance to a distributed semantic
representation; a dialog state tracking module that accumulates the semantic representation across different turns to
form the dialog state; a dialog policy learning module that
decides system dialog act based on the dialog state, and a
natural language generation module that maps the obtained
∗

Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8327

