The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SalSAC: A Video Saliency Prediction Model with
Shufﬂed Attentions and Correlation-Based ConvLSTM
Xinyi Wu,1 Zhenyao Wu,1 Jinglin Zhang,3 Lili Ju,1∗ Song Wang1,2∗
1

University of South Carolina, USA 2 Tianjin University, China
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
{xinyiw, zhenyao}@email.sc.edu, jinglin.zhang@nuist.edu.cn, ju@math.sc.edu, songwang@cec.sc.edu
3

Abstract
The performance of predicting human ﬁxations in videos has
been much enhanced with the help of development of the
convolutional neural networks (CNN). In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end neural network “SalSAC” for video
saliency prediction, which uses the CNN-LSTM-Attention
as the basic architecture and utilizes the information from
both static and dynamic aspects. To better represent the static
information of each frame, we ﬁrst extract multi-level features of same size from different layers of the encoder CNN
and calculate the corresponding multi-level attentions, then
we randomly shufﬂe these attention maps among levels and
multiply them to the extracted multi-level features respectively. Through this way, we leverage the attention consistency across different layers to improve the robustness of the
network. On the dynamic aspect, we propose a correlationbased ConvLSTM to appropriately balance the inﬂuence of
the current and preceding frames to the prediction. Experimental results on the DHF1K, Hollywood2 and UCF-sports
datasets show that SalSAC outperforms many existing stateof-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Visualization of the predicted saliency results of
two test cases by our network SalSAC.
objects) in its preceding states along the temporal dimension; in other words, it needs to consider both spatial and
temporal context information to make decision.
Many methods have been proposed to tackle these challenges in video saliency prediction mentioned above. To
fully extract the spatial features, early works (Gao, Mahadevan, and Vasconcelos 2008; Guo and Zhang 2009) mainly
depend on hand-crafted features, such as intensity, color and
orientation. In recent years, many approaches (Bak et al.
2017; Wang et al. 2018a) are proposed to use convolutional
neural networks (CNN), such as VGG16 and ResNet, as the
encoder to extract features from the image sequences. Later,
the attention mechanism is also utilized within the networks
to further enhance the spatial features (Wang et al. 2018a;
Cornia et al. 2018). In this paper, we propose a shufﬂed attention module, which shufﬂes multi-level attention maps
calculated from the multi-level features to enforce the attention consistency across levels and further enhance the quality of spatial features.
To absorb information from both historic frames and the
current one, Convolutional LSTM (ConvLSTM) (Shi et al.
2015) structure is imported into this task in (Gorji and Clark
2018; Jiang et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018a). Compared to
the original LSTM, ConvLSTM can capture useful temporal
information in addition to the spatial one. While the ConvLSTM can model certain long-short term memory in the

Introduction
Saliency prediction has been introduced for years to learn
how people select useful information from complicated visual information they see every day. Thanks to the development of the deep learning techniques and the appearing
of many static gaze datasets such as SALICON (Jiang et al.
2015), the performance of the image saliency prediction has
been boosted very rapidly.
In recent years, video saliency prediction captures more
interest in the AI and vision community due to its huge beneﬁt to other applications, e.g., video captioning, video compression and video object segmentation. Compared to image saliency prediction, it is a much more challenging task.
Besides, extracting spatial features accurately as in image
saliency prediction, video saliency prediction also needs to
balance the memory to be kept (e.g., some moving objects
and the newly appearing or disappearing objects) in the current state and the memory to be forgotten (e.g., some static
∗

Co-corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12410

