The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Zone Unit for Recurrent Neural Networks
Fandong Meng,1 Jinchao Zhang,1 Yang Liu,2 Jie Zhou1
1

2

WeChat AI - Pattern Recognition Center Tencent Inc., China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{fandongmeng, dayerzhang, withtomzhou}@tencent.com
liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn

for a vanilla RNN. The state transition between consecutive
hidden states adds a new input to the summary of previous
ones. However, this procedure of constructing a new summary from the combination of the previous one and the new
input in conventional RNNs only bases on a single space
composition, which often has difﬁculty in capturing complicated long-range dependencies, to allow the hidden state to
rapidly adapt to quickly changing modes of the input while
still preserving a useful summary of the past.

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been widely used to
deal with sequence learning problems. The input-dependent
transition function, which folds new observations into hidden
states to sequentially construct ﬁxed-length representations
of arbitrary-length sequences, plays a critical role in RNNs.
Based on single space composition, transition functions in existing RNNs often have difﬁculty in capturing complicated
long-range dependencies. In this paper, we introduce a new
Multi-zone Unit (MZU) for RNNs. The key idea is to design a
transition function that is capable of modeling multiple space
composition. The MZU consists of three components: zone
generation, zone composition, and zone aggregation. Experimental results on multiple datasets of the character-level language modeling task and the aspect-based sentiment analysis
task demonstrate the superiority of the MZU.

Recent studies in neural machine translation show that
it is beneﬁcial to linearly project one single-space representation into multi-space representations and then capture useful information from these different representation
spaces, e.g., the multi-head attention (Vaswani et al. 2017;
Chen et al. 2018; Meng and Zhang 2019), which also has
been veriﬁed effective for capturing multiple semantic aspects from the user utterance in generative dialogue systems (Tao et al. 2018). Although some effective RNN extensions, e.g., GRU and LSTM, have been proposed with gating
units controlling the information ﬂow. The gating units are
also generated by such kind of function (F ) based on single space composition, which is not expressive enough to
capture potentially complex information for controlling the
information ﬂow.

Introduction
Processing sequential data of variable length is a major challenge in the ﬁeld of natural language processing (NLP). Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), Long Short-term Memories (LSTMs) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and
Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) (Cho et al. 2014) in particular, have recently become one of the most popular tools
to approach sequence learning tasks, such as handwriting
recognition (Graves 2013), sentiment classiﬁcation (Tang et
al. 2016; Wang et al. 2016), sequence labeling (Huang, Xu,
and Yu 2015; Akbik, Blythe, and Vollgraf 2018), language
modeling (Ha, Dai, and Le 2017; Zoph and Le 2017; Chung,
Ahn, and Bengio 2017; Mujika, Meier, and Steger 2017;
Li et al. 2018b) and machine translation (Chen et al. 2018;
Meng and Zhang 2019).
RNNs sequentially construct ﬁxed-length representations
of arbitrary-length sequences by folding new observations
into their hidden states using an input-dependent transition
operator. The hidden state ht is updated recursively using
the previous hidden state ht−1 and the current input xt as
ht = F (ht−1 , xt ), where F is a differentiable function with
learnable parameters, such as multiplying its inputs by a
matrix and squashing the result with a non-linear function

In this paper, we thus boost the F function through modeling multiple space composition, and propose a Multi-zone
Unit for Recurrent Neural Networks, named MZU. The
MZU consists of three components: zone generation, zone
composition, and zone aggregation. At each time step, the
MZU projects the previous hidden state and the current input
into multiple zones (zone generation), then conducts full interactions and compositions on these zones (zone composition), and ﬁnally aggregates them to the ﬁnal representation
(zone aggregation). In particular, we propose three effective
approaches for the zone composition to verify the MZU. The
ﬁrst model exploits self-attention (Vaswani et al. 2017) to
draw global dependencies on zones. The second model utilizes graph convolutional network (Kipf and Welling 2016;
2017) to perform neighborhood mixing on zones by leveraging the graph connectivity structure as a ﬁlter. The third
model uses the dynamic routing algorithm (Sabour, Frosst,
and Hinton 2017) to model part-whole relationships on

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5150

