The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Inverse
Reinforcement Learning in Advancing Cancer Research
John Kalantari,1,2 Heidi Nelson,1,3 Nicholas Chia1,2,4
1

Microbiome Program, Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
2
Division of Surgical Research, Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
3
Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
4
Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
{kalantari.john, chia.nicholas}@mayo.edu
world’s most challenging problems requires we take advantage of the complex structure and relationships inherent in
real-world data. This important insight has already been intuited by AI communities working in computer vision and
natural language processing, resulting in improved AI solutions (Li et al. 2019; Wang and Wan 2018). Unfortunately,
the majority of cancer research exempliﬁes what happens
when one does the opposite and uses statistical approaches
that assume no meaningful structure exists in cancer data.
Historically, this occurred because there was no algorithmic
means to account for the complexities inherent to cancer and
because our understanding of cancer as a complex process
was lacking. Here, we demonstrate the impact of considering the underlying biological processes of cancer evolution
into the algorithmic design of tools for studying cancer progression. More speciﬁcally, we argue that Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is an unreasonably effective algorithm
for gaining interpretable and intuitive insight about cancer
progression because of its ability to take advantage of prior
knowledge about the structure and source of its input data.

Abstract
The “No Free Lunch” theorem states that for any algorithm,
elevated performance over one class of problems is offset by
its performance over another. Stated differently, no algorithm
works for everything. Instead, designing effective algorithms
often means exploiting prior knowledge of data relationships
speciﬁc to a given problem. This “unreasonable efﬁcacy” is
especially desirable for complex and seemingly intractable
problems in the natural sciences. One such area that is rife
with the need for better algorithms is cancer biology—a ﬁeld
where relatively few insights are being generated from relatively large amounts of data. In part, this is due to the inability
of mere statistics to reﬂect cancer as a genetic evolutionary
process—one that involves cells actively mutating in order to
navigate host barriers, outcompete neighboring cells, and expand spatially.
Our work is built upon the central proposition that the Markov
Decision Process (MDP) can better represent the process by
which cancer arises and progresses. More speciﬁcally, by encoding a cancer cell’s complex behavior as a MDP, we seek
to model the series of genetic changes, or evolutionary trajectory, that leads to cancer as an optimal decision process.
We posit that using an Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL)
approach will enable us to reverse engineer an optimal policy
and reward function based on a set of “expert demonstrations”
extracted from the DNA of patient tumors. The inferred reward function and optimal policy can subsequently be used to
extrapolate the evolutionary trajectory of any tumor. Here, we
introduce a Bayesian nonparametric IRL model (PUR-IRL)
where the number of reward functions is a priori unbounded
in order to account for uncertainty in cancer data, i.e., the existence of latent trajectories and non-uniform sampling. We
show that PUR-IRL is “unreasonably effective” in gaining
interpretable and intuitive insights about cancer progression
from high-dimensional genome data.

1

In support of this, we implement the Pop-Up Restaurant for Inverse Reinforcement Learning (PUR-IRL)
approach—a Bayesian nonparametric IRL model that takes
advantage of relationships between events in seemingly disparate data sources by allowing for the inference of multiple reward functions from non-uniformly sampled data. In
testing PUR-IRL on real-world data from colorectal cancer
(CRC) patients, we verify its ability to infer a series of mutational events, or an evolutionary trajectory, that broadly
matches those arrived at by CRC experts through the curation of a variety of multi-omics and experimental data
sources. Furthermore, we show that PUR-IRL can accomplish this with data taken from a mere tens of patients and
that this outperforms frequency-based statistical approaches
that are commonly used in cancer research. Our experimental results show that PUR-IRL can correctly identify the
number of distinct experts, the reward function and optimal
policy of each expert, and remain robust in classiﬁcation under various data sampling conditions. Tested on GridWorld,
PUR-IRL achieved an F1-score of 0.9328 and 0.90331 under
uniform and non-uniform sampling conditions, respectively.

Introduction

In the follow up survey paper (Halevy, Norvig, and Pereira
2009) to ”The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics
in the Natural Sciences” (Wigner 1960) it was argued that
solving the most complex AI problems require embracing
the unreasonable effectiveness of data. That is, solving the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
437

