The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Information-Theoretic Understanding of
Population Risk Improvement with Model Compression
Yuheng Bu,1∗ Weihao Gao,1† Shaofeng Zou,2 Venugopal V. Veeravalli1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA
buyuheng@mit.edu, weihao.gao@bytedance.com, szou3@buffalo.edu, vvv@illinois.edu
2

recent surveys). Existing studies mainly focus on designing
compression algorithms to reduce the memory and computational cost, while keeping the same population risk. However, in some recent works (Choi, El-Khamy, and Lee 2016;
Zhu et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2017), it has been observed empirically that the population risk of the compressed model
can sometimes be better than that of the original model. This
phenomenon is counterintuitive at a ﬁrst glance, since compression generally leads to information loss.
Indeed, as neural networks are usually trained by minimizing the empirical risk, a compressed model has a larger
empirical risk than the original one. Despite this fact, model
compression could possibly improve the generalization error,
since it can be interpreted as a regularization technique to
avoid overﬁtting. As the population risk is the sum of the
empirical risk and the generalization error, it is possible for
the population risk to be reduced by model compression.

Abstract
We show that model compression can improve the population
risk of a pre-trained model, by studying the tradeoff between
the decrease in the generalization error and the increase in the
empirical risk with model compression. We ﬁrst prove that
model compression reduces an information-theoretic bound
on the generalization error; this allows for an interpretation
of model compression as a regularization technique to avoid
overﬁtting. We then characterize the increase in empirical risk
with model compression using rate distortion theory. These
results imply that the population risk could be improved by
model compression if the decrease in generalization error exceeds the increase in empirical risk. We show through a linear
regression example that such a decrease in population risk
due to model compression is indeed possible. Our theoretical
results further suggest that the Hessian-weighted K-means
clustering compression approach can be improved by regularizing the distance between the clustering centers. We provide
experiments with neural networks to support our theoretical
assertions.

1

1.1

Contributions

In this paper, we provide an information-theoretic explanation
for the population risk improvement with model compression
by characterizing the tradeoff between generalization error
and empirical risk. Speciﬁcally, we focus on the case where
the model is compressed based on a pre-trained model.
We ﬁrst prove that model compression tightens the
information-theoretic generalization error bound in (Raginsky et al. 2016), and it can therefore be interpreted as a
regularization method to reduce overﬁtting. Furthermore, we
deﬁne the distortion as the difference in the empirical risk
between the original and compressed models, and use rate
distortion theory to characterize the distortion as a function
of the number of bits R used to describe the model. If the
decrease in generalization error exceeds the increase in empirical risk, the population risk can be improved. An empirical
illustration of this result for the MNIST dataset is provided in
Figure 1, where model compression and population risk improvement are achieved simultaneously (details are given in
Section 7). To better demonstrate our theoretical results, we
investigate an example of linear regression comprehensively,
where we develop explicit bounds on the generalization error
and the distortion.
Our generalization error bound also suggests that the

Introduction

The recent success of deep neural networks has dramatically
boosted the applications of machine learning (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Silver et al. 2017; Goodfellow
et al. 2016). However, implementing a deep neural network
model on resource-limited devices becomes increasingly difﬁcult, as deep neural networks usually have a large number of
parameters. For example, for the problem of image classiﬁcation, it takes over 200MB to save the parameters of AlexNet
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), and more than
500MB for VGG-16 net (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). It
is difﬁcult to port such large models to mobile devices and
embedded systems, due to their limited storage, bandwidth,
energy and computational resources.
For this reason there has been a ﬂurry of recent work on
compressing the parameters of deep neural networks (see
(Cheng et al. 2017; Krishnamoorthi 2018; Guo 2018) for
∗
Currently with Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
†
Currently with Bytedance Inc., Bellevue, WA, USA
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3300

