The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AdaCare: Explainable Clinical Health Status Representation
Learning via Scale-Adaptive Feature Extraction and Recalibration
Liantao Ma,1,3 Junyi Gao,1,2 Yasha Wang,1,2∗ Chaohe Zhang,1,3 Jiangtao Wang,4
Wenjie Ruan,4 Wen Tang,5 Xin Gao,1,3 Xinyu Ma1,3
1

Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
National Engineering Research Center of Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, UK
5
Division of Nephrology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China
{malt, wangyasha}@pku.edu.cn, {jiangtao.wang, wenjie.ruan}@lancaster.ac.uk, tanggwen@126.com
2

Abstract
EMR

Deep learning-based health status representation learning and
clinical prediction have raised much research interest in recent years. Existing models have shown superior performance, but there are still several major issues that have not
been fully taken into consideration. First, the historical variation pattern of the biomarker in diverse time scales plays a
vital role in indicating the health status, but it has not been explicitly extracted by existing works. Second, key factors that
strongly indicate the health risk are different among patients.
It is still challenging to adaptively make use of the features for
patients in diverse conditions. Third, using prediction models as the black box will limit the reliability in clinical practice. However, none of the existing works can provide satisfying interpretability and meanwhile achieve high prediction
performance. In this work, we develop a general health status representation learning model, named AdaCare. It can
capture the long and short-term variations of biomarkers as
clinical features to depict the health status in multiple time
scales. It also models the correlation between clinical features to enhance the ones which strongly indicate the health
status and thus can maintain a state-of-the-art performance in
terms of prediction accuracy while providing qualitative interpretability. We conduct a health risk prediction experiment
on two real-world datasets. Experiment results indicate that
AdaCare outperforms state-of-the-art approaches and provides effective interpretability, which is veriﬁable by clinical
experts.

Health Risk
Risk Assessment

Lab Test

Current time
Diagnosis

record1record2ŏ recordt

Time
Future

Figure 1: Perform dynamic patient health risk prediction to
trigger the alarm for adverse outcomes and take an early individualized intervention.

and blood glucose, are recorded through the treatment trajectories and further have been taken into consideration for
the predication. In a practical diagnosis process, physicians
need to comprehensively evaluate the health of patients by
identifying the high-risk factors. The precise risk prediction
requires a high level of clinical expertise and experience.
Nowadays, electronic healthcare information systems are
widely used in various healthcare institutions, which can
precisely record the lab test results and health information
of patients in terms of Electronic Medical Records (EMR).
As depicted by Figure 1, EMR can be seen as a type of multivariate time series data and provide essential healthcare information for the data-driven healthcare prediction.
Recently, due to the remarkable representation learning
ability of deep neural networks, many deep learning-based
models have been developed to tackle such prediction tasks
by using EMR data, including mortality prediction (Ma et
al. 2020), disease diagnosis prediction (Lee et al. 2018),
and patient phenotype identiﬁcation (Baytas et al. 2017).
Usually, those models ﬁrst embed the EMR data into lowdimensional feature space to learn the dense representation
of the patients’ health status and then perform speciﬁc clinical analysis tasks based on such representation. However,
there are still some issues that are not yet fully resolved by
existing research works, i.e., how to effectively embed tem-

Introduction
Health status prediction (e.g., mortality risk prediction, disease prediction) is of great interest to physicians. For inpatients or patients with chronic diseases who face severe life
threats and receive long-term treatments, their health conditions are complex and continually changing over time. By
predicting patient’s health status, physicians can select personalized follow-up treatments, prevent adverse outcomes,
assign medical resources effectively, and reduce the medical cost. Normally, some biomarkers, such as blood albumin
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
825

