The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Explanation vs Attention: A Two-Player Game to Obtain Attention for VQA
Badri N. Patro, Anupriy, Vinay P. Namboodiri
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur
{badri, anupriy, vinaypn}@iitk.ac.in

When asked a question based on an image, a human invariably focuses on the part of the image that aids in answering the question. This is a commonly known fact in cognitive science. An extreme example that depicts perceptual
blindness was demonstrated by (Simons and Chabris 1999),
where two groups of participants are passing balls. When
asked to count the balls, viewers ignore a gorilla in the video
as it is not pertinent to the task of counting. However, the
deep networks that solve semantic tasks such as visual question answering do not have such attentive mechanisms. The

fact that the existing deep networks do not attend to the areas
that humans do was shown by the work of (Das et al. 2016).
While there have been some works that aim to improve the
attended regions, it is challenging as obtaining supervision
for attention is tedious and may not always be possible for
all the semantic tasks that we would like to use deep networks. In this paper, we propose a simple method to obtain
self-supervision to guide attention.
The main idea is that given the task of solving visual question answering (VQA), there exist methods based on obtaining visual explanations such as Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al.
2017) that obtain class activation mappings from gradients
that allow us to understand the areas that a network focuses
while solving the task for the correct class label. As during training, class labels are available for the VQA task; it
is easy to obtain such supervision. Using this, it is possible to obtain surrogate supervision for supervising attention.
One can obtain the visual explanation using the ground-truth
label for a deep network that solves the visual question answering task. As the network is provided the actual label, the
corresponding activation maps do aid in solving the task.
Therefore, we hypothesize that this supervision can aid in
obtaining better attention maps, and this is evident from the
results that we obtain.
The next challenge is to consider how the surrogate supervision obtained from Grad-CAM can be used to obtain
better attention regions. Directly using these as supervision
is not optimal as the distributions for the visual explanation
differs from that of the attention maps as the attention maps
are also supervised by the task loss. We show that just using
the mean-square error loss for the two maps is sub-optimal.
In this paper, we show that a very simple way of using a
two-player game between a discriminator that tries to discriminate between Grad-CAM results & attention maps and
a generator that generates attention maps serves to provide
substantially improved attention maps. We show that this
method performs much better and also provides state of the
art results in terms of attention maps that correlates well with
human attention maps. To summarize, through this paper, we
provide the following contributions :

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a means for obtaining surrogate supervision
for obtaining better attention maps based on the visual ex-

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to obtain improved attention for a visual
question answering (VQA) task. It is challenging to provide
supervision for attention. An observation we make is that visual explanations as obtained through class activation mappings (speciﬁcally Grad-CAM) that are meant to explain the
performance of various networks could form a means of supervision. However, as the distributions of attention maps and
that of Grad-CAMs differ, it would not be suitable to directly
use these as a form of supervision. Rather, we propose the
use of a discriminator that aims to distinguish samples of visual explanation and attention maps. The use of adversarial
training of the attention regions as a two-player game between attention and explanation serves to bring the distributions of attention maps and visual explanations closer. Signiﬁcantly, we observe that providing such a means of supervision
also results in attention maps that are more closely related to
human attention resulting in a substantial improvement over
baseline stacked attention network (SAN) models. It also results in a good improvement in rank correlation metric on the
VQA task. This method can also be combined with recent
MCB based methods and results in consistent improvement.
We also provide comparisons with other means for learning
distributions such as based on Correlation Alignment (Coral),
Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) and Mean Square Error (MSE) losses and observe that the adversarial loss outperforms the other forms of learning the attention maps. Visualization of the results also conﬁrms our hypothesis that
attention maps improve using this form of supervision.

1

Introduction

11848

