The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TANDA: Transfer and Adapt Pre-Trained
Transformer Models for Answer Sentence Selection
Siddhant Garg∗

Thuy Vu

Alessandro Moschitti

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA
sidgarg@cs.wisc.edu

Amazon Alexa
Manhattan Beach, CA, USA
thuyvu@amazon.com

Amazon Alexa
Manhattan Beach, CA, USA
amosch@amazon.com

since, a combination of a search engine and an AS2 model
already implements an initial QA system.
The AS2 task was originally deﬁned in the TREC competition (Wang, Smith, and Mitamura 2007). With the advent of neural models, it has had signiﬁcant contributions
from techniques such as (He and Lin 2016; Yang et al. 2018;
Wang and Jiang 2016).
Recently, approaches for training neural language models,
e.g., ELMO (Peters et al. 2018), GPT (Radford et al. 2018),
BERT (Devlin et al. 2018), RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019), XLNet (Dai et al. 2019) have led to major advancements in
several NLP subﬁelds. These methods capture dependencies
between words and their compounds by pre-training neural
networks on large amounts of data. Interestingly, the resulting models can be easily applied to solve different NLP applications by just ﬁne-tuning them on the training data of
the target tasks. For example, the Transformer (Vaswani et
al. 2017) can be pre-trained on a large amount of data obtaining a powerful language model, which can then be specialized for solving speciﬁc NLP tasks by just adding new layers
and training them on the target data. Although the approach
is simple, the procedure for ﬁne-tuning a Transformer-based
model is not completely understood, and can result in high
accuracy variance, with a possible on-off behavior, e.g.,
models may always predict a single label. As a consequence,
researchers need to invest a considerable effort in selecting
suitable parameters, with no theory or a well-assessed best
practice helping them. Such problem also affects QA, and,
in particular, AS2 since no large and and accurate dataset
has been developed for it.
In this paper, we study the use of Transformer-based models for AS2 and provide effective solutions to tackle the data
scarceness problem for AS2 and the instability of the ﬁnetuning step. In detail, the contributions of our papers are:
• We improve stability of Transformer models by adding an
intermediate ﬁne-tuning step, which aims at specializing
them to the target task (AS2), i.e., this step transfers a pretrained language model to a model for the target task.
• We show that the transferred model can be effectively
adapted to the target domain with a subsequent ﬁnetuning step, even when using target data of small size.
• Our Transfer and Adapt (TANDA) approach makes ﬁne-

Abstract
We propose TANDA, an effective technique for ﬁne-tuning
pre-trained Transformer models for natural language tasks.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst transfer a pre-trained model into a model
for a general task by ﬁne-tuning it with a large and highquality dataset. We then perform a second ﬁne-tuning step to
adapt the transferred model to the target domain. We demonstrate the beneﬁts of our approach for answer sentence selection, which is a well-known inference task in Question Answering. We built a large scale dataset to enable the transfer step, exploiting the Natural Questions dataset. Our approach establishes the state of the art on two well-known
benchmarks, WikiQA and TREC-QA, achieving the impressive MAP scores of 92% and 94.3%, respectively, which
largely outperform the the highest scores of 83.4% and 87.5%
of previous work. We empirically show that TANDA generates more stable and robust models reducing the effort required for selecting optimal hyper-parameters. Additionally,
we show that the transfer step of TANDA makes the adaptation step more robust to noise. This enables a more effective
use of noisy datasets for ﬁne-tuning. Finally, we also conﬁrm
the positive impact of TANDA in an industrial setting, using
domain speciﬁc datasets subject to different types of noise.

1

Introduction

In recent years, virtual assistants have become a central asset
for technological companies. This has increased the interest
of AI researchers in studying and developing conversational
agents, some popular examples being Google Home, Siri
and Alexa. This has renewed the research interest in Question Answering (QA) and, in particular, in two main tasks:
(i) answer sentence selection (AS2), which, given a question
and a set of answer sentence candidates, consists in selecting
sentences (e.g., retrieved by a search engine) correctly answering the question; and (ii) machine reading (MR) (Chen
et al. 2017) or reading comprehension, which, given a question and a reference text, consists in ﬁnding a text span answering it. Even though the latter is gaining more and more
popularity, AS2 is more relevant to a production scenario
∗

Work done while the author was an intern at Amazon Alexa.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7780

