The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GTC: Guided Training of CTC towards
Efﬁcient and Accurate Scene Text Recognition
Wenyang Hu,1∗ Xiaocong Cai,2 Jun Hou,2 Shuai Yi,2 Zhiping Lin1
1

Nanyang Technological University
2
SenseTime Group Ltd.
huwe0013@e.ntu.edu.sg, {caixiaocong, houjun, yishuai}@sensetime.com, ezplin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) and attention
mechanism are two main approaches used in recent scene
text recognition works. Compared with attention-based methods, CTC decoder has a much shorter inference time, yet a
lower accuracy. To design an efﬁcient and effective model,
we propose the guided training of CTC (GTC), where CTC
model learns a better alignment and feature representations
from a more powerful attentional guidance. With the beneﬁt of guided training, CTC model achieves robust and accurate prediction for both regular and irregular scene text while
maintaining a fast inference speed. Moreover, to further leverage the potential of CTC decoder, a graph convolutional network (GCN) is proposed to learn the local correlations of extracted features. Extensive experiments on standard benchmarks demonstrate that our end-to-end model achieves a new
state-of-the-art for regular and irregular scene text recognition and needs 6 times shorter inference time than attentionbased methods.

Figure 1: Accuracy versus inference time (ms/image) tradeoff tables of different approaches. 1D Attention and 2D Attention represent two attention-based methods. Our method
is much faster and more effective.

Introduction

to extract feature sequence and the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is used to model the feature sequence. They
are trained with CTC loss and can make fast prediction
using parallel decoding. Attention-based methods use the
attention-mechanism to capture the dependencies of each
character in a text line, which can learn a better alignment
and deeper feature representations than CTC-based methods. Also some rectiﬁcation methods have been proposed
for text image preprocessing. The rectify module transforms
the input text image and rectiﬁes character alignments based
on Thin-Plate Spline transformation. The rectiﬁed images
are then passed to the encoder-decoder structure for recognition. This module can be added to CTC or attention-based
methods and it is trained in an end-to-end fashion to learn
adaptive transformations.
Motivations Though previous approaches give promising
results on either regular or irregular scene text recognition,
they still have limitations of balancing the trade-off between
recognition accuracy and inference time (see Figure 1). As
attention-based methods make predictions depending on the
features in previous time steps, this non-parallel decoding
scheme will slow down the inference process a lot. Although

Scene text recognition has been studied in academia and industry for many years, as it plays an important role in various
real-world applications such as vehicle license plate recognition, identity authentication and content analysis. In recent years, many methods proposed (Bissacco et al. 2013;
Shi, Bai, and Yao 2016; Shi et al. 2018) to recognize text in
the wild. However, due to different sizes, fonts, colors and
character placements of scene texts, scene text recognition
is still a challenging task.
Current Recognition Framework Generally, the framework of scene text recognition models is an encoder-decoder
structure. Recent methods mainly use two techniques to
train the sequence recognition model, namely Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) and attention mechanism.
Inspired by speech recognition, CTC is introduced to align
the frame-wise probability with labels. In CTC-based methods (Liu et al. 2016; Shi, Bai, and Yao 2016), CNN is used
∗
This work was done when Wenyang was an intern at SenseTime Group Ltd.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11005

