The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Analysis of One-to-One Matching Mechanisms
via SAT Solving: Impossibilities for Universal Axioms
Ulle Endriss
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation
University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands

analysing an intricate model of matching to better understand what opportunities there are (or are not) for designing
good mechanisms. In this paper, we develop an approach
to automatically search for impossibility theorems regarding the design of matching mechanisms that satisfy a number of desirable properties of interest (so-called axioms). We
focus on the classical model of one-to-one matching, with
two groups of n agents each, who we need to pair up with
each other on the basis of their reported preferences.
Our approach makes use of SAT solving techniques,
which have long been studied—and applied—in AI (Biere,
Heule, and van Maaren 2009). SAT is the NP-complete
problem of deciding whether a given propositional formula
has a model. Despite this high complexity, in practice a modern SAT solver will often be able to compute an answer in a
matter of seconds for formulas in CNF (conjunctive normal
form) with millions of clauses. We use such formulas to encode the desirable properties of matching mechanisms (for a
speciﬁc choice of n) we are interested in; a model then corresponds to a mechanism with those properties. If we obtain
a negative answer and thus designing a mechanism of the
desired kind is impossible for the speciﬁc value of n tested,
then in some cases this observation can be generalised to an
impossibility theorem for all larger values of n.

Abstract
We develop a powerful approach that makes modern SAT
solving techniques available as a tool to support the axiomatic
analysis of economic matching mechanisms. Our central result is a preservation theorem, establishing sufﬁcient conditions under which the possibility of designing a matching mechanism meeting certain axiomatic requirements for
a given number of agents carries over to all scenarios with
strictly fewer agents. This allows us to obtain general results
about matching by verifying claims for speciﬁc instances using a SAT solver. We use our approach to automatically derive elementary proofs for two new impossibility theorems:
(i) a strong form of Roth’s classical result regarding the impossibility of designing mechanisms that are both stable and
strategyproof and (ii) a result establishing the impossibility
of guaranteeing stability while also respecting a basic notion
of cross-group fairness (so-called gender-indifference).

1

Introduction

The development of the theory of matching, going back to
the seminal work of Gale and Shapley (1962), has been one
of the grand success stories of Economics and Operations
Research, leading to signiﬁcant beneﬁts to society at large.
Examples include matching schemes developed for the allocation of students to schools, of resident doctors to hospitals,
and of organ donors to patients (Economic Sciences Prize
Committee 2012).
Motivated by the demands of diverse applications, many
different variants of the basic model of matching have been
considered. For instance, we may need to compute one-toone matchings between agents on two sides of a market, or
we may be able to match several agents to a single agent on
the other side of the market. We may require agents to report
complete preferences over potential partners or we may want
to permit incomplete (truncated) preferences. Similarly, we
may or may not want to allow agents to declare preferential indifferences. The list goes on. This makes it difﬁcult
to obtain a clear picture of the range of desiderata for which
we can successfully design a matching mechanism. This difﬁculty motivates the idea of using tools from AI to automate some of the tasks of the economic theorist intent on

Related work. The original idea of using a SAT solver
to automatically prove the “base case” on an impossibility
theorem is due to Tang and Lin (2009) who used this approach to obtain an alternative proof of Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem and a number of closely related results in
social choice theory. Since then, this methodology has also
been applied, amongst other things, to the analysis of preference extensions (Geist and Endriss 2011), resolute voting
rules (Brandt, Geist, and Peters 2017), irresolute voting rules
(Brandt and Geist 2016), and multiwinner voting rules (Peters 2018). Geist and Peters (2017) review the state of the
art in this subﬁeld of computational social choice (Brandt et
al. 2016). While SAT solving can automate the proof of a
“base case”, deriving a fully ﬂedged impossibility theorem
still requires a manual proof of the corresponding “inductive step”. Depending on the axioms involved, this can be
difﬁcult and/or tedious. Only for the (particularly simple)
domain of preference extensions has it been possible so far

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1918

