The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Results on a Super Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis∗
Nikhil Vyas,† Ryan Williams‡
MIT, USA

Introduction

Abstract

k-SAT is the canonical NP-complete problem for k ≥ 3:
Given a Boolean formula in conjunctive normal form with
clauses of width at most k, is it satisﬁable? In practice,
k-SAT is often cited as a “solved problem” (Gomes et al.
2008), due to the incredible performance of modern SAT
solvers on instances arising from practice (mostly hardware
and software veriﬁcation).
However, it is very possible that in the future, the demands
and designs from practice will change signiﬁcantly, leading to signiﬁcantly different SAT instances. In general, the
worst-case complexity of k-SAT is far from understood, in
spite of tremendous effort devoted to ﬁnding faster worstcase algorithms. Because it is widely believed that P = NP,
the search has been conﬁned to super-polynomial-time algorithms. Although is trivial to obtain an algorithm running
in 2n · mO(1) time on k-SAT instances with m clauses and
n variables, we cannot seem to improve the base of the exponent below 2: there are are no known algorithms for kSAT which run in (2 − )n · mO(1) time for a universal
constant  > 0, independent of k. This apparent barrier to
algorithms led researchers to the following two popular hypotheses which strengthen P = NP:
• Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH) (Impagliazzo and
Paturi 2001) There is an α > 0 such that no 3-SAT algorithm runs in 2αn time on all n-variable instances.
• Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH) (Calabro, Impagliazzo, and Paturi 2009) There is no  > 0
such that for all k, k-SAT can be solved in (2 − )n time.
In fact, the performance of known worst-case k-SAT algorithms is even worse than what the hypotheses conjecture. The current best known algorithms for k-SAT all have
1
c
running time 2n(1−Ω( k )) , i.e., time 2n(1− k ) for a constant
c > 0. As k → ∞, the running time bound converges to 2n ,
but moreover this bound converges to 2n at a certain rate.
1
Somewhat surprisingly, this best-known 2n(1−Ω( k ))
bound can be achieved by multiple algorithmic paradigms,
such as randomized backtracking (Paturi, Pudlák, and Zane
1999; Paturi et al. 2005), local search (Schöning 1999), and
the polynomial method (Chan and Williams 2016). Even
for simpler variants such as Unique k-SAT (where we are

All known SAT-solving paradigms (backtracking, local search, and the polynomial method) only yield a
2n(1−1/O(k)) time algorithm for solving k-SAT in the worst
case, where the big-O constant is independent of k. For
this reason, it has been hypothesized that k-SAT cannot be
solved in worst-case 2n(1−f (k)/k) time, for any unbounded
f : N → N. This hypothesis has been called the “SuperStrong Exponential Time Hypothesis” (Super Strong ETH),
modeled after the ETH and the Strong ETH. We prove two
results concerning the Super-Strong ETH:
1. It has also been hypothesized that k-SAT is hard to solve
for randomly chosen instances near the “critical threshold”, where the clause-to-variable ratio is 2k ln 2 − Θ(1).
We give a randomized algorithm which refutes the SuperStrong ETH for the case of random k-SAT and planted kSAT for any clause-to-variable ratio. In particular, given
any random k-SAT instance F with n variables and
m clauses, our algorithm decides satisﬁability for F in
2n(1−Ω(log k)/k) time, with high probability (over the
choice of the formula and the randomness of the algorithm). It turns out that a well-known algorithm from the
literature on SAT algorithms does the job: the PPZ algorithm of Paturi, Pudlak, and Zane (1998).
2. The Unique k-SAT problem is the special case where
there is at most one satisfying assignment. It is natural to
hypothesize that the worst-case (exponential-time) complexity of Unique k-SAT is substantially less than that
of k-SAT. Improving prior reductions, we show the time
complexities of Unique k-SAT and k-SAT are very tightly
related: if Unique k-SAT is in 2n(1−f (k)/k) time for an
unbounded f , then k-SAT is in 2n(1−f (k)(1−ε)/k) time
for every ε > 0. Thus, refuting Super Strong ETH in the
unique solution case would refute Super Strong ETH in
general.

∗

Supported by NSF Grant CCF-1741615 and CCF-1909429.
nikhilv@mit.edu
‡
rrw@mit.edu
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13700

