The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Triple Embeddings from Knowledge Graphs
Valeria Fionda,1 Giuseppe Pirrò2∗
1

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Calabria
Via Pietro Bucci 30B, 87036, Rende (CS), Italy
2
Department of Computer Science, Sapienza University of Rome
Via Salaria 113, 00198, Rome, Italy
ﬁonda@mat.unical.it, pirro@di.uniroma1.it

Mauroux 2018). One common denominator of both homogeneous and knowledge graph embedding approaches is the
usage of language model techniques. The idea is to consider
sequences of nodes in a graph (i.e., random walks) as analogous to sentences in a document; then, the node sequences
are fed into models like Skip-gram (Mikolov et al. 2013)
to learn the ﬁnal node embeddings. There have been previous attempts considering edge embeddings in homogeneous
graphs. In particular, node2vec construct edge embeddings
by applying some operator (e.g., average, Hadamard product) to the embeddings of the endpoint nodes of an edge.
However, this will be problematic in the context of KGs
since it is not clear how to behave when nodes are linked by
more than an edge as typically happens in real-world KGs
like DBpedia. Other approaches like ComplexE (Trouillon
et al. 2016), ConvE (Dettmers et al. 2018), TransG (Xiao,
Huang, and Zhu 2016), and RotatE (Sun et al. 2019) learn
embeddings of both entities and predicate types for link prediction. These approaches could compute triple embeddings
by aggregating node and predicates embeddings. This approach is sub-optimal as it will consider the same predicate
and node embeddings in all triples where these appear.

Abstract
Graph embedding techniques allow to learn high-quality feature vectors from graph structures and are useful in a variety
of tasks, from node classiﬁcation to clustering. Existing approaches have only focused on learning feature vectors for
the nodes and predicates in a knowledge graph. To the best
of our knowledge, none of them has tackled the problem of
directly learning triple embeddings. The approaches that are
closer to this task have focused on homogeneous graphs involving only one type of edge and obtain edge embeddings by
applying some operation (e.g., average) on the embeddings
of the endpoint nodes. The goal of this paper is to introduce
Triple2Vec, a new technique to directly embed knowledge
graph triples. We leverage the idea of line graph of a graph
and extend it to the context of knowledge graphs. We introduce an edge weighting mechanism for the line graph based
on semantic proximity. Embeddings are ﬁnally generated by
adopting the SkipGram model, where sentences are replaced
with graph walks. We evaluate our approach on different realworld knowledge graphs and compared it with related work.
We also show an application of triple embeddings in the context of user-item recommendations.

1

The goal of this paper is to devise a novel technique to directly learn triple embeddings from knowledge graphs. This
sets three main challenges. The ﬁrst is about how to go from
node embeddings to triple embeddings. To tackle this ﬁrst
challenge, we build upon the notion of line graph of a graph.
As an example, the directed line graph obtained from the
knowledge graph in Fig. 1 (a) is shown in Fig. 1 (b), where
the two copies of the node Lauren Oliver, Americans correspond to the triples having nationality and citizenship as
a predicate, respectively. It would be tempting to directly apply embedding techniques to the nodes of the directed line
graph to obtain triple embeddings. However, we detect two
main problems. The ﬁrst is that it is impossible to discern between the two triples encoded by the nodes Lauren Oliver
and Americans. The second is that the directed line graph
is disconnected and as such, it becomes problematic to learn
triple embeddings via random walks. Therefore, we introduce the notion of triple line graph GL of a knowledge graph
G. In GL , nodes are the triples of G and an edge is introduced
whenever the triples of G share an endpoint.

Introduction

In the last years, learning graph representations using lowdimensional vectors has received attention as viable support
to various (machine) learning tasks, from node classiﬁcation
to clustering (Cai, Zheng, and Chang 2018). Approaches like
DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014), node2vec
(Grover and Leskovec 2016) and their variants strive to ﬁnd
node embeddings that preserve structural relations in the
embedding space. These approaches only focus on homogeneous graphs including only one type of edge. Another
strand of research focused on embedding nodes in knowledge graphs (aka heterogeneous information networks) characterized by several distinct types of nodes and edges
(Wang et al. 2017). Notable approaches are RDF2Vec (Ristoski and Paulheim 2016), metapath2vec (Dong, Chawla,
and Swami 2017), and JUST (Hussein, Yang, and Cudré∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3874

