The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Embedded Non-Redundant Clustering
Lukas Miklautz,∗,1 Dominik Mautz,∗,2 Muzaffer Can Altinigneli,1,2 Christian Böhm,2,3
Claudia Plant1,4
1

Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
2
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany
3
MCML, 4 ds:UniVie
1
{lukas.miklautz, claudia.plant}@univie.ac.at
2
{altinigneli, boehm, mautz}@dbs.iﬁ.lmu.de

Abstract
Complex data types like images can be clustered in multiple valid ways. Non-redundant clustering aims at extracting
those meaningful groupings by discouraging redundancy between clusterings. Unfortunately, clustering images in pixel
space directly has been shown to work unsatisfactory. This
has increased interest in combining the high representational
power of deep learning with clustering, termed deep clustering. Algorithms of this type combine the non-linear embedding of an autoencoder with a clustering objective and optimize both simultaneously. None of these algorithms try to
ﬁnd multiple non-redundant clusterings. In this paper, we propose the novel Embedded Non-Redundant Clustering algorithm (ENRC). It is the ﬁrst algorithm that combines neuralnetwork-based representation learning with non-redundant
clustering. ENRC can ﬁnd multiple highly non-redundant
clusterings of different dimensionalities within a data set.
This is achieved by (softly) assigning each dimension of the
embedded space to the different clusterings. For instance, in
image data sets it can group the objects by color, material and
shape, without the need for explicit feature engineering. We
show the viability of ENRC in extensive experiments and empirically demonstrate the advantage of combining non-linear
representation learning with non-redundant clustering.

1

Figure 1: This data set can be meaningfully grouped either by shapes (cube, cylinder, sphere), by colors (red, blue,
green, yellow, purple, gray), or by materials (rubber, metal).
All of these clusterings are non-redundant.

the terms ’deep clustering’ or ’embedded clustering’. They
combine a ﬂat clustering objective—considering only one
valid clustering— with unsupervised representation learning through neural networks (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013; Aljalbout et al. 2018). These approaches make
it possible to achieve a high-quality clustering even in the
above described domains. The advantage of an integrated
approach that performs clustering and representation learning simultaneously is that they beneﬁt from each other. The
clustering provides feedback to the transformation, and in
return the non-linear transformation can alter the embedded
space to improve the clustering. All these methods assume
that the data can be partitioned into only a single valid clustering. Yet, we argue that most modern complex data sets
can be partitioned in multiple valid ways. Techniques from
subspace clustering address these issues, but they deliver
a multitude of redundant clustering solutions, which might
be valid, but are hard to interpret even for domain experts.
Deep subspace clustering algorithms like (Ji et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018) can only ﬁnd a single valid clustering,
where a cluster can belong to a different subspace. We think
it is necessary to constrain the solution space by only consid-

Introduction

Every day massive amounts of complex data like images,
texts, videos and audios are generated and most of them
have no labels. This makes it nearly impossible to apply supervised methods, because it may be too expensive to label the data or there might not even be a labeling consensus. This calls for unsupervised classiﬁcation techniques like
clustering, which are unsupervised learning algorithms for
partitioning data into similar groups. Unfortunately, these
kinds of complex domains have been notoriously difﬁcult
to handle for classical clustering algorithms (Xie, Girshick,
and Farhadi 2016). The deep learning ’revolution’ of the
last few years targets these data sets explicitly, which suggests that a combination of both approaches is promising.
Several techniques have been proposed in this area under
∗

First authors with equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5174

