The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Interpretable and Differentially Private Predictions
Frederik Harder,1,2 Matthias Bauer,1,3* Mijung Park1,2
1

2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
3
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
{fharder, bauer, mpark}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract

A

Interpretable predictions, which clarify why a machine learning model makes a particular decision, can compromise privacy by revealing the characteristics of individual data points.
This raises the central question addressed in this paper: Can
models be interpretable without compromising privacy? For
complex “big” data ﬁt by correspondingly rich models, balancing privacy and explainability is particularly challenging,
such that this question has remained largely unexplored. In
this paper, we propose a family of simple models with the
aim of approximating complex models using several locally
linear maps per class to provide high classiﬁcation accuracy,
as well as differentially private explanations on the classiﬁcation. We illustrate the usefulness of our approach on several
image benchmark datasets as well as a medical dataset.

1

Privacy

Interpretability
C

B

Accuracy

Figure 1: Modern machine learning systems need to trade
off accuracy, privacy, and interpretability.
In order to soften this trade-off between interpretability
and accuracy (Fig. 1 B ), many post-processing schemes
aim to gain insights from complex models like deep neural networks. One prominent aspect of these approaches is
the use of gradient-based attributions (Selvaraju et al. 2016;
Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Smilkov et al. 2017;
Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Montavon et al. 2015;
Bach et al. 2015; Ancona et al. 2017).
In another line of research, many recent papers address
the concern that complex models with outstanding predictive performance can expose sensitive information from the
dataset they were trained on (Carlini et al. 2018; Song, Ristenpart, and Shmatikov 2017; Shokri and Shmatikov 2015;
Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015). To quantify privacy,
several approaches adopt the notion of differential privacy
(DP), which provides a mathematically provable deﬁnition
of privacy, and can quantify the level of privacy an algorithm or a model provides (Dwork and Roth 2014). In plain
English, an algorithm is called differentially private (DP),
if its output is random enough to obscure the participation
of any single individual in the data. The randomness is typically achieved by injecting noise into the algorithm. The
amount of noise is determined by the level of privacy the
algorithm guarantees and the sensitivity, a maximum difference in its output depending on a single individual’s participation or non-participation in the data (see Sec. 2 for the
mathematical deﬁnition of DP).
There is, however, a natural trade-off between privacy
and accuracy (Fig. 1 C ): A large amount of added noise
provides a high level of privacy but also harms prediction
accuracy. When the number of parameters is high, like in
deep neural network models, juggling this trade-off is very

Introduction

The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) by the
European Union imposes two important requirements on
algorithmic design, interpretability and privacy (Voigt and
Bussche 2017). These requirements introduce new standards
on future algorithmic techniques, making them of particular concern to the machine learning community (Goodman
and Flaxman 2016). This paper addresses these two requirements in the context of classiﬁcation, and studies the tradeoff between privacy, accuracy and interpretability, see Fig. 1.
Broadly speaking, there are two options to take for gaining interpretability: (i) rely on inherently interpretable models; and (ii) rely on post-processing schemes to probe trained
complex models. Inherently interpretable models are often
relatively simple and their predictions can be easily analyzed
in terms of their respective input features. For instance, in
logistic regression classiﬁers and sparse linear models the
coefﬁcients represent the importance of each input feature.
However, modern “big” data typically exhibit complex patterns, such that these relatively simplistic models often have
lower accuracy than more complex ones.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
Matthias Bauer is now at DeepMind
4083

