The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unsupervised Nonlinear Feature
Selection from High-Dimensional Signed Networks
Qiang Huang,1,3 Tingyu Xia,2 Huiyan Sun,2∗ Makoto Yamada,4,5∗ Yi Chang2,3
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
3
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
4
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, 5 RIKEN AIP, Kyoto, Japan
huangqiang18@mails.jlu.edu.cn, xiatingyu1012@163.com,
sunhuiyan111@foxmail.com, myamada@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, yichang@jlu.edu.cn
dimensional data brings great difﬁculty to the subsequent
data mining tasks (Duda, Hart, and Stork 2012).
Users typically demonstrate their preferences on social
media by posting comments, following someone on the Internet, and leaving positive/negative ratings, which creates
positive or negative relationships between users and generates a social network. Moreover, each user has a set of attributes (e.g., age, sex, etc.). This data composes a signed
network in which each node has an attribute vector. To understand the relationships among users, we must determine
which user attributes (i.e., features) best represent the these
relationships. Moreover, in many social data, most nodes are
unlabeled, which means selecting features in unsupervised
manner is generally preferred. Thus, the development of an
unsupervised feature selection algorithm for signed network
would have a signiﬁcant impact on the ﬁeld of data mining.
Feature selection is a widely studied type of machine
learning algorithm and there exist many feature selection
algorithms, including the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (Lasso) (Tibshirani 1996) and minimum redundancy maximum relevance (mRMR) (Peng, Long, and
Ding 2005). These feature selection algorithms employs the
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) assumption;
therefore, the performances of these methods can be poor
for network data.
To handle feature selection from network data, networkbased feature selection algorithms are useful. One of the
most widely used approach incorporates the network information into a regularizer. For example, LinkedFS (Tang and
Liu 2012) extracts various link information and evaluates
the effects of user–user and user–post relationships in the
linked data to ﬁnd a relevant feature subset. Recently, a novel
framework called SignedFS (Cheng, Li, and Liu 2017) was
proposed to ﬁnd the most relevant features in signed social
networks by modeling user proximity and link information
of both positive and negative links. However, existing approaches are all based on linear models.
To this end, in this paper, we propose a nonlinear unsupervised feature selection method for signed networks called
SignedLasso, which can select a small number of important
features with nonlinear association between inputs and output, from a high-dimensional data. More speciﬁcally, we for-

Abstract
With the rapid development of social media services in recent
years, relational data are explosively growing. The signed
network, which consists of a mixture of positive and negative links, is an effective way to represent the friendly and
hostile relations among nodes, which can represent users
or items. Because the features associated with a node of a
signed network are usually incomplete, noisy, unlabeled, and
high-dimensional, feature selection is an important procedure
to eliminate irrelevant features. However, existing networkbased feature selection methods are linear methods, which
means they can only select features that having the linear
dependency on the output values. Moreover, in many social
data, most nodes are unlabeled; therefore, selecting features
in an unsupervised manner is generally preferred. To this end,
in this paper, we propose a nonlinear unsupervised feature
selection method for signed networks, called SignedLasso.
This method can select a small number of important features with nonlinear associations between inputs and output
from a high-dimensional data. More speciﬁcally, we formulate unsupervised feature selection as a nonlinear feature selection problem with the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion Lasso (HSIC Lasso), which can ﬁnd a small number
of features in a nonlinear manner. Then, we propose the use
of a deep learning-based node embedding to represent node
similarity without label information and incorporate the node
embedding into the HSIC Lasso. Through experiments on
two real world datasets, we show that the proposed algorithm
is superior to existing linear unsupervised feature selection
methods.

1

Introduction

With the development of the increasingly prosperous online
world, people are becoming involved in online social networks in a variety of ways everyday, which means social media data is growing explosively (Tang et al. 2016). Therefore,
extracting knowledge from social media data has become an
important and urgent part of data mining in recent years. For
example, Twitter1 generates 6000 twitters per second. High
∗
Joint corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://twitter.com/

4182

