The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Differential Equation Units:
Learning Functional Forms of Activation Functions from Data
MohamadAli Torkamani,1 Shiv Shankar,2
Amirmohammad Rooshenas,2 Phillip Wallis3
2

1
Amazon.com∗
University of Massachusetts Amherst
3
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI
1
alitor@amazon.com
2
{sshankar, pedram}@cs.umass.edu
3
phwallis@microsoft.com

be more suitable to describe data. In this paper, we introduce differential equation units (DEUs), where the activation
function of each neuron is the nonlinear, possibly periodic
solution of a parameterized second order, linear, ordinary
differential equation. By learning the parameters of the differential equations using gradient descent on the loss function, the solutions to the differential equations change their
functional form, thus adapting their forms to extract more
complex features from data.
From an applicability perspective, our approach is similar to Maxout networks (Goodfellow et al. 2013) and adaptive piece-wise linear units (PLUs) (Agostinelli et al. 2014;
Ramachandran, Zoph, and Le 2017).
Figure 1 shows nested noisy circles for which we trained
neural networks with Maxout, ReLU, and our proposed DEU
activation functions. For using ReLU, we needed at least
two layers of four hidden units to separate the circles, while
one layer of either two Maxout or two DEUs is enough to
learn an appropriate decision boundary. While, the number
of parameters learned by Maxout and PLU is proportional to
the number of input weights to a neuron, and the number of
linear units in that neuron, for each DEU, we learn only ﬁve
additional parameters that give us highly ﬂexible activation
functions in return; altogether, resulting in more compact
representations. Moreover, DEUs can represent a broad range
of functions including harmonic functions, while Maxout is
limited to piecewise approximation of convex functions (see
Figure 2).
DEUs can also transform their forms during training in
response to the behavior of other neurons in the network in
order to describe data with interaction to the other part of
the network, thus the neurons in a neural network may adopt
different forms as their activation functions. The variety of
activation function forms throughout a network enables it to
encode more information, thus requiring fewer neurons to
achieve the same performance compared to networks with
ﬁxed activation functions.
The main contribution of this paper is to explore the beneﬁts of learning the form of activation functions through the
introduction of differential equation units (DEUs). We also
propose a learning algorithm to train the parameters of DEUs,

Abstract
Most deep neural networks use simple, ﬁxed activation functions, such as sigmoids or rectiﬁed linear units, regardless of
domain or network structure. We introduce differential equation units (DEUs), an improvement to modern neural networks,
which enables each neuron to learn a particular nonlinear activation function from a family of solutions to an ordinary
differential equation. Speciﬁcally, each neuron may change its
functional form during training based on the behavior of the
other parts of the network. We show that using neurons with
DEU activation functions results in a more compact network
capable of achieving comparable, if not superior, performance
when compared to much larger networks.

Introduction
Driven in large part by advancements in storage, processing,
and parallel computing, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
become capable of outperforming other methods across a
wide range of highly complex tasks.
The advent of new activation functions such as rectiﬁed
linear units (ReLU) (Nair and Hinton 2010), exponential linear units (ELU) (Clevert, Unterthiner, and Hochreiter 2015),
and scaled exponential linear units (SELU) (Klambauer et
al. 2017) address a network’s ability to effectively learn complicated functions, thereby allowing them to perform better
on complicated tasks. The choice of an activation function is
typically determined empirically by tuning, or due to necessity. For example, in modern deep networks, ReLU activation
functions are often favored over sigmoid functions, which
used to be a popular choice in the earlier days of neural networks. A reason for this preference is that the ReLU function
is non-saturating and does not have the vanishing gradient
problem when used in deep structures (Hochreiter 1998).
In all of the aforementioned activation functions, the functional form of the activation function is ﬁxed. However, depending on data, different forms of activation functions may
∗
The work was done when the author was afﬁliated with the
University of Oregon
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6030

