The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DRAGON-V: Detection and Recognition of
Airplane Goals with Navigational Visualization
Christabel Wayllace, Sunwoo Ha, Yuchen Han, Jiaming Hu, Shayan Monadjemi,
William Yeoh, Alvitta Ottley
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
{cwayllace, sha, hyuchen, jiaminghu, monadjemi, wyeoh, alvitta}@wustl.edu

Abstract
We introduce Detection and Recognition of Airplane GOals
with Navigational Visualization (DRAGON-V), a visualization system that uses probabilistic goal recognition to infer
and display the most probable airport runway that a pilot is
approaching. DRAGON-V is especially useful in cases of
miscommunication, low visibility, or lack of airport familiarity which may result in a pilot deviating from the assigned
taxiing route. The visualization system conveys relevant information, and updates according to the airplane’s current geolocation. DRAGON-V aims to assist air trafﬁc controllers in
reducing incidents of runway incursions at airports.

Figure 1: DRAGON-V Architecture

Runway safety is of crucial importance and a constant
challenge in aviation. Runway incursion refers to an incident where an unauthorized aircraft, vehicle, or person
is on a runway.1 Investigations in past years found that
the leading causes of runway incursion are: (1) Failure to
comply with instructions provided by air trafﬁc controllers
(ATCs); (2) Lack of airport familiarity by the pilot; and
(3) Non-conformance of pilots with standard operating procedures. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) of the
United States reports that pilots caused 65% of all runway incursions. In severe cases, runway incursion can lead
to tragic accidents. Therefore, aviation organizations, researchers, and inventors work on improving standards, procedures, and technology to avoid such incursions.
Researchers have proposed different types of systems to
assist both pilots in the cockpit as well as ATCs. For example, Sun et al. (2019) proposed a system to predict accidents
by analyzing communication errors between ATCs and pilots, and their dependency on other factors such as airport
layout, time of the day, etc. Singla et al. (2019) proposed
a system that alerts the aircrew and the ATC if the current
state of an airplane differs from its expected state. The aircraft’s current state is determined from sensors on board the
airplane. (Gotteland et al. 2001) used a system based on
genetic algorithms to optimize aircraft ground trafﬁc.
Systems to avoid collisions have also been designed. Runway Awareness and Advisory Systems (RAAS) notify ﬂight

crews about their relative position on the ground with respect
to their allocated runway (Ishihara and Johnson 2019). Other
systems analyze the dynamics of the aircraft and external objects to measure collision risk (Pesik and Matty 2019) or use
a radar system to detect external obstacles (Okamura et al.
2019).
In this paper, we introduce the Detection and Recognition of Airplane GOals with Navigational Visualization
(DRAGON-V) system with the intention to provide a tool
that could be used by the ATC to (1) Verify whether an aircraft is following its intended route; and (2) Visually determine the most probable runway(s) that the aircraft is heading towards. To the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst
system that provides such a visual aid to the ATC. Further,
DRAGON-V requires only a fairly limited set of inputs – the
airport layout and current location of the airplane – which
are readily available to ATCs, thereby simplifying the use
and adoption of such a system in practice.

DRAGON-V Architecture
Figure 1 shows the system architecture of DRAGON-V. We
describe each module below.
Airport Layout Retrieval: We retrieved the airport layout from the ﬂight simulator X-Plane,2 where taxi and truck
route networks, as well as runways, are represented as a directed graph. Nodes are described as latitude, longitude

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
www.faa.gov/airports/runway safety/news/runway incursions

2
https://developer.x-plane.com/article/
airport-data-apt-dat-ﬁle-format-speciﬁcation/

13642

