The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Attentive Experience Replay
Peiquan Sun, Wengang Zhou, Houqiang Li
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
spq@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Experience replay (ER) has become an important component
of deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. ER enables
RL algorithms to reuse past experiences for the update of current policy. By reusing a previous state for training, the RL
agent would learn more accurate value estimation and better decision on that state. However, as the policy is continually updated, some states in past experiences become rarely
visited, and optimization over these states might not improve
the overall performance of current policy. To tackle this issue,
we propose a new replay strategy to prioritize the transitions
that contain states frequently visited by current policy. We
introduce Attentive Experience Replay (AER), a novel experience replay algorithm that samples transitions according to
the similarities between their states and the agent’s state. We
couple AER with different off-policy algorithms and demonstrate that AER makes consistent improvements on the suite
of OpenAI gym tasks.

1

(a) Pong

(b) HalfCheetah

Figure 1: Snapshots of OpenAI gym tasks. Left: Pong, one
of the Atari 2600 games. Right: HalfCheetah, one of the
MuJoCo tasks.

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has made remarkable advances in many sequential decision-making problems, including Atari games (Mnih et al. 2013; 2015), realistic simulated robotic (Schulman et al. 2015; 2017) and board games
(Silver et al. 2016; 2017). With the utilization of deep neural network (DNN) as function approximators, deep RL algorithms are able to learn complex nonlinear policies (or
value functions) directly from high dimensional input without prior knowledges. Experience Replay (ER) (Lin 1992)
is a technique that stores and reuses past experiences with a
replay buffer. By randomly sampling transitions from the replay buffer, ER alleviates the temporal correlations between
sequential transitions, and offers i.i.d. samples required for
the training of DNN. Furthermore, the reuse of the transitions from the past improves the sample efﬁciency and stabilizes the learning process.
As suggested in (De Bruin et al. 2018), the learning efﬁciency and stability of RL algorithm, as well as the ﬁnal performance of the learned policy, are heavily dependent on how the experiences are replayed. In the origi-

nal form of ER, experience transitions are replayed uniformly at random from the replay buffer, which neglects
the signiﬁcance of different transitions. To make better use
of the experiences, various sampling strategies (De Bruin
et al. 2015; Schaul et al. 2016; De Bruin et al. 2016;
Novati and Koumoutsakos 2019; Zha et al. 2019) have been
proposed to prioritize important experiences. For off-policy
algorithms, as the policy diverges from previous behaviors,
some experiences in the replay buffer might become irrelevant to current policy. For example, some transitions from
the past might contain states that would never be visited by
current policy. Optimization over these states might not improve the overall performance of current policy and can possibly undermine the performances on the frequently visited
states. For off-policy algorithms that contain such irrelevant
experiences, a proper sampling strategy should be able to
improve the performance.
In this paper, we propose a new criterion for sampling
transitions from the replay buffer. We argue that transitions that contain states frequently visited by current policy
should be sampled with higher priorities, and ones that contain rarely visited states should be sampled less. Based on

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5900

