The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Document Summarization with VHTM:
Variational Hierarchical Topic-Aware Mechanism
Xiyan Fu,1 Jun Wang,2∗ Jinghan Zhang,1 Jinmao Wei,1 Zhenglu Yang1∗
1

College of Computer Science, Nankai University, China
2
Ludong University, China
{fuxiyan, junwang, jhzhang}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, {weijm, yangzl}@nankai.edu.cn

erate abundant topic-related words and maintain the original ideas of documents (Harabagiu and Lacatusu 2005;
Wang et al. 2009). Recently, some deep learning-based approaches have achieved remarkable summarizing performance and drawn extensive attentions (Wang et al. 2018;
Narayan, Cohen, and Lapata 2018a). In this work, we devote our efforts to approach the uniﬁed summarization tasks
with deep learning by fusing topic information.
Most existing deep learning-based summarizaiton works
are assisted by an external topic model, e.g., latent dirichlet
allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). This widely
adopted strategy accompanies three major weaknesses:
(1) The summarizing process is driven by the externally
generated topics beyond summarization models, which may
neither characterize the speciﬁed ﬂavor of each article nor
satisfy the individual requirement of each task. For example, LDA is performed under the assumption that topics are
drawn from multinomial distributions across an article; this
apparently does not hold for all of the articles fetched from
diverse domains. Furthermore, as to the summarizing task, it
prefers the most informative topics, while LDA extracts all
of the latent topics.
(2) The pre-trained topics are fetched in the document
level, neglecting the non-trival difference between paragraphs (i.e., segments with an equal length). An established
belief in summarization is that different paragraphs typically possess distinct levels of importance. Thus, excluding the sub-topics hidden in paragraphs may compromise
the summarizing performance. In other words, we need the
paragraph-gained topics and document-gained ones.
(3) The fusion effect of a deep learning approach coupled with an arbitrary topic model is doubted according to
some empirical evidence (Dieng et al. 2017). We argue that
a co-optimization framework that incorporates summarization and topic inference is an applicable solution to dispense
with the intricate selection of appropriate topic models.
In this study, we present a general deep learning-based
framework equipped with a variational hierarchical topicaware mechanism, dubbed VHTM. This model aims to accomplish topic inference and summarization in an end-toend manner via variational encoder decoder (VED) and embed the latent topics into the summarization under different

Abstract
Automatic text summarization focuses on distilling summary
information from texts. This research ﬁeld has been considerably explored over the past decades because of its significant role in many natural language processing tasks; however, two challenging issues block its further development:
(1) how to yield a summarization model embedding topic inference rather than extending with a pre-trained one and (2)
how to merge the latent topics into diverse granularity levels. In this study, we propose a variational hierarchical model
to holistically address both issues, dubbed VHTM. Different from the previous work assisted by a pre-trained singlegrained topic model, VHTM is the ﬁrst attempt to jointly accomplish summarization with topic inference via variational
encoder-decoder and merge topics into multi-grained levels
through topic embedding and attention. Comprehensive experiments validate the superior performance of VHTM compared with the baselines, accompanying with semantically
consistent topics.

Introduction
Automatic text summarization reﬁnes integrant information
from long texts to a short summary for convenient understanding. It has provided great beneﬁts for many natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as text classiﬁcation, information retrieval, and question answering (Gambhir and
Gupta 2017).
Dozens of summarization approaches have been introduced in the literature, and they can be roughly categorized into three groups, i.e., extractive (Nallapati, Zhai, and
Zhou 2017; Narayan, Cohen, and Lapata 2018b), abstractive (Tan, Wan, and Xiao 2017; Cao et al. 2018), and uniﬁed (See, Liu, and Manning 2017; Chen and Bansal 2018),
which focus on picking up original crucial objects, generating new expressions, and combining the process of selection and generation. To tackle the limitations of inaccurate factual details and low relevancy of original document
in these traditional approaches, topic-aware models are introduced, in which topic serves as guidance to help gen∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7740

