The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

JSNet: Joint Instance and Semantic Segmentation of 3D Point Clouds
Lin Zhao, Wenbing Tao ∗
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing
School of Artiﬁcal Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{linzhao, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Encoder

In this paper, we propose a novel joint instance and semantic segmentation approach, which is called JSNet, in order to
address the instance and semantic segmentation of 3D point
clouds simultaneously. Firstly, we build an effective backbone network to extract robust features from the raw point
clouds. Secondly, to obtain more discriminative features, a
point cloud feature fusion module is proposed to fuse the different layer features of the backbone network. Furthermore, a
joint instance semantic segmentation module is developed to
transform semantic features into instance embedding space,
and then the transformed features are further fused with instance features to facilitate instance segmentation. Meanwhile, this module also aggregates instance features into semantic feature space to promote semantic segmentation. Finally, the instance predictions are generated by applying a
simple mean-shift clustering on instance embeddings. As a
result, we evaluate the proposed JSNet on a large-scale 3D indoor point cloud dataset S3DIS and a part dataset ShapeNet,
and compare it with existing approaches. Experimental results demonstrate our approach outperforms the state-of-theart method in 3D instance segmentation with a signiﬁcant
improvement in 3D semantic prediction and our method is
also beneﬁcial for part segmentation. The source code for this
work is available at https://github.com/dlinzhao/JSNet.

Raw Point Cloud

Instance
Decoder

Feature
Fusion
JISS

Semantic
Decoder

Instance Segmentation

Feature
Fusion
Semantic Segmentation

Figure 1: Our network JSNet takes raw point clouds as inputs and gets outputs instance and semantic segmentation
results for each point. JISS stands for Joint Instance and Semantic Segmentation.

Literature research shows that 3D scene data have different representations, e.g., volumetric grids (Wu et al. 2015;
Thanh Nguyen et al. 2016; Maturana and Scherer 2015) and
3D point clouds (Qi et al. 2017b; Li et al. 2018; Wang et
al. 2018b; Yu et al. 2018). Compared with other representations, point cloud is a more compact and intuitive representation of 3D scene data. Recently, more efﬁcient and powerful deep learning network architectures (Qi et al. 2017b;
Wu, Qi, and Fuxin 2019; Li, Chen, and Hee Lee 2018) have
been proposed to directly process point clouds and shown
promising results in point cloud classiﬁcation and part segmentation. Those approaches are often used as feature extraction network in other tasks, e.g., instance segmentation
and semantic segmentation.
In previous works, instance segmentation and semantic
segmentation have often been processed respectively or instance segmentation is treated as a post-processing task of
semantic segmentation (Wang et al. 2018a; Pham et al.
2019a). However, those two problems are related because
points of different categories belong to different instances
and points of the same instance belong to the same class.
Recently, (Pham et al. 2019b) handles the two problems
with multi-task pointwise network and multi-value Conditional Random Field (CRF). However, the CRF is an individual part behind the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN),
it is difﬁcult to explore the performance of their combination. Moreover, this method does not investigate whether semantic segmentation and instance segmentation can facili-

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is the task which is used to segment
all informative regions in a scene and classify each region
into a speciﬁc class. Instance segmentation is different from
semantic segmentation for that different objects of the same
class will have different labels. Both the two tasks have a
wide applications in real-world scenarios, e.g., autonomous
driving and mobile-based navigation. In 2D images, those
two tasks have achieved remarkable results (Chen et al.
2018; He et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019). However, the studies of
3D semantic and instance segmentation are still facing huge
challenges, e.g., large-scale with noisy data processing, high
computation as well as memory consumption.
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12951

