The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Constructing Multiple Tasks for Augmentation:
Improving Neural Image Classiﬁcation with K-Means Features
Tao Gui,∗ Lizhi Qing,∗ Qi Zhang, Jiacheng Ye, Hang Yan, Zichu Fei, Xuanjing Huang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
825 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, China
{tgui16, lzqing18, qz, yejc19, hyan19, zcfei19, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn

Omniglot

Abstract

1

CIFAR-10

MNIST

Multi-task learning (MTL) has received considerable attention, and numerous deep learning applications beneﬁt
from MTL with multiple objectives. However, constructing
multiple related tasks is difﬁcult, and sometimes only a
single task is available for training in a dataset. To tackle
this problem, we explored the idea of using unsupervised
clustering to construct a variety of auxiliary tasks from
unlabeled data or existing labeled data. We found that some
of these newly constructed tasks could exhibit semantic
meanings corresponding to certain human-speciﬁc attributes,
but some were non-ideal. In order to effectively reduce
the impact of non-ideal auxiliary tasks on the main task,
we further proposed a novel meta-learning-based multi-task
learning approach, which trained the shared hidden layers on
auxiliary tasks, while the meta-optimization objective was
to minimize the loss on the main task, ensuring that the
optimizing direction led to an improvement on the main task.
Experimental results across ﬁve image datasets demonstrated
that the proposed method signiﬁcantly outperformed existing
single task learning, semi-supervised learning, and some data
augmentation methods, including an improvement of more
than 9% on the Omniglot dataset.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Examples of k-means clustering classes based on
ACAI embeddings with random scaling (Berthelot et al.
2019), which can be used to perform multi-task learning. (a)
Some of the clusters correspond well to true labels. (b) Some
of the clusters exhibit semantic meaning, like the heads of
the animals. (c) Others are non-ideal or are based on image
artifacts, which could cause a performance deterioration. We
proposed a meta-learning-based MTL to tackle this problem.

Yim et al. 2015), these methods continue to have difﬁculty
with two issues. First, we have always been hindered in
searching a sufﬁcient number of related tasks (Bingel and
Søgaard 2017). In particular, in some domains, only a
single task is available for training. Second, because of
the lack of a good notion of when two tasks should be
considered related (Ruder 2017), it is difﬁcult to avoid
introducing some unrelated tasks, which can result in the
learned features being negatively inﬂuenced (Zhang and
Yang 2017). Meyerson and Miikkulainen (2018) explored
the pseudo-task augmentation method, which veriﬁed that
MTL improved the generalization performance of single
task. However, they only regarded the duplicates of a single
task as multiple tasks, which lost the diversity of the task and
could not take advantage of unlabeled data.
In this work, we considered an extreme situation where
only a single task was available for training, but we expected
to ﬁnd sufﬁcient related tasks and utilize the framework
of deep MTL to improve the single task learning. To
tackle the above issues, we used unsupervised clustering

Introduction

Multi-task learning (Caruana 1997) is a learning paradigm
in machine learning. Its goal is to improve the generalization performance of a single task by leveraging useful
information contained in multiple related tasks (Zhang and
Yang 2017). Multi-task learning has been used successfully
across all applications of machine learning, from natural
language processing (Collobert and Weston 2008) and
speech recognition (Deng, Hinton, and Kingsbury 2013)
to computer vision (Girshick 2015) and reinforcement
learning (Wilson et al. 2007). Critical assumptions in
these applications are that MTL typically involves very
heterogeneous tasks and the tasks are closely related in some
way (Ruder 2017; Zhang and Yang 2017).
Although the use of MTL to improve single task learning
(STL) has achieved great success (Luong et al. 2015;
∗

Both authors contributed equally
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10877

