The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Zhorai: Designing a Conversational Agent for
Children to Explore Machine Learning Concepts
Phoebe Lin,1 Jessica Van Brummelen,2 Galit Lukin,3
Randi Williams,4 Cynthia Breazeal5
1

Harvard Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, MA 02138
2
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA 02139
3
MIT ORC, Cambridge, MA 02139
4,5
MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA 02139
phoebelin@gsd.harvard.edu, jess@csail.mit.edu, {glukin, randiw12, cynthiab}@mit.edu
Abstract
Understanding how machines learn is critical for children to
develop useful mental models for exploring artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and smart devices that they now frequently interact with. Although children are very familiar with having
conversations with conversational agents like Siri and Alexa,
children often have limited knowledge about AI and machine
learning. We leverage their existing familiarity and present
Zhorai, a conversational platform and curriculum designed to
help young children understand how machines learn. Children ages eight to eleven train an agent through conversation
and understand how the knowledge is represented using visualizations. This paper describes how we designed the curriculum and evaluated its effectiveness with 14 children in
small groups. We found that the conversational aspect of the
platform increased engagement during learning and the novel
visualizations helped make machine knowledge understandable. As a result, we make recommendations for future iterations of Zhorai and approaches for teaching AI to children.

Figure 1: Zhorai platform. Children converse with Zhorai
through the computer’s built-in microphone.

Introduction

an assessment for children to explore machine learning and
knowledge representation. In this paper, we discuss how we
designed the system and curriculum, and the results of a
small scale study with 14 eight- to eleven-year-old children.
We investigated how well children learned and their engagement levels with Zhorai’s conversational interface. Although
prior knowledge of conversational agents and other factors
may impact a child’s ability to understand, we hypothesize
that all children can beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from conversational
interaction with Zhorai and the visualizations. From that, we
form two speciﬁc hypotheses:
1. Interacting with Zhorai through conversation helps increase engagement in the overall activity.
2. Zhorai’s visualizations and curriculum leads to children’s
learning and understanding of how machines learn.

Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) curriculum is increasingly being incorporated into what is now considered standard 21st
century computing education. AI for K-12 initiatives have
driven the development of a diverse range of resources, including formal curricula guidelines and accessible online directories for all educators (Touretzky et al. 2019). At the
same time, children are also frequently interacting with intelligent agents, such as Siri and Alexa. Frequent interaction fosters familiarity and natural interaction between children and agents, which enables us to design learning opportunities around these conversations. Currently, commercially available in-home voice assistants are designed to be
like black boxes for ease of use and adoption. Thus, children often have limited knowledge for how they work. Our
work helps unveil the black box using a simpliﬁed, teachable
agent, such that children can learn about the agent’s underlying processes while teaching it.
The Zhorai platform and curriculum consists of the conversational agent Zhorai, four sequential AI modules, and

Background
AI in Education
While many of the K-12 AI initiatives are recent calls to action, the idea of introducing children to AI concepts dates
back to work by Seymour Papert and Cynthia Solomon

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13438

