The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Revision in Continuous Space: Unsupervised
Text Style Transfer without Adversarial Learning
Dayiheng Liu,† Jie Fu,‡ Yidan Zhang,† Chris Pal,‡ Jiancheng Lv†∗
‡

†
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
Québec Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute (Mila), Polytechnique Montréal
losinuris@gmail.com, lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn

al. 2014). The attribute-independent content and the desired
attribute vector are then fed into the decoder to generate
the target sentence. However, some recent evidence suggests that using adversarial learning may not be able to
learn representations that are disentangled (Li et al. 2018;
Guillaume Lample 2019). Moreover, vanilla adversarial
learning is designed for generating real-valued and continuous data but has difﬁculties in generating sequences
of discrete tokens directly . As a result, algorithms such
as REINFORCE (Sutton et al. 2000) or those that approximate the discrete tokens with temperature-softmax
probability vectors (Kusner and Hernández-Lobato 2016;
Zhang et al. 2017) are used. Unfortunately, these methods
tend to be unstable, slow, and hard-to-tune in practice (Guillaume Lample 2019).

Abstract
Typical methods for unsupervised text style transfer often rely
on two key ingredients: 1) seeking the explicit disentanglement of the content and the attributes, and 2) troublesome
adversarial learning. In this paper, we show that neither of
these components is indispensable. We propose a new framework that utilizes the gradients to revise the sentence in a
continuous space during inference to achieve text style transfer. Our method consists of three key components: a variational auto-encoder (VAE), some attribute predictors (one for
each attribute), and a content predictor. The VAE and the two
types of predictors enable us to perform gradient-based optimization in the continuous space, which is mapped from
sentences in a discrete space, to ﬁnd the representation of a target sentence with the desired attributes and preserved content.
Moreover, the proposed method naturally has the ability to simultaneously manipulate multiple ﬁne-grained attributes, such
as sentence length and the presence of speciﬁc words, when
performing text style transfer tasks. Compared with previous
adversarial learning based methods, the proposed method is
more interpretable, controllable and easier to train. Extensive
experimental studies on three popular text style transfer tasks
show that the proposed method signiﬁcantly outperforms ﬁve
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Is it really a necessity to explicitly disentangle the content and the attributes? Also, do we have to use adversarial
learning to achieve text style transfer? Recently, the idea of
mapping the discrete input into a continuous space and then
performing gradient-based optimization with a predictor to
ﬁnd the representation of a new discrete output with desired
property has been applied for sentence revision (Mueller, Gifford, and Jaakkola 2017) and neural architecture search (Luo
et al. 2018). Motivated by the success of these works, we
propose a new solution to the task of content-preserving text
style transfer.

Introduction

Text style transfer, which is an under-explored challenging
task in the ﬁeld of text generation, aims to convert some
attributes of a sentence (e.g., negative sentiment) to other
attributes (e.g., positive sentiment) while preserving attributeindependent content. In other words, text style transfer can
generate sentences with desired attributes in a controlled
manner. Due to the difﬁculty in obtaining training sentence
pairs with the same content and differing styles, this task
usually works in an unsupervised manner where the model
can only access non-parallel, but style labeled sentences.
Most existing methods (Hu et al. 2017; Shen et al. 2017;
Fu et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018) for text style transfer usually ﬁrst explicitly disentangle the content and the attribute
through an adversarial learning paradigm (Goodfellow et

The proposed approach contains three key components: (a)
A variational auto-encoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling
2013), whose encoder maps sentences into a smooth continuous space and its decoder can map a continuous representation back to the sentence. (b) Some attribute predictors that
take the continuous representation of a sentence as input and
predict the attributes of its decoder output sentence, respectively. These attribute predictors enable us to ﬁnd the target
sentence with the desired attributes in the continuous space.
(c) A content predictor that takes the continuous representation of a sentence as input and predicts the Bag-of-Word
(BoW) feature of its decoder output sentence. The purpose
of component (c) is threefold: First, it could enhance the content preservation during style transfer; Second, it enables the
target sentence to contain some speciﬁc words; Third, it can
tackle the vanishing latent variable problem of VAE (Zhao,

∗

Correspondence to Jiancheng Lv.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8376

