The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relation Network for Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Hyunjong Park, Bumsub Ham∗
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
{hyunpark, bumsub.ham}@yonsei.ac.kr

rics (Zhang, Xiang, and Gong 2016; Chen et al. 2017) for
computing the similarities of person features.

Abstract
Person re-identiﬁcation (reID) aims at retrieving an image of
the person of interest from a set of images typically captured
by multiple cameras. Recent reID methods have shown that
exploiting local features describing body parts, together with
a global feature of a person image itself, gives robust feature
representations, even in the case of missing body parts. However, using the individual part-level features directly, without considering relations between body parts, confuses differentiating identities of different persons having similar attributes in corresponding parts. To address this issue, we propose a new relation network for person reID that considers
relations between individual body parts and the rest of them.
Our model makes a single part-level feature incorporate partial information of other body parts as well, supporting it
to be more discriminative. We also introduce a global contrastive pooling (GCP) method to obtain a global feature of
a person image. We propose to use contrastive features for
GCP to complement conventional max and averaging pooling
techniques. We show that our model outperforms the state of
the art on the Market1501, DukeMTMC-reID and CUHK03
datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach on
discriminative person representations.

Person reID methods using CNNs typically focus on extracting a global feature of a person image (Lin et al. 2017a;
2017b; Ge et al. 2018; Zhang, Xiang, and Gong 2016;
Chen et al. 2017) to obtain a compact descriptor for an efﬁcient retrieval. This, however, gives a limited representation,
as the global feature may not account for intra-class variations (e.g., human pose, occlusion, background clutter). To
address this problem, part-based methods (Zhao et al. 2017a;
Su et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2017a; Li, Zhu, and Gong 2018;
Liu et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2017b; Sun et al. 2018b;
Fu et al. 2019) have been proposed. They extract local features from body parts (e.g., arms, legs, torso), often together with the global feature of a person image itself, and
aggregate them for an effective person reID. To leverage
body parts, these approaches extract pose maps from offthe-shelf pose estimators (Zhao et al. 2017a; Su et al. 2017;
Zheng et al. 2017a), compute attention maps to consider discriminative regions of interest (Li, Zhu, and Gong 2018;
Liu et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2017b), or slice person images into horizontal grids (Sun et al. 2018b; Fu et al.
2019). Part-level features provide better person representations than a global one, but aggregating the individual local
features e.g., by concatenating them without considering relations between body parts, is limited to represent an identity of a person discriminatively. In particular, this does not
differentiate the identities of different persons that have similar attributes in corresponding parts between images, since
part-based methods compute the similarity of corresponding
part-level features independently.

Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (reID) is one of fundamental tasks in
computer vision, with the purpose of retrieving a particular
person from a set of pedestrian images, captured by multiple cameras. It has been getting a lot of attention in recent years, due to the wide range of applications including
pedestrian detection (Zheng et al. 2017b) and multi-person
tracking (Tang et al. 2017). This problem is very challenging, since pedestrians have different attributes (e.g., clothing,
gender, hair), and the pictures of them are taken under different conditions, such as illumination, occlusion, background
clutter, and camera types. Remarkable advances in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) over the last decade allow
to obtain person representations (Lin et al. 2017a; 2017b;
Ge et al. 2018) robust to these factors of variations, especially for human pose, and they also enables learning met-

In this paper, we propose to make each part-level feature incorporate information of other body parts to obtain
discriminative person representations for an effective person reID. To this end, we introduce a new relation module exploiting one-vs.-rest relations of body parts. It accounts for the relations between individual body parts and
the rest of them, so that each part-level feature contains information of the corresponding part itself and other body
parts, supporting it to be more discriminative. As will be
seen in our experiments, considering the relation between
body parts provides better part-level features with a clear ad-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11839

