The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

A Natural Language Processing System for Extracting
Evidence of Drug Repurposing from Scientiﬁc Publications
Shivashankar Subramanian,1,2 Ioana Baldini,1 Sushma Ravichandran,1
Dmitriy A. Katz-Rogozhnikov,1 Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy,1 Prasanna Sattigeri,1
Kush R. Varshney,1 Annmarie Wang,3,4 Pradeep Mangalath,3,5 Laura B. Kleiman3
1

IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA, 2 University of Melbourne, VIC, Australia,
3
Cures Within Reach for Cancer, Cambridge, MA, USA,
4
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, 5 Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
(Pantziarka et al. 2017; Bouche, Pantziarka, and Meheus
2017; Verbaanderd et al. 2017). However, manual review to
identify and analyze potential evidence is time-consuming
and intractable to scale, as PubMed indexes millions of articles and the collection is continuously updated. For example, the PubMed query Neoplasms [mh] yields more than
3.2 million articles.1 Hence there is a need for a (semi-) automatic approach to identify relevant scientiﬁc articles and
provide an easily consumable summary of the evidence.
Cures Within Reach for Cancer is developing the Oncology Repurposing Engine™ , which synthesizes the plethora
of scientiﬁc and real-world data on non-cancer generic drugs
to identify the most promising therapies to repurpose for
cancer. Drug repurposing is a complex process involving
synthesizing and prioritizing evidence, conducting clinical
trials and, upon success, inﬂuencing the standard of care.
The focus of this paper is on the key evidence synthesis step.
Synthesizing scientiﬁc evidence for drug repurposing can
be divided into three major categories: network-based, natural language processing (NLP) approaches, and semantic
techniques (Xue et al. 2018). Network-based approaches
aim to infer relationships between biological entities (drug–
disease or drug–target relationships), inspired by the fact
that biologic entities (disease, drug, protein, etc.) in the
same module of biological networks share similar characteristics (Martı́nez et al. 2015). NLP approaches aim to both
identify biological entities and mine new knowledge from
scientiﬁc literature (Li, Zhu, and Chen 2009). Semantic approaches require a semantic network to be built ﬁrst, which
can be used with various approaches to mine relationships
between entities (Palma, Vidal, and Raschid 2014).
We focus on NLP approaches in this paper. Our primary
contributions are as follows:

Abstract
More than 200 generic drugs approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration for non-cancer indications have shown
promise for treating cancer. Due to their long history of safe
patient use, low cost, and widespread availability, repurposing of these drugs represents a major opportunity to rapidly
improve outcomes for cancer patients and reduce healthcare
costs. In many cases, there is already evidence of efﬁcacy for
cancer, but trying to manually extract such evidence from the
scientiﬁc literature is intractable. In this emerging applications paper, we introduce a system to automate non-cancer
generic drug evidence extraction from PubMed abstracts. Our
primary contribution is to deﬁne the natural language processing pipeline required to obtain such evidence, comprising the following modules: querying, ﬁltering, cancer type
entity extraction, therapeutic association classiﬁcation, and
study type classiﬁcation. Using the subject matter expertise
on our team, we create our own datasets for these specialized
domain-speciﬁc tasks. We obtain promising performance in
each of the modules by utilizing modern language processing
techniques and plan to treat them as baseline approaches for
future improvement of individual components.

1

Introduction

Sir James Black, the 1998 Nobel Prize laureate in physiology and medicine, famously said, “The most fruitful basis of the discovery of a new drug is to start with an old
drug.” Drug repurposing is the process of identifying and
validating a new therapeutic indication for an existing drug.
A major beneﬁt of drug repurposing is that it can lead to
faster drug development and approval as well as safer and
less costly treatments for patients (Hernandez et al. 2017).
This work focuses on repurposing non-cancer generic
drugs for the treatment of cancer. Scientiﬁc publications,
such as pre-clinical studies (in vitro and in vivo studies) and
early-clinical studies (case reports, observational studies,
and small clinical trials), contain evidence on these drugs
being tested for cancer use. For example, the Repurposing Drugs in Oncology (ReDO) project, through manually
searching research articles indexed by PubMed, found anticancer evidence for more than 200 non-cancer generic drugs

1. Formulating the set of tasks required to identify appropriate evidence of non-cancer generic drug repurposing as a
pipeline of individual NLP tasks
1

Neoplasm is a technical term for abnormal and excessive
growth of tissue; cancers are a type of neoplasm. The [mh] in
PubMed’s query syntax instructs the search to expand the query
using Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), which are a taxonomic
organization of medical terms.

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13376

