The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weakly Supervised POS Taggers
Perform Poorly on Truly Low-Resource Languages
Katharina Kann∗

Ophélie Lacroix∗

Anders Søgaard

Center for Data Science
New York University, USA
kann@nyu.edu

Siteimprove, Denmark
ola@siteimprove.com

Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen, Denmark
soegaard@di.ku.dk

the literature, supervised POS taggers have reported tagging
accuracies in the high 90s.1 However, supervised POS taggers typically require corpora that have been manually created by professional linguistic annotators.2 In the absence
of such corpora, we have to resort to alternative sources of
(weak) supervision. One very popular source of such supervision is tag dictionaries (Li, Graça, and Taskar 2012;
Garrette and Baldridge 2013; Täckström et al. 2013; Wisniewski et al. 2014; Moore 2015; Plank and Agić 2018).
In this paper, we revisit and critically examine existing
methods for weakly supervised POS tagging. While such
approaches have been created to meet the needs of lowresource languages, many experiments with weakly supervised POS taggers have been limited to languages for which
good resources actually exist. This has practical reasons:
it is easier to obtain translations, dictionaries, and benchmark data for widely studied languages. However, since the
resource-rich languages are not a representative sample of
the world’s languages, this means we have no guarantee that
results scale to truly low-resource languages.
Contributions We study the performance of weakly supervised POS taggers for actual low-resource languages. To
this end, we consider a language truly low-resource for a
task when no or almost no resources, i.e., annotated corpora or manually created dictionaries, are available for that
task in that language. Assuming a setting in which we have
access to no annotated data in the target language at all,
we investigate several state-of-the art baselines, as well as
two cross-lingual transfer variants of a state-of-the-art model
for the high-resource case (Plank, Søgaard, and Goldberg
2016), extended to a multi-task learning (MTL) architecture in order to provide additional character-level supervision (Kann et al. 2018). Our results show that POS tagging
is still a difﬁcult problem in the truly low-resource setting:
Our strongest baseline obtains a macro-average accuracy
of 39.11% over 15 languages, even though it was devel-

Abstract
Part-of-speech (POS) taggers for low-resource languages
which are exclusively based on various forms of weak supervision – e.g., cross-lingual transfer, type-level supervision,
or a combination thereof – have been reported to perform almost as well as supervised ones. However, weakly supervised
POS taggers are commonly only evaluated on languages that
are very different from truly low-resource languages, and the
taggers use sources of information, like high-coverage and almost error-free dictionaries, which are likely not available for
resource-poor languages. We train and evaluate state-of-theart weakly supervised POS taggers for a typologically diverse
set of 15 truly low-resource languages. On these languages,
given a realistic amount of resources, even our best model
gets only less than half of the words right. Our results highlight the need for new and different approaches to POS tagging for truly low-resource languages.

Introduction
Part-of-speech (POS) tagging can be very helpful in many
natural language processing (NLP) applications, including
machine translation, question answering, or relation extraction, especially for low-resource languages (Sennrich and
Haddow 2016; Nadejde et al. 2017; Currey and Heaﬁeld
2019). POS taggers assign a syntactic category, i.e., a part
of speech, to each token in a sentence, thus providing a rudimentary syntactic analysis of the sentence. While ambiguity
and unseen words make POS tagging non-trivial, supervised
POS tagging is often considered a relatively simple problem, reaching a performance close to inter-annotator agreement (Bohnet et al. 2018, 97.96% accuracy for English). The
fact that weakly supervised POS taggers sometimes obtain
almost-as-good scores makes POS tagging come across as
a task where there is little room for improvement. We show
that on the contrary, there is a lot of room for improvement.
The accuracy of POS taggers naturally depends on the
quality of available training data, as well as the granularity of the POS inventory, i.e., the size of the tag set. Nevertheless, for almost all resource-rich languages considered in

1

The CoNLL 2018 shared task (Zeman et al. 2018) on universal
dependencies reported macro-average F1 scores of up to 96.23%
on a set of 61 treebanks in high-resource languages.
2
See Hovy et al. (2015) for experiments with crowdsourcing
POS annotation, indicating that sometimes, lay annotators can be
used at a small cost in accuracy.

∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8066

