The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weighted-Sampling Audio Adversarial Example Attack
Xiaolei Liu,1 Kun Wan,2 Yufei Ding,2 Xiaosong Zhang,1∗ Qingxin Zhu1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 2 University of California, Santa Barbara
luxaole@gmail.com, {kun, yufeiding}@cs.ucsb.edu, {johnsonzxs, qxzhu}@uestc.edu.cn

audio to any targeted phrases (Carlini and Wagner 2018).
However, it is much more difﬁcult to generate adversarial
examples for audio than images. To generate an effective
audio adversarial example, there are still several technical
challenges to be addressed:
(C1) Generating audio adversarial examples demands signiﬁcant computational resources and huge time overhead. It
takes over one hour or more to generate an effective audio
adversarial example by recently proposed approaches (Carlini and Wagner 2018; Kreuk et al. 2018; Yuan et al. 2018;
Qin et al. 2019). Such inefﬁciency signiﬁcantly undermines
the practicability of the attack.
(C2) Recording and replaying, which are common operations for audio, could easily introduce extra noise. Therefore, the robustness of adversarial examples against noise
is crucial. Nevertheless, the adversarial examples prepared
over hours are still poor in robustness. The state-of-theart audio adversarial examples (Carlini and Wagner 2018;
Alzantot, Balaji, and Srivastava 2018) become invalid after
adding imperceptible pointwise random noise.
(C3) Different from the image domain where lp -based
metrics are carefully studied as a part of the loss function
to generate adversarial examples, there are no investigations
on which kind of metric is more suitable for constructing
audio adversarial examples.
In this paper, we achieve a fast, robust adversarial example attack to ASR by proposing two novel techniques named
Weighted Perturbation Technology (WPT) and Sampling
Perturbation Technology (SPT).
WPT adjusts the weights of distortion at different positions of audio during the generation process, and thus generates adversarial examples faster and improves the attack
efﬁciency (addressing C1).
Meanwhile, by reducing the number of points to perturb
based on the characteristics of context correlation in the
speech recognition model, SPT can increase the robustness
of audio adversarial examples (addressing C2).
To best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst in the ﬁeld
to both take the factors of the weights and the numbers of
perturbed points into consideration during the generation of
audio adversarial examples. And the two techniques are always complementary to all existing ASR adversarial attacks,

Abstract
Recent studies have highlighted audio adversarial examples
as a ubiquitous threat to state-of-the-art automatic speech
recognition systems. Thorough studies on how to effectively
generate adversarial examples are essential to prevent potential attacks. Despite many research on this, the efﬁciency and
the robustness of existing works are not yet satisfactory. In
this paper, we propose weighted-sampling audio adversarial
examples, focusing on the numbers and the weights of distortion to reinforce the attack. Further, we apply a denoising
method in the loss function to make the adversarial attack
more imperceptible. Experiments show that our method is
the ﬁrst in the ﬁeld to generate audio adversarial examples
with low noise and high audio robustness at the minute timeconsuming level 1 .

Introduction
In recent years, machine learning algorithms are widely
used in various ﬁelds. However, studies show that existing learning-based algorithms are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014). Currently, majority of the research on adversarial examples are in the image recognition ﬁeld (Kurakin,
Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016; Carlini and Wagner 2017;
Chen et al. 2018; Su, Vargas, and Sakurai 2019), while others investigate ﬁelds such as text classiﬁcation (Jia and Liang
2017), trafﬁc classiﬁcation (Liu et al. 2018), and malicious
software classiﬁcation (Grosse et al. 2016; Hu and Tan 2017;
Liu et al. 2019).
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) is another vital ﬁeld
where machine learning algorithms are also frequently applied (Hinton et al. 2012). To date, it has been proved that
audio adversarial examples can mislead ASR to transfer any
∗
Correspondence author is Xiaosong Zhang. This research
was supported by National Key R&D Program of China
(2017YFB0802900), National Natural Science Foundation of
China (61572115,61902262), Sichuan Science and Technology
Program (2019JDRC0069).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We encourage you to listen to these audio adversarial examples on this website: https://sites.google.com/view/
audio-adversarial-examples/.

4908

