The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generating Well-Formed Answers by
Machine Reading with Stochastic Selector Networks
Bin Bi, Chen Wu, Ming Yan, Wei Wang, Jiangnan Xia, Chenliang Li
Alibaba Group
{b.bi, wuchen.wc, ym119608, hebian.ww, jiangnan.xjn, lcl193798}@alibaba-inc.com

tion or explanation, so that users make sense of the answers
without the need for perfect context.
Generating well-formed answers can be beneﬁcial to a variety of QA applications. For example, digital agents, such
as Siri, Google Assistant, Cortana and Alexa, are designed to
respond to a question by reading out the well-formed answer
in natural language. In this scenario, the answers need to be
standalone and self-contained, as users are not expected to
understand full context.
In this paper, we present a new neural architecture,
LatentQA, which generates well-formed answers to given
questions by reading contextual paragraphs. Unlike existing
answer generation models which add a decoder on top of
extractive models, LatentQA neither relies on extraction results, nor needs labels of answer spans for training. Instead,
LatentQA resorts to a novel stochastic selector network that
selects words to form a ﬁnal answer directly from the modeled relationship between the question and the paragraph. In
the stochastic selector network, a sequence of discrete latent variables is introduced to indicate which source to look
at to produce every answer word. A word in a well-formed
answer comes from one of three sources: the question, the
paragraph or the global vocabulary. To train LatentQA, we
perform Bayesian inference for the latent variables, and derive the posterior probabilities.
With the stochastic mechanism, LatentQA is able to
model the ambiguity inherent in questions and paragraphs,
and to generate ﬁnal answers based on the interpretations.
Furthermore, LatentQA is more robust against overﬁtting
than deterministic models, by marginalizing over the latent
variables. We conduct experiments on two public datasets
of natural answer generation, MARCO and DuReader. The
empirical evaluation conﬁrms the effectiveness of LatentQA
in generating high-quality answers.

Abstract
Question answering (QA) based on machine reading comprehension has been a recent surge in popularity, yet most work
has focused on extractive methods. We instead address a more
challenging QA problem of generating a well-formed answer
by reading and summarizing the paragraph for a given question.
For the generative QA task, we introduce a new neural architecture, LatentQA, in which a novel stochastic selector network composes a well-formed answer with words selected
from the question, the paragraph and the global vocabulary,
based on a sequence of discrete latent variables. Bayesian
inference for the latent variables is performed to train the
LatentQA model. The experiments on public datasets of natural answer generation conﬁrm the effectiveness of LatentQA
in generating high-quality well-formed answers.

Introduction
Question answering (QA) is an essential problem in natural language understanding and a major milestone towards
human-level machine intelligence. Machine reading comprehension, which enables machines to answer questions after reading documents, has become a popular and attractive
solution to question answering in recent years (Rajpurkar
et al. 2016; Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018; Nguyen et al.
2016). Existing techniques for machine reading comprehension fall primarily into the category of extractive methods,
which extract a piece of text from a contextual paragraph as
an answer to a given question. The extractive answer comprised of a few words is restricted to be an exact sub-span in
the paragraph.
In real-world applications, however, a span of text is often
insufﬁcient to answer a question, such as How/Why questions that lead to long answers. Generating an abstractive
answer is needed instead, which requires a QA system to
summarize the content in the paragraph that is relevant to
the question. Moreover, users prefer answers that can be read
in a standalone fashion. Such well-formed answers not only
address the questions, but also provide supporting informa-

Related Work
Machine Reading Comprehension. Machine reading has
made rapid progress in recent years. such as SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018). The
majority of studies treat reading comprehension as answer
span extraction from a given paragraph, which is normally
achieved by predicting the start and end position of an an-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7424

