The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Residual Neural Processes
Byung-Jun Lee,1 Seunghoon Hong,1 Kee-Eung Kim1,2
1

School of Computing, KAIST, Republic of Korea
Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Republic of Korea
bjlee@ai.kaist.ac.kr, {seunghoon.hong, kekim}@kaist.ac.kr
2

ﬂexible and accurate, at a certain computational cost. After the training, an NP incurs prediction with computational
cost linear in the number of the contexts (quadratic in case
of an ANP), which is favorable over a GP which requires a
cubic computational cost.
The success of NPs is partially due to a recently blooming line of research on the set function approximators, based
on the permutation invariant neural networks such as Deep
Sets (Zaheer et al. 2017; Bloem-Reddy and Teh 2019). Nevertheless, given the ﬁnite capacity, it has been reported that
not every permutation invariant continuous function is reasonably well approximated. Wagstaff et al. (2019) argues
that even if the function approximators, after and before the
sum pooling, are ﬂexible enough, the dimension of the embedding to be summed should be at least the cardinality of
the input set to represent any permutation invariant function
with neural networks. In other words, when the embedding
dimension is not large enough to match the input cardinality, Deep Set based architectures can approximate only some
of the permutation invariant functions (e.g. averaging function). In practice, the function approximators after and before the sum pooling are typically not ﬂexible enough, and
Deep Set fails for some of the tasks even though the embedding dimension is larger than the input set cardinality (Murphy et al. 2019). These imply the importance of building a
task-speciﬁc set function approximator, as ANPs improved
from NPs by a large margin.
In this paper, we delve further into the structural similarity between the ANPs and traditional stochastic processes,
namely the Bayesian last layer (BLL) (Calandra et al. 2016;
Weber et al. 2018; Harrison, Sharma, and Pavone 2018), as
ANPs are designed to mimic BLL’s behavior efﬁciently. It
turns out that the self-attention layers in an ANP are not
expressive enough, and simple cases where the underlying
functions lie in the space spanned by a feature extractor,
which can be exactly modeled with BLL, might not be efﬁciently learned. This motivates us to extend the NP to explain the residual part of the prediction that the BLL cannot
model, which we call Residual Neural Processes. This also
allows us to improve the variety of function samples by borrowing the idea of kernel learning, i.e. learning the approximate posterior of feature functions with the implicit distribution. We show that such extension improves convergence
speed and asymptotic performance signiﬁcantly.

Abstract
A Neural Process (NP) is a map from a set of observed
input-output pairs to a predictive distribution over functions,
which is designed to mimic other stochastic processes’ inference mechanisms. NPs are shown to work effectively in tasks
that require complex distributions, where traditional stochastic processes struggle, e.g. image completion tasks. This paper concerns the practical capacity of set function approximators despite their universality. By delving deeper into the
relationship between an NP and a Bayesian last layer (BLL),
it is possible to see that NPs may struggle in simple examples, which other stochastic processes can easily solve. In this
paper, we propose a simple yet effective remedy; the Residual Neural Process (RNP) that leverages traditional BLL for
faster training and better prediction. We demonstrate that the
RNP shows faster convergence and better performance, both
qualitatively and quantitatively.

Introduction
Inferring with stochastic processes, such as Gaussian Processes (GPs), provides a powerful probabilistic learning
framework. Despite its computational cost, it is still widely
used due to the unique strengths that usual function approximators are not equipped with. One important strength is that
they do not require a costly training phase of parameters:
after tuning a small set of hyper-parameters, GPs can be directly applied to any set of observations to infer the posterior
distribution of functions.
Neural Processes (NPs) (Garnelo et al. 2018a; 2018b) are
a novel attempt to achieve such strength using the combination of neural network function approximators. It is deﬁned
by two components: a permutation invariant encoder that
processes query-observations pairs (which are called contexts) and yields an approximate posterior of function embeddings, and a decoder that takes the function embedding
and query point as inputs and yields the prediction on the
query point (which is called targets). Training is done by
feeding the model with random contexts and targets from
random functions and maximizing the lower bound of the
log probability of the predictive distribution. Attentive Neural Processes (ANPs) (Kim et al. 2019) are an improvement
over NPs by adopting the attention mechanism to be more
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4545

