The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph-Hist: Graph Classiﬁcation from Latent
Feature Histograms with Application to Bot Detection
Thomas Magelinski, David Beskow, Kathleen M. Carley
CASOS, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave. Pittsburgh, PA, 15213
{tmagelin, dbeskow, kathleen.carley}@cs.cmu.edu

problem, each input sample is a graph, which has a corresponding category or label. The goal is to create a model
which takes an entire graph as an input, and assigns it to the
correct class.

Abstract
Neural networks are increasingly used for graph classiﬁcation in a variety of contexts. Social media is a critical application area in this space, however the characteristics of social
media graphs differ from those seen in most popular benchmark datasets. Social networks tend to be large and sparse,
while benchmarks are small and dense. Classically, large and
sparse networks are analyzed by studying the distribution of
local properties. Inspired by this, we introduce Graph-Hist:
an end-to-end architecture that extracts a graph’s latent local features, bins nodes together along 1-D cross sections
of the feature space, and classiﬁes the graph based on this
multi-channel histogram. We show that Graph-Hist improves
state of the art performance on true social media benchmark
datasets, while still performing well on other benchmarks.
Finally, we demonstrate Graph-Hist’s performance by conducting bot detection in social media. While sophisticated bot
and cyborg accounts increasingly evade traditional detection
methods, they leave artiﬁcial artifacts in their conversational
graph that are detected through graph classiﬁcation. We apply
Graph-Hist to classify these conversational graphs. In the process, we conﬁrm that social media graphs are different than
most baselines and that Graph-Hist outperforms existing botdetection models.

Graph classiﬁcation is gaining interest in part due to the
variety of domains it may be applied to. The same models
that can classify proteins based on their structure may also
be used to classify social media conversations. We identify
a new application which is highly relevant in today’s sociopolitical landscape: bot classiﬁcation in social media. Automated accounts called bots are increasingly used in online
information operations to manipulate both networks (virtual
social links) and the narratives that transit these networks.
Since bots operate through networks, their network structure
can be used to identify them.
While many problems regarding social media data can
be posed under a graph classiﬁcation framework, few prior
models focus on this domain. Much of the prior work in
graph classiﬁcation focuses on benchmark data that does not
reﬂect the typical structure of social media data. Speciﬁcally,
social media graphs or networks tend to have large nodesets
and low density, while benchmark datasets tend to have less
than 100 nodes and are quite dense.

Introduction

In this work, we develop a new graph classiﬁcation architecture inspired by classical network analysis. In analysis
of large networks, it is common practice to calculate local
features and study the distribution. Here, we use an end-toend graph-convolutional architecture to extract local latent
features and classify the graph based on the distribution of
these features. Due to the high dimensionality of the feature
space, we instead use one-dimensional cross sections of the
distribution in the form of a multi-channel histogram. Since
this procedure classiﬁes graphs based on histograms of latent features, it has been named Graph-Hist.

Given the success of traditional machine learning, interest
in geometric learning has grown in recent years. Geometric learning seeks to extend machine learning models beyond Euclidean data to include objects such as graphs, point
clouds, and manifolds. Non-Euclidean data structures are
information-rich, as they can describe data that traditional
structures cannot. For example, a traditional data structure
may contain attributes of a group of individuals, while a
graph or network can also encode the relationships between
the individuals. Thus, new algorithms to leverage this type
of information can bring new insights.
There are three main problems for graphs in particular:
node classiﬁcation, link prediction, and graph classiﬁcation.
Here, we focus on the last task, graph classiﬁcation. In this

In the following sections, we review prior work in graph
classiﬁcation, explain our architecture, demonstrate GraphHist’s ability to achieve state of the art results on social media benchmarks, and ﬁnally demonstrate real-world application of our model through a case study of bot classiﬁcation
on Twitter data.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5134

