The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

How Machine Learning is Improving U.S. Navy Customer Support
Michael Powell, Ph.D.,1 Jamison A. Rotz,1 and Kevin D. O’Malley, Ph.D.2
1

Manada Technology, LLC, Harrisburg, PA USA
2
Naval Information Warfare Center, Pacific
powell@manadatechnology.com, rotz@manadatechnology.com, kevin.o’malley@navy.mil

Abstract
The U.S. Navy is successfully using natural language processing (NLP) and common machine-learning (ML) algorithms to categorize and automatically route plain text support requests at a Navy fleet support center. The algorithms
enhance routine IT support tasks with automation and reduce the workload of service desk agents. The ML pipeline
works in a five-step process. First, an archive of documents
is created from various sources, including standard operating procedure (SOP) memos, frequently asked questions
(FAQs), knowledge articles, Wikipedia articles, encyclopedia articles, previously closed support requests, and other
relevant documents. Next, a library of words and phrases is
generated from the archive. Then, this library is used to vectorize an incoming support request, producing a term frequency inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) vector. Following, the TF-IDF vector is used to compute similarity
scores between the support request and the documents in the
previously-created archive. Finally, the similarity scores are
processed by support vector machine (SVM) classifiers to
categorize and route the incoming support request to the
correct support provider. This algorithm was deployed at a
U.S. Navy customer support center as part of a pilot study,
where it decreased the amount of time agents spend on tickets by 35%; the amount of time required to assign tickets by
74%; and the amount of time to close tickets by 60%. Our
internal tests show that, with an error rate of 2%, a 35% reduction in ticket volume could be achieved by fully deploying these algorithms.

Introduction
Nowhere has artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) been more disruptive and influential than in the
U.S. Navy. From unmanned aerial vehicles over the sea, to
sophisticated cyber defenses on our ships, to unmanned
submersibles under the sea, ML has made our nation safer,
our defenses stronger, and kept our soldiers and sailors out
of harm’s way. ML, however, is also being used in many

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release: distribution unlimited.

13188

aspects of military support far beyond the battlefield. One
of these areas is in the realm of military customer support
centers. Advancements in ML and NLP are reducing the
cost of labor and saving the DoD precious taxpayer dollars.
The US Navy has relied on 24/7 customer support centers for decades to assist sailors with a wide range of problems, including aircraft maintenance, IT support, shipboard
equipment, and logistics. These customer support centers
collectively process more than 1,000 requests each day, the
majority of which are submitted as text via email. In the
past, customer support agents were typically required to
read and analyze the text for routing to the correct support
provider for resolution. Robust NLP algorithms, however,
are now assisting support request center personnel by reading incoming requests, categorizing them according to the
requesting sailors' needs, and automatically assigning the
requests to the correct support provider organization. The
algorithms are also responding to queries with approved
solutions to a wide range of naval issues.
The U.S. Navy’s NAVY 311 program, operating in the
program executive office for enterprise information systems, developed a capability that improved upon current
information technology (IT) help desk and customer relationship management (CRM), specifically in parsing and
analyzing help desk communications, reports, and logs.
The program operates a 24/7/365 customer support center
primarily for Navy sailors seeking help to common nontactical problems when underway and ashore. The resulting predictive algorithm is being used to employ technical
enhancements to the military IT support and the CRM domain.

Background
The U.S. Navy operates the NAVY 311 program as the
CRM component of the Navy’s Distance Support capability. The program’s support center is a single point of customer service entry into the Naval ashore infrastructure and
network of fleet support providers. Through NAVY 311,

