The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relative Attributing Propagation: Interpreting the
Comparative Contributions of Individual Units in Deep Neural Networks
Woo-Jeoung Nam,1 Shir Gur,3 Jaesik Choi,5 Lior Wolf,3,4 Seong-Whan Lee1,2∗
1

Department of Computer and Radio Communications Engineering, Korea University
2
Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Korea University
3
The School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
4
Facebook AI Research
5
Graduate School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, KAIST
Abstract

As Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated superhuman performance in a variety of ﬁelds, there is an increasing interest in understanding the complex internal mechanisms of DNNs. In this paper, we propose Relative Attributing Propagation (RAP), which decomposes the output predictions of DNNs with a new perspective of separating the
relevant (positive) and irrelevant (negative) attributions according to the relative inﬂuence between the layers. The relevance of each neuron is identiﬁed with respect to its degree
of contribution, separated into positive and negative, while
preserving the conservation rule. Considering the relevance
assigned to neurons in terms of relative priority, RAP allows
each neuron to be assigned with a bi-polar importance score
concerning the output: from highly relevant to highly irrelevant. Therefore, our method makes it possible to interpret
DNNs with much clearer and attentive visualizations of the
separated attributions than the conventional explaining methods. To verify that the attributions propagated by RAP correctly account for each meaning, we utilize the evaluation
metrics: (i) Outside-inside relevance ratio, (ii) Segmentation
mIOU and (iii) Region perturbation. In all experiments and
metrics, we present a sizable gap in comparison to the existing literature.

Figure 1: Comparison of the conventional explaining methods and RAP applied to VGG-16. In the previous methods,
the attributions are similarly distributed across the entire image. Our RAP clearly distinguishes relevant (red) and irrelevant pixels (blue), placing the relevant attributions on the
object, and the irrelevant ones on the background.

which propagates the relevance from the prediction. However, propagating the positive and negative relevance without considering the amount and direction of the contribution, may lead to defective interpretation. It is required to
clarify the actual inﬂuences of individual units to the output,
since the components of the complex inner structure shift
and switch the conveyance of value. Furthermore, the relevance of each neuron is highly dependent on the absolute
amount of contribution, resulting in both positive and negative relevance types to be correlated.
In this paper, we propose a new perspective for interpreting the relevance of each neuron, accounting for each neuron’s inﬂuence among connected neighbors and allocating
it with the relative importance. The main idea of this paper is changing the perspective of the relevance, from the
sign of contribution to the inﬂuence among the neurons. Our
method redistributes the relevance by changing the priority
and rearranging it into positive and negative while preserving the conservation. This way, the relevance is assigned to
each neuron directionally in line with the degree of importance to the output.
Fig. 1 illustrates the comparison between RAP and conventional methods. While previous work considers directionality based on the sign of the neuron’s contribution,
which leads to a similar distribution of the positive and negative attributions, our method assigns the relevance according
to the importance of neuron, which is highly focused on the
object. The main contributions of this work are as follows:

Introduction
Despite the impressive performance, the adoption of Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) is sometimes hindered by a transparency issue that arises from the complex internal structure of DNNs. Many studies have recently attempted to resolve the lack of transparency in DNNs. The attributing
methods (Bach et al. 2015; Montavon et al. 2017; Kindermans et al. 2017; Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017;
Montavon, Samek, and Müller 2018; Lapuschkin et al. 2019;
Lundberg and Lee 2017; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017)
reveal the signiﬁcant factors of the input in making decisions
by assigning a relevance score to the input layer.
To consider the positive and negative contributions of
each image location to the output of a DNN, (Bach et al.
2015) introduced the layer-wise relevance propagation rule,
∗

Corresponding author: Seong-Whan Lee
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2501

