The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Annotation Sparsiﬁcation Strategy for 3D Medical
Image Segmentation via Representative Selection and Self-Training
Hao Zheng, Yizhe Zhang, Lin Yang, Chaoli Wang, Danny Z. Chen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
{hzheng3, yzhang29, lyang5, chaoli.wang, dchen}@nd.edu

Abstract
Image segmentation is critical to lots of medical applications.
While deep learning (DL) methods continue to improve performance for many medical image segmentation tasks, data
annotation is a big bottleneck to DL-based segmentation because (1) DL models tend to need a large amount of labeled data to train, and (2) it is highly time-consuming and
label-intensive to voxel-wise label 3D medical images. Signiﬁcantly reducing annotation effort while attaining good performance of DL segmentation models remains a major challenge. In our preliminary experiments, we observe that, using
partially labeled datasets, there is indeed a large performance
gap with respect to using fully annotated training datasets.
In this paper, we propose a new DL framework for reducing
annotation effort and bridging the gap between full annotation and sparse annotation in 3D medical image segmentation. We achieve this by (i) selecting representative slices in
3D images that minimize data redundancy and save annotation effort, and (ii) self-training with pseudo-labels automatically generated from the base-models trained using the selected annotated slices. Extensive experiments using two public datasets (the HVSMR 2016 Challenge dataset and mouse
piriform cortex dataset) show that our framework yields competitive segmentation results comparing with state-of-the-art
DL methods using less than ∼ 20% of annotated data.

(a)

(c)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Examples showing similarity in consecutive
slices of the HVSMR 2016 heart dataset and of the neuron
dataset of mouse piriform cortex. (b) Sparse annotation in
a 3D image (top: image, bottom: annotation); only selected
slices are manually annotated to train deep learning models.
(c) Performance on the HVSMR 2016 dataset using different amounts of annotated training data. Let sk denote the
setting of selecting slices at an equal distance (i.e., label one
out of every k slices). The segmentation performance drops
drastically as the annotation ratio sk decreases.

Introduction
3D image segmentation is one of the most important tasks
in medical image applications, such as morphological and
pathological analysis (Lee et al. 2015b; Hou et al. 2019), disease diagnosis (Pace et al. 2015), and surgical planning (Kordon et al. 2019). Recently, 3D deep learning (DL) models
have been widely used in medical image segmentation and
achieved state-of-the-art performance (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Yu et al. 2017; Liang et al. 2019),
most of which were trained with fully annotated 3D image stacks. The performance of DL models (when applied
to testing images) is highly dependant on the amount and
variety of labeled data used in model training. However,
obtaining medical image annotation data is highly difﬁcult
and expensive, and full annotation of 3D medical images

is a monotonous, labor-intensive, and time-consuming job.
For example, a typical 3D abdominal CT scan is of size
300 × 512 × 512, and would take hours of a medical expert
to label certain objects of interest in it. How to reduce annotation effort (e.g., cost, time, and available experts) while attaining the best possible performance of DL models remains
a challenging problem for 3D medical image segmentation.
A common method to alleviate annotation burden is
sparse 3D fully convolutional networks (FCNs) (Çiçek et al.
2016). As shown in Fig. 1(a), there can be a great deal of redundancy in consecutive 2D slices along an axis of a 3D image, and it is unnecessary to annotate each and every one of
them. (Çiçek et al. 2016) showed that a small number of annotated 2D slices could be used as supervision (see Fig. 1(b))

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6925

