The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SM-NAS: Structural-to-Modular Neural Architecture Search for Object Detection
∗

∗

†

Lewei Yao,1 Hang Xu,1 Wei Zhang,1 Xiaodan Liang,2 Zhenguo Li1
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Sun Yat-Sen University

2

Abstract
The state-of-the-art object detection method is complicated
with various modules such as backbone, RPN, feature fusion
neck and RCNN head, where each module may have different designs and structures. How to leverage the computational
cost and accuracy trade-off for the structural combination as
well as the modular selection of multiple modules? Neural architecture search (NAS) has shown great potential in ﬁnding
an optimal solution. Existing NAS works for object detection only focus on searching better design of a single module
such as backbone or feature fusion neck, while neglecting the
balance of the whole system. In this paper, we present a twostage coarse-to-ﬁne searching strategy named Structural-toModular NAS (SM-NAS) for searching a GPU-friendly design of both an efﬁcient combination of modules and better
modular-level architecture for object detection. Speciﬁcally,
Structural-level searching stage ﬁrst aims to ﬁnd an efﬁcient
combination of different modules; Modular-level searching
stage then evolves each speciﬁc module and pushes the Pareto
front forward to a faster task-speciﬁc network. We consider a
multi-objective search where the search space covers many
popular designs of detection methods. We directly search a
detection backbone without pre-trained models or any proxy
task by exploring a fast training from scratch strategy. The
resulting architectures dominate state-of-the-art object detection systems in both inference time and accuracy and demonstrate the effectiveness on multiple detection datasets, e.g.
halving the inference time with additional 1% mAP improvement compared to FPN and reaching 46% mAP with the similar inference time of MaskRCNN.

Figure 1: Inference time (ms) and detection accuracy (mAP)
comparison on COCO dataset. SM-NAS yields state-of-theart speed/accuracy trade-off.

shows various designs of each modules: backbone (Li et al.
2018), region proposal network (Wang et al. 2019a), feature fusion neck (Liu et al. 2018) and RCNN head (Li et al.
2017).
However, how to select the best combination of modules
under hardware resource constrains remains unknown. This
problem draws much attention from the industry because in
practice adjusting each module manually based on a standard detection model is inefﬁcient and sub-optimal. It is hard
to leverage and evaluate the inference time and accuracy
trade-off as well as the representation capacity of each module in different datasets. For instance, empirically we found
that combination of Cascade-RCNN with ResNet18 (not a
standard detection model) is even faster and more accurate
than FPN with ResNet50 in COCO (Lin et al. 2014) and
BDD (Yu et al. 2018) (autonomous driving dataset). However, this is not true in the case of VOC.
There has been a growing trend in automatically designing a neural network architecture instead of relying heavily on human efforts and experience. For the image classiﬁ-

Introduction
Real-time object detection is a core and challenging task to
localize and recognize objects in an image on a certain device. This task widely beneﬁts autonomous driving, surveillance video, facial recognition in mobile phone, to name a
few. A state-of-the-art detection system (Liu et al.; Ren et
al. 2016; 2015) usually consists of four modules: backbone,
feature fusion neck, region proposal network (in two-stage
detection), and RCNN head. Recent progress in this area
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding Author: xdliang328@gmail.com
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12661

