The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Double-Oracle Sampling Method for Stackelberg
Equilibrium Approximation in General-Sum Extensive-Form Games
Jan Karwowski, Jacek Mańdziuk
Warsaw Univeristy of Technology
Koszykowa 75, 00-662 Warsaw, Poland
{jan.karwowski, j.mandziuk}@mini.pw.edu.pl

Contribution The main contribution of this paper is a
method for approximating SE in a broad and general genre
of sequential general-sum imperfect-information games1 ,
inspired by a double-oracle approach (Bosansky et al. 2014;
Jain et al. 2011).
Despite being rooted in the double-oracle framework, the
proposed method presents an entirely different operational
principle than those of (Bosansky et al. 2014; Jain et al.
2011) as it relies on iterative Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) (Browne et al. 2012) sampling of the Follower’s
strategy alternated with an adjustment of the Leader’s behavior strategy represented in the form of a tree.
Our method is experimentally proven to yield close-tooptimal defender’s strategies while scaling better in time and
memory usage than competitive MILP (Mixed Integer Linear Program) based approaches.
To the best of our knowledge there is only one other
approach that utilizes MCTS method to solve general-sum
extensive-form SGs (Karwowski and Mańdziuk 2015; 2016;
2019a) which, however, adopts a different protocol and relies on iterative adjustment of the Leader’s strategy by means
of direct MCTS sampling against gradually changing Follower’s strategy. This method, though, could not be applied
to solve games with complex information set (IS) structures,
e.g. Search Games (Bosansky and Cermak 2015) considered
in this paper.

Abstract
The paper presents a new method for approximating Strong
Stackelberg Equilibrium in general-sum sequential games
with imperfect information and perfect recall. The proposed
approach is generic as it does not rely on any speciﬁc properties of a particular game model. The method is based on
iterative interleaving of the two following phases: (1) guided
Monte Carlo Tree Search sampling of the Follower’s strategy
space and (2) building the Leader’s behavior strategy tree for
which the sampled Follower’s strategy is an optimal response.
The above solution scheme is evaluated with respect to expected Leader’s utility and time requirements on three sets
of interception games with variable characteristics, played on
graphs. A comparison with three state-of-the-art MILP/LPbased methods shows that in vast majority of test cases proposed simulation-based approach leads to optimal Leader’s
strategies, while excelling the competitive methods in terms
of better time scalability and lower memory requirements.

1

Introduction

Stackelberg Equilibrium (SE) (Leitmann 1978) deﬁnes equilibrium proﬁle for two-player asymmetric games. One
player – the Leader – commits to a certain strategy and the
other player – the Follower – deﬁnes his/her strategy being aware of the Leader’s commitment. The notion of SE,
which originated in the ﬁeld of economy, gained momentum in recent decade thanks to intensive research on Security Games (Sinha et al. 2018) which often use Stackelberg Game (SG) to model interactions between a defender
(playing the role of a Leader) and an attacker (being a
Follower). We consider the Strong Stackelberg Equilibrium
(SSE) (Leitmann 1978) in which (additionally to SE) the
Follower breaks ties in favor of the Leader when calculating the optimal response.
Majority of contemporary SG research is focused on developing effective methods for speciﬁc games, e.g. (Brazdil,
Kucera, and Rehak 2018; Schlenker et al. 2016; Basilico,
Gatti, and Amigoni 2012; Wang et al. 2018; Johnson, Fang,
and Tambe 2012) and there are just a few works related to
ﬁnding SE in the case of general SG models.

Related Work In the literature, the problem of ﬁnding
SE is usually considered in the context of some particular
game model and therefore majority of proposed approaches
are model-speciﬁc and cannot be straightforwardly applied
to other kinds of SGs. On a general note, existing solution
methods usually adapt and tune one of the following wellestablished techniques: column and constraint generation –
e.g. (Wang et al. 2018; Jain et al. 2010); marginal and compact strategies – exploiting a particular structure of a game
and its payoffs, e.g. (Kiekintveld et al. 2009; Schlenker et
al. 2016); or game abstraction – e.g. (Wang et al. 2018;
Basak et al. 2016). Utilization of these techniques requires
tailoring a solution method to characteristic game proper-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A source code of the presented method is available on our SGs
project website: https://sg.mini.pw.edu.pl/sgHome/src.html.

2054

