The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Incremental Symmetry Breaking
Constraints for Graph Search Problems
Avraham Itzhakov, Michael Codish
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
{itzhakoa, mcodish}@cs.bgu.ac.il

Walsh 2006; Shlyakhter 2007) which are satisﬁed by at least
one member of each isomorphism class. A symmetry breaking constraint is called complete if it is satisﬁed by exactly
one member from each isomorphism class and partial otherwise. Ideally, a symmetry breaking constraint should be
compact in size, and complete. This enables solvers to avoid
symmetries without imposing an overhead due to the size of
the constraint.
Computing compact and complete symmetry breaking
constraints is, most often, intractable (Crawford et al. 1996).
A universal measure for the size of a symmetry breaking
constraint is the number of clauses in its CNF representation. For graph search problems, it is unknown if there exists a complete symmetry breaking constraint that is polynomial in the size of the graph. The well-known lex-leader
approach (Read 1978), selects the smallest member of each
class, with respect to a lexicographic ordering, as a canonical
representative. Testing if a given graph is a lex-leader canonical representative is known to be co-NP complete (Luks and
Roy 2004). Hence, it is unlikely that there exists a polynomial size symmetry breaking constraint that identiﬁes lexleader canonical representatives.
In theory, a complete lex-leader symmetry breaking constraint should impose one lexicographic order constraint
for every symmetry. As an example, for order 10 graphs
this translates to 10! = 3,628,800 constraints. In practice
many of the these constraints are redundant. Itzhakov and
Codish (2016) compute a complete symmetry breaking constraint for order 10 graph search problems consisting of only
7,853 lexicographic order constraints instead of all 10! constraints. Codish et al. (2018) show that a further reduction is
made when expressing the symmetry breaking constraint using the implications derived from the AND-decomposition
of the lexicographic order constraints (Frisch et al. 2006).
In their approach, symmetry breaking constraints are more
compact and faster to compute. They compute, for the ﬁrst
time, a complete and compact symmetry breaking constraint for order 11 graph search problems. Heule (2016;
2019) computes complete symmetry breaking constraints
which are optimal in size for graphs up to order 5, and small
for graphs up to order 8.
This paper introduces incremental symmetry breaking
constraints for graph search problems which are complete,
compact and have two special properties: First, the symme-

Abstract
This paper introduces incremental symmetry breaking constraints for graph search problems which are complete and
compact. We show that these constraints can be computed
incrementally: A symmetry breaking constraint for order n
graphs can be extended to one for order n + 1 graphs. Moreover, these constraints induce a special property on their
canonical solutions: An order n canonical graph contains a
canonical subgraph on the ﬁrst k vertices for every 1 ≤ k ≤
n. This facilitates a “generate and extend” paradigm for parallel graph search problem solving: To solve a graph search
problem ϕ on order n graphs, ﬁrst generate the canonical
graphs of some order k < n. Then, compute canonical solutions for ϕ by extending, in parallel, each canonical order k
graph together with suitable symmetry breaking constraints.
The contribution is that the proposed symmetry breaking constraints enable us to extend the order k canonical graphs to
order n canonical solutions. We demonstrate our approach
through its application on two hard graph search problems.

1

Introduction

Graph search problems deal with existence and enumeration of simple graphs with certain properties which are invariant under isomorphism. One of the most famous graph
search problems is the search for Ramsey (s, t; n) graphs
which seeks order n graphs with no clique of size s and no
independent set of size t (Radziszowski 1994). The set of
Ramsey (4, 5; 24) graphs was determined only recently (Angeltveit and McKay 2018). Such problems are often challenging due to the large number of symmetries in graph representations, and enormous search space. For graph search
problems, each isomorphism class of graphs consists of either symmetric solutions or symmetric non-solutions.
Ultimately, symmetry breaking is about restricting the
search to a reduced space which considers a single graph
from each isomorphism class. If symmetries are eliminated,
the size of the search space is signiﬁcantly reduced, and it
can be explored more efﬁciently because paths that lead to
symmetric (non-)solutions are avoided.
Symmetry breaking in constraint programming and satisﬁability solving is often achieved by introducing symmetry
breaking constraints (Crawford et al. 1996; Shlyakhter 2001;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1536

