The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Co-GCN for Multi-View Semi-Supervised Learning
Shu Li, Wen-Tao Li, Wei Wang∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{lis, liwt, wangw}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Zhou and Li 2005a; 2005b). In many years, these semisupervised learning methods were developed in parallel
threads, then Wang and Zhou (2010) presented a theoretical graph-based explanation of co-training (a representative method of disagreement-based learning), and provided
a possibility of bringing the graph-based and disagreementbased methods together.
Co-training (Blum and Mitchell 1998) is a representative
method of disagreement-based learning. When co-training
was proposed, it assumed that the data have two disjoint sets
of features and each set is called as a view. In real-world applications, many data have more than one view. For example,
the webpage classiﬁcation data have two views, i.e., the text
appearing on the page itself and the anchor text attached to
the hyperlink pointing to this page (Blum and Mitchell 1998;
Jing et al. 2017); the multi-media data have at least two
views, i.e., image and text (Yan and Mikolajczyk 2015).
Previous studies surveyed in Xu, Tao, and Xu (2013) have
shown that multi-view learning methods could achieve better performance than traditional single-view learning methods.
In recent years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have witnessed great successes in many applications. With the fast
development of deep learning, some deep semi-supervised
learning methods were developed. When the data have multiple views or multiple feature sets, deep neural network
and co-training are brought together to improve the performance (Ardehaly and Culotta 2017; Cheng et al. 2016).
These methods utilized the two views (i.e., RGB and depth
in Cheng et al. (2016); image and text in Ardehaly and Culotta (2017)) to learn two DNNs and let them label unlabeled data to augment the training set for each other to boost
the performance. Then Chen et al. (2018) presented tri-net
which extends to the case with more than two DNNs. However, these methods all try to iteratively augment the labeled
data set, which is time-consuming for retraining and can be
easily corrupted by the misleading pseudo labels.
Inspired by the theoretical graph-based explanation of cotraining (Wang and Zhou 2010) which provides the possibility of bringing graph-based methods and co-training together, in this paper we simultaneously consider the spectral
graph information, multiple views and the expressive power

Abstract
In many real-world applications, the data have several disjoint sets of features and each set is called as a view. Researchers have developed many multi-view learning methods
in the past decade. In this paper, we bring Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) into multi-view learning and propose a
novel multi-view semi-supervised learning method Co-GCN
by adaptively exploiting the graph information from the multiple views with combined Laplacians. Experimental results
on real-world data sets verify that Co-GCN can achieve better
performance compared with state-of-the-art multi-view semisupervised methods.

Introduction
Learning from labeled data is well-established in the machine learning community. However, providing labels to the
data requires human labor, and is time-consuming and expensive. In many real-world applications, unlabeled data
can often be obtained abundantly and cheaply, so there
has been substantive interest in semi-supervised learning
that exploits a large amount of unlabeled data together
with labeled data to achieve better performance. In general,
semi-supervised learning (Olivier, Schölkopf, and Alexander 2006; Zhu 2005) can be categorized into four classes:
generative methods that use a generative model for the
classiﬁer and employ EM to model the label or parameter estimation process (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin 1977;
Miller and Uyar 1996; Nigam et al. 2000); semi-supervised
support vector machine methods (S3 VMs) that use unlabeled data to guide the decision boundary away from dense
regions (Bennett and Demiriz 1999); graph-based methods
that regularize the learning process by enforcing the label
smoothness over the graph as a regularization term (Belkin,
Matveeva, and Niyogi 2004; Zhou, Schölkopf, and Hofmann
2004; Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003); disagreementbased methods that train different learners and then let
them label unlabeled data to boost the learning performance (Blum and Mitchell 1998; Goldman and Zhou 2000;
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4691

