The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Rare Words: A Major Problem for Contextualized
Embeddings and How to Fix it by Attentive Mimicking
Timo Schick

Hinrich Schütze

Sulzer GmbH
Munich, Germany
timo.schick@sulzer.de

Center for Information and Language Processing
LMU Munich, Germany
inquiries@cislmu.org

Abstract

Q: A lime is a .
Q: A bicycle is a .

Pretraining deep neural network architectures with a language
modeling objective has brought large improvements for many
natural language processing tasks. Exempliﬁed by BERT, a
recently proposed such architecture, we demonstrate that despite being trained on huge amounts of data, deep language
models still struggle to understand rare words. To ﬁx this
problem, we adapt Attentive Mimicking, a method that was
designed to explicitly learn embeddings for rare words, to
deep language models. In order to make this possible, we introduce one-token approximation, a procedure that enables us
to use Attentive Mimicking even when the underlying language model uses subword-based tokenization, i.e., it does
not assign embeddings to all words. To evaluate our method,
we create a novel dataset that tests the ability of language
models to capture semantic properties of words without any
task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning. Using this dataset, we show that
adding our adapted version of Attentive Mimicking to BERT
does substantially improve its understanding of rare words.

1

Q: A kumquat is a
Q: A unicycle is a

A: lime, lemon, fruit
A: bicycle, motorcycle, bike
.
.

A: noun, horse, dog
A: structure, unit, chain

Table 1: Example queries and most probable outputs of
BERT for frequent (top) and rare words (bottom)
should be able to correctly complete the sentence “Guilt is
the opposite of .” with the word “innocence”.
The examples in Table 1 show that, according to this measure, BERT is indeed able to understand frequent words such
as “lime” and “bicycle”: it predicts, among others, that the
former is a fruit and the latter is the same as a bike. However, it fails terribly for both “kumquat” and “unicycle”, two
less frequent words from the same domains. This poor performance raises the question whether deep language models
generally struggle to understand rare words and, if so, how
this weakness can be overcome.
To answer this question, we create a novel dataset containing queries like the ones shown in Table 1. This dataset
consists of (i) natural language patterns such as

Introduction

Distributed representations of words are a key component
of natural language processing (NLP) systems. In particular,
deep contextualized representations learned using an unsupervised language modeling objective (Peters et al. 2018)
have led to large performance gains for a variety of NLP
tasks. Recently, several authors have proposed to not only
use language modeling for feature extraction, but to ﬁnetune entire language models for speciﬁc tasks (Radford et
al. 2018; Howard and Ruder 2018). Taking up this idea, Devlin et al. (2019) introduced BERT, a bidirectional language
model based on the Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) that
has achieved a new state-of-the-art for several NLP tasks.
As demonstrated by Radford et al. (2019), it is possible
for language models to solve a diverse set of tasks to some
extent without any form of task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning. This
can be achieved by simply presenting the tasks in form of
natural language sentences that are to be completed by the
model. The very same idea can also be used to test how well
a language model understands a given word: we can “ask” it
for properties of that word using natural language. For example, a language model that understands the concept of “guilt”

<W> is a

.

where <W> is a placeholder for a word to be investigated,
and (ii) corresponding pairs of keywords (<W>) and targets
(ﬁllers for ) obtained using semantic relations extracted
from WordNet (Miller 1995).
Using this dataset, we show that BERT indeed fails to understand many rare words. To overcome this limitation, we
propose to apply Attentive Mimicking (Schick and Schütze
2019a), a method that allows us to explicitly learn highquality representations for rare words. A prerequisite for
using this method is to have high-quality embeddings for
as many words as possible, because it is trained to reproduce known word embeddings. However, many deep language models including BERT make use of byte-pair encoding (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2015), WordPiece (Wu et
al. 2016) or similar subword tokenization algorithms. Thus,
many words are not represented by a single token but by a
sequence of subword tokens and do not have their own embeddings.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8766

