The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fast and Efﬁcient Boolean Matrix Factorization by Geometric Segmentation
Changlin Wan,1,2 Wennan Chang,1,2 Tong Zhao,3 Mengya Li,2 Sha Cao,2,∗ Chi Zhang2,*
1
Purdue University, 2 Indiana University, 3 Amazon
{wan82, chang534}@purdue.edu, zhaoton@amazon.com, imyli1024@gmail.com, {shacao,czhang87}@iu.edu

as well as adapting to the drastic increase of dimensionality
is of prominent interests for nowadays data science research.
Recent study also showed that some continuous data could
beneﬁt from binary pattern mining. For instance, the binarization of continuous single cell gene expression data to its
on and off state, can better reﬂect the coordination patterns
of genes in regulatory networks (Larsson et al. 2019). However, owing to its two value characteristics, the rank of a
binary matrix under normal linear algebra can be very high
due to certain spike rows or columns. This makes it infeasible to apply established methods such as SVD and PCA for
BMF (Wall, Rechtsteiner, and Rocha 2003).
Boolean matrix factorization (BMF) has been developed
particularly for binary pattern mining, and it factorizes a binary matrix into approximately the product of two low rank
binary matrices following Boolean algebra, as shown in Figure 1. The decomposition of a binary matrix into low rank
binary patterns is equivalent to locating submatrices that
are dense in 1. Analyzing binary matrix with BMF shows
its unique power. In the most optimal case, it signiﬁcantly
reduces the rank of the original matrix calculated in normal linear algebra to its log scale (Monson, Pullman, and
Rees 1995). Since the binary patterns are usually embedded
within noisy and randomly arranged binary matrix, BMF is
known to be an NP-hard problem (Miettinen et al. 2008).

Abstract
Boolean matrix has been used to represent digital information in many ﬁelds, including bank transaction, crime records,
natural language processing, protein-protein interaction, etc.
Boolean matrix factorization (BMF) aims to ﬁnd an approximation of a binary matrix as the Boolean product of two low
rank Boolean matrices, which could generate vast amount of
information for the patterns of relationships between the features and samples. Inspired by binary matrix permutation theories and geometric segmentation, we developed a fast and
efﬁcient BMF approach, called MEBF (Median Expansion
for Boolean Factorization). Overall, MEBF adopted a heuristic approach to locate binary patterns presented as submatrices that are dense in 1’s. At each iteration, MEBF permutates the rows and columns such that the permutated matrix is approximately Upper Triangular-Like (UTL) with socalled Simultaneous Consecutive-ones Property (SC1P). The
largest submatrix dense in 1 would lie on the upper triangular area of the permutated matrix, and its location was determined based on a geometric segmentation of a triangular. We
compared MEBF with other state of the art approaches on
data scenarios with different density and noise levels. MEBF
demonstrated superior performances in lower reconstruction
error, and higher computational efﬁciency, as well as more accurate density patterns than popular methods such as ASSO,
PANDA and Message Passing. We demonstrated the application of MEBF on both binary and non-binary data sets, and
revealed its further potential in knowledge retrieving and data
denoising.

Background
Related work
BMF was ﬁrst introduced as a set basis problem in 1975
(Stockmeyer 1975). This area has received wide attention
after a series of work by Mittenin et al (Miettinen et al.
2008; Miettinen and Vreeken 2014; Karaev, Miettinen, and
Vreeken 2015). Among them, the ASSO algorithm performs factorization by retrieving binary bases from row-wise
correlation matrix in a heuristic manner (Miettinen et al.
2008). Despite its popularity, the high computational cost
of ASSO makes it impracticable when dealing with large
scale data. Recently, an algorithm called Nassua was developed by the same group (Karaev, Miettinen, and Vreeken
2015). Nassua optimizes the initialization of the matrix factorization by locating dense seeds hidden within the matrix,
and with improved performance comparing to ASSO. How-

Introduction
Binary data gains more and more attention during the transformation of modern living (Kocayusufoglu, Hoang, and
Singh 2018; Balasubramaniam, Nayak, and Yuen 2018). It
consists of a large domain of our everyday life, where the
1s or 0s in a binary matrix can physically mean whether
or not an event of online shopping transaction, web browsing, medical record, journal submission, etc, has occurred
or not. The scale of these datasets has increased exponentially over the years. Mining the patterns within binary data
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6086

