The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Temporal Pyramid Recurrent Neural Network
Qianli Ma,1 Zhenxi Lin,1 Enhuan Chen,1 Garrison W. Cottrell2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA
qianlima@scut.edu.cn, zhenxi lin@foxmail.com, ceh930603@gmail.com, gary@ucsd.edu

modeling long sequences. The gradient clipping method (Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio 2013) can avoid the exploding
gradient problem, while gated RNNs, such as long short-term
memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and
gated recurrent units (GRU) (Cho et al. 2014), can alleviate the vanishing gradient problem using linear units with a
self-connection weighted by gated units. Besides, additional
direct connections from previous time steps to the current
time step is another way to improve learning long-term dependencies for RNNs (Soltani and Jiang 2016; Wang 2017;
Zilly et al. 2017; Campos et al. 2018). On the other hand, it is
a challenge for these single-layer RNNs to learn multi-scale
dependencies (Chung, Ahn, and Bengio 2017).
A common strategy to deal with multi-scale sequential
data is to design hierarchical information processing systems (Jaeger 2007). Hence, many hierarchical RNNs (Chung
et al. 2015; Chang et al. 2017; Chung, Ahn, and Bengio 2017)
have been proposed to learn multi-scale dependencies, where
various layers in the multi-layer structure specialize on different scales. But multi-layer structures always lead to deep
RNNs, which more easily suffer from the gradient vanishing
problem and are more difﬁcultly trained to learn long-term
dependencies than single-layer RNNs (Li et al. 2018).
In this paper, a novel hierarchical RNN, called temporal
pyramid RNN (TP-RNN), is proposed to learn long-term and
multi-scale dependencies in sequential data. TP-RNN is a
pyramid-like structure and generally has multiple layers. In
each layer of the network, there are several sub-pyramids
ordered by the time step. The bottom of each sub-pyramid
consists of several consecutive hidden states, which are hierarchically aggregated into high-level states that represent larger
timescales. Further, the top state nodes of all sub-pyramids
in the same layer are iteratively aggregated in time step order
through skip connections to form a shortcut path to the output
of the layer. The sub-pyramids connected by the shortcut path
can efﬁciently aggregate historical information from hidden
states and provide many gradient feedback short-paths.
In particular, in the multi-layer structure of TP-RNN, the
input sequence of the higher layer is a large-scale aggregated
state sequence produced by the sub-pyramids in the previous
layer, but not the usual sequence of hidden states. TP-RNN
can therefore explicitly learn multi-scale dependencies with

Abstract
Learning long-term and multi-scale dependencies in sequential data is a challenging task for recurrent neural networks
(RNNs). In this paper, a novel RNN structure called temporal
pyramid RNN (TP-RNN) is proposed to achieve these two
goals. TP-RNN is a pyramid-like structure and generally has
multiple layers. In each layer of the network, there are several sub-pyramids connected by a shortcut path to the output,
which can efﬁciently aggregate historical information from
hidden states and provide many gradient feedback short-paths.
This avoids back-propagating through many hidden states as
in usual RNNs. In particular, in the multi-layer structure of TPRNN, the input sequence of the higher layer is a large-scale
aggregated state sequence produced by the sub-pyramids in
the previous layer, instead of the usual sequence of hidden
states. In this way, TP-RNN can explicitly learn multi-scale
dependencies with multi-scale input sequences of different
layers, and shorten the input sequence and gradient feedback
paths of each layer. This avoids the vanishing gradient problem
in deep RNNs and allows the network to efﬁciently learn longterm dependencies. We evaluate TP-RNN on several sequence
modeling tasks, including the masked addition problem, pixelby-pixel image classiﬁcation, signal recognition and speaker
identiﬁcation. Experimental results demonstrate that TP-RNN
consistently outperforms existing RNNs for learning long-term
and multi-scale dependencies in sequential data.

Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are well-known for modeling sequential data by learning temporal dependencies via
recurrent connections. They have achieved good performance
in various sequence modeling applications, such as pixel-bypixel image classiﬁcation (Cooijmans et al. 2017; Trinh et
al. 2018; Hu, Qi, and Wang 2019), speech recognition (Tao
and Liu 2018), language modeling (Soltani and Jiang 2016;
Chung, Ahn, and Bengio 2017) and so on.
RNNs are usually trained by the back-propagation through
time (BPTT) method (Werbos 1990). However, it is difﬁcult to train vanilla RNNs to learn long-term dependencies
since the gradient tends to either vanish or explode when
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5061

