The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Few-Shot Knowledge Graph Completion
Chuxu Zhang,1 Huaxiu Yao,2 Chao Huang,3 Meng Jiang,1 Zhenhui Li,2 Nitesh V. Chawla1
1

1

University of Notre Dame, 2 Pennsylvania State University, 3 JD Finance American Corporation
{czhang11, mjiang2, nchawla}@nd.edu, 2 {huaxiuyao, jessieli}@psu.edu, 3 chaohuang75@gmail.com

The above methods need a good number of entity pairs for
every relation. However, the frequency distributions of relations in real datasets often have long tails. A large portion of
relations have only few entity pairs in KGs. It is important
and challenging to deal with the relations with limited (fewshot) number of entity pairs. The few-shot scenario incurs
the infeasibility of previous models which assume available,
sufﬁcient training instances for all relations.

Abstract
Knowledge graphs (KGs) serve as useful resources for various natural language processing applications. Previous KG
completion approaches require a large number of training instances (i.e., head-tail entity pairs) for every relation. The real
case is that for most of the relations, very few entity pairs are
available. Existing work of one-shot learning limits method
generalizability for few-shot scenarios and does not fully use
the supervisory information; however, few-shot KG completion has not been well studied yet. In this work, we propose
a novel few-shot relation learning model (FSRL) that aims at
discovering facts of new relations with few-shot references.
FSRL can effectively capture knowledge from heterogeneous
graph structure, aggregate representations of few-shot references, and match similar entity pairs of reference set for every relation. Extensive experiments on two public datasets
demonstrate that FSRL outperforms the state-of-the-art.

In light of the above issue, Xiong et al. (2018) proposed
GMatching which introduces a local neighbor encoder to
learn entity embeddings. It achieves considerable performance in one-shot relation inference yet still has some limitations. First, GMatching assumes all local neighbors contribute equally to the entity embedding, whereas heterogeneous neighbors could have different impacts. For example,
the embedding of “Nadella” may have more inﬂuence on the
embedding of “Microsoft” than “Apple” as the company has
only one CEO and a number of competitors. Thus the neighbor encoder of GMatching learns insufﬁcient graph structure
representation and impairs the model performance. Second,
GMatching is designed under one-shot learning setting. Although it can be modiﬁed to few-shot case by adding a pooling layer over reference set, the general operation ignores
the interaction among few-shot reference instances and limits the representation capability of reference set. Therefore,
it is crucial to design a model to effectively complete relations with limited reference entity pairs.

Introduction
Large-scale knowledge graphs (KGs) such as YAGO
(Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007), NELL (Carlson
et al. 2010), and Wikidata (Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014)
usually represent facts in the form of relations (edges) between (head-tail) entity pairs (nodes). This kind of graphstructured knowledge is essential for many downstream applications such as search, question answering, and semantic web. However, KGs are known for their incompleteness. In order to automate the KG completion process, many
work (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel 2011; Bordes et al. 2013;
Socher et al. 2013; Yang et al. 2015; Trouillon et al. 2016;
Schlichtkrull et al. 2018; Dettmers et al. 2018) have been
proposed to infer missing relations by learning existing
ones. For example, RESCAL (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel
2011) employs tensor factorization to capture inherent structure of multi-relational data in KGs. TransE (Bordes et al.
2013) interprets relations as translation operation on the
low-dimensional embeddings of entities. And recently, GGCN (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018) models relational structure
by graph neural network.

To address the above weak points, we propose a FewShot Relation Learning model (FSRL) with the purpose of
learning a matching function that can effectively infer the
true entity pairs given the set of few-shot reference entity
pairs for each relation. To be more speciﬁc, ﬁrst, we propose a relation-aware heterogeneous neighbor encoder to
learn entity embeddings based on the heterogeneous graph
structure and attention mechanism. It captures both different relation types and impact differences of local neighbors.
Next, we design a recurrent autoencoder aggregation network to model interactions of few-shot reference entity pairs
and accumulate their expression capabilities for each relation. With the aggregated embedding of reference set, we
ﬁnally employ a matching network to discover similar entity
pairs of reference set. The meta-training based gradient de-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3041

