The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Stealthy and Efﬁcient Adversarial Attacks against Deep Reinforcement Learning
Jianwen Sun,1 Tianwei Zhang,1 Xiaofei Xie,1,∗ Lei Ma,2 Yan Zheng,1,* Kangjie Chen,1 Yang Liu1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Kyushu University, Japan
{kevensun, tianwei.zhang, xfxie, yan.zheng, kangjie.chen,yangliu}@ntu.edu.sg
malei@ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp

A DRL policy usually adopts a Deep Neural Network
(DNN) to approximate the action-value function. However, DNNs are well known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2015). An adversary can add small but carefully
crafted perturbations in an input, which can mislead the
DNN to give an incorrect output with very high conﬁdence.
Extensive work have been done towards attacking supervised DNN applications across various domains such as image classiﬁcation (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015;
Szegedy et al. 2015; Carlini and Wagner 2017), audio recognization (Alzantot, Balaji, and Srivastava 2018; Carlini and
Wagner 2018), and natural language processing (Alzantot
et al. 2018). To date, little attention has been paid to adversarial attacks against DNN-based policies in DRL. As DRL
is widely applied in many decision-making tasks, which require high safety and security guarantee, it is of importance
to understand the possibility and cost of adversarial attacks
against DRL policies, which can help us design more robust
and secure algorithms and systems.

Abstract
Adversarial attacks against conventional Deep Learning (DL)
systems and algorithms have been widely studied, and various
defenses were proposed. However, the possibility and feasibility of such attacks against Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) are less explored. As DRL has achieved great success
in various complex tasks, designing effective adversarial attacks is an indispensable prerequisite towards building robust
DRL algorithms. In this paper, we introduce two novel adversarial attack techniques to stealthily and efﬁciently attack the
DRL agents. These two techniques enable an adversary to inject adversarial samples in a minimal set of critical moments
while causing the most severe damage to the agent. The ﬁrst
technique is the critical point attack: the adversary builds a
model to predict the future environmental states and agent’s
actions, assesses the damage of each possible attack strategy,
and selects the optimal one. The second technique is the antagonist attack: the adversary automatically learns a domainagnostic model to discover the critical moments of attacking
the agent in an episode. Experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our techniques. Speciﬁcally, to successfully
attack the DRL agent, our critical point technique only requires 1 (TORCS) or 2 (Atari Pong and Breakout) steps, and
the antagonist technique needs fewer than 5 steps (4 Mujoco
tasks), which are signiﬁcant improvements over state-of-theart methods.

There are two challenges to attack a DRL system due to
its unique features. First, for a supervised DNN model, the
task is to produce an output given an input. Then the adversary’s goal is to make the model predict the wrong output. In contrast, the task of a DRL is more complicated and
application-speciﬁc: a self-driving car needs to reach the
destination safely in the shortest time; a video game player
needs to win the game with more points. Completion of a
DRL task requires a sequence of action predictions, which
are highly correlated. So the adversary needs to compromise
the agent’s end goal, instead of simply misleading some predictions in a task. Second, one major requirement for adversarial attacks is stealthiness. For the supervised DNN case,
the adversary needs to add human imperceptible perturbations to the input. For the DRL case, in addition to injecting
small perturbations in one input, the adversary is also required to interfere with a very small number of steps to cause
the damage. Otherwise, crafted inputs in too many steps can
be easily detected and corrected by the agent. In sum, to conduct a successful attack against DRL, the adversary needs
to add smallest perturbations to the environment states in a
minimal number of steps to incur maximum damage to the

Introduction
Past years have witnessed the rapid development of Deep
Reinforcement Learning (DRL) technology. The essential
component of a DRL system is the policy, which instructs
the agent to perform the optimal action responding to the
environment state. Advanced algorithms were proposed to
train these policies, making them achieve signiﬁcant performance on various artiﬁcial intellectual tasks, e.g., Go (Silver et al. 2016), robotics (Levine et al. 2016), autonomous
driving (Sallab et al. 2017), multiagent system (Zheng et al.
2018b; 2018a), video game playing (Mnih et al. 2015), testing (Zheng et al. 2019b) and designing (Zheng et al. 2019a).
∗

Corresponding authors: Xiaofei Xie and Yan Zheng.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5883

