The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cross-Lingual Natural Language Generation via Pre-Training
Zewen Chi,†∗ Li Dong,‡ Furu Wei,‡ Wenhui Wang,‡ Xian-Ling Mao,† Heyan Huang†
†

Beijing Institute of Technology
‡
Microsoft Research
{czw, maoxl, hhy63}@bit.edu.cn
{lidong1, fuwei, Wenhui.Wang}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Monolingual NLG Data
(E.g. Summarization)

In this work we focus on transferring supervision signals of
natural language generation (NLG) tasks between multiple
languages. We propose to pretrain the encoder and the decoder of a sequence-to-sequence model under both monolingual and cross-lingual settings. The pre-training objective
encourages the model to represent different languages in the
shared space, so that we can conduct zero-shot cross-lingual
transfer. After the pre-training procedure, we use monolingual data to ﬁne-tune the pre-trained model on downstream
NLG tasks. Then the sequence-to-sequence model trained
in a single language can be directly evaluated beyond that
language (i.e., accepting multi-lingual input and producing
multi-lingual output). Experimental results on question generation and abstractive summarization show that our model
outperforms the machine-translation-based pipeline methods for zero-shot cross-lingual generation. Moreover, crosslingual transfer improves NLG performance of low-resource
languages by leveraging rich-resource language data. Our
implementation and data are available at https://github.com/
CZWin32768/xnlg.

1

EN
ZH

Pre-Trained XNLG

FR

EN

Many-to-Many
Cross-Lingual
NLG

ZH
FR

Figure 1: We use a monolingual (such as English) NLG
dataset to ﬁne-tune the pre-trained model X NLG, and then
evaluate it beyond the language for both source and target
sides (e.g., Chinese, and French).

The cross-lingual generation problem is challenging due
to the following reasons. First, it requires the models to
understand multilingual input texts, and generate multilingual target sequences. So both the encoder and the decoder
should be pre-trained together. Second, the many-to-many
nature of cross-lingual NLG increases language pairs with
the square of the number of languages. Third, the prediction space of cross-lingual NLG is much larger than classiﬁcation tasks, which makes knowledge transfer of decoders
quite critical.
Previous work mainly relies on machine translation (MT)
to map texts to different languages. The ﬁrst strand of research directly uses MT in a pipeline manner (Wan, Li, and
Xiao 2010). For example, the inputs written in other languages are ﬁrst translated to English, and fed into the NLG
model that is trained by English data. Then the generated English texts are translated back to the target language. Another
strand of work uses MT to generate pseudo training data for
other language pairs that are lack of annotations (Shen et
al. 2018; Duan et al. 2019). However, such methods have
to use multiple MT systems, which renders them suffering from error propagation. Moreover, because the pipelinebased methods do not explicitly share the same parameter
space across languages, we can not directly transfer the taskspeciﬁc supervision to other low-resource languages.
In this paper, we propose a cross-lingual pre-trained
model (named as X NLG) in order to transfer monolingual
NLG supervision to other pre-trained languages by ﬁnetuning. Speciﬁcally, X NLG shares the same sequence-to-

Introduction

Learning natural language generation (NLG) models heavily relies on annotated training data. However, most available datasets are collected in a single language (typically
English), which restricts deploying the applications to other
languages. In this work, we aim at transferring the supervision of a monolingual NLG dataset to unseen languages, so
that we can boost performance for the low-resource settings.
Various methods have been proposed over the years to
learn cross-lingual word embeddings (Mikolov, Le, and
Sutskever 2013; Xing et al. 2015; Conneau et al. 2017) or
sentence encoders (Johnson et al. 2017; Conneau et al. 2018;
Lample and Conneau 2019), which try to encode multilingual texts into a shared vector space. Despite achieving
promising results on cross-lingual classiﬁcation problems,
cross-lingual pre-trained models purposed for NLG tasks remains relatively understudied.
∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7570

