The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Socially Responsible AI: Cognitive Bias-Aware Multi-Objective Learning
Procheta Sen,1 Debasis Ganguly2
ADAPT Centre, Dublin City University, Ireland,1 IBM Research, Dublin, Ireland2
procheta.sen@adaptcentre.ie,1 debasis.ganguly1.ie.ibm.com2

Abstract
Human society had a long history of suffering from cognitive
biases leading to social prejudices and mass injustice. The
prevalent existence of cognitive biases in large volumes of
historical data can pose a threat of being manifested as unethical and seemingly inhumane predictions as outputs of AI
systems trained on such data. To alleviate this problem, we
propose a bias-aware multi-objective learning framework that
given a set of identity attributes (e.g. gender, ethnicity etc.)
and a subset of sensitive categories of the possible classes
of prediction outputs, learns to reduce the frequency of predicting certain combinations of them, e.g. predicting stereotypes such as ‘most blacks use abusive language’, or ‘fear is
a virtue of women’. Our experiments conducted on an emotion prediction task with balanced class priors shows that a
set of baseline bias-agnostic models exhibit cognitive biases
with respect to gender, such as women are prone to be afraid
whereas men are more prone to be angry. In contrast, our
proposed bias-aware multi-objective learning methodology is
shown to reduce such biases in the predictid emotions.

Figure 1: Examples of social bias in existing AI systems:
‘Google Image Search’ under-representing women as CEOs
(left), and ‘Google query completion’ prioritizing appearance over ﬁlmography for a popular female actor (right).

content that was authored during the yester-years. To corroborate this point, existing studies have shown that word
embedding reﬂects the gender stereotypes present in large
volumes of text (Bolukbasi et al. 2016; Manzini et al. 2019),
e.g. men are more likely to be computer programmers while
women are more likely to be home-makers. To cite further
examples, existing studies on prominent existence of social bias in commercially deployed AI systems report that,
a) gender proportions in ‘Google Image search’ are exaggerated according to career-related stereotypes images retrieved
in response to the query ‘CEO’ (Kay, Matuszek, and Munson 2015) (left of Figure 1); b) ‘Google query completion’
suggests queries related to the ﬁlmography of a male actor,
whereas for a female one it typically focuses on her appearance (Temperton 2019) (right of Figure 1); and c) a recidivism AI system deployed by a number of US states (falsely)
predicts high risks for black people (Angwin et al. 2016).
Developing AI systems that appear to be more humanlike in the responses they generate (Scheutz et al. 2007;
Cambria 2016) can lead to the risk of associating a humanlike persona to AI systems, which in turn can lead to the disastrous consequence of a section of the society into (falsely)
believing that the biased responses (such as the ones illustrated in Figure 1) are also human in nature.
A possibility in feature-based models is to manually intervene and leave out the features that could lead to biased
predictions for a task, e.g. the New York Police Department
(NYPD) refrains from using the race of a person to predict
the risks of future crimes (Angwin et al. 2016). However, understanding which features or their combinations could lead
to ethically correct responses for a particular task is not always easy, unless such a bias resurfaces out from the data

Introduction
Throughout the course of history, human society has witnessed the ‘us vs. them’ conﬂict, where certain sections of
the society have exhibited bias (in the form of hatred, prejudices, repression and even violence) towards other communities. This social discrimination has manifested itself in different forms, identiﬁed by a wide range of different characteristics, such as gender, ethnicity, religion and caste, among
others. Some devastating consequences of social discrimination in history include reducing a woman to a mere legal possession of her husband in ancient Greece (Blundell
1995), depriving admission to a deserving black student in
a South-African university (Schaefer 2008), or preventing a
boy of a Hindu priest family to marry a girl of a lower caste
in an Indian village (Chandra 2005), among many others.
Scientiﬁc and technological revolution has played a pivotal role in mitigating social biases and prejudices to a large
extent in modern human society. Yet the advent of datadriven AI poses a great threat to shift the equilibrium again
because these data-driven AI-based predictions are prone to
essentially pick up the cognitive biases and prejudices from
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2685

