The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Accelerating Ranking in E-Commerce
Search Engines through Contextual Factor Selection
Anxiang Zeng,1,2 Han Yu,1 Qing Da,3* Yusen Zan,3 Chunyan Miao1,2*
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
2
Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
*Corresponding authors: daqing.dq@alibaba-inc.com, ascymiao@ntu.edu.sg
b) efﬁciency, how fast the search engine’s response to the
user’s queries can be and whether the computational overhead of the ranking operation is as low as possible from a
system perspective. It is a challenge to address both issues
in large-scale applications for providing excellent user experience and an efﬁcient performance solution.
To address the high computational cost of more factors as
well as large-scale trafﬁc requests, a search engine generally
has to degrade the service level in terms of effectiveness, i.e.,
reducing the number of recalled items, deactivating some
unnecessary service and so on, in oder to avoid access delay or even unavailability, which severely affects the users’
experience (Li et al. 2009). Liu et al. proposed a cascading
ranking model to address the trade-off between effectiveness
and efﬁciency in the large-scale e-commerce search applications (Liu et al. 2017), by reducing the number of items in
the ranking process with some strategies, which sheds a light
on us to optimize the e-commerce search engine in another
possible way. In a search engine, a set of factors is applied
to the ranking process and not all of those factors are necessary under all circumstances. On the one hand, there may
exist redundancy of factors; on the other hand, conversion
rates vary on items under different contexts1 . For instance,
for the users with higher purchasing power or for long-tail
queries, maybe cheap factors are enough. The above observations shows the possibility of simultaneously improving
effectiveness and efﬁciency by carefully selecting a subset
of all factors under certain circumstances, which indeed is a
standard combinatorial optimization problem, but with auxiliary context description.
Recently, Bello et al. show that reinforcement learning
is capable of solving combinatorial optimization problem
like TSP via pointer network (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly
2015; Bello et al. 2016). In this paper, we report our experience deploying an innovative model via reinforcement learning based approach – Contextual Factor Selection (CFS)
– in Taobao.com to address the aforementioned challenge.
We formally deﬁne our optimization problem with a general
framework and a loss function which reﬂects both ranking
effectiveness and efﬁciency. Then, we transform the contextual combinatorial optimization problem into a sequential decision-making problem by incorporating the contex-

Abstract
In large-scale search systems, the quality of the ranking results is continually improved with the introduction of more
factors from complex procedures. Meanwhile, the increase in
factors demands more computation resources and increases
system response latency. It has been observed that, under
some certain context a search instance may require only a
small set of useful factors instead of all factors in order to return high quality results. Therefore, removing ineffective factors accordingly can signiﬁcantly improve system efﬁciency.
In this paper, we report our experience incorporating our Contextual Factor Selection (CFS) approach into the Taobao ecommerce platform to optimize the selection of factors based
on the context of each search query in order to simultaneously achieve high quality search results while signiﬁcantly
reducing latency time. This problem is treated as a combinatorial optimization problem which can be tackled through
a sequential decision-making procedure. The problem can
be efﬁciently solved by CFS through a deep reinforcement
learning method with reward shaping to address the problems of reward signal scarcity and wide reward signal distribution in real-world search engines. Through extensive offline experiments based on data from the Taobao.com platform, CFS is shown to signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-theart approaches. Online deployment on Taobao.com demonstrated that CFS is able to reduce average search latency
time by more than 40% compared to the previous approach
with negligible reduction in search result quality. Under peak
usage during the Single’s Day Shopping Festival (November 11th) in 2017, CFS reduced peak load search latency
time by 33% compared to the previous approach, helping
Taobao.com achieve 40% higher revenue than the same period during 2016.

Introduction
Information retrieval plays an important role in commercial applications, ranging from web searching engines (Google.com, Baidu.com, etc.) to e-commence websites (Taobao.com, Amazon.com). Such applications usually
need to rank a large set of data items in response to users’
requests. To support these applications, there are generally
two issues to be considered: a) effectiveness, how accurate
and reliable the search results in the ﬁnal ranking list are and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13212

Here, the u, q user-query pair denotes the context.

