The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

3D Shape Completion with Multi-View Consistent Inference
Tao Hu, Zhizhong Han, Matthias Zwicker
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
{taohu, zwicker}@cs.umd.edu, h312h@umd.edu

where the loss encourages all views to match the ground
truth shape. But at inference time or in unsupervised training,
ground truth is not available and a different mechanism is
required to encourage consistency.
In this paper, we address the problem of shape completion
using a multi-view depth image representation, and we propose a multi-view consistency loss that is minimized during
inference. We formulate inference as an energy minimization
problem, where the energy is the sum of a data term given by
a conditional generative net, and a regularization term given
by a geometric consistency loss. Our results show the beneﬁts
of optimizing geometric consistency in a multi-view shape
representation during inference, and we demonstrate that our
approach leads to state-of-the-art results in shape completion
benchmarks. In summary, our contributions are as follows:

Abstract
3D shape completion is important to enable machines to perceive the complete geometry of objects from partial observations. To address this problem, view-based methods have been
presented. These methods represent shapes as multiple depth
images, which can be back-projected to yield corresponding 3D point clouds, and they perform shape completion by
learning to complete each depth image using neural networks.
While view-based methods lead to state-of-the-art results, they
currently do not enforce geometric consistency among the
completed views during the inference stage. To resolve this
issue, we propose a multi-view consistent inference technique
for 3D shape completion, which we express as an energy minimization problem including a data term and a regularization
term. We formulate the regularization term as a consistency
loss that encourages geometric consistency among multiple
views, while the data term guarantees that the optimized views
do not drift away too much from a learned shape descriptor.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method completes
shapes more accurately than previous techniques.

i) We propose a multi-view consistency loss for 3D shape
completion that does not rely on ground truth data.
ii) We formulate multi-view consistent inference as an energy minimization problem including our consistency
loss as a regularizer, and a neural network-based data
term.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have proven highly successful
at analysis and synthesis of visual data such as images and
videos. This has spurred interest in applying convolutional
network architectures also to 3D shapes, where a key challenge is to ﬁnd suitable generalizations of discrete convolutions to the 3D domain. Popular techniques include using discrete convolutions on 3D grids (Wu et al. 2015), graph convolutions on meshes (Litany et al. 2018), convolution-like operators on 3D point clouds (Atzmon, Maron, and Lipman 2018;
Li et al. 2018b), or 2D convolutions on 2D shape parameterizations (Cohen et al. 2018). A simple approach in the last
category is to represent shapes using multiple 2D projections,
or multiple depth images, and apply 2D convolutions on
these views. This has led to successful techniques for shape
classiﬁcation (Su et al. 2015), single-view 3D reconstruction
(Richter and Roth 2018), shape completion (Hu et al. 2019),
and shape synthesis (Soltani et al. 2017). One issue in these
approaches, however, is to encourage consistency among the
separate views and avoid that each view represents a slightly
different object. This is not an issue in supervised training,

iii) We show state-of-the-art results in standard shape completion benchmarks, demonstrating the beneﬁts of the
multi-view consistency loss in practice.

Related Work
3D shape completion. Different 3D shape representations
have been applied in 3D shape completion, such as voxels, point clouds, and multiple views. Voxel-based representations are widely used in shape completion with 3D
CNN, such as 3D-Encoder-Predictor CNNs (Dai, Qi, and
Nießner 2017) and encoder-decoder CNN for patch-level
geometry reﬁnement (Han et al. 2017). However, computational complexity grows cubically as the voxel resolution
increases, which severely limits the completion accuracy. To
address this problem, several point cloud-based shape completion methods (Achlioptas et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2017;
Yuan et al. 2018) have been proposed. The point completion
network (PCN) (Yuan et al. 2018) is a current state-of-theart approach that extends the PointNet architecture (Qi et al.
2017) to provide an encoder, followed by a multi-stage decoder that uses both fully connected (Achlioptas et al. 2018)

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10997

