The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Operational Semantics for True Concurrency in BDI Agent Systems
Lavindra de Silva
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge, UK
Lavindra.deSilva@eng.cam.ac.uk

(Nunes, Lucena, and Luck 2011), PRS, and JACK.1 JACK
gives four (programmer selectable) deﬁnitions for the success of a concurrent program: (1) it immediately succeeds
on the successful termination of a branch; (2) it allows all
branches to terminate but only succeeds if at least one of
them succeeds; (3) it succeeds iff all branches terminate successfully, and immediately fails on the failure of a branch; or
(4) it allows all branches to terminate but only succeeds if all
branches succeed. We follow this last deﬁnition.
There is also related work in concurrent distributed systems, particularly three strands of work that deﬁne behaviour
in terms of transitions between conﬁgurations, using a structural operational semantics (Plotkin 1981). In the ﬁrst strand
(Boudol and Castellani 1988b; 1989), every transition is
labelled with a representation of its ‘proof’, i.e., information comprising the inference rules that were used when deriving the transition. This information enables the extraction of a transition labelled with a partially ordered multiset (pomset) of actions, representing the sequential and concurrent actions performed. A similar transition is extracted
in (Degano, De Nicola, and Montanari 1985; 1990), but
from information stored in conﬁgurations rather than transition labels. In the third strand (Boudol and Castellani 1987;
1988a), transitions are labelled with ‘composite actions’,
which represent pomsets. This avoids the need to extract a
pomset-labelled transition ‘a posteriori’ from a sequence of
transitions, as done above.
Our work was inspired by the last two strands: our transitions represent composite actions, which are stored in conﬁgurations. However, unlike the above strands, we account
for concerns speciﬁc to agent programming languages, e.g.
goal reﬁnement, plan failure, and constructs beyond actions.
Our proposal, called Concurrent CAN (CCAN), is based on
the work in (Sardina and Padgham 2011), which reﬁnes and
extends the CAN agent programming language (Winikoff et
al. 2002). We discuss the syntax of CCAN (sec. 2) and its
semantics (secs. 3 and 4), and we prove key properties of
CCAN, in relation to true concurrency and to its link with
interleaving (sec. 5); e.g., we show that if a concurrent program’s branches are interleaved as in CAN, Jason, etc., any
resulting behaviour can also be produced by the concurrent

Abstract
Agent programming languages have proved useful for formally modelling implemented systems such as PRS and
JACK, and for reasoning about their behaviour. Over the past
decades, many agent programming languages and extensions
have been developed. A key feature in some of them is their
support for the speciﬁcation of ‘concurrent’ actions and programs. However, their notion of concurrency is still limited,
as it amounts to a nondeterministic choice between (sequential) action interleavings. Thus, the notion does not represent
‘true concurrency’, which can more naturally exploit multicore computers and multi-robot manufacturing cells. This paper provides a true concurrency operational semantics for a
BDI agent programming language, allowing actions to overlap in execution. We prove key properties of the semantics,
relating to true concurrency and to its link with interleaving.

1

Introduction

Agent programming languages have proved useful for formally modelling implemented systems such as Jason (Bordini and Hübner 2010), PRS (Georgeff and Ingrand 1989),
and JACK (Busetta et al. 1999), and for reasoning about their
behaviour. Over the past decades, many agent programming
languages and extensions have emerged, e.g. (Rao 1996;
Hindriks et al. 2001; Dastani 2008; Winikoff et al. 2002;
Morley and Myers 2004; Sardina, de Silva, and Padgham
2006; Chaouche et al. 2014; de Silva, Meneguzzi, and Logan 2018; de Giacomo, Lespérance, and Levesque 2000). A
key feature in some of them is their support for the speciﬁcation of ‘concurrent’ actions and programs. However, while
their notion of concurrency is useful in some applications,
it is still limited as it amounts to a nondeterministic choice
between (sequential) action interleavings. Thus, the notion
does not represent ‘true concurrency’, which can more naturally exploit multi-core computers and multi-robot manufacturing cells, e.g. a cell comprising two robot arms that work
on a part simultaneously. This paper provides a true concurrency operational semantics for a BDI agent programming
language, allowing actions to overlap in execution.
From the implemented BDI agent systems, there are some
that support some form of true concurrency, e.g. SPARK
(Morley and Myers 2004), JAM (Huber 1999), BDI4JADE
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
There are also implemented BDI systems that do not support
true concurrency but support action interleaving, e.g. Jason.

7119

