The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

M-NAS: Meta Neural Architecture Search
Jiaxing Wang,1,2∗ Jiaxiang Wu,3 Haoli Bai,4 Jian Cheng1,2,5†
1

NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
Tencent AI Lab, 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
5
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
{jiaxing.wang, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, jonathanwu@tencent.com, hlbai@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

neural architectures. Nevertheless, it is non-trivial to establish such a universal neural architecture search method,
which is challenged by the following two issues:
1) How can we ﬁnd an architecture controller, such
that task-aware candidate models can be effectively generated? Prevalent NAS methods utilize Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Zoph and Le 2016; Pham et al. 2018), random variables (Bender et al. 2018) or trainable architecture
parameters (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018) as network controllers to generate the child models. However, no external
information about tasks is considered (Elsken, Metzen, and
Hutter 2019), making it unable to generate task-aware child
models. The design of discriminative controller to different
tasks is still left unexplored.
2) How can we efﬁciently estimate optimal weights associated with a candidate architecture, so that the child model
can be reliably evaluated? Training the model to exact convergence (Zoph and Le 2016) incurs unaffordable computational costs. Previously NAS methods only focus on a single
ﬁxed task, and adopt parameter sharing (Pham et al. 2018;
Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018; Bender et al. 2018) to reduce the computational cost of estimating optimal weights
associated with different architectures. However, when there
are different tasks, parameter sharing deteriorates the model
capacity, as the assumption that the same parameter value is
shared across different tasks could be too strong. Therefore,
it is desirable to develop a novel weight estimation scheme
that can efﬁciently estimate the optimal weights of the candidate architecture on a new task.
To address the above issues, we propose meta neural architecture search (M-NAS). Speciﬁcally, a task-conditional
controller is developed, which embeds a task and uses the
task representation to generates task-aware candidate architectures. To efﬁciently estimate optimal weights of candidate architectures on different tasks, we resort to modelagnostic meta-learning (MAML) (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine
2017), which learns meta-weights as shared initialization for
all the tasks from where the model can adapt to new tasks
with a few gradient descent steps. By maintaining metaparameters shared across different architectures, rather than
the model weights itself, the proposed optimal weights estimation scheme avoids model capacity deterioration and

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has recently outperformed
hand-crafted networks in various areas. However, most prevalent NAS methods only focus on a pre-deﬁned task. For a previously unseen task, the architecture is either searched from
scratch, which is inefﬁcient, or transferred from the one obtained on some other task, which might be sub-optimal. In
this paper, we investigate a previously unexplored problem:
whether a universal NAS method exists, such that task-aware
architectures can be effectively generated? Towards this problem, we propose Meta Neural Architecture Search (M-NAS).
To obtain task-speciﬁc architectures, M-NAS adopts a taskaware architecture controller for child model generation.
Since optimal weights for different tasks and architectures
span diversely, we resort to meta-learning, and learn metaweights that efﬁciently adapt to a new task on the corresponding architecture with only several gradient descent steps.
Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of M-NAS
against a number of competitive baselines on both toy regression and few shot classiﬁcation problems.

Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) has made it possible to automatically ﬁnd optimal deep neural network architectures,
which conventionally requires hand-crafted heuristics, domain expertise, and repetitive trials. Existing studies show
that NAS can better explore the large design space and the
architectures found can outperform human-designed competitors in image classiﬁcation, language modeling (Zoph
and Le 2016; Pham et al. 2018; Liu, Simonyan, and Yang
2018), object detection (Zoph et al. 2018) and semantic segmentation (Chen et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019).
Despite the success, most prevalent NAS methods can
only enumerate the search space for a pre-deﬁned task. However, in reality, heterogeneous tasks of various kinds need
diverse network architectures, and it is rarely investigated
whether a universal NAS method can be found to cope with
the various properties of these tasks, and generate task-aware
∗
This work is done when Jiaxing Wang works as an intern in
Tencent AI Lab
†
Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6186

