The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

What Is It You Really Want of Me? Generalized
Reward Learning with Biased Beliefs about Domain Dynamics
Ze Gong, Yu Zhang
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281 USA
{zgong11, yzhan442}@asu.edu

dress this problem, learning methods based on non-expert
user ratings of the robot’s behaviors (Daniel et al. 2014;
Dorsa Sadigh, Sastry, and Seshia 2017; Cui and Niekum
2018) are developed. A common assumption made implicitly in all these prior works is that the human always maintains a correct understanding of the robot’s domain dynamics. This, however, may not be the case in many scenarios especially with non-expert users. Having a biased belief about
the robot could lead to biased (not just noisy) ratings for the
robot’s behaviors, resulting in an inaccurate estimation of
the human’s reward function.

Abstract
Reward learning as a method for inferring human intent and
preferences has been studied extensively. Prior approaches
make an implicit assumption that the human maintains a correct belief about the robot’s domain dynamics. However, this
may not always hold since the human’s belief may be biased,
which can ultimately lead to a misguided estimation of the
human’s intent and preferences, which is often derived from
human feedback on the robot’s behaviors. In this paper, we
remove this restrictive assumption by considering that the human may have an inaccurate understanding of the robot. We
propose a method called Generalized Reward Learning with
biased beliefs about domain dynamics (GeReL) to infer both
the reward function and human’s belief about the robot in a
Bayesian setting based on human ratings. Due to the complex forms of the posteriors, we formulate it as a variational
inference problem to infer the posteriors of the parameters
that govern the reward function and human’s belief about the
robot simultaneously. We evaluate our method in a simulated
domain and with a user study where the user has a bias based
on the robot’s appearances. The results show that our method
can recover the true human preferences while subject to such
biased beliefs, in contrast to prior approaches that could have
misinterpreted them completely.

Consider a robot vacuum cleaner that is tasked to clean
the ﬂoors in a house. Suppose that the robot vacuum is designed to clean most ﬂoor types except for hardwood since it
is too slippery for the robot to grasp onto (so it may be stuck
in a room with a hardwood ﬂoor once entered). Consider a
user who is asked to rate the robot’s behaviors. Given a set
of trajectories of the robot cleaner (with most of the areas
covered except for the living room with a hardwood ﬂoor),
the robot may get low ratings even though it should have
received high ratings had the user known about the robot’s
capabilities (which are expressed in terms of domain dynamics). On the other hand, the robot may receive high ratings
(even though it should not have) when it stays (stuck) in the
living room but somehow manages to clean it (albeit much
less efﬁciently), if the user had the belief that the robot was
designed to clean only one room at a time.

Introduction
With the rapid advancement in AI and robotics, intelligent agents begin to play an important role in our lives in
many different areas. Robots will soon be expected to not
only achieve tasks alone, but also engage in tasks that require close collaboration with their human teammates. In
such situations, the ability of the robot to understand the
human’s intent and preferences becomes a determinant for
achieving effective human-robot teaming. The problem of
inferring human’s intent and preferences has been studied extensively before. Some researchers (Ng and Russell
2000) formulated this problem as an Inverse Reinforcement
Learning (IRL) problem (Russell 1998). The reward function is recovered from optimal policies or behaviors demonstrated by human experts. Such expert demonstrations, however, are often difﬁcult to obtain in real-world tasks. To ad-

In this paper, we remove the restrictive assumption that
humans have a correct belief about the robot’s domain dynamics. Our goal is to recover the true reward function under
biased beliefs. We refer to this problem as Generalized Reward Learning (GRL) and propose a method called Generalized Reward Learning with biased beliefs about domain
dynamics (GeReL) that infers the latent variables governing both the reward function and human’s belief together
in a Bayesian setting based on human ratings of the robot’s
behaviors. Due to the complex forms of the posteriors, the
problem is formulated in a variational inference framework
(Jordan et al. 1999; Bishop 2006). The variational posterior distribution of the latent variables for estimating the
true posterior is optimized using a black-box optimization
method (Ranganath, Gerrish, and Blei 2014). To reduce the

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2485

