The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improving Question Generation with
Sentence-Level Semantic Matching and Answer Position Inferring
Xiyao Ma,1 Qile Zhu,1 Yanlin Zhou,1 Xiaolin Li2
1

NSF Center for Big Learning, University of Florida
2
AI Institute, Tongdun Technology
{maxiy, valder, zhou.y}@uﬂ.edu, xiaolin.li@tongdun.net

keywords and wrong question words, as shown in the examples in Table 1. (2) Poor copy mechanism: The model copies
the context words semantically irrelevant to the answer (Sun
et al. 2018), as illustrated in the examples in Table 2.
Generally, the decoder with parameters θd in seq-to-seq
models (Zhou et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018; Zhao et al.
2018) is trained by maximizing the generation probability
p(yt |y<t , z; θd ) of the reference question word yt , given the
previous generated words conditioned on the encoded context z. However, the decoder may focus on local word semantics while ignoring the global question semantics during generation, resulting in above-mentioned issues. Meanwhile, the answer position-aware features are not exploited
well by the copy mechanism, resulting in copying answerirrelevant context words from input.
To alleviate these issues, we claim that learning the
sentence-level semantics and answer position-awareness in
a Multi-Task Learning (MTL) fashion results in a better performance as shown in Table 1 and 2. To do so, we ﬁrst
propose sentence-level semantic matching module for learning global semantics from both the encoder and decoder
simultaneously. Then, answer position inferring module is
introduced to enforce the model with the copy mechanism
(See, Liu, and Manning 2017) to emphasize the relevant
context words with the answer position-awareness. Furthermore, we propose answer-aware gated fusion mechanism for
improved answer-aware sentence vector for decoder.
We further conduct extensive experiments on SQuAD
(Rajpurkar et al. 2016) and MS MARCO (Nguyen et al.
2016) dataset to show the superiority of our proposed model.
The experimental results show that our model not only outperforms the SOTA models on main metrics, auxiliary metrics, and human judgments, but also improves different models due to its generality. Our contributions are three-fold:

Abstract
Taking an answer and its context as input, sequence-tosequence models have made considerable progress on question generation. However, we observe that these approaches
often generate wrong question words or keywords and copy
answer-irrelevant words from the input. We believe that lacking global question semantics and exploiting answer positionawareness not well are the key root causes. In this paper, we
propose a neural question generation model with two general
modules: sentence-level semantic matching and answer position inferring. Further, we enhance the initial state of the
decoder by leveraging the answer-aware gated fusion mechanism. Experimental results demonstrate that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) models on SQuAD and
MARCO datasets. Owing to its generality, our work also improves the existing models signiﬁcantly.

Introduction
Question Generation (QG), an inverse problem of Question Answering (QA), aims to generate a semantically relevant question given a context and a corresponding answer.
It has huge potential in education scenario (Du, Shao, and
Cardie 2017), dialogue system, and question answering (Du
and Cardie 2018). A bunch of models using sequence-tosequence (seq-to-seq) models (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le
2014) with the attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2014) have been proposed for neural question generation (Zhou et al. 2017; Du, Shao, and Cardie 2017).
Enriched linguistic features with Part-Of-Speech (POS)
tags, relative position information, and paragraph context
are incorporated in the embedding layers (Zhou et al. 2017;
Kim et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2018). Copy mechanism (Gulcehre et al. 2016) is exploited to enhance the output quality
of decoders (Zhao et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2018).
However, checking the questions generated by the strong
baseline models NQG++ (Zhou et al. 2017) and Pointergenerator (See, Liu, and Manning 2017) originally solving
text summarization, the modern question generation models
face the two main issues as follows: (1) Wrong keywords and
question words: The model may ask questions with wrong

• We analyze the questions generated by strong baselines
and ﬁnd two issues: wrong keywords and wrong question
words and copying answer-irrelevant context words. We
identify that lacking whole question semantics and expoiting answer position-awareness not weel are the key root
causes.
• To address the issues, we propose neural question generation model with sentence-level semantic matching, an-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8464

