The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Joint Commonsense and Relation Reasoning for Image and Video Captioning
Jingyi Hou,1 Xinxiao Wu,1∗ Xiaoxun Zhang,2 Yayun Qi,1 Yunde Jia,1 Jiebo Luo3
1

Lab. of IIT, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
2
Alibaba Group
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester NY 14627, USA
{houjingyi, wuxinxiao, 1120163657, jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn, xiaoxun.zhang@alibaba-inc.com, jluo@cs.rochester.edu

As we know, human beings can still describe images and
videos by summarizing object relationships when some objects are not precisely identiﬁed or even absent, thanks to
their remarkable reasoning ability based on prior knowledge.
This inspires us to explore how to leverage prior knowledge to achieve relation reasoning in captioning, mimicking the human reasoning procedure. As an augmentation of
the object relationships explicitly inferred from an image or
a video, the prior knowledge about object relationships in
the world provides information that is not available in the
image or video. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the caption of “Several people waiting at a race holding umbrellas” will be generated via prior knowledge when describing
a crowd of people standing along the road, even if the image
shows no players or running actions (perhaps because the
game is yet to begin). Clearly, the relationship of “people
waiting race” is inferred from the commonsense relationship between “people” and “race” rather than from the image. Therefore, it is beneﬁcial to integrate prior knowledge
with visual information to reason relationships for generating accurate and reasonable captions.

Abstract
Exploiting relationships between objects for image and video
captioning has received increasing attention. Most existing
methods depend heavily on pre-trained detectors of objects
and their relationships, and thus may not work well when
facing detection challenges such as heavy occlusion, tiny-size
objects, and long-tail classes. In this paper, we propose a joint
commonsense and relation reasoning method that exploits
prior knowledge for image and video captioning without relying on any detectors. The prior knowledge provides semantic
correlations and constraints between objects, serving as guidance to build semantic graphs that summarize object relationships, some of which cannot be directly perceived from images or videos. Particularly, our method is implemented by an
iterative learning algorithm that alternates between 1) commonsense reasoning for embedding visual regions into the
semantic space to build a semantic graph and 2) relation reasoning for encoding semantic graphs to generate sentences.
Experiments on several benchmark datasets validate the effectiveness of our prior knowledge-based approach.

Introduction

In this paper, we utilize prior knowledge to guide the reasoning of object relationships for image and video captioning. The prior knowledge provides commonsense semantic
correlations and constraints between objects to augment visual information extracted from images or videos. We employ external knowledge graphs in Visual Genome (Krishna
et al. 2017) which represents a type of prior knowledge in
that the nodes represent the objects and the edges denote the
relations between nodes.

Most existing methods for image and video captioning
(Donahue et al. 2015; Venugopalan et al. 2015b; 2015a;
Pan et al. 2016) are based on the encoder-decoder framework which directly translates visual features into sentences,
without exploiting high-level semantic entities (e.g., objects, attributes, and concepts) as well as relations among
them. Recent work (Yao et al. 2018; Li and Jiang 2019;
Yang et al. 2019) has shown promising efforts of using
a scene graph that provides an understanding of semantic
relationships for image captioning. These methods usually
use pre-trained object and relationship detectors to extract
a scene graph and then reason about object relationships in
the graph. However, when facing detection challenges, such
as heavy occlusion, tiny-size objects, and the long-tail problem, this paradigm might not accurately depict the objects
and their relationships in images or videos, thus resulting in
a degradation of captioning performance.

To effectively apply the prior knowledge into image and
video captioning, we propose a joint commonsense and relation reasoning (C-R Reasoning) method that integrates both
commonsense reasoning and relation reasoning, and implements them simultaneously. The commonsense reasoning
selects local visual regions and maps them into a high-level
semantic space to build a semantic graph by using the semantic constraints about relations in the knowledge graphs.
The relation reasoning encodes the semantic graph by reﬁning the representations of regions through a graph convolutional network (GCN) to generate textual descriptions. To be
speciﬁc, we develop an iterative learning algorithm which

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10973

