The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Evaluating the Cross-Lingual Effectiveness of
Massively Multilingual Neural Machine Translation
Aditya Siddhant, Melvin Johnson, Henry Tsai, Naveen Ari,
Jason Riesa, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Karthik Raman
Google Research
{adisid, melvinp, henrytsai, navari, reisa, ankurbpn, orhanf, karthikraman}@google.com

albeit on only a pair of language pairs (Eriguchi et al. 2018),
or by limiting the decoder to use a pooled vector representation of the entire sentence from the encoder (Artetxe and
Schwenk 2018).
In this paper we scale up the number of translation directions used in the NMT model to include 102 languages to
and from English. Unlike Artetxe and Schwenk (2018), we
do not apply any restricting operations such as pooling while
training mNMT which allows us to obtain token level representations making it possible to transfer them to sequence
tagging tasks as well. We ﬁnd that mNMT models trained
using plain translation losses can out of the box emerge
as competitive alternatives to other methods at the forefront of cross-lingual transfer learning (Devlin et al. 2018;
Artetxe and Schwenk 2018)
Our contributions in this paper are threefold:

Abstract
The recently proposed massively multilingual neural machine
translation (NMT) system has been shown to be capable of
translating over 100 languages to and from English within
a single model (Aharoni, Johnson, and Firat 2019). Its improved translation performance on low resource languages
hints at potential cross-lingual transfer capability for downstream tasks. In this paper, we evaluate the cross-lingual effectiveness of representations from the encoder of a massively multilingual NMT model on 5 downstream classiﬁcation and sequence labeling tasks covering a diverse set of over
50 languages. We compare against a strong baseline, multilingual BERT (mBERT) (Devlin et al. 2018), in different
cross-lingual transfer learning scenarios and show gains in
zero-shot transfer in 4 out of these 5 tasks.

1

Introduction

• We use representations from a Massively Multilingual
Translation Encoder (MMTE) that can handle 103 languages to achieve cross-lingual transfer on 5 classiﬁcation and sequence tagging tasks spanning more than 50
languages.

English has an abundance of labeled data that can be used
for various Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, such
as part-of-speech tagging (POS), named entity recognition
(NER), and natural language inference (NLI). This richness
of labeled data manifests itself as a boost in accuracy in the
current era of data-hungry deep learning algorithms. However, the same is not true for many other languages where
task speciﬁc data is scarce and expensive to acquire. This
motivates the need for cross-lingual transfer learning – the
ability to leverage the knowledge from task speciﬁc data
available in one or more languages to solve that task in languages with little or no task-speciﬁc data.
Recent progress in NMT has enabled one to train multilingual systems that support translation from multiple source
languages into multiple target languages within a single
model (Firat, Cho, and Bengio 2016; Johnson et al. 2017;
Aharoni, Johnson, and Firat 2019). Such multilingual NMT
(mNMT) systems often demonstrate large improvements in
translation quality on low resource languages. This positive
transfer originates from the model’s ability to learn representations which are transferable across languages. Previous
work has shown that these representations can then be used
for cross-lingual transfer in other downstream NLP tasks -

• We compare MMTE to mBERT in different cross-lingual
transfer scenarios including zero-shot, few-shot, ﬁnetuning, and feature extraction scenarios.
• We outperform the state-of-the-art on zero-shot crosslingual POS tagging [Universal Dependencies 2.3 dataset
(Nivre et al. 2018)], intent classiﬁcation (Schuster et al.
2018), and achieve results comparable to state-of-the-art
on document classiﬁcation [ML-Doc dataset (Schwenk
and Li 2018)].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our MMTE model in detail and points out its
differences from mBERT. All experimental details, results
and analysis are given in Sections 3 and 4. This is followed
by a discussion of related work. In Section 6, we summarize our ﬁndings and present directions for future research.
We emphasize that the primary motivation of the paper is
not to challenge the state-of-the-art but instead to investigate
the effectiveness of representations learned from an mNMT
model in various transfer-learning settings.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8854

