The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Accelerating and Improving AlphaZero Using Population Based Training
Ti-Rong Wu,1 Ting-Han Wei,1,3 I-Chen Wu1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
2
Pervasive Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (PAIR) Labs, Taiwan
3
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
{kds285, ting, icwu}@aigames.nctu.edu.tw

Up until recently, games such as chess, Go, and shogi had
crucial roles as interesting and challenging measures of development in artiﬁcial intelligence research. DeepMind’s
work, starting with AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016), followed
up by AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al. 2017), and culminating
in AlphaZero (Silver et al. 2018), demonstrated that reinforcement learning can be a powerful tool in solving difﬁcult
problems, ﬁrst with the help of human expert knowledge,
then, without any human intervention.
While this family of algorithms were able to deal with the
challenge posed by these benchmarks, interest in classical
games research remains high. Starting from ELF OpenGo,

a reimplementation of the AlphaGo Zero/AlphaZero algorithm, Facebook AI Research is also moving ahead with
the more general ELF project (Tian et al. 2019), which is
aimed at covering a wider range of games for reinforcement
learning research. In late August, 2019, DeepMind also announced the OpenSpiel framework, with the goal of incorporating various games with different properties (Lanctot et
al. 2019).
Given the continued interest in using games as a reinforcement learning environment, there are still issues that
need to be resolved even with a powerful algorithm such
as AlphaZero. First, AlphaZero training requires a signiﬁcant amount of computing resources, at a scale that is prohibitively costly for smaller research teams. As an example, both DeepMind and Facebook AI research use several thousand GPUs to train their Go agents (Tian et al.
2019). Recently, Wu (2019) tested and proposed several
techniques that can accelerate AlphaZero training. First, the
number of network outputs was increased, including multiple value outputs for different komi1 values, and also having new outputs for ownership of board intersections (Wu
et al. 2018). Additionally, Wu also proposed a new method
for Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) exploration and variation of search parameters, among many other techniques
which we will not cover in detail in this paper. While the acceleration factor was reported to be 50, the new techniques
introduced a variety of hyperparameters, which were all set
to speciﬁc values without further explanation.
This leads to the next issue that remains to be resolved
for AlphaZero training, namely hyperparameter choice or
design. Each hyperparameter conﬁguration requires a signiﬁcant amount of computing resource commitment before
its effects on the trained agent can be observed. As an improvement on manually tuning hyperparameters through experience, Wang et al. (2019) investigated designing hyperparameter conﬁgurations by sweeping each hyperparameter
and evaluating their different combinations for 6x6 Othello.
By comprehensively listing 12 hyperparameters, then testing each with three different values, they were able to arrive
at some intuition on what good hyperparameter design en-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In Go, komi is the number of points added to the second player
to balance the game.

Abstract
AlphaZero has been very successful in many games. Unfortunately, it still consumes a huge amount of computing resources, the majority of which is spent in self-play. Hyperparameter tuning exacerbates the training cost since each hyperparameter conﬁguration requires its own time to train one
run, during which it will generate its own self-play records.
As a result, multiple runs are usually needed for different hyperparameter conﬁgurations. This paper proposes using population based training (PBT) to help tune hyperparameters
dynamically and improve strength during training time. Another signiﬁcant advantage is that this method requires a single run only, while incurring a small additional time cost,
since the time for generating self-play records remains unchanged though the time for optimization is increased following the AlphaZero training algorithm. In our experiments
for 9x9 Go, the PBT method is able to achieve a higher win
rate for 9x9 Go than the baselines, each with its own hyperparameter conﬁguration and trained individually. For 19x19
Go, with PBT, we are able to obtain improvements in playing
strength. Speciﬁcally, the PBT agent can obtain up to 74%
win rate against ELF OpenGo, an open-source state-of-theart AlphaZero program using a neural network of a comparable capacity. This is compared to a saturated non-PBT agent,
which achieves a win rate of 47% against ELF OpenGo under
the same circumstances.

Introduction

1046

