The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Predicting AC Optimal Power Flows:
Combining Deep Learning and Lagrangian Dual Methods
Ferdinando Fioretto,1,2 Terrence W.K. Mak,1 Pascal Van Hentenryck1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Syracuse University
fﬁorett@syr.edu, wmak@gatech.edu, pvh@isye.gatech.edu

niﬁcant variations in load and generation. This uncertainty
forces system operators to adjust the generators setpoints
with increasing frequency in order to serve the power demand while ensuring stable network operations. However,
the resolution frequency to solve OPFs is limited by their
computational complexity. To address this issue, system operators typically solve OPF approximations such as the linear DC model (DC-OPF). While these approximations are
more efﬁcient computationally, their solution may be suboptimal and induce substantial economical losses, or they
may fail to satisfy the physical and engineering constraints.
Similar issues also arise in expansion planning and other
conﬁguration problems, where plans are evaluated by solving a massive number of multi-year Monte-Carlo simulations at 15-minute intervals (Pache et al. 2015; DeutcheEnergue-Agentur 2019). Additionally, the stochasticity introduced by renewable energy sources further increases the
number of scenarios to consider. Therefore, modern approaches recur to the linear DC-OPF approximation and focus only on the scenarios considered most pertinent (Pache
et al. 2015) at the expense of the ﬁdelity of the simulations.
To address these challenges, this paper studies how to approximate OPFs using a Deep Neural Network (DNN) approach. The main goal of the OPF is to ﬁnd generator setpoints, i.e., the amount of real power and the voltage magnitude for each generator. Approximating the OPF using
DNNs can thus be seen as an empirical risk minimization
problem. However, the resulting setpoints must also satisfy
the physical and engineering constraints that regulate power
ﬂows, and these constraints introduce signiﬁcant difﬁculties
for machine learning-based approaches, as shown in (Ng et
al. 2018; Deka and Misra 2019). To address these difﬁculties, this paper presents a DNN approach to the OPF (OPFDNN) that borrows ideas from Lagrangian duality and models the learning task as the Lagrangian dual of the empirical
risk minimization problem under the OPF constraints. Note
also that the AC-OPF is an ideal application for machine
learning, since it must be solved almost continuously. Hence
signiﬁcant data is available to train deep learning networks
and improve them over time.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows. (1) It proposes an approach (OPF-DNN) that uses a

Abstract
The Optimal Power Flow (OPF) problem is a fundamental
building block for the optimization of electrical power systems. It is nonlinear and nonconvex and computes the generator setpoints for power and voltage, given a set of load
demands. It is often solved repeatedly under various conditions, either in real-time or in large-scale studies. This need is
further exacerbated by the increasing stochasticity of power
systems due to renewable energy sources in front and behind
the meter. To address these challenges, this paper presents a
deep learning approach to the OPF. The learning model exploits the information available in the similar states of the system (which is commonly available in practical applications),
as well as a dual Lagrangian method to satisfy the physical
and engineering constraints present in the OPF. The proposed
model is evaluated on a large collection of realistic mediumsized power systems. The experimental results show that its
predictions are highly accurate with average errors as low as
0.2%. Additionally, the proposed approach is shown to improve the accuracy of the widely adopted linear DC approximation by at least two orders of magnitude.

Introduction
The Optimal Power Flow (OPF) problem determines the
generator dispatch of minimal cost that meets the demands
while satisfying the physical and engineering constraints
of the power system (Chowdhury and Rahman 1990). The
OPF (aka AC-OPF) is a non-convex non-linear optimization problem and the building bock of many applications, including security-constrained OPFs (Monticelli et al. 1987),
optimal transmission switching (Fisher, O’Neill, and Ferris
2008), capacitor placement (Baran and Wu 1989), expansion
planning (Verma et al. 2016), and security-constrained unit
commitment (Wang, Shahidehpour, and Li 2008).
Typically, generation schedules are updated in intervals
of 5 minutes (Tong and Ni 2011), possibly using a solution to the OPF solved in the previous step as a starting
point. In recent years, the integration of renewable energy
in sub-transmission and distribution systems has introduced
signiﬁcant stochasticity in front and behind the meter, making load proﬁles much harder to predict and introducing sigc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
630

