The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Explaining Image Classiﬁers Generating Exemplars
and Counter-Exemplars from Latent Representations
Riccardo Guidotti,1 Anna Monreale,2 Stan Matwin,3 Dino Pedreschi2
1

ISTI-CNR, Pisa, Italy, riccardo.guidotti@isti.cnr.it
University of Pisa, Italy, {annam, pedre}@di.unipi.it
3
Dalhousie University and Polish Academy of Sciences, stan@cs.dal.ca
2

gradient and perturbation-based attribution methods (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013; Shrikumar, Greenside, and others 2016) reveal saliency maps highlighting
the parts of the image that most contribute to its classiﬁcation. However, these methods are model speciﬁc and can
be employed only to explain speciﬁc deep neural networks.
On the other hand, model agnostic approaches can explain,
also through a saliency map, the outcome of any black
box (Ribeiro and others 2016; Guidotti and others 2019b).
Agnostic methods may generate a local neighborhood of the
instance to explain and mime the behavior of the black box
using an interpretable classiﬁer. However, these methods exhibit drawbacks that may negatively impact the reliability of
the explanations. First, they do not take into account existing
relationships between features (or pixels) during the neighborhood generation. Second, the neighborhood generation
does not produce “meaningful” images since, e.g., some areas of the image to explain in (Ribeiro and others 2016) are
obscured, while in (Guidotti and others 2019b) they are replaced with pixels of other images. Finally, transparent-bydesign approaches produce prototypes from which it should
be clear to the user why a certain decision is taken (Kim and
others 2016). These approaches, however, cannot be used to
explain an already trained black box: the transparent model
has to be directly adopted as a classiﬁer, possibly with limitations on the accuracy achieved.

Abstract
We present an approach to explain the decisions of black box
image classiﬁers through synthetic exemplar and counterexemplar learnt in the latent feature space. Our explanation
method exploits the latent representations learned through an
adversarial autoencoder for generating a synthetic neighborhood of the image for which an explanation is required. A
decision tree is trained on a set of images represented in the
latent space, and its decision rules are used to generate exemplar images showing how the original image can be modiﬁed to stay within its class. Counterfactual rules are used to
generate counter-exemplars showing how the original image
can “morph” into another class. The explanation also comprehends a saliency map highlighting the areas that contribute to
its classiﬁcation, and areas that push it into another class. A
wide and deep experimental evaluation proves that the proposed method outperforms existing explainers in terms of ﬁdelity, relevance, coherence, and stability, besides providing
the most useful and interpretable explanations.

Introduction
Today’s automated decision systems for image classiﬁcation are generally based on accurate machine learning techniques, such as deep neural networks. These models are recognized to be “black boxes” because of their opaque, hidden
internal structure, whose complexity makes their comprehension for humans very difﬁcult (Doshi-Velez and others
2017). Thus, there is an increasing interest in the scientiﬁc
community in deriving explanations able to describe the behavior of a black box (Guidotti and others 2018), or explainable by design approaches (Kim and others 2016). In particular, explaining the reasons for a certain decision can be very
important. For example, when dealing with medical images
for diagnosing, how we can validate that an accurate image
classiﬁer built to recognize cancer actually focuses on the
malign areas and not on the background for taking the decisions? Therefore, in this paper we investigate the problem of
black box explanation for image classiﬁcation.
In the literature, the problem is addressed by producing
explanations through different approaches. On the one hand,

We present ABELE, an Adversarial Black box Explainer
generating Latent Exemplars (Guidotti et al. 2019). ABELE
is a local, model-agnostic explanation method able to overcome the existing limitations of the local approaches by exploiting the latent feature space, learned through an adversarial autoencoder (Makhzani et al. 2015), for the neighborhood generation process. Given an image classiﬁed by
a given black box model, ABELE provides an explanation
for the reasons of the proposed classiﬁcation. The explanation consists of two parts: (i) a set of exemplars and counterexemplars images illustrating, respectively, instances classiﬁed with the same label and with a different label than the
instance to explain, which may be visually analyzed to understand the reasons for the classiﬁcation, and (ii) a saliency
map highlighting the areas of the image to explain that contribute to its classiﬁcation, and areas of the image that push

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13665

