The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

InvNet: Encoding Geometric and
Statistical Invariances in Deep Generative Models
Ameya Joshi,∗1 Minsu Cho,∗1 Viraj Shah,1 Balaji Pokuri,2
Soumik Sarkar,2 Baskar Ganapathysubramanian,2 Chinmay Hegde1
1

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 Dept. of Mechanical Engineering
Iowa State University, Ames
{ameya, chomd90, viraj, balajip, soumiks, baskarg, chinmay}@iastate.edu

concerns. However, there remain several challenges that
must be overcome for realistic design problems.
Challenges. When standard GAN models are applied to
solve real-world design problems, several challenges arise.
It is well known that GANs incur dramatically high sample complexity. For example, BigGAN (Brock, Donahue,
and Simonyan 2019) requires 14 million (natural) images
trained over ∼24K TPU-hours, which is well beyond the
reach of normal computing environments. This cost is exacerbated in scientiﬁc and engineering design problems that
rely on expensive simulations for training data generation.
A possible solution is to use a priori domain knowledge
about the physics of the design problem to reduce training
data requirements, but the standard GAN framework does
not leverage such knowledge.
Further, designers often require ﬁne-grained input control
over speciﬁc parameters of the search space. For example,
in (computational) materials design, the designer may wish
to adjust material composition, grain sizes, or other material
property parameters on the ﬂy. Conditional GANs (Odena,
Olah, and Shlens 2017; Mirza and Osindero 2014) do provide some amount of input control, but these are coarse: the
training data has to be carefully binned due to the categorical
conditioning involved.
Our contributions. We introduce InvNet, an architecture
that extends deep generative models (such as GANs) by
encoding user-speciﬁed geometric (discrete) and statistical
constraints. Our InvNet generative model has the dual advantage of being able to learn implicit features from training data, while also being able to explicit user-speciﬁed
invariances. Similar to GANs, we pose the InvNet training problem as a minimax game and propose a three-way
alternating-optimization style training algorithm. Our algorithm requires minimal parameter tuning and gives stable results across a wide range of problem domains.
We showcase our framework in the context of two challenging problems in materials informatics. In both cases, the
physics governing the formation of such microstructures are
typically very complex and involve solving nonlinear highorder partial differential equations (PDEs) that are computationally very intensive. In both problems, we show that
InvNet is successful in generating a large, diverse variety

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), while widely successful in modeling complex data distributions, have not yet
been sufﬁciently leveraged in scientiﬁc computing and design. Reasons for this include the lack of ﬂexibility of GANs
to represent discrete-valued image data, as well as the lack
of control over physical properties of generated samples. We
propose a new conditional generative modeling approach (InvNet) that efﬁciently enables modeling discrete-valued images, while allowing control over their parameterized geometric and statistical properties. We evaluate our approach on
several synthetic and real world problems: navigating manifolds of geometric shapes with desired sizes; generation of
binary two-phase materials; and the (challenging) problem of
generating multi-orientation polycrystalline microstructures.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have
proven to be highly successful in synthesizing samples arising from complex distributions, including face images (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2016), content generation (Jin et
al. 2017), image translation (Isola et al. 2017), style transfer (Zhu et al. 2017), and many others. Our motivation
for this paper arises from computational engineering design, for which promising progress has been made in areas
such as drug discovery (Blaschke et al. 2018), molecule design (Sanchez-Lengeling and Aspuru-Guzik 2018), and 3D
modeling (Wu et al. 2016).
Computational design problems often are accompanied
by stringent geometric and statistical constraints that all
valid solutions are required to satisfy. These constraints are
generally informed by the physics of the problem, or by
manufacturing limitations. Additionally, the solution spaces
for several design problems are often discrete (integer) valued, often combinatorially complex, and generally nondifferentiable, therefore disallowing the use of scalable traditional optimization tools. Machine learning methods such
as GANs show the promise of sidestepping some of these
∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4377

