The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Open Domain Event Text Generation∗
Zihao Fu,1 Lidong Bing,2 Wai Lam1
1

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{zhfu, wlam}@se.cuhk.edu.hk; l.bing@alibaba-inc.com

The WikiBio (Lebret, Grangier, and Auli 2016) task generates the ﬁrst sentence of a person’s biography based on its
Wikipedia Infobox.

Abstract
Text generation tasks aim at generating human-readable text
from different kinds of data. Normally, the generated text
only contains the information included in the data and its application is thus restricted to some limited scenarios. In this
paper, we extend the task to an open domain event text generation scenario with an entity chain as its skeleton. Specifically, given an entity chain containing several related event
entities, the model should retrieve from a trustworthy repository (e.g. Wikipedia) the detailed information of these entities and generate a description text based on the retrieved
sentences. We build a new dataset called WikiEvent1 that
provides 34K pairs of entity chain and its corresponding description sentences. To solve the problem, we propose a wiki
augmented generator framework that contains an encoder,
a retriever, and a decoder. The encoder encodes the entity
chain into a hidden space while the decoder decodes from
the hidden space and generates description text. The retriever
retrieves relevant text from a trustworthy repository which
provides more information for generation. To alleviate the
overﬁtting problem, we propose a novel random drop component that randomly deletes words from the retrieved sentences making our model more robust for handling long input
sentences. We apply the proposed model on the WikiEvent
dataset and compare it with a few baselines. The experimental results show that our carefully-designed architecture does
help generate better event text, and extensive analysis further
uncovers the characteristics of the proposed task.

Punic War
Roman Republic
Ancient Carthage

The second Punic war between Rome and Carthage
broke out in 219 BC and ended in 201 BC.

Figure 1: Illustration of the Open Domain Event Text Generation task. The event description is generated based on a
given entity chain.
The current NLG tasks always assume that the generated
text only contains the information included in the given data.
However, this assumption is very rigid and sort of less practical in the real world. For example, in the novel writing scenario as shown in Fig. 1, when a writer wants to describe the
“Punic War”, what comes into his mind ﬁrst is only some
entity words such as “Punic War”, “Roman Republic” and
“Ancient Carthage”. Then, he digs his own or turns to certain resources for help to acquire knowledge of these entities
to compose a complete sentence. It would be very useful if
such event text description can be automatically generated.
In this paper, we propose a new task named Open Domain Event Text Generation (ODETG). In this task, we are
given a sequence of entities called an entity chain. The goal
is to generate a sentence with this entity chain as its skeleton. We assume that we only know the entity chain and require the model to retrieve from a trustworthy repository
(e.g. Wikipedia) to ﬁnd the detailed information of these entities and generate a description text based on the retrieved
sentences. The ODETG task can be applied to more scenarios where the traditional generation task cannot handle eas-

Introduction
In recent years, many natural language generation (NLG)
tasks have been proposed to generate human-readable text
based on different kinds of data. (Gardent et al. 2017a;
2017b) propose the WebNLG task to generate text descriptions based on a group of knowledge base triples. The E2E
(Novikova, Dušek, and Rieser 2017) task aims to generate restaurant reviews with respect to the given attributes.
∗
The work described in this paper is substantially supported by
a grant from the Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, China (Project Code: 14204418).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Available at https://github.com/fuzihaofzh/WikiEvent

7748

