The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Causal Inference Method for Reducing
Gender Bias in Word Embedding Relations
Zekun Yang, Juan Feng∗
Department of Information Systems, College of Business
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China
zekunyang3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, juafeng@cityu.edu.hk
gender-biased word embeddings are known to be susceptible to clustering algorithms. For instance, Gonen and Goldberg (2019) discover that clustering algorithms tend to differentiate word vectors as either male or female associated,
despite the fact that these words are by deﬁnition not associated with gender. When it comes to concrete downstream
NLP tasks, the usage of gender-biased word vectors is even
more worrying. Zhao et al. (2018a) illustrate that the word
embedding component used in coreference resolution systems results in gender-biased identiﬁcation outcomes. Park,
Shin, and Fung (2018) ﬁnd that one of the leading causes
of gender bias in abusive language detection models is the
sexist word embeddings employed.
Due to the importance of eliminating gender bias from
word embeddings, previous research has proposed postprocessing algorithms (Bolukbasi et al. 2016; Kaneko and
Bollegala 2019) and word-vector-learning algorithms (Zhao
et al. 2018b) aiming at solving this issue. While these methods adopt the strategy of forcing gender-biased word vectors to be orthogonal to a gender directional vector, which
alleviates the gender bias associated with gender direction
signiﬁcantly, this strategy has been proven to be unhelpful
in reducing the gender bias in word vector relation (Gonen
and Goldberg 2019). Moreover, some previous methods require tuning several hyper-parameters as well as differentiating between gender-neutral and gender-biased words.
In this paper, we design a causal and simple postprocessing approach for reducing gender bias in word embeddings, which addresses the limitations of previous research. While traditional methods mitigate gender bias
by diminishing the relationship between the gender-biased
word vector and the gender direction, our method is quite
different: we propose to learn the spurious gender information via causal inference by utilizing the statistical dependency between gender-biased word vectors and genderdeﬁnition word vectors. The learned spurious gender information is then subtracted from the gender-biased word vectors to achieve gender-debiasing. Through learning the gender information in gender-biased word vectors, both gender bias in word vector relation and gender bias associated
with gender direction are approximated and subtracted. The
proposed method is theoretically interpretable via the HalfSibling framework proposed by Schölkopf et al. (2016), and
it is practically simple as only one hyper-parameter needs

Abstract
Word embedding has become essential for natural language
processing as it boosts empirical performances of various
tasks. However, recent research discovers that gender bias
is incorporated in neural word embeddings, and downstream
tasks that rely on these biased word vectors also produce
gender-biased results. While some word-embedding genderdebiasing methods have been developed, these methods
mainly focus on reducing gender bias associated with gender
direction and fail to reduce the gender bias presented in word
embedding relations. In this paper, we design a causal and
simple approach for mitigating gender bias in word vector relation by utilizing the statistical dependency between genderdeﬁnition word embeddings and gender-biased word embeddings. Our method attains state-of-the-art results on genderdebiasing tasks, lexical- and sentence-level evaluation tasks,
and downstream coreference resolution tasks.

.

1

Introduction

Word embeddings that capture the relationship between
words have become an essential component of natural language processing (NLP) due to its enhancement to the performance of numerous downstream tasks including sentiment analysis (Tang et al. 2014), information retrieval (Ganguly et al. 2015), and question answering (Yang et al. 2016).
Recent studies have discovered that neural word embeddings, such as Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) and GloVe
(Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014), exhibit gender
bias to various extents (Bolukbasi et al. 2016; Zhao et al.
2018b). Sources of gender bias of word vectors are two-fold.
Firstly, word vectors of gender-neutral words are found to
favor spatial directions of either male- or female-deﬁnition
words, which is deﬁned as gender bias associated with gender direction. Secondly, gender bias is also presented in
the distance between embeddings of gender-neutral words,
which is attributed to as gender bias in word vector relation.
Gender-biased word embeddings lead to serious social
implications. For example, many NLP pipelines routinely
use clustering algorithms as a feature extraction step. Yet,
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9434

