The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Going Deep: Graph Convolutional Ladder-Shape Networks
Ruiqi Hu,1 Shirui Pan,2 Guodong Long,1 Qinghua Lu,3 Liming Zhu,3 Jing Jiang1
1

Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
2
Faculty of IT, Monash University, Australia
3
Data61, CSIRO
{ruiqi.hu, guodong.long, jing.jiang}@uts.edu.au, shirui.pan@monash.edu
{qinghua.lu, liming.zhu}@data61.csiro.au

Zhang et al. 2016) and image classiﬁcation(Liu et al. 2019b;
2019a)).
There has recently been a rise in interest in leveraging
embedding methods or deep learning algorithms for graphs.
Many probabilistic models (Grover and Leskovec 2016;
Tang et al. 2015) or matrix factorization-based works (Cao,
Lu, and Xu 2015; Wang et al. 2017) aim to capture the patterns (walks) with neighborhood connections and the ﬁrst or
second order proximities from a graph, and to encode the
graph into a low-dimensional, compact vector space. The
well-learned embedding can be directly analyzed by conventional machine learning approaches. These methods exploit
and preserve the topological characteristics and lose sight of
the contextual features of the nodes in the graph.
Other methods simultaneously consider structural characteristics and node features to learn a robust embedding
of the graph. Examples in this category include content
enhanced network embedding methods and neighborhood
aggregation (or message passing) algorithms. Content enhanced methods associate text features with the representation architectures, examples like TADW (Yang et al. 2015)
which incorporates the feature information into network
representation under a matrix factorization framework and
TriDNR (Pan et al. 2016) which trains a neural network architecture to capture both structural proximity and attribute
proximity from the attributed graph. Neighborhood aggregation algorithms (Dai et al. 2018; Li, Han, and Wu 2018;
Klicpera, Bojchevski, and Günnemann 2018), represented
as spectral graph convolutional networks (spectral GCNs)
(Kipf and Welling 2016b), introduce the Laplacian smoothing operation to propagate the attributes of a node over its
neighborhood. Spectral-based algorithms have commanded
more attention among the aforementioned approaches due to
their signiﬁcant improvements over semi-supervised tasks.
Spectral-based algorithms borrow the idea of ﬁlters from
the graph signal processing domain to conduct the graph
convolution operation, which can also be interpreted as eliminating noises from graph signal. The major difference between one type of spectral GCN and another lies in the design of the ﬁlter. Spectral CNNs (Bruna et al. 2013) formulate the ﬁlter with a collection of learnable parameters to
implement the convolution operation based on the spectrum

Abstract
Neighborhood aggregation algorithms like spectral graph
convolutional networks (GCNs) formulate graph convolutions as a symmetric Laplacian smoothing operation to aggregate the feature information of one node with that of its
neighbors. While they have achieved great success in semisupervised node classiﬁcation on graphs, current approaches
suffer from the over-smoothing problem when the depth of
the neural networks increases, which always leads to a noticeable degradation of performance. To solve this problem, we
present graph convolutional ladder-shape networks (GCLN),
a novel graph neural network architecture that transmits messages from shallow layers to deeper layers to overcome the
over-smoothing problem and dramatically extend the scale
of the neural networks with improved performance. We have
validated the effectiveness of proposed GCLN at a node-wise
level with a semi-supervised task (node classiﬁcation) and an
unsupervised task (node clustering), and at a graph-wise level
with graph classiﬁcation by applying a differentiable pooling
operation. The proposed GCLN outperforms original GCNs,
deep GCNs and other state-of-the-art GCN-based models for
all three tasks, which were designed from various perspectives on six real-world benchmark data sets.

Introduction
Graphs are of the essence for constructing non-Euclidean
data and they are omnipresent in most areas. In the social
media industry, for instance, users, through their personal
proﬁle information, are linked with and interact with other
users (e.g., friends, colleagues), and the entire social media network is modeled as an attributed graph for product/friend/community recommendations (node clustering);
In medicine and pharmacology, molecules and chemical
bonds can be constructed as graphs to potentially discover
new drugs by identifying their bio-activities (node classiﬁcation (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016;
Gilmer et al. 2017)); In academic citation networks, papers are connected by their citations, and the titles, authors, venues and keywords form graph characteristics for
automatic categorization (semi-supervised node classiﬁcation (Velickovic et al. 2017; Kipf and Welling 2016b;
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2838

