The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generative Adversarial Networks for Video-to-Video Domain Adaptation
Jiawei Chen, Yuexiang Li, ∗ Kai Ma, Yefeng Zheng
YouTu Lab, Tencent, Shenzhen, China
{jiaweichen, vicyxli, kylekma, yefengzheng}@tencent.com

Abstract

Seq. #1

Endoscopic videos from multicentres often have different
imaging conditions, e.g., color and illumination, which make
the models trained on one domain usually fail to generalize well to another. Domain adaptation is one of the potential solutions to address the problem. However, few of existing works focused on the translation of video-based data.
In this work, we propose a novel generative adversarial network (GAN), namely VideoGAN, to transfer the video-based
data across different domains. As the frames of a video may
have similar content and imaging conditions, the proposed
VideoGAN has an X-shape generator to preserve the intravideo consistency during translation. Furthermore, a loss
function, namely color histogram loss, is proposed to tune the
color distribution of each translated frame. Two colonoscopic
datasets from different centres, i.e., CVC-Clinic and ETISLarib, are adopted to evaluate the performance of domain
adaptation of our VideoGAN. Experimental results demonstrate that the adapted colonoscopic video generated by our
VideoGAN can signiﬁcantly boost the segmentation accuracy, i.e., an improvement of 5%, of colorectal polyps on multicentre datasets. As our VideoGAN is a general network architecture, we also evaluate its performance with the CamVid
driving video dataset on the cloudy-to-sunny translation task.
Comprehensive experiments show that the domain gap could
be substantially narrowed down by our VideoGAN.

CVC-Clinic

Seq. #2

Seq. #3

ETIS-Larib

Seq. #4

Figure 1: Examples of colonoscopy videos from multicentres. The colonoscopic images from CVC-Clinic and ETISLarib databases have different distributions of color and illumination.

images. For example, Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2018) proposed a regression-based convolutional neural network (RCNN) pipeline for the automated detection of polyps during colonoscopy. Yu et al. (Yu et al. 2017) developed an ofﬂine and online 3D deep learning integration framework by
leveraging the 3D fully convolutional network (3D-FCN) to
tackle the problem of colorectal polyp detection. Although
the existing studies signiﬁcantly improved the diagnosis performance of CAD systems, the generality of the established
models was merely investigated as data from single source
domain was often used. The endoscopic images from multicentres usually have different imaging conditions such as
color distribution and illumination effects, because imaging
devices and imaging parameter settings are not well standardized. As shown in Fig. 1, the colonoscopic video frames
captured by the CVC-Clinic centre (Vázquez et al. 2017)
is warm-toned (higher red intensity) compared to the ones
from the ETIS-Larib centre (Silva et al. 2014). Such variations would make models trained on one domain fail on
another.
Domain adaptation is one of the potential solutions to address the problem of variations of imaging conditions among

Introduction
The colorectal and stomach cancers are the leading causes of
worldwide cancer deaths in 2018, accounting for 9.2% and
8.2% of total cancer deaths, respectively (Bray et al. 2018).
The endoscopy is the primary imaging modality for screening and diagnosis of these cancers and over 100 million endoscopy exams are annually performed. However, the traditional screening approach requires specialized physicians to
visually analyze extensive endoscopic videos, which is extremely laborious and suffers from various problems, e.g.
inter-observer variations. With the recent development of
deep learning, an increasing number of studies tried to develop computer-aid diagnosis (CAD) system for endoscopic
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3462

