The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Crowd Counting with Decomposed Uncertainty
Min-hwan Oh,1∗ Peder Olsen,2† Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy3
1

Columbia University, New York, NY 10025
Microsoft, Azure Global Research, Redmond, WA 98052
3
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
1
m.oh@columbia.edu, 2 peolsen@microsoft.com, 3 knatesa@us.ibm.com
2

One problem with existing CNN methods is that they only
offer point estimates of counts (or density map) and do not
address the uncertainty in the prediction, which can come
from the model and also from data itself. When given a new
unlabeled crowd image, how much can we trust the output
of the model if it only provides a point estimate? Probabilistic interpretations of outputs of the model via uncertainty
quantiﬁcation are very important. Uncertainty quantiﬁcation accompanied by point estimation can lead to a more
informed decision, and even improve the prediction quality. This can is crucial for the practitioners of these crowd
counting methods. With the quantiﬁcation of prediction conﬁdence at hand, one can treat uncertain inputs and special
cases explicitly. For instance, a crowd counting model might
return a density map (or a count) with less conﬁdence (high
uncertainty) in some area of a given scene. In this case, the
practitioner could decide to pass the image – or the speciﬁc
part of the image that the model is uncertain about – to a
human for validation.
While Bayesian methods provide a mathematically plausible framework to deal with uncertainty quantiﬁcation, often these methods come with a prohibitively computational
cost. In this work, we propose a simple and scalable neural
network framework using a bootstrap ensemble to quantify
decomposed uncertainty for crowd counting. The key highlights of our work are:

Abstract
Research in neural networks in the ﬁeld of computer vision
has achieved remarkable accuracy for point estimation. However, the uncertainty in the estimation is rarely addressed.
Uncertainty quantiﬁcation accompanied by point estimation
can lead to a more informed decision, and even improve
the prediction quality. In this work, we focus on uncertainty
estimation in the domain of crowd counting. With increasing occurrences of heavily crowded events such as political rallies, protests, concerts, etc., automated crowd analysis is becoming an increasingly crucial task. The stakes can
be very high in many of these real-world applications. We
propose a scalable neural network framework with quantiﬁcation of decomposed uncertainty using a bootstrap ensemble. We demonstrate that the proposed uncertainty quantiﬁcation method provides additional insight to the crowd counting problem and is simple to implement. We also show that
our proposed method exhibits state-of-the-art performances
in many benchmark crowd counting datasets.

Introduction
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been
shown to have successes in a wide range of tasks in computer vision, such as object detection, image recognition,
face recognition, and image segmentation. Inspired by these
successes, many CNN based crowd counting methods have
been proposed. Along with density estimation techniques
(Lempitsky and Zisserman 2010), CNN based approaches
have shown outstanding performances over previous works
that were relying on handcrafted feature extraction.
With increasing occurrences of heavily crowded events
such as political rallies, protests, concerts, etc., automated
crowd analysis is becoming an increasingly crucial task.
The stakes can be very high in many of these real-world
applications. Hence, we ask the following question:

• To the best of our knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst to address uncertainty quantiﬁcation of neural network predictions for crowd counting. Our method is shown to produce
accurate estimated uncertainty.
• Our method decomposes uncertainties coming from the
model and also from input data, which can be of independent interest for image analysis.
• Our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art level
performances on multiple crowd counting benchmark
datasets. The proposed architecture is more efﬁcient than
previously known state-of-the-art methods in terms of
computational complexity.

Question: Can we use the existing neural network based
methods for real-world crowd analysis?
∗

Part of the work was done during the internship at IBM.
Much of the work was done while the author was at IBM.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Our proposed uncertainty quantiﬁcation framework is
generic and independent of the architecture of an underlying network. Combined with its simplicity for implemen-

†

11799

