The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Latent Relation Language Models
Hiroaki Hayashi,1∗ Zecong Hu,1∗ Chenyan Xiong,2 Graham Neubig1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Microsoft Research AI
{hiroakih, zeconghu, gneubig}@cs.cmu.edu, Chenyan.Xiong@microsoft.com

Abstract

Topic: Barack Obama
Article

In this paper, we propose Latent Relation Language Models
(LRLMs), a class of language models that parameterizes the
joint distribution over the words in a document and the entities that occur therein via knowledge graph relations. This
model has a number of attractive properties: it not only improves language modeling performance, but is also able to
annotate the posterior probability of entity spans for a given
text through relations. Experiments demonstrate empirical
improvements over both word-based language models and
a previous approach that incorporates knowledge graph information. Qualitative analysis further demonstrates the proposed model’s ability to learn to predict appropriate relations
in context.†

1

Barack Hussein Obama II (...; born August 4, 1961) is an
American[nationality] attorney[occupation] and politician[occupation] who served as the 44th president of the
United States[position held] from 2009 to 2017. ...

Knowledge Graph

<occupation>
<occupation>

...

politician
lawyer
(“attorney”, ...)

<position
held>

<nationality>

American

president of the United States

Figure 1: Overview of our task of language modeling conditioned on a knowledge graph. For a given topic, we want to
learn a language model that leverages the knowledge graph
through relations when modeling the text.

Introduction

Language models (LMs) calculate the probability P (X) of
textual data X, and are a core model class of interest to NLP.
LMs are used as testbeds for evaluation of generative models
of text, and have applications such as rescoring of upstream
language generation inputs (Sundermeyer, Schlüter, and Ney
2012), grammatical error correction (Felice et al. 2014), or
pre-training of sentence representations (Peters et al. 2018).
Neural networks are used to model this probability in stateof-the-art LMs (Bengio et al. 2003; Mikolov et al. 2010;
Merity et al. 2017).
Textual data X comprise a wide variety of words to
be modeled, from closed-class function words, to common
nouns or verbs, to named entities and numbers (Zipf 1949).
Notably, words on the rarer end of this spectrum are often
more semantically or topically important, as evidenced by
the success of heuristics such as TF-IDF (Salton and McGill
1986), which up-weight words with low frequency. Previous work has noted that while neural LMs greatly outperform alternatives such as n-gram models on frequent words,
they often under-perform on these rare words due to their
limited parameter budget, which puts them at a disadvantage compared to non-parametric models like count-based

n-grams (Neubig and Dyer 2016).
Methods to mitigate this bottleneck have been proposed
in the context of conditional LMs, which instead model the
conditional probability P (X | C), where C is some context given to the model. For instance, in sequence transduction tasks, there are mechanisms to copy from the source
sequence (Gu et al. 2016) or use word or phrase dictionaries (Arthur, Neubig, and Nakamura 2016) to improve
modeling of low-frequency words. Perhaps more interesting from an LM perspective are methods conditioned on
information from structured knowledge sources such as
knowledge graphs (Ahn et al. 2016; Parvez et al. 2018;
Logan et al. 2019), tables (Lebret, Grangier, and Auli 2016),
or grammars (Konstas and Lapata 2013). These methods are
analogous to human language production, where the underlying knowledge is converted into linguistic realizations.
In this work, we propose Latent Relation Language Models (LRLMs), a class of conditional LMs that take relational
information between entities in a knowledge graph as context. Speciﬁcally, our model is able to generate either words
from a ﬁxed word vocabulary, or a span of words deﬁned
according to their relations with a topic entity of interest, as
shown in Figure 1. The choices of which method of generation to use is deﬁned as a latent variable sequence Z. We

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Equal Contribution.
†
Code & Data: https://github.com/neulab/lrlm.
7911

