The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Theory-Based Causal Transfer:
Integrating Instance-Level Induction and Abstract-Level Structure Learning
Mark Edmonds,1,2 Xiaojian Ma,1 Siyuan Qi,1,2 Yixin Zhu,1,2 Hongjing Lu,3 Song-Chun Zhu1,2
1

UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy
2
International Center for AI and Robot Autonomy (CARA)
3
UCLA Computational Vision and Learning (CVL) Lab
{markedmonds, maxiaojian, syqi, yixin.zhu, hongjing}@ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu
Abstract
Learning transferable knowledge across similar but different
settings is a fundamental component of generalized intelligence. In this paper, we approach the transfer learning challenge from a causal theory perspective. Our agent is endowed
with two basic yet general theories for transfer learning: (i)
a task shares a common abstract structure that is invariant
across domains, and (ii) the behavior of speciﬁc features of
the environment remain constant across domains. We adopt
a Bayesian perspective of causal theory induction and use
these theories to transfer knowledge between environments.
Given these general theories, the goal is to train an agent by
interactively exploring the problem space to (i) discover, form,
and transfer useful abstract and structural knowledge, and (ii)
induce useful knowledge from the instance-level attributes observed in the environment. A hierarchy of Bayesian structures
is used to model abstract-level structural causal knowledge,
and an instance-level associative learning scheme learns which
speciﬁc objects can be used to induce state changes through
interaction. This model-learning scheme is then integrated
with a model-based planner to achieve a task in the OpenLock environment, a virtual “escape room” with a complex
hierarchy that requires agents to reason about an abstract, generalized causal structure. We compare performances against a
set of predominate model-free reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. RL agents showed poor ability transferring learned
knowledge across different trials. Whereas the proposed model
revealed similar performance trends as human learners, and
more importantly, demonstrated transfer behavior across trials
and learning situations.1

1

Figure 1: (a) Starting conﬁguration of a 3-lever OpenLock
room. The arm can interact with levers by either pushing
outward or pulling inward, achieved by clicking either the
outer or inner regions of the levers’ radial tracks, respectively.
Light gray levers are always locked; however, this is unknown
to agents. The door can be pushed only after being unlocked.
The green button serves as the mechanism to push on the
door. The black circle on the door indicates whether or not
the door is unlocked; locked if present, unlocked if absent.
(b) Pushing on a lever. (c) Opening the door.

causal understanding as learning stimulus-response relationships through observation in classical conditioning experimental paradigms (Shanks and Dickinson 1988; Rescorla
and Wagner 1972). However, more recent studies show
human understanding of causal mechanisms in the distal
world is more complex than covariation between observed
(perceptual) variables (Holyoak and Cheng 2011); e.g., humans explore and experiment with dynamic physical scenarios to reﬁne causal hypotheses (Bramley et al. 2018;
Stahl and Feigenson 2015).
Since the associative account, researchers have demonstrated that humans uncover causal relationships through
the discovery of abstract causal structure (Waldmann and
Holyoak 1992) and causal strength (Cheng 1997). Simultaneously, causal graphical models and Bayesian statistical inference have been developed to provide a general
representational framework for how causal structure and
strength are discovered (Grifﬁths and Tenenbaum 2005;
2009; Tenenbaum, Grifﬁths, and Kemp 2006; Bramley,

Introduction

The ability of agents to learn and reuse knowledge is a
fundamental characteristic of general intelligence and is essential for agents to succeed in novel circumstances (Legg
and Hutter 2007). Humans demonstrate a remarkable ability to transfer causal knowledge between environments governed by the same underlying mechanics, in spite of observational changes to the features of the environment (Edmonds et al. 2018). Early psychological research framed
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The proposed algorithm and all baseline algorithms can be
found on the ﬁrst author’s website.
1283

