The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generating Persona Consistent Dialogues
by Exploiting Natural Language Inference
Haoyu Song, Wei-Nan Zhang, Jingwen Hu, Ting Liu
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
Harbin Institute of Technology, Heilongjiang Province, China
{hysong, wnzhang, jwhu, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Consistency is one of the major challenges faced by dialogue
agents. A human-like dialogue agent should not only respond
naturally, but also maintain a consistent persona. In this paper, we exploit the advantages of natural language inference
(NLI) technique to address the issue of generating persona
consistent dialogues. Different from existing work that reranks the retrieved responses through an NLI model, we cast
the task as a reinforcement learning problem and propose to
exploit the NLI signals from response-persona pairs as rewards for the process of dialogue generation. Speciﬁcally,
our generator employs an attention-based encoder-decoder to
generate persona-based responses. Our evaluator consists of
two components: an adversarially trained naturalness module and an NLI based consistency module. Moreover, we
use another well-performed NLI model in the evaluation of
persona-consistency. Experimental results on both human and
automatic metrics, including the model-based consistency
evaluation, demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms strong generative baselines, especially in the personaconsistency of generated responses.

Figure 1: Naturalness is an important attribute of dialogue
responses. In persona-based dialogue generation, the consistency with persona is another essential factor to consider. An
ideal response should be not only natural but also consistent
with the persona.

Natural Language Inference (NLI) learns a mapping between a sentence pair and an entailment category. Taking
advantages of the NLI techniques in natural language understanding (Bowman et al. 2015), the detection of personaconsistency can be modeled as an NLI task (Welleck et al.
2019), which assigns a label of entailment, neutral, or contradiction to an “(utterance, persona)” pair. Meanwhile, existing persona-based dialogue models are limited by their
loss functions. For these deep generative models, it is difﬁcult to design a differentiable training objective to exploit the
NLI based consistency detection method. Besides designing a differentiable training objective, reinforcement learning (RL) offers another solution to this problem, which backpropagates the reward signals to guide the generator.
In this paper, different from re-ranking the archived responses (Welleck et al. 2019), we take advantages of the NLI
techniques in guiding the generation of persona consistent
dialogues. Speciﬁcally, we propose a system trained using
reinforcement learning. Our model has one evaluator with
two modules and one generator. The evaluator consists of a
naturalness module and a consistency module. The naturalness module is trained adversarially for higher accuracy. As
for the consistency module, we use an NLI styled classiﬁer

Introduction
Despite the recent success of dialogue generation in opendomain by training from large volumes of human-to-human
interaction data (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Serban et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2019), conversing to a dialogue
agent is still in its infancy, and one major issue for these datadriven models is the lack of a consistent persona (Vinyals
and Le 2015; Li et al. 2016a; Zhang et al. 2018; Song et al.
2019a). Figure 1 shows how consistency affects the quality
of dialogues.
One practical approach to increase the consistency of a
dialogue agent is to explicitly deﬁne a set of personal facts
describing the characters (the personas) of the agent and
learn to generate responses that reﬂect the predeﬁned personas (Zhang et al. 2018). However, due to the lack of consistency modeling and the maximum-likelihood estimation
(MLE) objective function, these persona-based models still
face the inconsistency issue (Welleck et al. 2019).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8878

