The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DASOT: A Uniﬁed Framework Integrating Data
Association and Single Object Tracking for Online Multi-Object Tracking
Qi Chu,1∗ Wanli Ouyang,2 Bin Liu,1 Feng Zhu,3 Nenghai Yu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
3
SenseTime Group Limited, China
{qchu, ﬂowice, ynh}@ustc.edu.cn, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au, zhufeng@sensetime.com
2

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an online multi-object tracking
(MOT) approach that integrates data association and single
object tracking (SOT) with a uniﬁed convolutional network
(ConvNet), named DASOTNet. The intuition behind integrating data association and SOT is that they can complement
each other. Following Siamese network architecture, DASOTNet consists of the shared feature ConvNet, the data association branch and the SOT branch. Data association is treated
as a special re-identiﬁcation task and solved by learning discriminative features for different targets in the data association branch. To handle the problem that the computational
cost of SOT grows intolerably as the number of tracked objects increases, we propose an efﬁcient two-stage tracking
method in the SOT branch, which utilizes the merits of correlation features and can simultaneously track all the existing
targets within one forward propagation. With feature sharing
and the interaction between them, data association branch and
the SOT branch learn to better complement each other. Using
a multi-task objective, the whole network can be trained endto-end. Compared with state-of-the-art online MOT methods,
our method is much faster while maintaining a comparable
performance.

Figure 1: Examples of detection results (left), tracking results using data association (middle) and tracking results of
single object tracker (right). The top row shows the case of
non-accurate bounding box and the bottom row illustrates
the case of missing detection.

ods inherently fail to track some targets in case of missing
detection or non-accurate bounding box.
To handle this problem, some previous works (Xiang,
Alahi, and Savarese 2015; Chu et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2018)
have attempted to introduce single object tracking (SOT)
into MOT problem. These works expect to utilize the merits
of single object tracker in tracking target by searching for the
best matched location without the help of object detections.
However, there are some problems with these methods.
First, the data association model and single object tracker
used in existing methods (Xiang, Alahi, and Savarese 2015;
Zhu et al. 2018) are isolated. It makes the whole MOT algorithm complicated and cumbersome. What’s more, separate
training data association model and single object tracker can
not utilize information from each other. Single object tracker
will make redundant efforts in many easy cases (e.g. targets
#1 and #5 in Fig. 1) that can be well handled by data association model. Data association model can not obtain better
samples from tracking results of single object tracker (e.g.
targets #2 and #9 in Fig. 1) for training. In this paper, we
integrate data association and SOT into a uniﬁed network,
which consists of the feature ConvNet, the data association
branch and the SOT branch. The two branches can share

Introduction
Online multi-object tracking aims at estimating the locations of multiple objects in the video sequence and yielding
their individual trajectories in a sequential manner. It has a
wide range of applications in casual video analysis systems
such as video surveillance, robot navigation and autonomous
driving.
Beneﬁting from the advances in object detection, the
tracking-by-detection paradigm has become popular for
MOT in the past decade. Online MOT Methods based on
this paradigm mainly focus on associating detection results
in each frame provided by a pre-deﬁned object detector with
existing tracks, namely the data association problem. However, detection results are not always reliable. Due to the
heavy dependency on the performance of the pre-deﬁned object detector, these data association based online MOT meth∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10672

