The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unsupervised Neural Dialect Translation
with Commonality and Diversity Modeling
Yu Wan,∗ Baosong Yang,∗ Derek F. Wong,† Lidia S. Chao, Haihua Du, Ben C.H. Ao

NLP2 CT Lab, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
{nlp2ct.ywan, nlp2ct.baosong, nlp2ct.duhaihua, nlp2ct.benao}@gmail.com, {derekfw,lidiasc}@um.edu.mo

Abstract
As a special machine translation task, dialect translation has
two main characteristics: 1) lack of parallel training corpus; and 2) possessing similar grammar between two sides
of the translation. In this paper, we investigate how to exploit the commonality and diversity between dialects thus to
build unsupervised translation models merely accessing to
monolingual data. Speciﬁcally, we leverage pivot-private embedding, layer coordination, as well as parameter sharing to
sufﬁciently model commonality and diversity among source
and target, ranging from lexical, through syntactic, to semantic levels. In order to examine the effectiveness of the proposed models, we collect 20 million monolingual corpus for
each of Mandarin and Cantonese, which are ofﬁcial language
and the most widely used dialect in China. Experimental results reveal that our methods outperform rule-based simpliﬁed and traditional Chinese conversion and conventional unsupervised translation models over 12 BLEU scores.

CAN

nei


yaugeiho


faan ngukkei
jamdaam tong

 


MAN

ni


nande


hui


jia




xian

sin



hekou tang



Figure 1: An example of C AN-M AN translation.

while dialect translation is not equipped such kind of prerequisite. This makes our task fall into unsupervised learning category (Artetxe et al. 2018; Lample et al. 2018a;
2018c). Second, dialects are closely related and, despite their
differences, often share similar grammar, e.g. morphology
and syntax (Chambers and Trudgill 1998). The extraction of
commonality is beneﬁcial to unsupervised mapping (Lample et al. 2018b) and model robustness (Firat, Cho, and Bengio 2016), in the meanwhile, preserving the explicit diversity
plays a crucial role in our dialect translation. Consequently,
it is challenging to balance the commonality and diversity
for dialect translation thus to improve its performance.
We approach the mentioned problems by proposing unsupervised neural dialect translation model, which is merely
trained using monolingual corpus and sufﬁciently leverage
commonality and diversity of dialects. Speciﬁcally, we train
an advanced NMT model T RANSFORMER (Vaswani et al.
2017) with denoising reconstruction (Vincent et al. 2008)
and back-translation (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016a),
which aim at building common language model and mapping different attributes, respectively. We introduce several
strategies into translation model for balancing the commonality and diversity: 1) parameter-sharing that forces dialects
to share the same latent space; 2) pivot-private embedding
which models similarities and differences at lexical level;
and 3) layer coordination which enhances the interaction of
features between two sides of translation.
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed
model, we propose monolingual dialect corpus which consists of 20 million colloquial sentences for each of M AN1
and C AN. The sentences are extracted from conversations
and comments in forums, social medias as well as subti-

Introduction
Dialect refers to a variant of a given language, which could
be deﬁned by factors of regional speech patterns, social class
or ethnicity (Lyons 1981). Except for pronunciation, a dialect is also distinguished by its textual expression (Wong
and Lee 2018). For instance, Mandarin (M AN) and Cantonese (C AN) are the ofﬁcial language and the most widely
used dialect of China, respectively (Lee and Wong 1998). As
seen in Fig. 1, although the sentences have absolutely same
semantic meaning, they have distinct attributes with respect
to the expression on text. Correspondingly, in this task we
attempt to build automatic translation system for dialects.
An intuitive way is to leverage advanced machine translation systems which have recently yielded human-level performance with the use of neural networks (Chen et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2018). Nevertheless, contrast with traditional machine translation, there are two main challenges in dialect
translation. First, the success of supervised neural machine
translation depends on large-scale training parallel data,
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1

9130

For simpliﬁcation, we regard ofﬁcial language as a dialect.

