The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SPARQA: Skeleton-Based Semantic Parsing
for Complex Questions over Knowledge Bases
Yawei Sun, Lingling Zhang, Gong Cheng, Yuzhong Qu
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{ywsun, llzhang}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {gcheng, yzqu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) Question

Semantic parsing transforms a natural language question into
a formal query over a knowledge base. Many existing methods rely on syntactic parsing like dependencies. However, the
accuracy of producing such expressive formalisms is not satisfying on long complex questions. In this paper, we propose
a novel skeleton grammar to represent the high-level structure of a complex question. This dedicated coarse-grained
formalism with a BERT-based parsing algorithm helps to improve the accuracy of the downstream ﬁne-grained semantic parsing. Besides, to align the structure of a question with
the structure of a knowledge base, our multi-strategy method
combines sentence-level and word-level semantics. Our approach shows promising performance on several datasets.

1

What movie that Miley Cyrus acted in had a director
named Tom Vaughan ?
What movie had a director ? [S]
acl
acl:relcl

(b) Skeleton

that Miley Cyrus acted in [S]

acted in

(c) Ungrounded Query

named Tom Vaughan [VP]

What movie

film.performance.film
(d) Grounded Query

director named
Tom Vaughan

Miley Cyrus
?x

film.film.directed_by
m.02z02cx

?y
film.performance.actor
m.0bdxs5

Introduction

Figure 1: (a) A complex question, (b) its skeleton, (c) the
derived ungrounded query and (d) grounded formal query.

Question answering over knowledge bases (KBQA) has
been a popular application of NLP technologies. Many recent approaches are based on semantic parsing (Herzig and
Berant 2018; Jie and Lu 2018; Labutov, Yang, and Mitchell
2018; Dong and Lapata 2018; Dong, Quirk, and Lapata
2018; Chen, Sun, and Han 2018). They transform a natural language question into a formal query, for example, a
SPARQL query, which in turn is executed over a knowledge
base (KB) such as Freebase to retrieve answers. State-ofthe-art methods (Hao et al. 2018; Mohammed, Shi, and Lin
2018; Wang et al. 2018; Chen, Wu, and Zaki 2019) have
achieved promising results on simple questions that are represented as a formal query with a single predicate, for example, “who is the wife of Obama?” However, difﬁculties are
faced when processing complex questions that correspond to
a formal query with multiple predicates (Talmor and Berant
2018b), for example, “what movie that Miley Cyrus acted
in had a director named Tom Vaughan?” We will use this
question as a running example throughout the paper.
Challenges. To understand and answer a complex question, we identify two challenges among others.
First, semantic parsing often relies on syntactic parsing
like dependencies (Abujabal et al. 2017; 2018; Luo et
al. 2018). Errors in syntactic parsing, which are expected

for complex questions, will be propagated to the downstream semantic parsing and inﬂuence the overall performance. In our running example, as shown in Figure 2, dependency parsing misses the long-distance dependency between “movie” and “had”, but generates an incorrect relation
between “in” and “had”.
Second, a question is often transformed into a KBindependent graph-structured ungrounded query (Reddy et
al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2017; Hu et al. 2018), which in turn
is grounded over the underlying KB into a formal query
which may have a different structure. Such heterogeneity in
grounding is common for complex questions with multiple
predicates. In our running example, the ungrounded query in
Figure 1(c) has two predicates: acted in and director, but the
grounded query in Figure 1(d) has three predicates due to the
use of a mediator node (performance) for representing nary relations (actor-film-character) in Freebase.
Contributions. We address these two challenges with a
new approach called SPARQA, that is an abbreviation for
Skeleton-based semantic PARsing for Question Answering.
Figure 3 presents an overview of our approach. From an input question, we identify its high-level skeleton structure,
to help accurate generation of an ungrounded query. This

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8952

