The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Can Eruptions Be Predicted? Short-Term Prediction of
Volcanic Eruptions via Attention-Based Long Short-Term Memory
Hiep V. Le,1∗ Tsuyoshi Murata,1 Masato Iguchi2
1

Department of Computer Science, Tokyo Institute of Technology
hiep@net.c.titech.ac.jp, murata@c.titech.ac.jp
2
Disaster Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University
iguchi.masato.8m@kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Short-term prediction of volcanic eruptions is one of the ultimate objectives of volcanology. At Sakurajima volcano, an
active volcano in Japan, experts monitor the volcanic sensor data and analyze the prior signal to predict the eruptions.
Even though experts derived some patterns, it is hard to make
a good prediction due to handcrafted features. To address this
issue, we propose to predict eruptions using machine learning. In this paper, we attempt to predict the eruptions hourly
by adapting several machine learning methods including traditional and deep learning approaches. As recurrent neural
network is well-known for extracting the time-sensitive features, we propose the model especially for volcanic eruption prediction named VepNet. The assumption is based on
domain knowledge that some speciﬁc triggers are the main
causes of future eruptions. To take this advantage, VepNet
deploys an attention layer to locate and prioritize these triggers in decision making. The extensive experiments ever conducted using data from Sakurajima volcano showed the effectiveness of deep learning approach over the traditional approach. On top of that, VepNet showed its effectiveness on
prediction with AUC-score up to 0.8665. Moreover, an attempt has been made to explain the mechanism of the eruptions by analyzing the attention layer of VepNet. Lastly, to
support volcano expert in issuing warnings and the safety of
living people around Sakurajima, a warning system named
3LWS is proposed. The system predicted the eruptions hourly
with high accuracy and reliability with the eruption rate up to
68.97% in the High-Risk level.

Figure 1: The monitoring system and short-term prediction
at Sakurajima volcano.

prior signals of these data before an eruption occurs and
found some interesting patterns (Kamo and Ishihara 1989;
Iguchi et al. 2008). However, it is hard to map that knowledge into an accurate model due to handcrafted features.
This creates an opportunity for machine learning researchers
to solve this problem while collaborating with volcano experts.
In this paper, we attempt to predict the eruptions hourly
using the historical sensor data two hours ago. This setting
is due to domain knowledge and recommended by volcano
experts. An eruption is very hard to predict more than an
hour in advance due to the limitation of the current technology (Sparks 2003). The factors that lead to a volcanic eruption unfold deep inside our planet, further down than current
technology can reach. In the current monitoring system, the
prior signals of an eruption measured by the sensors on the
ground are clear only when the eruption is about to happen
soon. That is why in this paper, we predict the eruptions an
hour in advance and use the past data of two hours ago as
more data just increase the computational cost and do not
bring much useful information about the eruptions. The prediction will be made hourly and is either explosive or not
explosive.
We conduct this research on two perspectives: traditional
and deep learning approaches. As recurrent neural network
is promising for learning the nonlinearity and the temporality of time series data, we propose a modern deep neural network architecture called Volcanic eruption prediction
(VepNet) especially for the short-term prediction of vol-

Introduction
Volcanic eruptions cause severe damages to human and society, hence it is an important research topic to solve. In the
context of this paper, the eruption means explosive eruption.
Volcano experts at Sakurajima volcano deploy a monitoring system (Figure 1) which includes the sensors to measure time series data like strain and energy data (Iguchi
et al. 2013). The details of these data will be explained
later in the Background Knowledge and Dataset section.
Experts observe the data over many years to extract the
∗
At the time of writing this paper, the ﬁrst author is working at
LINE Fukuoka Corporation, Japan.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13320

