The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

HirePeer: Impartial Peer-Assessed Hiring
at Scale in Expert Crowdsourcing Markets
Yasmine Kotturi,1 Anson Kahng,2 Ariel D. Procaccia,2 Chinmay Kulkarni1
1

Human-Computer Interaction Institute
2
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh PA 15213
{ykotturi, akahng, arielpro, chinmayk}@cs.cmu.edu
payment with lower quality work (Silberman et al. 2010).
Indeed, in other markets, such large costs for hiring have
been shown to dissuade employers from hiring workers entirely (Stigler 1962). This may cause online crowdsourcing
markets to degrade over time. This paper investigates a new
scalable method to hire expert workers quickly and accurately.
Perhaps the most widely adopted method today to address
the large costs of screening applicants is reputation systems.
These systems aggregate a candidate’s prior task performance,
as assessed by past employers, into a score. Although reputation systems are widely adopted by platforms, they bring
with them their own set of challenges to effective hiring at
scale, which worsen over time. For instance, online reputations become inﬂated over time: the (social) cost of giving
negative feedback is higher than positive feedback (Horton
and Golden 2015). As a result, norms shift over time, and
reputation inﬂation worsens, reducing reliability.
While ongoing work continues to improve existing approaches to address some of these limitations, this paper
instead presents an entirely new approach to hiring at scale.
Our approach is based on a widely used technique to address
the need for accurate assessments of open-ended material at
massive scale: peer assessment. To date, peer assessment remains the gold standard of review, as seen in its use to assess
quality in top-tier academic conferences (Ware 2008), grant
reviewing (Chubin and Hackett 1990), and more recently
massive online classrooms (Kulkarni et al. 2013). This paper
investigates: can crowd experts peer-assess each others’ job
materials to identify qualiﬁed candidates? Speciﬁcally, we
investigate if peer assessment can generate a ranked list of
all job applicants from which the employer can make ﬁnal
hiring decisions.
As might be apparent, the conﬂicts of interest that arise
in a hiring setting are the central challenge in realizing this
approach. Speciﬁcally, because all crowd experts applying
to a task presumably would like to take the job, they have
an incentive to rate other applications strategically, to make
themselves look more attractive to the employer. This paper
describes a system, HirePeer, that overcomes these conﬂicts.
Overcoming conﬂicts requires both algorithms that can aggregate judgments such that participants derive no beneﬁt from

Abstract
Expert crowdsourcing (e.g., Upwork.com) provides promising beneﬁts such as productivity improvements for employers, and ﬂexible working arrangements for workers. Yet to
realize these beneﬁts, a key persistent challenge is effective
hiring at scale. Current approaches, such as reputation systems
and standardized competency tests, develop weaknesses such
as score inﬂation over time, thus degrading market quality.
This paper presents HirePeer, a novel alternative approach to
hiring at scale that leverages peer assessment to elicit honest assessments of fellow workers’ job application materials,
which it then aggregates using an impartial ranking algorithm.
This paper reports on three studies that investigate both the
costs and the beneﬁts to workers and employers of impartial
peer-assessed hiring. We ﬁnd, to solicit honest assessments,
algorithms must be communicated in terms of their impartial
effects. Second, in practice, peer assessment is highly accurate, and impartial rank aggregation algorithms incur a small
accuracy cost for their impartiality guarantee. Third, workers report ﬁnding peer-assessed hiring useful for receiving
targeted feedback on their job materials.

Introduction
Expert crowdsourcing is on the rise. From 2009 and 2013,
one of the largest platforms for expert crowdsourcing, Upwork.com (previously oDesk), witnessed an 800% increase
in the number of paying employers (Agrawal et al. 2013).
Yet as more employers and workers move to expert crowdsourcing, a critical challenge remains: employers struggle to
hire effectively and efﬁciently at scale. On Upwork, for instance, it takes employers approximately three days to screen,
interview, and hire every candidate (Upwork 2014). Relative to the duration of an expert crowdsourcing task, this
cost in time and effort is enormous, encouraging employers
to adopt a satisﬁcing strategy (i.e., hiring workers who are
“good enough” instead of ﬁnding the most qualiﬁed candidate overall) (Terviö 2009). This cost also damages workers’
prospects: when employers cannot conﬁdently identify qualiﬁed applicants, they offer lower wages to offset their risk of
low-quality results; such depressed wages consequently turn
away qualiﬁed workers, or workers may respond to lower
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2577

