The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relation Extraction with
Convolutional Network over Learnable Syntax-Transport Graph
Kai Sun,1,2 Richong Zhang,1,2∗ Yongyi Mao,3 Samuel Mensah,1,2 Xudong Liu1,2
2

1
SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Beijing Advanced Institution on Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
{sunkai, samensah}@buaa.edu.cn, {zhangrc, liuxd}@act.buaa.edu.cn, ymao@uottawa.ca

(a) The man used a support pillow to remedy the pain caused
by stresses.
(b) Amateur video shows some of the devastation caused by
the tsunami waves.
(c) Work was completed by contractors using a temporary
entrance off old Renwick road.
(d) Analysts assess distribution and changes in distribution
over time by using frequency.

Abstract
A large majority of approaches have been proposed to leverage the dependency tree in the relation classiﬁcation task.
Recent works have focused on pruning irrelevant information from the dependency tree. The state-of-the-art Attention
Guided Graph Convolutional Networks (AGGCNs) transforms the dependency tree into a weighted-graph to distinguish the relevance of nodes and edges for relation classiﬁcation. However, in their approach, the graph is fully connected, which destroys the structure information of the original dependency tree. How to effectively make use of relevant
information while ignoring irrelevant information from the
dependency trees remains a challenge in the relation classiﬁcation task. In this work, we learn to transform the dependency tree into a weighted graph by considering the syntax
dependencies of the connected nodes and persisting the structure of the original dependency tree. We refer to this graph
as a syntax-transport graph. We further propose a learnable
syntax-transport attention graph convolutional network (LSTAGCN) which operates on the syntax-transport graph directly
to distill the ﬁnal representation which is sufﬁcient for classiﬁcation. Experiments on Semeval-2010 Task 8 and Tacred
show our approach outperforms previous methods.

Table 1: Four sentences with entities in bold.
Shen and Huang 2016; Zhang et al. 2017; Lee, Seo, and Choi
2019). However, conventional attention mechanism on sequence of words ignores the grammar structure information
of the sentence.
So far, a variety of methods have been proposed to leverage dependency grammar information in this task (Miwa
and Bansal 2016; Yang et al. 2016; Zhang, Qi, and Manning
2018; Guo, Zhang, and Lu 2019). In particular, the shortest
dependency path (SDP) between the two entities in the dependency tree of the given sentence is believed to convey informative clues of target relation (Xu et al. 2015). However,
some signiﬁcant nodes might not be included in the SDP
and be omitted (Liu et al. 2015). For example, the preposition is commonly excluded from SDP while it generally
indicates the subject-predicate relationship between the considered entities.
Recent works have focused on pruning irrelevant information from the dependency tree. The C-GCN (Zhang, Qi, and
Manning 2018) obtain a pruned tree by including tokens that
are up to distance K away from the dependency path in the
lowest common ancestor (LCA) subtree. However, the distance K is predeﬁned and ﬁxed. Such a rule-based pruning
strategy is not general for most cases.
The state-of-the-art C-AGGCN (Guo, Zhang, and Lu
2019) exploits self-attention to transform the dependency
tree into a fully connected weighted graph. However, as all
the nodes are connected, the new introduced connections
damage the dependency relationship between words preserved in the tree structure. How to effectively make use of
relevant information while ignoring irrelevant information
from the dependency trees remains a challenge in this task.
Generally, we claim that it is necessary to model the de-

Introduction
Relation classiﬁcation aims to classify the semantic relations
between two entities in a sentence. For instance, given a sentence “My apartment has a pretty large kitchen.” and two
entities apartment and kitchen, the goal is to classify the
relation of the two entities into a Component-Whole category, denoted as Component-Whole(kitchen, apartment) .
Relation classiﬁcation plays a vital role in a variety of downstream natural language processing task including knowledge extraction from unstructured texts and question answering.
With the aim to address the classiﬁcation task, several
methods have been developed. The sequence-based methods only take word sequence as input (Zeng et al. 2014;
Zhang et al. 2015) and attention mechanism is applied to distill relevant information for classiﬁcation (Zhou et al. 2016;
∗

Corresponding author:zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8928

