The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DeGAN: Data-Enriching GAN for Retrieving
Representative Samples from a Trained Classiﬁer
Sravanti Addepalli, Gaurav Kumar Nayak,
Anirban Chakraborty, R. Venkatesh Babu
Department of Computational and Data Sciences
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
{sravantia, gauravnayak, anirban, venky}@iisc.ac.in
Srinivas and Babu 2015) before deployment, expand the
functionality of the model (Rebufﬁ et al. 2017), or reﬁne
the model based on domain speciﬁc data (Csurka 2017).
These tasks typically require access to the initial training
data, which may not be available to the client due to its proprietary nature. In addition, storage and future use of personal data could be limited due to privacy restrictions. This
could include user details, biometric data or medical history.
Non-availability of data restricts future enhancements to
a trained model. This issue has fuelled research in limiteddata and data-free learning approaches to speciﬁc tasks such
as Knowledge Distillation (Lopes, Fenu, and Starner 2017),
Incremental Learning (Castro et al. 2018) and improving
model robustness (Mopuri, Krishna, and Babu 2018). The
key concern with Data-free approaches is that they operate
in a severely constrained setting, where they assume nonavailability of any additional data. This often leads to the
process of reconstructing samples using variants of activation maximization (Erhan et al. 2009), which is computationally expensive. Several iterations of back-propagation
are required to generate one batch of representative samples. One of the concerns with few-shot learning approaches
is that they require careful selection of exemplars (Castro
et al. 2018), which may not be permitted in a privacy restricted setting. We aim to bridge the gap between datafree approaches, which over-constrain the problem setting;
few-shot learning approaches, which assume availability of
cherry-picked samples; and the traditional learning methods,
that assume the entire training dataset to be available; by using related domain data as a proxy to the true data.
While the lack of a rich, diverse dataset that is relevant to
a given application is a key challenge, there are ever increasing sources of diverse data available on the web, which can
potentially be tapped for the same. Such data however cannot be used directly as they may not belong to the same distribution as the training dataset, may not be diverse enough,
and may not be equally represented across all classes. In this
paper, we propose a Data-enriching GAN (DeGAN) framework to enrich any available data to make it more useful
for the future learning tasks of a pre-trained classiﬁer. We
term the any available data used as Proxy Data, or Proxy
Dataset as it serves as a proxy to the True dataset. Proxy
dataset could comprise of unlabeled test data collected over
a limited duration, or open source datasets, or a collection

Abstract
In this era of digital information explosion, an abundance of
data from numerous modalities is being generated as well as
archived everyday. However, most problems associated with
training Deep Neural Networks still revolve around lack of
data that is rich enough for a given task. Data is required not
only for training an initial model, but also for future learning
tasks such as Model Compression and Incremental Learning.
A diverse dataset may be used for training an initial model,
but it may not be feasible to store it throughout the product
life cycle due to data privacy issues or memory constraints.
We propose to bridge the gap between the abundance of available data and lack of relevant data, for the future learning
tasks of a given trained network. We use the available data,
that may be an imbalanced subset of the original training
dataset, or a related domain dataset, to retrieve representative samples from a trained classiﬁer, using a novel Dataenriching GAN (DeGAN) framework. We demonstrate that
data from a related domain can be leveraged to achieve stateof-the-art performance for the tasks of Data-free Knowledge
Distillation and Incremental Learning on benchmark datasets.
We further demonstrate that our proposed framework can enrich any data, even from unrelated domains, to make it more
useful for the future learning tasks of a given network.

1

Introduction

The performance and generalizability of Deep Neural Networks largely depend on the amount and quality of training data available. Several successful implementations of
tasks such as classiﬁcation, object detection and segmentation leverage very large, class-balanced and diverse datasets.
In addition to training an initial network, data is also required for future updates to the model. This makes it important for training data to be available throughout the life
cycle of a product. While data collection is a challenge in
itself, storing the data for future use could also be a concern due to data conﬁdentiality constraints, privacy issues,
or memory costs. Business establishments may also protect
their data to gain market advantage. There are several corporates that provide trained models to clients while maintaining the conﬁdentiality of their data. The client may want
to compress the model (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3130

