The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence

Model AI Assignments 2020
Todd W. Neller,1 Stephen Keeley,2 Michael Guerzhoy,2,3,4 Wolfgang Hoenig,5 Jiaoyang Li,6
Sven Koenig,6 Ameet Soni,7 Krista Thomason,7 Lisa Zhang,3 Bibin Sebastian,3
Cinjon Resnick,8 Avital Oliver,9 Surya Bhupatiraju,10 Kumar Krishna Agrawal,11
James Allingham,12 Sejong Yoon,13 Jonathan Chen,14 Tom Larsen,14 Marion Neumann,14
Narges Norouzi,15 Ryan Hausen,15 Matthew Evett16
1

Gettysburg College, 2 Princeton University, 3 University of Toronto, 4 Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute,
California Institute of Technology, 6 University of Southern California, 7 Swarthmore College, 8 New York University,
9
Google, 10 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 11 Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 12 University of Cambridge,
13
The College of New Jersey, 14 Washington University in St. Louis, 15 University of California, Santa Cruz,
16
Eastern Michigan University
5

robots) operate in a known environment and are tasked with
moving from their current locations to their respective goal
locations without colliding with the environment or each
other. MAPF is a key task for autonomous warehousing and
just-in-time manufacturing. Traditional search algorithms in
the joint location space, such as A*, scale poorly in the number of agents. Therefore, one needs to develop search algorithms that exploit the problem structure better to gain efﬁciency. We provide project material for two such search algorithms, namely the incomplete and suboptimal prioritized
planning and the complete and optimal (but slower) conﬂictbased search.
The project material is designed for students with prior
knowledge of A* and working knowledge of Python. We
provide a textbook-style overview of MAPF for the teacher
and students that describes the MAPF problem and two solution approaches; lecture slides for the teacher; a code framework that includes result visualization and a generator for
random MAPF instances; a handout for the students that
guides them to ﬁnish the implementations with a focus on
single-agent path ﬁnding, constraint generation and resolution; and sample solutions for the teacher.

Abstract
The Model AI Assignments session seeks to gather and disseminate the best assignment designs of the Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) Education community. Recognizing that assignments form the core of student learning experience,
we here present abstracts of nine AI assignments from the
2020 session that are easily adoptable, playfully engaging,
and ﬂexible for a variety of instructor needs. Assignment
speciﬁcations and supporting resources may be found at
http://modelai.gettysburg.edu.

Predicting and Preventing Deaths in the ICU:
Designing and Analyzing an AI System
Stephen Keeley, Michael Guerzhoy
In this assignment, students build a system for predicting patient deaths in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) using the
large PhysioNet Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2012
dataset. For each patient in the dataset, demographic variables and time series of physiological variables were collected during their stay in the ICU. Students use simulation
and model the impact of the system’s ﬂagging higher-risk
patients for intervention by physicians on saving lives in the
ICU. The assignment illustrates the process of building and
evaluating the potential impact of an AI system when only
observational data is available.
The assignment is designed in R/tidyverse and is suitable
for students who are taking their ﬁrst programming course.
We provide a translation to Python/Pandas/scikit-learn.

A Module for Introducing Ethics in AI:
Detecting Bias in Language Models
Ameet Son, Krista Thomason
The widespread adoption of machine learning algorithms
has raised awareness of the potential biases these systems
can encode and perpetuate. This course module introduces
students to this concept and has them detect biases in widely
used language models. In this lab, students ﬁrst work with
programs that demonstrate the usefulness of word embedding algorithms in ﬁnding relationships between words. Students use an implementation of the Word Embedding Association Test (WEAT) (Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan
2017) to detect gender and racial bias encoded in word embeddings. Students devise their own bias test, experiment
with different data sources (e.g., Twitter, Wikipedia) and

A Project on Multi-Agent Path Finding
(MAPF)
Wolfgang Hoenig, Jiaoyang Li, Sven Koenig
We provide project material for the emerging topic of
multi-agent path ﬁnding (MAPF), where agents (typically:
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13509

