The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Transparent Classiﬁcation with Multilayer
Logical Perceptrons and Random Binarization
Zhuo Wang,1 Wei Zhang,2∗ Ning Liu,1 Jianyong Wang1∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing,
East China Normal University
wang-z18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zhangwei.thu2011, victorliucs}@gmail.com, jianyong@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

each node in Decision Tree corresponds to a rule description, e.g., “if #citations > 300 then a good paper”. The main
reason for deep neural networks not being transparent models is that the activation value of each neuron is not explainable. Unlike the Boolean state, i.e., True or False, used in the
rule-based model, the continuous activation value of deep
neural networks is hard to associate with one actual meaning. In addition, ensemble models like Random Forest are
not transparent as well for the decision is made by hundreds
of models which are hard to explain as a whole.
Linear model and rule-based model are two widely used
transparent models, however, they both suffer from low
model capability. Linear models cannot ﬁt non-linear data
well because of the limitation of their model structures.
Rule-based models (e.g., Decision Tree, Rule Set, and Rule
List) have strong model expressivity that can ﬁt both linear and non-linear data well. However, a fundamental limitation with these rule-based models is that they ﬁnd the rules
by employing various heuristic methods (Quinlan 1993;
Breiman 2017; Cohen 1995) which may not ﬁnd the globally
best solution or a solution with close performance. In addition, the gradient descent method cannot be directly applied
to the rule-based model learning for the discrete parameters.
Studies in recent years provide some solutions to improve
model transparency in different aspects. Surrogate models
(Frosst and Hinton 2017; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016;
Selvaraju et al. 2017) try to use a simple model to ﬁt a complex model globally or locally. Then understanding the complex model by interpreting the simple model. Hidden layers investigation (Yosinski et al. 2015; Zhou et al. 2018;
Zhang, Wu, and Zhu 2017) aims to visualize and analyze
the statuses of hidden neurons or features learned by hidden neurons. All these methods improve the model transparency in speciﬁc scenarios. However, there is always a gap
between the surrogate model and the complex model it aims
to ﬁt, and this inconsistency may have an inﬂuence on subsequent model analysis and understanding. The interpretation
provided by hidden layer investigation is very intuitive, but it
could hardly be quantitatively measured and applied, which
limits the scope of application of this method. One fundamental problem of these methods is that they all learn complex models ﬁrst to obtain high classiﬁcation performance,
then try to interpret these learned complex models which
are hard to understand and the interpretations may be incon-

Abstract
Models with transparent inner structure and high classiﬁcation performance are required to reduce potential risk and
provide trust for users in domains like health care, ﬁnance,
security, etc. However, existing models are hard to simultaneously satisfy the above two properties. In this paper,
we propose a new hierarchical rule-based model for classiﬁcation tasks, named Concept Rule Sets (CRS), which has
both a strong expressive ability and a transparent inner structure. To address the challenge of efﬁciently learning the nondifferentiable CRS model, we propose a novel neural network
architecture, Multilayer Logical Perceptron (MLLP), which
is a continuous version of CRS. Using MLLP and the Random Binarization (RB) method we proposed, we can search
the discrete solution of CRS in continuous space using gradient descent and ensure the discrete CRS acts almost the same
as the corresponding continuous MLLP. Experiments on 12
public data sets show that CRS outperforms the state-of-theart approaches and the complexity of the learned CRS is close
to the simple decision tree.

Introduction
Relying on strong ability of data modeling, machine learning, especially deep learning, becomes the main paradigm
for decision-making systems (Goodfellow et al. 2016;
Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017). The decision-making systems
have widespread usage in important areas such as medicine,
ﬁnance, politics, as well as law, where people need the explanations why decisions are made to ensure their safety and
protect their rights (Goodman and Flaxman 2016; Lipton
2016). As a result, the demand for the transparency of machine learning methods is increasing, which is crucial for
earning the trust of users (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017) and
reducing potential risks and bugs (Chu et al. 2018). However, most of the machine learning models can hardly ensure
good predictive ability and transparency at the same time,
and sacriﬁcing transparency for good performance could result in serious consequences.
One important notion of transparency is that each part of
the model, including input, parameter, and calculation, etc.,
admits an intuitive explanation (Lipton 2016). For example,
∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6331

