The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Making the Most of BERT in Neural Machine Translation
Jiacheng Yang,1 Mingxuan Wang,2 Hao Zhou,2 Chengqi Zhao,2 Weinan Zhang,1 Yong Yu,1 Lei Li2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
ByteDance AI Lab, Beijing, China
{PrayStarJirachi, wnzhang, yyu}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{wangmingxuan.89, zhouhao.nlp, zhaochengqi.d, lileilab}@bytedance.com
2

and Auli (2019) observe that using pre-trained model in
such a way leads to remarkable improvements without ﬁnetuning, but give few gains in the setting of ﬁne-tuning in
resource-poor scenario. While the gain diminishes when
more labeled data become available. This is not in line with
our expectation.
We argue that current approaches do not make the most
use of BERT in NMT. Ideally, ﬁne-tuning BERT in NMT
should lead to adequate gain as in other NLP tasks. However,
compared to other tasks working well with direct BERT ﬁnetuning, NMT has two distinct characteristics, the availability of large training data (10 million or larger) and the high
capacity of baseline NMT models (i.e. Transformer). These
two characteristics require a huge number of updating steps
during training in order to ﬁt the high-capacity model well
on massive data 1 . Updating too much leads to the catastrophic forgetting problem (Goodfellow et al. 2013), namely
too much updating in training make the BERT forget its
universal knowledge from pre-training. The assumption lies
well with previous observations that ﬁxed BERT improves
NMT a bit and ﬁne-tuning BERT even offers no gains.
In this paper, we propose the concerted training approach
(CT NMT) to make the most use of BERT in NMT. Specifically, we introduce three techniques to integrate the power
of pre-trained BERT and vanilla NMT, namely asymptotic
distillation, dynamic switch for knowledge fusion, and ratescheduled updating. First, an asymptotic distillation (AD)
technique is introduced to keep remind the NMT model of
BERT knowledge. The pre-trained BERT serves as a teacher
network while the encoder of the NMT model serves as a
student. The objective is to mimic the original teacher network by minimizing the loss (typically L2 or cross-entropy
loss) between the student and the teacher in an asymptotic
way. The asymptotic distillation does not introduce additional parameters therefore it can be trained efﬁciently. Secondly, a dynamic switching gate (DS) is introduced to combine the encoded embedding from BERT and the encoder
of NMT. Based on the source input sentence, it provides
an adaptive way to fuse the power of BERT and NMT’s
encoder-decoder network. The intuition is that for some

Abstract
GPT-2 and BERT demonstrate the effectiveness of using pretrained language models (LMs) on various natural language
processing tasks. However, LM ﬁne-tuning often suffers from
catastrophic forgetting when applied to resource-rich tasks.
In this work, we introduce a concerted training framework
(CT NMT) that is the key to integrate the pre-trained LMs
to neural machine translation (NMT). Our proposed CT NMT
consists of three techniques: a) asymptotic distillation to ensure that the NMT model can retain the previous pre-trained
knowledge; b) a dynamic switching gate to avoid catastrophic
forgetting of pre-trained knowledge; and c) a strategy to adjust the learning paces according to a scheduled policy. Our
experiments in machine translation show CT NMT gains of up
to 3 BLEU score on the WMT14 English-German language
pair which even surpasses the previous state-of-the-art pretraining aided NMT by 1.4 BLEU score. While for the large
WMT14 English-French task with 40 millions of sentencepairs, our base model still signiﬁcantly improves upon the
state-of-the-art Transformer big model by more than 1 BLEU
score.

Introduction
Pre-trained text representations like ELMo (Peters et al.
2018), GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019; 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) have shown their superiors, which significantly boost the performances of various natural language
processing tasks, including classiﬁcation, POS tagging, and
question answering. Empirically, on most downstream NLP
tasks, ﬁne-tuning BERT parameters in training achieves better results compared to using ﬁxed BERT as features.
However, introducing BERT to neural machine translation (NMT) is non-trivial, directly using BERT in NMT
does not always yield promising results, especially for the
resource-rich setup. As in many other NLP tasks, we could
use BERT as the initialization of NMT encoder, or even
directly replace the word embedding layer of the encoderdecoder framework with the BERT embeddings. This does
work in some resource-poor NMT scenarios but hardly gives
inspiring results in high resource NMT benchmarks such
as WMT14 English-French, which always have a large size
of parallel data for training. Furthermore, Edunov, Baevski,

1

For example, for the EN-DE translation task, it always takes
100 thousands of training steps, while a typical POS tagging model
needs several hundreds of steps.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9378

