The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Assessing the Benchmarking Capacity of
Machine Reading Comprehension Datasets
Saku Sugawara∗

Pontus Stenetorp

University of Tokyo
sakus@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

University College London
p.stenetorp@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Kentaro Inui

Akiko Aizawa

Tohoku University and RIKEN Center for AIP
inui@ecei.tohoku.ac.jp

National Institute of Informatics
aizawa@nii.ac.jp
be useful for analyzing datasets. However, for most datasets,
the skills required to answer existing questions are not identiﬁed, or signiﬁcant human annotation is needed.
In this study, we propose a semi-automated, ablationbased methodology to analyze the capabilities of MRC
datasets to benchmark NLU. Our motivation is to investigate to what extent a dataset allows unintended solutions
that do not need requisite skills. This leads to the following
intuition: if a question is correctly answered (or solvable)
even after removing features associated with a given skill,
the question does not require the skill. We show an example
of our ablation method in Figure 1. Suppose we wish to analyze a dataset’s capacity to evaluate understanding of texts
beyond the information of part-of-speech (POS) tags. To this
end, we replace context and question words with POS tags
and ID numbers. If a model can still correctly answer this
modiﬁed question, the question does not necessarily require
deep understanding of texts but matching word patterns only.
Questions of this kind might be insufﬁcient for developing
a model that understands texts deeply as they may reduce
models to recognizing superﬁcial word overlaps.
Our methodology uses a set of requisite skills and corresponding ablation methods. Inspired by the computational
model of reading comprehension (Kintsch 1988), we exemplify 12 skills on two classes: reading and reasoning (Section 3). Then, we present a large-scale analysis over 10 existing datasets using a strong baseline model (Section 4). In
Section 5, we perform a complementary inspection of questions with our ablation methods in terms of the solvability
of questions and the reconstructability of ablated features.
Finally we discuss, in Section 6, two requirements for developing MRC to benchmark NLU: the control of question
solvability and the comprehensiveness of requisite skills.
Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a semi-automated methodology to analyze
the benchmarking capacity of MRC datasets in terms of
requisite skills for answering questions.
• With an example set of 12 skills and corresponding inputablation methods, we use our methodology and examine
10 existing datasets with two answering styles.
• Our analysis shows that the relative performance on questions with content words only, shufﬂed sentence words,

Abstract
Existing analysis work in machine reading comprehension
(MRC) is largely concerned with evaluating the capabilities
of systems. However, the capabilities of datasets are not assessed for benchmarking language understanding precisely.
We propose a semi-automated, ablation-based methodology
for this challenge; By checking whether questions can be
solved even after removing features associated with a skill
requisite for language understanding, we evaluate to what degree the questions do not require the skill. Experiments on 10
datasets (e.g., CoQA, SQuAD v2.0, and RACE) with a strong
baseline model show that, for example, the relative scores
of the baseline model provided with content words only and
with shufﬂed sentence words in the context are on average
89.2% and 78.5% of the original scores, respectively. These
results suggest that most of the questions already answered
correctly by the model do not necessarily require grammatical and complex reasoning. For precise benchmarking, MRC
datasets will need to take extra care in their design to ensure
that questions can correctly evaluate the intended skills.

1

Introduction

Machine reading comprehension (MRC) is a testbed for
evaluating natural language understanding (NLU), by letting
machines answer questions about given texts (Hirschman et
al. 1999). Although MRC could be the most suitable task
for evaluating NLU (Chen 2018) and the performance of
systems is comparable to humans on some existing datasets
Devlin et al. (2019), it has been found that the quality of
existing datasets might be insufﬁcient for requiring precise
understanding (Jia and Liang 2017). Whereas these analyses
are useful to investigate the performance of systems, however, it is still necessary to verify the ﬁne-grained capabilities of datasets for benchmarking NLU.
In the design of MRC datasets, it is implicitly assumed
that questions test a cognitive process of language understanding (Sutcliffe et al. 2013). As various aspects of such a
process, we can use requisite skills for answering questions
such as coreference resolution and commonsense reasoning
(Sugawara et al. 2017). Considering skills as metrics would
∗

Work carried out while visiting University College London.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8918

