The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DNNs as Layers of Cooperating Classiﬁers
Marelie H. Davel, Marthinus W. Theunissen, Arnold M. Pretorius, Etienne Barnard
Multilingual Speech Technologies, North-West University, South Africa; and CAIR, South Africa.
{marelie.davel, tiantheunissen, arnold.m.pretorius, etienne.barnard}@gmail.com

not be useful in practice. It should also be noted that while
parametric compactness is a sufﬁcient condition for generalization, it has never been shown to be a necessary condition (Kawaguchi, Pack Kaelbling, and Bengio 2019). Hence,
the widespread search for a deﬁnition of model complexity
that renders CLT applicable to DNN-like classiﬁers may in
the long run prove fruitless.
In the current work, we investigate the capabilities of
DNNs by studying the behavior of hidden nodes in some detail, limiting our attention to the conceptually simplest case
of fully-connected feedforward classiﬁcation networks with
ReLU activation functions. We show that intriguing regularities in the activation patterns of nodes within such networks
exist; and can be understood by analyzing the DNN training
process as an interaction between two processes: one discrete and descriptive of the input patterns that a node is responsive to, and the other continuous and concerned with
the magnitude of activation. We verify that either of these
processes can be used as basis for deriving node-based classiﬁers from a trained network. These observations suggest
a novel way of viewing the behavior of DNNs as layers of
cooperating classiﬁers. Although we do not directly relate
this point of view to their generalization capabilities, our
work suggests some novel perspectives that may contribute
to such an understanding.

Abstract
A robust theoretical framework that can describe and predict
the generalization ability of DNNs in general circumstances
remains elusive. Classical attempts have produced complexity metrics that rely heavily on global measures of compactness and capacity with little investigation into the effects
of sub-component collaboration. We demonstrate intriguing
regularities in the activation patterns of the hidden nodes
within fully-connected feedforward networks. By tracing the
origin of these patterns, we show how such networks can be
viewed as the combination of two information processing systems: one continuous and one discrete. We describe how these
two systems arise naturally from the gradient-based optimization process, and demonstrate the classiﬁcation ability of the
two systems, individually and in collaboration. This perspective on DNN classiﬁcation offers a novel way to think about
generalization, in which different subsets of the training data
are used to train distinct classiﬁers; those classiﬁers are then
combined to perform the classiﬁcation task, and their consistency is crucial for accurate classiﬁcation.

1

Introduction

One of the central tenets of computational learning theory
(CLT) is that the ability of a machine-learning system to generalize to unseen data results from its compactness. That is,
if the system employs a number of parameters that is small
relative to the number of training samples that it processes
appropriately, we can be conﬁdent that the system will generalize well to unseen samples drawn from the same distribution as the training data.
Several observations in recent years have raised questions about the applicability of this explanation in systems such as deep neural networks (DNNs). Most strikingly, Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2016) showed a number
of cases where networks with very large capacity achieve
excellent generalization performance. Although this work
lead to a ﬂurry of activity (Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby 2017;
Bartlett, Foster, and Telgarsky 2017; Neyshabur et al. 2017;
Dinh et al. 2017) and some controversy, it actually conﬁrms
long-observed weaknesses in the classical CLT bounds: going back to at least 1992 (Cohn and Tesauro 1992), it has
been noted that those bounds are often so conservative as to

2

An unexpected observation on node
behavior

As motivated in Section 1, we wish to understand the role of
the hidden nodes within a trained DNN. By design, each of
the output nodes corresponds to class membership, whereas
each of the input nodes responds to a particular featurtee
(and is therefore quite agnostic about class membership).
Also, in a feedforward network without skipped connections, each layer of node activations is a comprehensive summary or “state” (Jiang et al. 2019): taken together, a layer
of activations fully determines the activations in each of the
subsequent layers.
In a ReLU network, where a node is either activated or
not, one can approach this question by asking how responsive each node is to inputs belonging to the different classes.
Figure 1 shows an example of the activation patterns that we
have observed in numerous ReLU-activated networks of var-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3725

