The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Partner Selection for the Emergence of Cooperation
in Multi-Agent Systems Using Reinforcement Learning
Nicolas Anastassacos,1,2 Stephen Hailes,2 Mirco Musolesi1,2,3
1

The Alan Turing Institute 2 University College London
3
University of Bologna

opponents or using joint-action distributions over the population (Lowe et al. 2017) though these techniques tend to
be affected by scalability issues. The traditional RL objective describes a selﬁsh agent that looks to maximize its own
reward. In decentralized settings, it may not be possible to
impose any cooperative reward function on all the agents.
In these cases, it is important for the environment to be
designed in a way that allows even selﬁsh agents to learn
behaviors which do not severely hinder other agents and,
preferably, are beneﬁcial for the society as a whole. We argue that an answer to training RL agents in decentralized
multi-agent scenarios potentially lies in understanding the
societal dynamics that produces norm-inducing behaviors
and their effects on how and what agents learn.
We investigate a key characteristic of social interaction:
partner selection. The capability for an individual to freely
choose who they want to interact with has been thought
to have a prominent role in determining the structure of a
population and the competitive and collaborative relationships that form between members of society (Santos, Santos,
and Pacheco 2008). In turn, these relationships can cause
a change in the strategies that agents learn that may go on
to impact partner selection in the future. The development
is dynamic and cyclical and has been hypothesized to be
a driving factor in the emergence of cooperative societies
and, potentially, a catalyst for altruistic behavior (Barclay
and Willer 2006; Cuesta et al. 2015).
Reputation and signaling are directly tied to the notion
of partner selection. Individuals prefer cooperative partners
and are inclined to avoid partnerships with known selﬁsh
individuals (Albert et al. 2007; Milinski, Semmann, and
Krambeck 2002). This tendency towards preferring to interact with reputable individuals suggests that the freedom to
choose may lead agents to develop strategies that maximize
the reward, while also improving reputation or signaling in
order to attract the attention of others. Signaling a desire to
coordinate or cooperate, however, may come at the cost of
becoming a target for exploitation by others. The interplay of
these dynamics has made partner selection a key component
of group formation and group inequality (Bolton and Ockenfels 2000; Mohtashemi and Mui 2003). Fu et al. developed a
reputation-based partner switching model that predicts a cooperative response using agents (Fu et al. 2008) and the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma; using result from evolutionary

Abstract
Social dilemmas have been widely studied to explain how humans are able to cooperate in society. Considerable effort has
been invested in designing artiﬁcial agents for social dilemmas that incorporate explicit agent motivations that are chosen to favor coordinated or cooperative responses. The prevalence of this general approach points towards the importance
of achieving an understanding of both an agent’s internal design and external environment dynamics that facilitate cooperative behavior. In this paper, we investigate how partner
selection can promote cooperative behavior between agents
who are trained to maximize a purely selﬁsh objective function. Our experiments reveal that agents trained with this dynamic learn a strategy that retaliates against defectors while
promoting cooperation with other agents resulting in a prosocial society.

Introduction
Human history provides many examples of people behaving more cooperatively than is typically assumed
in behavior models featuring assumptions of rationality
and self-interest. Examples include behaving environmentally responsibly (littering, recycling, etc.) (Cialdini 2003;
Thøgersen 2006) or citizens honestly paying their taxes
when there are ﬁnancial incentives to do otherwise (Posner
2000). These types of situations are known as social dilemmas and are characterized by a trade-off between an individual’s short-term rewards and the collective long-term interests of the group, community or society as a whole (Dawes
1980). Understanding the mechanisms for the emergence of
cooperation is still an open problem in several disciplines
ranging from evolutionary biology and economics to autonomous systems.
Recently, Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been applied to the study of general-sum multi-agent games like
social dilemmas (Hughes et al. 2018; Jaques et al. 2019;
Leibo et al. 2017; Perolat et al. 2017), however, it is known
that it is difﬁcult to obtain optimal results due to the nonstationarity caused by agents learning simultaneously (Busoniu, Babuska, and De Schutter 2008). Solutions to these
problems can involve introducing techniques like modeling
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7047

