The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A MaxSAT-Based Framework for Group Testing
Lorenzo Ciampiconi,1 Bishwamittra Ghosh,2 Jonathan Scarlett,2 Kuldeep S Meel2
1

Politecnico di Milano, 2 National University of Singapore

be formulated as a combinatorial optimization problem (Du,
Hwang, and Hwang 2000; Malioutov and Malyutov 2012;
Aldridge, Baldassini, and Johnson 2014). The design phase
can be modeled in two ways: adaptive and non-adaptive testing (Aldridge, Johnson, and Scarlett 2019). In adaptive testing, the test pools are designed sequentially, wherein each
test depends on the outcome of the previous ones. In the
case of non-adaptive testing, all test pools are designed in
advance, which allows parallel implementation. In a more
practical setting, a noisy variant to group testing is considered where tests are inverted/ﬂipped according to some speciﬁc random model or in an adversarial manner (Aldridge,
Johnson, and Scarlett 2019). In this work, we pursue the direction of solving the decoding phase in non-adaptive group
testing in both noiseless and noisy settings by introducing a
novel MaxSAT-based approach.
The primary contribution of this paper is a framework
MGT1 (MaxSAT-based framework for Group Testing),
which provides a novel and efﬁcient MaxSAT-based encoding to address the decoding phase of non-adaptive group
testing. We consider both noiseless and noisy testing to
make the proposed approach applicable in the realistic settings. For the noisy setting, we propose a compact encoding and prove its soundness. Our extensive experimental results show that MGT can solve group testing instances of
10000 items with 3% defectivity, which no prior work can
handle to the best of our knowledge. Moreover, the accuracy
of MGT is shown better than that of the existing state-ofthe-art approaches. In our experiments, we also observe a
phase transition between the unrecoverability-recoverability
of the input items in terms of computation time. This phase
transition in MGT shows a promising connection between
two sub ﬁelds: group testing and the MaxSAT problem, and
demonstrates the practical application of MaxSAT.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We discuss
related works in Section 2, deﬁne notations and preliminaries in Section 3 and formulate the problem in Section 4. In
Section 5, we introduce our framework MGT, show the experimental results in Section 6 and conclude in Section 7.

Abstract
The success of MaxSAT (maximum satisﬁability) solving
in recent years has motivated researchers to apply MaxSAT
solvers in diverse discrete combinatorial optimization problems. Group testing has been studied as a combinatorial optimization problem, where the goal is to ﬁnd defective items
among a set of items by performing sets of tests on items.
In this paper, we propose a MaxSAT-based framework, called
MGT, that solves group testing, in particular, the decoding
phase of non-adaptive group testing. We extend this approach
to the noisy variant of group testing, and propose a compact
MaxSAT-based encoding that guarantees an optimal solution.
Our extensive experimental results show that MGT can solve
group testing instances of 10000 items with 3% defectivity,
which no prior work can handle to the best of our knowledge.
Furthermore, MGT has better accuracy than the LP-based approach. We also discover an interesting phase transition behavior in the runtime, which reveals the easy-hard-easy nature of group testing.

1

Introduction

Given a large set of items containing a subset of defective
items, the problem of group testing concerns the design and
evaluation of tests on pools of items (a pool is a selected
subset of all items) to identify the defective items. A test is
positive if the pool contains at least one defective items and
negative if it contains no defective item. Group testing can be
viewed as a sparse inference problem with a combinatorial
ﬂavor with diverse applications, for example, clone screening (Balding and Torney 1997), multichannel access in high
speed computer networks (Bar-Noy et al. 1992), medical examination (Robert 1943), statistics (Hu, Hwang, and Wang
1981), compressed sensing and machine learning (Atia and
Saligrama 2012).
The group testing problem can be separated into two
parts: design and decoding (Aldridge, Johnson, and Scarlett
2019). The design part concerns how to choose the testing
strategy, that is, which items to place in which pools. The
decoding problem consists of determining which items are
defective given the set of tests and their outcomes, and can
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

10144

https://github.com/meelgroup/mgt

