The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Alternating Language Modeling for Cross-Lingual Pre-Training
†

Jian Yang,1∗ Shuming Ma,2 Dongdong Zhang,2 ShuangZhi Wu,3∗ Zhoujun Li,1 Ming Zhou2
1

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
SPPD of Tencent Inc.
{jiaya, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn; {shumma, dozhang, mingzhou}@microsoft.com; frostwu@tencent.com

澷濜濝濢濙濧濙澔濨濣濟濙濢
澹濢濛濠濝濧濜澔濨濣濟濙濢

Abstract
Language model pre-training has achieved success in many
natural language processing tasks. Existing methods for
cross-lingual pre-training adopt Translation Language Model
to predict masked words with the concatenation of the source
sentence and its target equivalent. In this work, we introduce a novel cross-lingual pre-training method, called Alternating Language Modeling (ALM). It code-switches sentences of different languages rather than simple concatenation, hoping to capture the rich cross-lingual context of words
and phrases. More speciﬁcally, we randomly substitute source
phrases with target translations to create code-switched sentences. Then, we use these code-switched data to train ALM
model to learn to predict words of different languages. We
evaluate our pre-training ALM on the downstream tasks of
machine translation and cross-lingual classiﬁcation. Experiments show that ALM can outperform the previous pretraining methods on three benchmarks.1

⍻⌀ 㒯 䖃 ↲ⳤ 坋↧ 濖濴濿濿瀆澳濹瀂瀅澳濹瀅濸瀆濻澳濼瀁濷瀈瀆瀇瀅濼濴濿澳濴濶瀇濼瀂瀁
澜濕澝澔濌激濁

濖濴濿濿瀆

濹瀂瀅

㒯

䖃

↲ⳤ

濴濶瀇濼瀂瀁

澜濖澝澔澵激濁

Figure 1: Example of Translation Language Model and Alternating Language Model.
cross-lingual pre-training model can learn the relationship
between languages.
In this work, we propose a novel cross-lingual language
model, which alternately predicts words of different languages. Figure 1 shows an example of the proposed Alternating Language Model (ALM). Different from XLM, the
input sequence of ALM is mixed with different languages,
so it can capture the rich cross-lingual context of words and
phrases. Moreover, it forces the language model to predict
one language conditioned on the context of the other language. Therefore, it can minor the gap between the embeddings of the source language and the target languages, which
is beneﬁcial for the cross-lingual setting.
Based on Alternating Language Model, we introduce a
new cross-lingual pre-training method. More speciﬁcally,
we take the Transformer model (Vaswani et al. 2017) as
the backbone model. Then, we construct the training examples for pre-training by replacing the phrases with their
translation of the other language. Finally, we pre-train the
Transformer model with the constructed examples using the
masked language model objective. The pre-trained model
can be used to further ﬁne-tune the downstream crosslingual tasks.
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, we
evaluate our pre-training method on machine translation and
cross-lingual classiﬁcation. Experiments show that ALM
can outperform the previous pre-training methods on three
benchmark datasets.
The contributions of this work are as follows:

Introduction
Recently language model pre-training methods, including
ELMo (Peters et al. 2018), GPT (Radford et al. 2018),
GPT2 (Radford et al. 2019), BERT (Devlin et al. 2019),
and UniLM (Dong et al. 2019), have achieved impressive results on various natural language processing tasks
such as question-answering (Min, Seo, and Hajishirzi 2017;
Yang et al. 2019a), machine reading comprehension (Salant
and Berant 2018; Yu et al. 2018) and natural language inference (Tay, Luu, and Hui 2018). More recently, XLM (Lample and Conneau 2019) has extended this approach to crosslingual pre-training, and proven successful in applying language model pre-training in the cross-lingual setting.
Existing methods for supervised cross-lingual pretraining adopt a cross-lingual language model objective,
called Translation Language Model (TLM). It makes use of
parallel data by predicting the masked words with concatenation of the sentence and its translation. In this way, the
∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code can be found at https://github.com/zddfunseeker/ALM.
†

9386

