The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁcient Algorithms for Generating Provably
Near-Optimal Cluster Descriptors for Explainability
Prathyush Sambaturu,1 Aparna Gupta,2 Ian Davidson,3
S. S. Ravi,4,5 Anil Vullikanti,1,4 Andrew Warren4
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904
2
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24060
3
Department of Computer Science, UC Davis, Davis, CA 95616
4
Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904
5
Department of Computer Science, University at Albany–SUNY, Albany, NY 12222
{pks6mk, vsakumar, asw3xp}@virginia.edu, agupta12@vt.edu, davidson@cs.ucdavis.edu, ssravi0@gmail.com
els of pathogens for which genomic sequences are available. In (Jain, Gali, and Kihara 2018; Jain and Kihara 2018;
Hamid and Friedberg 2018; Ramesh and Warren 2018),
researchers have been able to identify some genomic sequences as coming from harmful pathogens (through lab experiments and bioinformatics analysis). Understanding what
makes some sequences harmful and distinguishing them
from harmless sequences corresponds to the problem of interpreting the clusters.
Davidson et al. (2018) present the following formulation
of the Cluster Description Problem for explaining a given
set of clusters. Let S = {s1 , . . . , sn } be a set of n objects.
Let π = {C1 , . . . , Ck } be a partition of S into k ≥ 2 clusters. Let T be the universe of tags such that each object
si ∈ S is associated with a subset ti ⊆ T of tags. A descriptor Di for a cluster Ci (1 ≤ i ≤ k) is a subset of T . An
object sj in cluster Ci is said to be covered by the descriptor
Di if at least one of the tags associated with sj is in Di . The
goal is to ﬁnd k pairwise disjoint descriptors (one descriptor per cluster) so that all the objects in S are covered and
the total number of tags used in all the descriptors, which
will henceforth be referred to as the “cost” of the solution,
is minimized. Davidson et al. (Davidson, Gourru, and Ravi
2018) showed that even deciding whether there exists a feasible solution (with no restriction on cost) is NP-hard. They
use Integer Linear Programming (ILP) methods to solve the
problem and other relaxed versions (e.g., not requiring coverage of all objects in S, referred to as the “cover-or-forget”
version, if there is no exact feasible solution) on social media
datasets. They point out that this gives interesting and representative descriptions for clusters. However, they leave open
the questions of designing efﬁcient and rigorous approximation algorithms, which can scale to much larger datasets, and
a deeper exploration of different notions of approximate descriptions for real world datasets.
Our contributions. We ﬁnd in some datasets that the exact cover formulation of (Davidson, Gourru, and Ravi 2018)
does not have a feasible solution. The “cover-or-forget” variation does give a solution, but might have highly unbalanced
coverage, i.e., one cluster gets covered well, but not the others. We extend the formulation of (Davidson, Gourru, and
Ravi 2018) to address these issues, develop a suite of scal-

Abstract
Improving the explainability of the results from machine
learning methods has become an important research goal.
Here, we study the problem of making clusters more interpretable by extending a recent approach of [Davidson et al.,
NeurIPS 2018] for constructing succinct representations for
clusters. Given a set of objects S, a partition π of S (into
clusters), and a universe T of tags such that each element in
S is associated with a subset of tags, the goal is to ﬁnd a representative set of tags for each cluster such that those sets are
pairwise-disjoint and the total size of all the representatives is
minimized. Since this problem is NP-hard in general, we develop approximation algorithms with provable performance
guarantees for the problem. We also show applications to explain clusters from datasets, including clusters of genomic sequences that represent different threat levels.

1

Introduction

As AI and machine learning (ML) methods become pervasive across all domains from health to urban planning,
there is an increasing need to make the results of such
methods more interpretable. Providing such explanations
has now become a legal requirement in some countries
(Goodman and Flaxman 2016). Many researchers are investigating this topic under supervised learning, particularly for methods in deep learning (see e.g., (Proc. XAI2017 Workshop 2017; Proc. XAI-2018 Workshop 2018)).
Clustering is a commonly used unsupervised ML technique
(see e.g., (Blondel et al. 2008; Bolla 2013; Fortunato 2010;
Tan, Steinbach, and Kumar 2006; Han and Kamber 2011;
Zaki and Meira 2014)). It is routinely performed on diverse kinds of datasets, sometimes after constructing network abstractions, and optimizing complex objective functions (e.g., modularity (Blondel et al. 2008)). This can often make clusters hard to interpret especially in a post-hoc
analysis. Thus, a natural question is whether it is possible
to explain a given set of clusters, using additional attributes
which, crucially, were not used in the clustering procedure.
One motivation for our work is to understand the threat levc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1636

