The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Repetitive Reprediction Deep Decipher for Semi-Supervised Learning
Guo-Hua Wang, Jianxin Wu∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University
Nanjing, China
wangguohua@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

In this paper, we propose an end-to-end framework called
deep decipher (D2). Inspired by (Yi and Wu 2019), we
treat pseudo-labels as variables and update them by backpropagation, which is also learned from data. The D2 framework speciﬁes a well-deﬁned optimization problem, which
can be properly interpreted as a maximum likelihood estimation over two set of random variables (the network parameters and the pseudo-labels). With deep decipher, we
prove that there exists an exponential relationship between
pseudo-labels and network predictions, leading to a theoretical support for using network predictions as pseudo-labels.
Then, we further analyze the D2 framework and prove that
pseudo-labels will become ﬂat (i.e., their entropy is high)
during training and there is an equality constraint bias in
it. To mitigate these problems, we propose a simple but effective strategy, repetitive reprediction (R2). The improved
D2 framework is named R2-D2 and obtaines state-of-the-art
results on several SSL problems.
Our contributions are as follows.
• We propose D2, a deep learning framework that deciphers
the relationship between predictions and pseudo-labels. D2
updates pseudo-labels by back-propagation. To the best of
our knowledge, D2 is the ﬁrst deep SSL method that learns
pseudo-labels from data end-to-end.
• Within D2, we prove that pseudo-labels are exponentially
transformed from the predictions. Hence, it is reasonable
for previous works to use network predictions as pseudolabels. Meanwhile, many SSL methods can be considered
as special cases of D2 in certain aspects.
• To further boost D2’s performance, we ﬁnd some shortcomings of D2. In particular, we prove that pseudo-labels
will become ﬂat during the optimization. To mitigate this
problem, we propose a simple but effective remedy, R2.
We tested the R2-D2 method on ImageNet and it outperforms state-of-the-arts by a large margin. On small-scale
datasets like CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2009),
R2-D2 also produces state-of-the-art results.

Abstract
Most recent semi-supervised deep learning (deep SSL) methods used a similar paradigm: use network predictions to update pseudo-labels and use pseudo-labels to update network
parameters iteratively. However, they lack theoretical support
and cannot explain why predictions are good candidates for
pseudo-labels. In this paper, we propose a principled end-toend framework named deep decipher (D2) for SSL. Within the
D2 framework, we prove that pseudo-labels are related to network predictions by an exponential link function, which gives
a theoretical support for using predictions as pseudo-labels.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that updating pseudo-labels by
network predictions will make them uncertain. To mitigate
this problem, we propose a training strategy called repetitive reprediction (R2). Finally, the proposed R2-D2 method
is tested on the large-scale ImageNet dataset and outperforms
state-of-the-art methods by 5 percentage points.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved state-of-the-art results on many
visual recognition tasks. However, training these models
often needs large-scale datasets such as ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015). Nowadays, it is easy to collect images by search engines, but image annotation is expensive
and time-consuming. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a
paradigm to learn a model with a few labeled data and massive amounts of unlabeled data. With the help of unlabeled
data, the model performance may be improved.
With a supervised loss, unlabeled data can be used in
training by assigning pseudo-labels to them. Many stateof-the-art methods on semi-supervised deep learning used
pseudo-labels implicitly. Temporal Ensembling (Laine and
Aila 2017) used the moving average of network predictions as
pseudo-labels. Mean Teacher (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017)
and Deep Co-training (Qiao et al. 2018) employed another
network to generate pseudo-labels. However, they produced
or updated pseudo-labels in ad-hoc manners. Although these
methods worked well in practice, there are few theories to
support them. A mystery in deep SSL arises: why can predictions work well as pseudo-labels?

Related Works

∗

J. Wu is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

We ﬁrst brieﬂy review deep SSL methods and the related
works that inspired this paper.
6170

