The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Improving ECG Classiﬁcation Using Generative Adversarial Networks
Tomer Golany

Gal Lavee

Shai Tejman Yarden

Kira Radinsky

Technion
Israel Institute of Technology
Tomer.golany@cs.technion.ac.il

eBay Research
glavee@ebay.com

Cardiology Department
Sheba Medical Center
tegmanya@gmail.com

Technion
Israel Institute of Technology
Kirar@cs.technion.ac.il

as SVM (Ye, Kumar, and Coimbra 2012), linear discriminant (LD) (Chazal and Reilly 2007), and Reservoir Computing With Logistic Regression (RC) (Escalona-Moran et
al. 2014), have been explored. The performance of the algorithms strongly varied based on the engineered features,
as they have to be informative, discriminating, and independent based on expert knowledge. Discounting the tedious effort needed for such a task, in practice, these methods have
not been able to scale well across different patient’s types
of ECGs (Kiranyaz, Ince, and Gabbouj 2016). The changing nature of the ECG signal dynamics and morphological
characteristics are signiﬁcantly different across patients. It
strongly depends on the patient’s physical condition. For example, even for healthy patients, the R-R interval changes
across time between each heart beat. Additionally, such an
algorithm must also recognize the distinct wave types and
discern the complex relationships between them over time
in the presence of noise. To address these issues, deep learning approaches have been proposed (Al Rahhal et al. 2016).
Methods, such as fully-connected networks (Al Rahhal et al.
2016), have shown signiﬁcant performance boosts over the
state-of-the-art with regard to known medical benchmarks.
In this work, we experiment with a sequence-based classiﬁer, recurrent neural network (RNN), that was recently used
for ECG arrhythmias classiﬁcation (Hou et al. 2019). This
model is considered state-of-the-art for the task of ECG arrhythmia classiﬁcation.

Abstract
The Electrocardiogram (ECG) is performed routinely by
medical personell to identify structural, functional and electrical cardiac events. Many attempts were made to automate
this task using machine learning algorithms. Numerous supervised learning algorithms were proposed, requiring manual feature extraction. Lately, deep neural networks were also
proposed for this task for reaching state-of-the-art results. The
ECG signal conveys the speciﬁc electrical cardiac activity of
each subject thus extreme variations are observed between
patients. These variations and the low amount of training data
available for each arrhythmia are challenging for deep learning algorithms, and impede generalization. In this work, the
use of generative adversarial networks is studied for the synthesis of ECG signals, which can then be used as additional
training data to improve the classiﬁer performance. Empirical
results prove that the generated signals signiﬁcantly improve
ECG classiﬁcation.

1

Introduction

Electrocardiography (ECG) is a non-invasive tool used for
diagnosis and followup of cardiac anomalies, functional disorders and cardiac arrhythmias. The cardiac cycle is composed of electrical depolarization-repolarization patterns
and presents the evolution of the heart’s electrical activity
over time. Any anomaly regarding the heart rhythm or the
morphological pattern of the cardiac heart beats as sampled
by the ECG, can indicate acute functional emergencies such
as acute myocardial ischemia or acute rhythm disturbances,
meaning an arrhythmia. Many studies were conducted in
an attempt to reach high performance in ECG classiﬁcation
(Kass and Clancy 2006). Such models were used to reduce
interpretation errors, namely by identifying life-threatening
arrhythmias. Automatic ECG analysis may also reduce interpretation time by different medical personell while investigating non-life-threatening arrhythmias.
Most methods today for ECG classiﬁcation focus on
applying classical supervised machine learning methods.
They perform feature engineering over the ECG wavelet
(Chazal and Reilly 2007) and subsequently apply a supervised learning algorithm to predict the class. Classiﬁers such

Although deep learning methods are showing promising
results for ECG classiﬁcation, they require large amount of
training examples per class. Most life-threatening arrhythmias are extremely rare, limiting the amount of examples
available to train deep learning models. Given the high variability between patients and internal-variability of heartbeat
classiﬁcation for same patients, building deep ECG models
that might be used in practice has been limited. In this work,
we overcome the sparseness of data by learning to synthetically generate ECG signals of different arrhythmias, which
we later use to train the deep learning models. Intuitively,
we build a model that learns to create synthetic ECG signals
that present variability across the ECG signal and across different generated synthetic signals. The inter-variability and
cross-variability through the generated signals might help

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13280

