The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Where to Go Next: Modeling Long- and Short-Term
User Preferences for Point-of-Interest Recommendation
Ke Sun,1 Tieyun Qian,1∗ Tong Chen,2 Yile Liang,1 Quoc Viet Hung Nguyen,3 Hongzhi Yin2∗
1

Wuhan University, China
The University of Queensland, Australia
3
Grifﬁth University, Australia
1
{sunke1995, qty, liangyile}@whu.edu.cn, 2 {tong.chen, h.yin1}@uq.edu.au, 3 henry.nguyen@grifﬁth.edu.au
2

day or one week. By partitioning the sequence into trajectories, the next-POI recommenders facilitate the modeling
of users’ long- and short-term preferences. The short-term
preferences indicate that the next POI a user will visit is inﬂuenced by her/his recently visited venues in the current trajectory. For example, a user may visit a bar right after having dinner in a restaurant. The long-term preferences denote
a user’s general interests mined from her/his historical trajectories. In summary, the long-term preferences are usually
stable, while the short-term preferences tend to change frequently over time.

Abstract
Point-of-Interest (POI) recommendation has been a trending
research topic as it generates personalized suggestions on facilities for users from a large number of candidate venues.
Since users’ check-in records can be viewed as a long sequence, methods based on recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
have recently shown promising applicability for this task.
However, existing RNN-based methods either neglect users’
long-term preferences or overlook the geographical relations
among recently visited POIs when modeling users’ shortterm preferences, thus making the recommendation results
unreliable. To address the above limitations, we propose a
novel method named Long- and Short-Term Preference Modeling (LSTPM) for next-POI recommendation. In particular,
the proposed model consists of a nonlocal network for longterm preference modeling and a geo-dilated RNN for shortterm preference learning. Extensive experiments on two realworld datasets demonstrate that our model yields signiﬁcant
improvements over the state-of-the-art methods.

1

In next-POI recommendation, with the assumption that a
user’s next destination is highly correlated with her/his recently visited POIs in the current trajectory, most existing
studies mainly focus on modeling the dynamics of shortterm user preferences. For example, Cheng et al. (2013)
apply a localized region constraint by factorizing personalized Markov Chain (FPMC) (Rendle, Freudenthaler, and
Schmidt-Thieme 2010), and Feng et al. (2015) consider the
personalized sequential information as well as model the
geographical inﬂuence by calculating the distance between
the destination POI and recently visited ones. More recently, researchers adopt recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
and other variants like Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) or
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) to characterize users’
dynamic short-term preferences, such as ST-RNN (Liu et al.
2016), TMCA (Li, Shen, and Zhu 2018) and CARA (Manotumruksa, Macdonald, and Ounis 2018).

Introduction

Location-based social networks (LBSNs) like Foursquare
and Yelp are becoming pervasive in our daily lives. Users
on LBSNs would like to share with friends their experiences on points of interest (POIs), e.g., restaurants and museums. The huge number of accumulated user check-in data
proliferates researches on recommending POIs to unvisited
users. POI recommendation is of high value to both the users
and service providers, and has thus attracted much attention from researchers in the recent years (Yin et al. 2016;
Cheng et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2019).
The task of next-POI recommendation (Feng et al. 2018)
is a natural extension to general POI recommendation. It
aims to provide personalized recommendations on POIs to
a user based on her/his historical check-in sequence. The
user’s long sequence can be further partitioned into multiple trajectories, where each trajectory contains a set of
check-ins occurring in a speciﬁc time window such as one

In addition to the short-term preference dynamics reﬂected by the recent check-in behaviors, human mobility
exhibits long-term periodical regularities. For instance, in
a student’s daily routine, she/he may go to a school cafeteria at lunch time in workdays. Unfortunately, in next-POI
recommendation, only a few studies have taken both longand short-term preferences into account. A successful example is the DRCF (Manotumruksa, Macdonald, and Ounis. 2017) which captures users’ general long-term preferences with Collaborative Filtering (CF). DeepMove (Feng
et al. 2018) exploits a deep neural network with two attention mechanisms to model the long-term periodicity. For
short-term preference modeling, RNN-based approaches are
adopted by both DRCF and DeepMove. As a recent attempt,

∗
Corresponding authors; contributing equally with the ﬁrst author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

214

