The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A New Framework for Online Testing of Heterogeneous Treatment Effect
Miao Yu, Wenbin Lu, Rui Song
Department of Statistics
North Carolina State University
{myu12, wlu4, rsong}@ncsu.edu

The time cost and opportunity cost for ﬁxed-horizon hypothesis testing are large (Ju et al. 2019), so users want to ﬁnd
true effects and stop the experiments as quickly as possible.
Moreover, the sample size calculation requires an estimate
of the minimum detectable effect (MDE). Most users lack
good prior knowledge of the trade-off between high detection ability and short waiting time and may want to adjust
them after peeking early at results.
Another problem of A/B testing is that it assumes there
is only an average treatment effect (ATE) in the population of experiment. But underlying this average effect may
be substantial variation in how particular subgroups respond
to treatments: there may be heterogeneous treatment effects
(HTE) (Grimmer, Messing, and Westwood 2017). It might
be that the population average effect of a product with a new
feature is not signiﬁcant, but the feature does beneﬁt a lot
among particular subgroups of users. In this case, we won’t
be able to detect those effects and will lose the chance of
making proﬁts by promoting new products to those target
sub-populations, if only ATE is tested in A/B testing.
To address the continuously monitoring problem, sequential testing (ST) was ﬁrst developed by Wald (Wald 1945),
who introduced the sequential probability ratio test (SPRT).
ST allows intermediate checks of signiﬁcance while providing type I error control at any time; see (Lai 2001) for a
survey on sequential testing. Moreover, ST could help decision makers conclude an experiment earlier with often
much fewer samples than the ﬁxed-horizon testing (Wald
1945). Mixture sequential probability ratio test (mSPRT)
(Robbins 1970) and maximized sequential probability test
(MaxSPRT) (Kulldorff et al. 2011) are two variants of sequential testing that generalized SPRT to a composite hypothesis. Due to the merits of mSPRT that it is a test
with power 1 (Robbins and Siegmund 1974) and almost
optimal (Pollak 1978) with respect to expected time to
stop, it was brought to A/B testing by Johari et al. (2015;
2017). They also proposed a notion of always valid p-value
process (sequential p-values) in the same papers and used it
as a tool for converting ﬁxed-horizon multiple testing procedures to a sequential version. Later, Malek et al. (2017) also
showed that if the original multiple testing procedure has a
type I error guarantee in a certain family (including false discovery rate and family-wise error rate), then the sequential
conversion inherits an analogous guarantee.

Abstract
We propose a new framework for online testing of heterogeneous treatment effects. The proposed test, named sequential
score test (SST), is able to control type I error under continuous monitoring and detect multi-dimensional heterogeneous
treatment effects. We provide an online p-value calculation
for SST, making it convenient for continuous monitoring, and
extend our tests to online multiple testing settings by controlling the false discovery rate. We examine the empirical
performance of the proposed tests and compare them with a
state-of-art online test, named mSPRT using simulations and
a real data. The results show that our proposed test controls
type I error at any time, has higher detection power and allows
quick inference on online A/B testing.

1

Introduction

Randomized controlled experiment, also known as A/B testing, is widely used in web facing industry to improve products and technologies in a data-driven manner (Kohavi et
al. 2009). Most of A/B tests are conducted by performing
a formal null hypothesis statistical testing (NHST) with the
typical null hypothesis H0 : β := μB − μA = 0 to determine if the difference of the metric across two variants is
signiﬁcant or not. The result of a NHST is summarized in a
p-value and the case that the p-value is less than a preset signiﬁcance level α will lead the null hypothesis to be rejected.
A valid testing is able to get a high power to detect the difference if there is, while controlling the type I error, i.e., the
probability of erroneously rejecting H0 , to be less than α.
However, the validity of NHST requires that the sample
size is ﬁxed in advance, which is often violated in practice. In A/B testing practice, a fast-paced product evolution
pushes its shareholders to continuously monitor the p-values
and draw conclusions prematurely. In fact, stopping experiments in an adaptive manner can favorably bias getting signiﬁcant results and lead to very high false positive probabilities, well in excess of the nominal signiﬁcance level (Goodson 2014; Simmons, Nelson, and Simonsohn 2011). As an
extreme example in (Pekelis, Walsh, and Johari 2015), it
can be shown that stopping the ﬁrst time that the p-value
is less than α actually has type I error probability of 1. Yet
for all that, this ”peeking” behavior is not without reasons.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10310

