The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Explainable Data Decompositions
Sebastian Dalleiger, Jilles Vreeken
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{sebastian.dalleiger, jv}@cispa.de

optimally characterise their similarities and differences—and
do so both efﬁciently and in a statistically well-founded manner where we only have to set a signiﬁcance threshold α.
To this end, we model a component given a set of patterns
using the Maximum Entropy principle (Jaynes 1982). That
is, we use a maximum likelihood estimator that satisﬁes the
empirically observed frequencies of the given patterns, but
otherwise makes no further assumptions. We can then formulate the problem in terms of a likelihood maximization
problem, where we after that composition that achieves the
highest overall likelihood. To avoid overﬁtting we rely on the
BIC model selection criterion. In other words, we are after
the most succinct way to summarise the data, by partitioning, such that parts exhibit signiﬁcantly different distributions,
and describing these distributions non-redundantly using only
small and interpretable pattern sets.
Clearly, the search space for this problem is enormous: for
a given dataset there exist an exponential number of patterns,
an exponential number of pattern sets, and an exponential
number of partitions. Moreover, this space is not structured,
barring efﬁcient search for the optimum. We therefore introduce D ISC, a deterministic method that heuristically discovers a good pattern composition. The main idea is that we
split the problem into two parts, and iterate between them
until convergence. That is, for a given data decomposition we
propose to approximate the pattern components using D ESC,
and then given those pattern components to D ISC to discover
reﬁned data components. In both steps we rely on statistical
tests to both prune the search space, as well as make sure we
do not discover any spurious patterns or components.
Extensive experiments show that D ESC and D ISC work
well in practice. D ESC outperforms the state of the art in
pattern set mining, highly efﬁciently discovering succinct
models, while D ISC recovers meaningful components. Case
studies conﬁrm that the components and their characterisations make sense: the ecological niches and commonalities
that D ISC discovers correspond to the ground truth.
In sum, the contributions of this paper are as follows, (I)
deﬁning the pattern composition problem, (II) a fast method
for discovering pattern components, (III) a fast method for
discovering pattern compositions, and (IV) extensive validation on synthetic and real data. We provide the proofs,
additional experiments, and details for reproducibility in the
supplementary material.

Abstract
Our goal is to discover the components of a dataset, characterize why we deem these components, explain how these
components are different from each other, as well as identify
what properties they share among each other. As is usual, we
consider regions in the data to be components if they show
signiﬁcantly different distributions. What is not usual, however, is that we parameterize these distributions with patterns
that are informative for one or more components. We do so
because these patterns allow us to characterize what is going
on in our data as well as explain our decomposition.
We deﬁne the problem in terms of a regularized maximum
likelihood, in which we use the Maximum Entropy principle
to model each data component with a set of patterns. As the
search space is large and unstructured, we propose the deterministic D ISC algorithm to efﬁciently discover high-quality
decompositions via an alternating optimization approach. Empirical evaluation on synthetic and real-world data shows that
D ISC efﬁciently discovers meaningful components and accurately characterises these in easily understandable terms.

Introduction
Suppose we are analysing the sales data from a supermarket.
Likely, our clientele consists of different groups of customers,
each of which have their own buying behaviour. Students, for
example, often buy pasta and ketchup, post-docs buy readymade sauce with their pasta, whereas professors can afford
to make the sauce themselves out of fresh ingredients. That
is, the data consists of different components, parts of the data
that show signiﬁcantly different pattern distributions.
Certain patterns may be characteristic for more than just
one component; both students and post-docs often consume
pizza and beer, after all. That is, the set of patterns that characterise the data can also be partitioned: each such pattern
component consists of those patterns that are characteristic
for a distinct set of data components. Together, the pattern
components give detailed yet easily interpretable insight in
why there are components, how they are different from each
other, and what properties are shared among them.
We propose to discover the pattern composition of a given
database. That is, our goal is to jointly discover the components of the data as well as those pattern components that
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3709

