The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CAWA: An Attention-Network for Credit Attribution
Saurav Manchanda, George Karypis
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, USA
{manch043, karypis}@umn.edu

Abstract
Credit attribution is the task of associating individual parts in
a document with their most appropriate class labels. It is an
important task with applications to information retrieval and
text summarization. When labeled training data is available,
traditional approaches for sequence tagging can be used for
credit attribution. However, generating such labeled datasets
is expensive and time-consuming. In this paper, we present
Credit Attribution With Attention (CAWA), a neural-networkbased approach, that instead of using sentence-level labeled
data, uses the set of class labels that are associated with an
entire document as a source of distant-supervision. CAWA
combines an attention mechanism with a multilabel classiﬁer into an end-to-end learning framework to perform credit
attribution. CAWA labels the individual sentences from the
input document using the resultant attention-weights. CAWA
improves upon the state-of-the-art credit attribution approach
by not constraining a sentence to belong to just one class,
but modeling each sentence as a distribution over all classes,
leading to better modeling of semantically-similar classes.
Experiments on the credit attribution task on a variety of
datasets show that the sentence class labels generated by
CAWA outperform the competing approaches. Additionally,
on the multilabel text classiﬁcation task, CAWA performs better than the competing credit attribution approaches1 .

Figure 1: Plot summary of the movie The Hate U Give from
the IMDB, belonging to the crime/drama genre. The blue
text depicts crime and the orange text depicts drama genre.

cessing and information retrieval tasks (Hearst 1997): it can
improve information retrieval (by indexing documents more
precisely or by giving the speciﬁc part of a document in response to a query); and text summarization (by including
information from each of the document’s topics).
A straightforward way to solve credit attribution is to formulate it as a text-segment-level classiﬁcation problem and
collect the corresponding labeled datasets. However, manually annotating these segments (words, sentences, paragraphs, etc.) with the corresponding class labels is a tedious
and expensive task. In order to reduce the need for such labeling, many methods have been developed that work in a
distant-supervised fashion, such as Labeled Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LLDA) (Ramage et al. 2009), Partially Labeled
Dirichlet Allocation (PLDA) (Ramage, Manning, and Dumais 2011) Multi-Label Topic Model (MLTM) (Soleimani
and Miller 2017), SEG-NOISY and SEG-REFINE (Manchanda and Karypis 2018). Among them, the current stateof-the-arts are the dynamic programming based approaches
SEG-NOISY and SEG-REFINE, that penalize the number
of topic-switches, therefore constraining neighboring sentences to belong to the same topic. However, these approaches cannot model case where sentences can belong to
multiple classes; thus, they cannot correctly model semantically similar classes.
To deal with this limitation, we developed Credit Attribution With Attention (CAWA), a neural-network based
approach that models multi-topic segments. CAWA uses
the class labels of a multilabel document as the source of

Introduction
A document can be considered as a union of segments
(text-pieces), where each segment tends to talk about a single topic (class). In multilabel documents, each of the segments can be associated with one or more of the document’s
classes. Credit attribution (Ramage et al. 2009) refers to the
task of associating these individual segments in a document
with their most appropriate class labels. For example, Fig.
1 shows the IMDB plot summary of the movie The Hate U
Give. The movie belongs to the crime and drama genres. As
shown, each sentence in the plot summary can be mapped
individually to the crime genre and drama genre. Credit attribution ﬁnds its application in many natural language proc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our code and data are available at https://github.com/
gurdaspuriya/cawa.
8472

