The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GRET: Global Representation Enhanced Transformer
Rongxiang Weng,1,2 Haoran Wei,2 Shujian Huang,1∗ Heng Yu,2
Lidong Bing,2 Weihua Luo,2 Jiajun Chen1
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{wengrx, funan.whr, yuheng.yh, l.bing, weihua.luowh}@alibaba-inc.com, {huangsj, chenjj}@nju.edu.cn

hidden states. However, there is evidence showing that hidden states from the encoder in Transformer only contain
local representations which focus on word level information. For example, previous work (Vaswani et al. 2017;
Devlin et al. 2018; Song et al. 2020) showed that these hidden states pay much attention to the word-to-word mapping;
and the weights of attention mechanism, determining which
target word will be generated, is similar to word alignment.

Abstract
Transformer, based on the encoder-decoder framework, has
achieved state-of-the-art performance on several natural language generation tasks. The encoder maps the words in the input sentence into a sequence of hidden states, which are then
fed into the decoder to generate the output sentence. These
hidden states usually correspond to the input words and focus
on capturing local information. However, the global (sentence
level) information is seldom explored, leaving room for the
improvement of generation quality. In this paper, we propose
a novel global representation enhanced Transformer (GRET)
to explicitly model global representation in the Transformer
network. Speciﬁcally, in the proposed model, an external state
is generated for the global representation from the encoder.
The global representation is then fused into the decoder during the decoding process to improve generation quality. We
conduct experiments in two text generation tasks: machine
translation and text summarization. Experimental results on
four WMT machine translation tasks and LCSTS text summarization task demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
approach on natural language generation1 .

1

As Frazier (1987) pointed, the global information, which
is about the whole sentence in contrast to individual words,
should be involved in the process of generating a sentence.
Representation of such global information plays an import
role in neural text generation tasks. In the recurrent neural
network (RNN) based models (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio
2014), Chen (2018) showed on text summarization task that
introducing representations about global information could
improve quality and reduce repetition. Lin et al. (2018b)
showed on machine translation that the structure of the translated sentence will be more correct when introducing global
information. These previous work shows global information is useful in current neural network based model. However, different from RNN (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Cho et al. 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) or
CNN (Gehring et al. 2016; 2017), although self-attention
mechanism can achieve long distance dependence, there
is no explicit mechanism in the Transformer to model the
global representation of the whole sentence. Therefore, it is
an appealing challenge to provide Transformer with such a
kind of global representation.

Introduction

Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) has outperformed other
methods on several neural language generation (NLG) tasks,
like machine translation (Deng et al. 2018), text summarization (Chang, Huang, and Hsu 2018), etc. Generally, Transformer is based on the encoder-decoder framework which
consists of two modules: an encoder network and a decoder
network. The encoder encodes the input sentence into a sequence of hidden states, each of which corresponds to a speciﬁc word in the sentence. The decoder generates the output
sentence word by word. At each decoding time-step, the decoder performs attentive read (Luong, Pham, and Manning
2015; Vaswani et al. 2017) to fetch the input hidden states
and decides which word to generate.
As mentioned above, the decoding process of Transformer only relies on the representations contained in these

In this paper, we divide this challenge into two issues that
need to be addressed: 1). how to model the global contextual
information? and 2). how to use global information in the
generation process?, and propose a novel global representation enhanced Transformer (GRET) to solve them. For the
ﬁrst issue, we propose to generate the global representation
based on local word level representations by two complementary methods in the encoding stage. On one hand, we
adopt a modiﬁed capsule network (Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017) to generate the global representation based the features extracted from local word level representations. The local representations are generally related to the word-to-word
mapping, which may be redundant or noisy. Using them to

∗
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Source code is available at: https://github.com/wengrx/GRET

9258

