The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relevance-Promoting Language Model for Short-Text Conversation∗
Xin Li,1 Piji Li,2 Wei Bi,2 Xiaojiang Liu,2 Wai Lam1
1

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{lixin, wlam}@se.cuhk.edu.hk, {pijili, victoriabi, kieranliu}@tencent.com

the quality of the generated responses (Li et al. 2016a;
Xing et al. 2017; Du et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019).
Despite the effectiveness of these efforts, some intrinsic
issues of S EQ 2S EQ-based models still hinder further improvement of generation performance. Under the S EQ 2S EQ
formulation, the auto-regressive decoder is only trained on
the gold-standard response text while the query text is ignored, leading to under-exploitation of the training data. Besides, the maximization-based decoding strategies adopted
in existing models, such as beam search and greedy search,
restrict the search space to the most frequent phrases and
thus they have the tendency to generate the generic responses or repetitive responses with unnaturally high likelihood, degrading the conversational experience.
GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019), a recently proposed
Transformer-based language model, provides an alternative
solution for language generation. One advantage of GPT-2 is
that the transformer language model can not only capture the
context of arbitrary length but also make full use of the textual supervision signals because the generator is actually the
language model itself. Moreover, GPT-2 adopts top-k sampling (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018) to diversify the generated texts while preserving the relevance. Obviously, these
characteristics are attractive and meaningful for solving the
STC task, whose aim is to generate informative and diverse
human-like responses given the user queries.
However, due to the essence of language modeling, directly applying GPT-2 on the STC task, a conditional language generation task, may be insufﬁcient because the language model is unable to discriminate the source (query)
sentence and the target (response) sentence. The original
experimental results of GPT-2 on the abstractive summarization task (Nallapati et al. 2016) also verify this claim.
Another potential issue of adapting language model for
the STC task comes from recency bias (Khandelwal et
al. 2018) and explanation-away effects (Yu et al. 2017;
Holtzman et al. 2019), where the language model has the
tendency to rely overly on the immediate context and explain away from the long-term context2 , yielding ﬂuent but
topically irrelevant responses.

Abstract
Despite the effectiveness of sequence-to-sequence framework
on the task of Short-Text Conversation (STC), the issue of
under-exploitation of training data (i.e., the supervision signals from query text is ignored) still remains unresolved.
Also, the adopted maximization-based decoding strategies,
inclined to generating the generic responses or responses with
repetition, are unsuited to the STC task. In this paper, we propose to formulate the STC task as a language modeling problem and tailor-make a training strategy to adapt a language
model for response generation. To enhance generation performance, we design a relevance-promoting transformer language model, which performs additional supervised source
attention after the self-attention to increase the importance of
informative query tokens in calculating the token-level representation. The model further reﬁnes the query representation with relevance clues inferred from its multiple references
during training. In testing, we adopt a randomization-overmaximization strategy to reduce the generation of generic responses. Experimental results on a large Chinese STC dataset
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed model on relevance metrics and diversity metrics.1

Introduction
Short Text Conversation (STC) (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015),
also known as single-turn chit-chat conversation, is a popular research topic in the ﬁeld of natural language processing. It is usually formulated as a sequence translation
problem (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011; Shang, Lu, and
Li 2015) and the sequence-to-sequence encoder-decoder
(S EQ 2S EQ) framework (Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015) is applied for solving this problem. The decoder generates the
responses token-by-token, conditioned on the compressed
query representations from the encoder. Following this
paradigm, many attempts have been conducted to reﬁne
∗

The work described in this paper is substantially supported by
a grant from the Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, China (Project Code: 14204418). It was
mainly done when Xin Li was an intern at Tencent AI Lab.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code available at https://ai.tencent.com/ailab/nlp/dialogue/.

2
Long-term context in language model is roughly equivalent to
the source information in S EQ 2S EQ framework.

8253

