The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Auto Weight: Entirely
Data-Driven and Highly Efﬁcient Weighting Framework
Zhenmao Li,1 Yichao Wu,1 Ken Chen,1
Yudong Wu,1 Shunfeng Zhou,1 Jiaheng Liu,2 Junjie Yan1
1
SenseTime, 2 BUAA
{lizhenmao, wuyichiao, wuyudong, zhoushunfeng, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com
kenchen1024@gmail.com, liujiaheng@buaa.edu.cn

which searches weighting strategies for picking more valuable samples or ﬁltering harmful samples. However, there
are some inherently severe challenges if we want to make the
searing process work well. The ﬁrst challenge is the huge
searching space caused by numerous iterations during the
training process. Our objective is to search step dependent
weighting strategies for making the accuracy on validation
datasets as high as possible. Suppose a complete training process involves thousands of steps N , the number of possible
weights for a sample is wn , the batch size is B (typical 128),
so the number of possible weights of a batch data in one step
BN
is an = wnB , the searching space of weights is aN
n = wn ,
which is an enormous number for searching a good strategy.
The second one is the randomness which is an implicit but
harmful problem for searching good weighting strategies. The
randomness can derive from different data combination, the
random augmentation, different initialization of parameters,
etc. Thus, given a strategy model for weighting strategies,
using accuracies on validation datasets to update the strategy
model may cause the searching process to fail easily. Last
but not least, collecting the training samples for learning
to auto weight is nontrivial. In practice, to obtain credible
feedback signals, we need to conduct complete training processes, so that huge numbers of networks must be trained to
convergence. Therefore, the process of searching a weighting
strategy is time-consuming with low efﬁciency.
Based on the above analysis, in this paper, we propose
a novel example weighting strategies searching framework
to learn weighting strategies from data adaptively, which is
modeled by the strategy model. For the ﬁrst challenge, we
simplify the searching process and divide the training process
into a small number of stages N  (typical 20) consisting of
successive iterations, so that the time steps for searching can
be signiﬁcantly limited to the number of stages N   N . We
call this method Stage-based Searching Strategy Method
(3SM), which can shrink the searching space and reduce time
costs signiﬁcantly. Meanwhile, to solve the second challenge,
we design a novel feedback signal measurement, called Duplicate Networks Reward (DNR), where a reference network
is added to generate accuracy difference on the validation
dataset as the feedback signal to remove the randomness.
In this way, if we get a higher accuracy or lower accuracy,

Abstract
Example weighting algorithm is an effective solution to the
training bias problem, however, most previous typical methods
are usually limited to human knowledge and require laborious
tuning of hyperparameters. In this paper, we propose a novel
example weighting framework called Learning to Auto Weight
(LAW). The proposed framework ﬁnds step-dependent weighting policies adaptively, and can be jointly trained with target
networks without any assumptions or prior knowledge about
the dataset. It consists of three key components: Stage-based
Searching Strategy (3SM) is adopted to shrink the huge searching space in a complete training process; Duplicate Network
Reward (DNR) gives more accurate supervision by removing
randomness during the searching process; Full Data Update
(FDU) further improves the updating efﬁciency. Experimental
results demonstrate the superiority of weighting policy explored by LAW over standard training pipeline. Compared
with baselines, LAW can ﬁnd a better weighting schedule
which achieves much more superior accuracy on both biased
CIFAR and ImageNet.

Introduction
Although the quantity of training samples is critical for current state-of-the-art deep neural networks (DNNs), the quality
of data also has signiﬁcant impacts on exerting the powerful
capacity of DNNs on various tasks. For supervised learning,
it is a common hypothesis that both training and test examples are drawn i.i.d. from the same distribution. However,
during practical training, this assumption is not always valid,
therefore, the training bias problems, mainly including label
noise and class imbalance, are encountered frequently.
It is widely known that the sample weighting algorithm is
an effective solution to the training bias problem. Although
common techniques such as cost-sensitive learning (Lin
et al. 2017) and curriculum learning (Bengio et al. 2009;
Kumar, Packer, and Koller 2010) demonstrate the effectiveness of example reweighting, they are usually predeﬁned for
speciﬁc tasks with prior knowledge and require laborious tuning of hyperparameters. To alleviate this problem adaptively,
a method of learning to auto-weight is probably effective,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4788

