The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

PHASEN: A Phase-and-Harmonics-Aware Speech Enhancement Network
Dacheng Yin,1∗ Chong Luo,2 Zhiwei Xiong,1 Wenjun Zeng2
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
ydc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {cluo, wezeng}@microsoft.com, zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Time-frequency (T-F) domain masking is a mainstream approach for single-channel speech enhancement. Recently,
focuses have been put to phase prediction in addition to
amplitude prediction. In this paper, we propose a phaseand-harmonics-aware deep neural network (DNN), named
PHASEN, for this task. Unlike previous methods which directly use a complex ideal ratio mask to supervise the DNN
learning, we design a two-stream network, where amplitude
stream and phase stream are dedicated to amplitude and phase
prediction. We discover that the two streams should communicate with each other, and this is crucial to phase prediction.
In addition, we propose frequency transformation blocks to
catch long-range correlations along the frequency axis. Visualization shows that the learned transformation matrix implicitly captures the harmonic correlation, which has been proven
to be helpful for T-F spectrogram reconstruction. With these
two innovations, PHASEN acquires the ability to handle detailed phase patterns and to utilize harmonic patterns, getting
1.76dB SDR improvement on AVSpeech + AudioSet dataset.
It also achieves signiﬁcant gains over Google’s network on
this dataset. On Voice Bank + DEMAND dataset, PHASEN
outperforms previous methods by a large margin on four metrics.

1

(a) Noisy signal

(b) cIRM.im

(c) Estimated cRM.im

Figure 1: Straightforward cIRM estimation does not achieve
desired results. Although the imaginary part of the cIRM, as
shown in (b), contains much information, that of a predicted
cRM, as shown in (c), is almost zero.
Wang 2016) was proposed aiming at faithfully recovering
the complex T-F spectrogram.
Williamson et al. (Williamson, Wang, and Wang 2016)
observed that, in Cartesian coordinates, structure exists in
both real and imaginary components of the cIRM, so they
designed deep neural network (DNN)-based methods to estimate the real and imaginary parts of cIRM. However, on
large dataset AVSpeech, our evaluations of a modern DNNbased cIRM estimation method (Ephrat et al. 2018) shows
that simply changing the training target to cIRM did not
generate desired prediction results. Fig.1(a) shows the amplitude of the noisy signal where the stripe pattern is caused
by noise. Fig.1(b) and (c) show the imaginary parts of the
ideal mask and the estimated mask, respectively. Surprisingly, Fig.1(c) is almost zero, meaning that the estimated
cIRM is downgraded to IRM. In another word, the phase
information is not recovered at all.
This observation motivates us to design a novel architecture to improve the phase prediction. A straightforward
idea is to separately predict amplitude mask and phase
with a two-stream network. However, Willianson et al.
(Williamson, Wang, and Wang 2016) also pointed out that,
in polar coordinates, structure does not exist in the phase
spectrogram. This suggests that independent phase estimation is very difﬁcult, if not completely impossible. In view
of this, we add two-way information exchange for the twostream architecture, so that the predicted amplitude can
guide the prediction of phase. Results show that such information exchange is critical to the successful phase predic-

Introduction

Single-channel speech enhancement aims at separating the
clean speech from a noise-corrupted speech signal. Existing
methods can be classiﬁed into two categories according to
the signal domain they work on. The time domain methods
directly operate on the one-dimensional (1D) raw waveform
of speech signals, while the time-frequency (T-F) domain
methods manipulate the two-dimensional (2D) speech spectrogram. Mainstream methods in the second category formulate the speech enhancement problem as to predict a T-F
mask over the input spectrogram. Early T-F masking methods only try to recover the amplitude of the target speech.
When the importance of phase information was recognized,
complex ideal ratio mask (cIRM) (Williamson, Wang, and
∗
This work was carried out while Dacheng Yin was an intern at
MSRA.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9458

