The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Evaluating Commonsense in Pre-Trained Language Models
Xuhui Zhou,1∗ Yue Zhang,2 Leyang Cui,2,3 Dandan Huang2
1

University of Washington
School of Engineering, Westlake University
3
Zhejiang University
xuhuizh@uw.edu, {yue.zhang, cuileyang, huangdandan}@westlake.edu.cn
2

that such knowledge can be effectively learned via language
model (LM) pre-training over large scale data.
Commonsense knowledge spans “a huge portion of human experience, encompassing knowledge about the spatial,
physical, social, temporal, and psychological aspects of typical everyday life. ” (Liu and Singh 2004). Intuitively, such
knowledge is at least as useful as semantic and syntactic
knowledge in natural language inference, reading comprehension and coreference resolution. For example, the word
“it” in the sentence “the dog cannot cross the street because
it is too X” can refer to three different entities when the word
“X” is “timid”, “wide” and “dark”, respectively, and resolving such ambiguity can require that a system has relevant
commonsense knowledge beyond the sentence level. However, relatively little work has been conducted on systematically evaluating the nature of commonsense knowledge
learned in contextualized representations.
We ﬁll this gap by evaluating ﬁve state-of-the-art contextualized embedding models on seven commonsense benchmarks. The models include off-the-shelf embeddings1 from
GPT (Radford and Sutskever 2018), GPT2 (Radford et al.
2019), BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), XLNet (Yang et al. 2019)
and RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019b), and the benchmarks include Conjunction Acceptability, Sense Making (Wang et al.
2019), Winograd Schema Challenge (Levesque, Davis, and
Morgenstern 2012), SWAG (Zellers et al. 2018), HellaSwag
(Zellers et al. 2019), Sense Making with Reasoning (Wang et
al. 2019), and Argument Reasoning Comprehension (Habernal et al. 2018). We evaluate commonsense knowledge contained in the above models by unifying the form of all the
datasets and comparing LM perplexities on positive and negative samples (i.e., sentences that make sense and those that
do not make sense, respectively). Commonsense contained
in our data covers a wide range of subjects, from physical
world knowledge to social conventions, from scientiﬁc domains to daily life scenes. We further categorize them by the
difﬁculty level, namely the number of inference steps necessary in making sense.
We reframe the datasets in order to conduct both wordand sentence-level testing. For word-level testing, negative
samples are drawn by replacing words from positive sam-

Abstract
Contextualized representations trained over large raw text
data have given remarkable improvements for NLP tasks
including question answering and reading comprehension.
There have been works showing that syntactic, semantic
and word sense knowledge are contained in such representations, which explains why they beneﬁt such tasks. However,
relatively little work has been done investigating commonsense knowledge contained in contextualized representations,
which is crucial for human question answering and reading
comprehension. We study the commonsense ability of GPT,
BERT, XLNet, and RoBERTa by testing them on seven challenging benchmarks, ﬁnding that language modeling and its
variants are effective objectives for promoting models’ commonsense ability while bi-directional context and larger training set are bonuses. We additionally ﬁnd that current models
do poorly on tasks require more necessary inference steps.
Finally, we test the robustness of models by making dual test
cases, which are correlated so that the correct prediction of
one sample should lead to correct prediction of the other. Interestingly, the models show confusion on these test cases,
which suggests that they learn commonsense at the surface
rather than the deep level. We release a test set, named CATs
publicly, for future research.

Introduction
Contextualized representations trained over large-scale text
data have given remarkable improvements to a wide range
of NLP tasks, including natural language inference (Bowman et al. 2015), question answering (Rajpurkar, Jia, and
Liang 2018) and reading comprehension (Lai et al. 2017).
Giving new state-of-the-art results that approach or surpass
human performance on several benchmark datasets, it is an
interesting question what types of knowledge are learned in
pre-trained contextualized representations in order to better
understand how they beneﬁt the NLP problems above. There
has been work investigating the nature of syntactic (Liu et al.
2019a), semantic (Liu et al. 2019a) and word sense (Kim et
al. 2019) knowledge contained in such contextualized representations, in particular BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), showing
∗

Work done while at Westlake University
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9733

https://github.com/huggingface/transformers

