The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Reinforcement Learning for Active Human Pose Estimation
Erik Gärtner,1∗ Aleksis Pirinen,1∗ Cristian Sminchisescu1,2,3
1

Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
2
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
3
Google Research
{erik.gartner, aleksis.pirinen, cristian.sminchisescu}@math.lth.se

computational complexity. There are good reasons for this,
as experimenting with an active system faces the difﬁculty
of linking perception and action in the real world, or may
have to resort on simulation, which can however lack visual
appearance and motion realism, especially for complex articulated and deformable structures such as people.
In this work we consider 3d human pose estimation from
the perspective of an active observer, and operate with an
idealization that allows us to distill the active vision concepts, develop new methodology, and test it on real image data. We work with a Panoptic massive camera grid
(Joo et al. 2015), where we can both observe the scene in
time-freeze, from a dense variety of viewpoints, and process the scene temporally, thus being able to emulate a moving observer. An active setup for 3d human pose estimation addresses the incomplete body pose observability in
any monocular image due to depth ambiguities or occlusions
(self-induced or produced by other people or objects). It also
enables adaptation with respect to any potential limitations
of the associated monocular pose estimation system, by sequentially selecting views that when combined yield accurate pose predictions.
In this context we introduce Pose-DRL, a deep reinforcement learning (RL) based active pose estimation architecture
operating in a dense camera rig, which learns to select appropriate viewpoints to feed an underlying monocular pose predictor. Moreover, our model learns when to stop viewpoint
exploration in time-freeze, or continue to the next temporal
step when processing video. In evaluations using Panoptic
we show that our system learns to select sets of views yielding more accurate pose estimates compared to strong multiview baselines. The results not only show the advantage of
intelligent viewpoint selection, but also that often ‘less is
more’, as fusing too many possibly incorrect viewpoint estimates leads to inferior results.
As our model consists of a deep RL-based active vision
module on top of a task module, it can be easily adjusted for
other visual routines in the context of a multi-camera setup
by simply replacing the task module and retraining the active
vision component, or reﬁning them jointly in case of access
and compatibility. We show encouraging results using different pose estimators and task settings.

Abstract
Most 3d human pose estimation methods assume that input –
be it images of a scene collected from one or several viewpoints, or from a video – is given. Consequently, they focus
on estimates leveraging prior knowledge and measurement
by fusing information spatially and/or temporally, whenever
available. In this paper we address the problem of an active
observer with freedom to move and explore the scene spatially – in ‘time-freeze’ mode – and/or temporally, by selecting informative viewpoints that improve its estimation accuracy. Towards this end, we introduce Pose-DRL, a fully trainable deep reinforcement learning-based active pose estimation architecture which learns to select appropriate views, in
space and time, to feed an underlying monocular pose estimator. We evaluate our model using single- and multi-target
estimators with strong result in both settings. Our system further learns automatic stopping conditions in time and transition functions to the next temporal processing step in videos.
In extensive experiments with the Panoptic multi-view setup,
and for complex scenes containing multiple people, we show
that our model learns to select viewpoints that yield signiﬁcantly more accurate pose estimates compared to strong
multi-view baselines.

1

Introduction

Existing human pose estimation models, be them designed
for 2d or 3d reconstruction, assume that viewpoint selection
is outside the control of the estimation agent. This problem
is usually solved by a human, either once and for all, or by
moving around and tracking the elements of interest in the
scene. Consequently, the work is split between sufﬁciency
(e.g. instrumenting the space with as many cameras as possible in motion capture setups), minimalism (work with as
little as possible, ideally a single view, as given), or pragmatism (use whatever is available, e.g. a stereo system and
lidar in a self-driving car). While each of these scenarios and
their underlying methodologies make practical or conceptual sense in their context of applicability, none covers the
case of an active observer moving in the scene in order to
reduce uncertainty, with emphasis on trading accuracy and
∗

Denotes equal contribution, order determined by coin ﬂip.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10835

