The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Enhancing Personalized Trip Recommendation with Attractive Routes
Jiqing Gu,1,3,4 Chao Song,1 Wenjun Jiang,2 Xiaomin Wang,1 Ming Liu1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University
3
CETC Big Data Research Institute Co.,Ltd, Guiyang
4
Big Data Application on Improving Government Governance Capabilities National Engineering Laboratory, Guiyang
gujiqing@std.uestc.edu.cn, {chaosong, csmliu, xmwang}@uestc.edu.cn, jiangwenjun@hnu.edu.cn
Abstract

Festival
booth

Personalized trip recommendation tries to recommend a sequence of point of interests (POIs) for a user. Most of existing
studies search POIs only according to the popularity of POIs
themselves. In fact, the routes among the POIs also have attractions to visitors, and some of these routes have high popularity. We term this kind of route as Attractive Route (AR),
which brings extra user experience. In this paper, we study
the attractive routes to improve personalized trip recommendation. To deal with the challenges of discovery and evaluation of ARs, we propose a personalized Trip Recommender
with POIs and Attractive Route (TRAR). It discovers the attractive routes based on the popularity and the Gini coefﬁcient of POIs, then it utilizes a gravity model in a category
space to estimate the rating scores and preferences of the attractive routes. Based on that, TRAR recommends a trip with
ARs to maximize user experience and leverage the tradeoff
between the time cost and the user experience. The experimental results show the superiority of TRAR compared with
other state-of-the-art methods.

1

AR

AR

B(60)
Commercial
booth

O(10)
D(50)
A(100)

POI
Route

Figure 1: An example of attractive routes.
travels along the two routes, she may also visit these events
and her experience will be improved. Thus, by considering
the popularity of routes and POIs, the recommended path
O → B → D will bring more user experience than the
previous one.
Moreover, by taking the route B → D in Fig.1 as an example, it is an incoming route to a POI with high popularity,
and its popularity occupies the majority of POI’s. Without
depending on POI, the route has its own attractions (such
as business events) for visitors. We term this kind of route
as Attractive Route (AR), which brings extra user experience. However, considering attractive route in personalized
trip recommendation has the following challenging issues:
(1) How to discover attractive routes? (2) How to evaluate
the rating score and the preference of an attractive route, so
as to decide if a user will visit an attractive route with extra
travel time? (3) How to improve personalized trip recommendation by considering attractive routes?
In this paper, we study the user experience from the routes
as an extension of the Orienteering Problem, which aims to
maximize the user experience of a recommended trip with
multi-constraints. To address these challenges, we propose a
personalized Trip Recommender with POIs and Attractive
Route (TRAR). It contains AR discovery, AR evaluation,
and trip recommendation. Our contributions are as follows:

Introduction

With the rapid development of mobile devices and location acquisition technologies, location-based personalized
trip recommender that recommends sequential points of interest (POIs) to visitors1 has emerged and received popularity recently. Traditional trip recommendation utilizes the
popularity and user preference to evaluate the attraction of
each POI, and recommends a sequential POIs with maximal
user experience (Lim et al. 2017; 2015). However, in addition to POIs, the route between two POIs also has attraction
to the visitors. We take Fig.1 as an example to illustrate the
attractions from routes. Each capital letter refers to a POI
and its number in the brackets indicates the popularity of
the POI. The number on each route indicates its popularity.
Traditional trip recommender only considers POIs with high
popularity to achieve high user experience. Thus, by only
considering the popularity of POIs, the path O → A → D
will be recommended, since POI A has the highest popularity. Although the popularity of B is less than that of A, the
business events on the two routes O → B and B → D attract many visitors to increase their popularity. When a user

• As far as we know, we are the ﬁrst to investigate the attractive routes in personalized trip recommendation. TRAR
discovers the attractive routes by the popularity and Gini
coefﬁcient of each POI from the travel history of users.
• In the process of AR evaluation, TRAR obtains the preference of each AR by unsupervised learning. Then, TRAR
calculates the rating score of each AR by a gravity model

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use the terms ”visitor” and ”user” interchangeably.
662

