The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Merging Weak and Active Supervision for Semantic Parsing
Ansong Ni, Pengcheng Yin, Graham Neubig
Carnegie Mellon University
{ansongn, pcyin, gneubig}@cs.cmu.edu

Classical supervised learning of semantic parsers requires
parallel corpora of NL utterances and their corresponding
annotated MRs (Zettlemoyer and Collins 2005; Dong and
Lapata 2018; Rabinovich, Stern, and Klein 2017). However, this annotation requires strong domain expertise in the
schema of the MR language ( e.g., SQL of KB queries),
and hiring such domain experts can be expensive. Moreover,
depending on the type of meaning representation used, the
same input utterance could be grounded to multiple, equally
acceptable MRs with diverse syntactic form (e.g. different
ways to implement a loop), making it non-trivial to validate
the correctness of annotated MRs given by different annotators. These factors make it very expensive to create fullysupervised semantic parsing datasets at large scale.

Abstract
A semantic parser maps natural language commands (NLs)
from the users to executable meaning representations (MRs),
which are later executed in certain environment to obtain
user-desired results. The fully-supervised training of such
parser requires NL/MR pairs, annotated by domain experts,
which makes them expensive to collect. However, weaklysupervised semantic parsers are learnt only from pairs of NL
and expected execution results, leaving the MRs latent. While
weak supervision is cheaper to acquire, learning from this input poses difﬁculties. It demands that parsers search a large
space with a very weak learning signal and it is hard to avoid
spurious MRs that achieve the correct answer in the wrong
way. These factors lead to a performance gap between parsers
trained in weakly- and fully-supervised setting. To bridge
this gap, we examine the intersection between weak supervision and active learning, which allows the learner to actively select examples and query for manual annotations as
extra supervision to improve the model trained under weak
supervision. We study different active learning heuristics for
selecting examples to query, and various forms of extra supervision for such queries. We evaluate the effectiveness of
our method on two different datasets. Experiments on the
WikiSQL show that by annotating only 1.8% of examples,
we improve over a state-of-the-art weakly-supervised baseline by 6.4%, achieving an accuracy of 79.0%, which is only
1.3% away from the model trained with full supervision.
Experiments on WikiTableQuestions with human annotators
show that our method can improve the performance with only
100 active queries, especially for weakly-supervised parsers
learnt from a cold start.1

Weakly-supervised semantic parsing aims to solve this
problem by relaxing the requirement for annotated MRs, instead training the parser using indirect supervision of only
the expected result of executing an MR corresponding to
user’s intent (i.e., an answer for a user question) (Clarke
et al. 2010; Berant et al. 2013; Pasupat and Liang 2015).
Compared with annotation-intensive MRs, such expected results are easy to obtain, even from annotators who do not
know the speciﬁc MR language. Still, weakly supervised
learning of semantic parsers remains a non-trivial task. First,
the search space of possible MRs given an execution result
is exponentially large, while the reward the parser receives
during training is sparse and binary (e.g. one iff the execution result is correct); Another issue is spurious MRs, which
are programs that happens to execute to the correct result,
but are semantically incorrect. For example, a parser may
wrongly parse the utterance “multiply two by two” to “2+2”
and still get the correct answer. Such spuriousness would
add a great amount of noise to the already-weak supervision
signal.

Introduction
Semantic parsing maps a user-issued natural language (NL)
utterance to a machine-executable meaning representation
(MR), such as λ−calculus (Zettlemoyer and Collins 2005),
SQL queries (Dong and Lapata 2018) or general purpose
programming languages (e.g., Python) (Yin and Neubig
2018). These MRs can then be executed in a certain environment (e.g., a knowledge base, KB) to achieve the goal of
users, such as querying a KB using natural language.

To tackle these challenges with weakly-supervised semantic parsing, we propose a method to combine Weak and
Active Supervision for Semantic Parsing (WASSP). As illustrated in Fig. Fig. 1, for each iteration, we ﬁrst train the
semantic parsing model to convergence with weak supervision. Then we perform active learning which allows the
model to actively ask for extra supervision (e.g. annotated
MRs) for only the small fraction of examples that would

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code available at https://github.com/niansong1996/wassp
8536

