The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Uncertainty Aware Graph Gaussian Process for Semi-Supervised Learning
Zhao-Yang Liu,1 Shao-Yuan Li,1 Songcan Chen,1 Yao Hu,2 Sheng-Jun Huang∗1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization Nanjing 211106, China
2
YouKu Cognitive and Intelligent Lab, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{zhaoyangliu, lisy, s.chen, huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn, yaoohu@alibaba-inc.com

et al. 2010), which rely on the label smooth assumption
that data connected to each other in the graph tend to
share the same label. Recently, implicit graph regularization via learned node representation have emerged, including graph embedding works(Perozzi, AI-Rfou, and Skiena
2014; Yang, Cohen, and Salakhutdinow 2016) and the powerful graph convolutional networks (GCN)(Wu et al. 2019;
Kipf and Welling 2017).
In real world tasks, the graph structure is not always precisely given, and usually suffer from uncertainty issues. For
example, it is a common case that edges connecting nodes
with different labels appear in a graph. In other words, the
connected neighbors could be irrelevant to the node. This
in turn would lead to uncertainty on the predictions of the
learning model. It is thus a signiﬁcant challenge to enhance
the learning model with ability to handle structure uncertainty in the graph. Attempts for GCN have been made towards this target. The approach in (Vashishth et al. 2019)
added the label prediction uncertainty of nodes as parameters and optimized them jointly with the network parameter by back propagation. The method in (Zhang et al. 2019)
treated the graph structure as one realization of a parametric
family of random graphs and proposed a Bayesian GCN to
solve it.
While the graph neural networks have generally surpassed
Laplacian and embedding based methods in predictive performance, they require a relatively large set of labeled validation set to prevent over-ﬁtting, whereas the labeled data
is usually limited in many applications. To bridge the gap
between the simpler models and the more data intensive
graph neural networks, Gaussian process model for GSSL
is proposed in (Ng, Colombo, and Silva 2018), which is
data-efﬁcient and can achieve competitive performance with
GCN when there are sufﬁcient labeled data. However, this
method does not consider the uncertainty issue during the
model inference and prediction.
In this paper, considering the appealing properties of
Gaussian process, which generalize well with few labels and
can naturally incorporate the uncertainty of inferences in the
learning process, we propose an Uncertainty aware Graph
Gaussian Process based approach (UaGGP) for GSSL. We
utilize the prediction uncertainty and label smooth regularization to guide each other during the learning process. To
further alleviate the possible side effect of irrelevant neigh-

Abstract
Graph-based semi-supervised learning (GSSL) studies the
problem where in addition to a set of data points with few
available labels, there also exists a graph structure that describes the underlying relationship between data items. In
practice, structure uncertainty often occurs in graphs when
edges exist between data with different labels, which may further results in prediction uncertainty of labels. Considering
that Gaussian process generalizes well with few labels and
can naturally model uncertainty, in this paper, we propose an
Uncertainty aware Graph Gaussian Process based approach
(UaGGP) for GSSL. UaGGP exploits the prediction uncertainty and label smooth regularization to guide each other
during learning. To further subdue the effect of irrelevant
neighbors, UaGGP also aggregates the clean representation
in the original space and the learned representation. Experiments on benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed approach.

Introduction
Datasets with graph or network structures are all around in
wide applications. It is often desirable to predict the labels
for nodes in the graph. For example, in a social network,
we may be interested in predicting the profession of individuals; in a citation network, we might want to predict the
topics of documents. Sometimes, only a small number of
labeled examples are available, and it is costly to collect a
large set of labeled data for training. In such cases, making
good use of the graph structure which contains information
about the relationship between data items is critical. Such
learning problem is referred as graph-based semi-supervised
learning (GSSL)(Zhu 2005).
During the past years, various studies have been conducted for GSSL. Early work led to the development of
explicit graph-based regularization(Zhu, Ghahramani, and
Lafferty 2003; Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006; Zhang
∗
This research was supported by NSFC(61732006, 61572252),
the Aerospace Power Funds No. 6141B09050342, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, NO. NE2019104
and Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization. Sheng-Jun Huang is the corresponding
author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4957

