The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Lifelong Spectral Clustering
Gan Sun,1,3∗ Yang Cong,2 Qianqian Wang,3 Jun Li,4 Yun Fu3

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. †
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
3
Northeastern University, USA. 4 MIT, USA.
{sungan1412, congyang81, junl.mldl}@gmail.com, qianqian174@foxmail.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu
1

2

Abstract

…

In the past decades, spectral clustering (SC) has become one
of the most effective clustering algorithms. However, most
previous studies focus on spectral clustering tasks with a ﬁxed
task set, which cannot incorporate with a new spectral clustering task without accessing to previously learned tasks. In
this paper, we aim to explore the problem of spectral clustering in a lifelong machine learning framework, i.e., Lifelong
Spectral Clustering (L2 SC). Its goal is to efﬁciently learn a
model for a new spectral clustering task by selectively transferring previously accumulated experience from knowledge
library. Speciﬁcally, the knowledge library of L2 SC contains
two components: 1) orthogonal basis library: capturing latent
cluster centers among the clusters in each pair of tasks; 2)
feature embedding library: embedding the feature manifold
information shared among multiple related tasks. As a new
spectral clustering task arrives, L2 SC ﬁrstly transfers knowledge from both basis library and feature library to obtain
encoding matrix, and further redeﬁnes the library base over
time to maximize performance across all the clustering tasks.
Meanwhile, a general online update formulation is derived to
alternatively update the basis library and feature library. Finally, the empirical experiments on several real-world benchmark datasets demonstrate that our L2 SC model can effectively improve the clustering performance when comparing
with other state-of-the-art spectral clustering algorithms.

t+1
ࢃ࢚ (Similarity Matrix)
Spectral
Clustering

t

Refining

t-1
B (Orthogonal Basis Library)

…

ࢄ࢚ (Original Matrix)

F (Feature Embedding Library)

Figure 1: The demonstration of our lifelong spectral clustering model, where different shapes are from different clusters. When a new clustering task X t is coming, the knowledge is iteratively transferred from orthogonal basis library
B and feature embedding library F to encode the new task.

focus on clustering tasks with a ﬁxed task set. When applied into a new task environment or incorporated into a new
spectral clustering task, these models have to repeatedly access to previous clustering tasks, which can result in high
energy consumption in real applications, e.g., in mobile applications. In this paper, our work explores how to adopt the
spectral clustering scenario into the setting of lifelong machine learning.
For the lifelong machine learning, recent works (Ruvolo and Eaton 2013; Isele, Rostami, and Eaton 2016;
Xu et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2018a; 2019) have explored the
methods of accumulating the single task over time. Generally, lifelong learning utilizes knowledge from previously
learned tasks to improve the performance on new tasks,
and accumulates a knowledge library over time. Although
these models have been successfully adopted into supervised learning (Chen, Ma, and Liu 2018; Sun, Cong, and
Xu 2018) and reinforcement learning (Ammar et al. 2014;
Isele and Cosgun 2018), its application in spectral clustering, one of the most classical research problems in machine
learning community, is still sparse. Take the news clustering
tasks as an example, the semantic meaning of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and NBA are very dissimilar in the newspaper of

Introduction
Spectral clustering algorithms (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2002;
Shi and Malik 2000) discover the corresponding embedding of data via utilizing manifold information embedded
in the sample distribution, which has shown the state-of-theart performance in many applications (Li and Chen 2015;
Zhao, Ding, and Fu 2017; Wang, Ding, and Fu 2019). In addition to single spectral clustering task scenario, (Yang et al.
2015) proposes a multi-task spectral clustering model, and
aims to perform multiple clustering tasks and make them reinforce each other. However, most recently-proposed models (Zhang et al. 2018; Pang et al. 2018; Kang et al. 2018)
∗

The corresponding author is Gan Sun.
This work has been done during Gan Sun visiting Northeastern
University, and he was supported by NSFC (61722311).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

5867

