The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Structure Learning for Headline Generation
Ruqing Zhang, Jiafeng Guo, Yixing Fan, Yanyan Lan, Xueqi Cheng
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{zhangruqing, guojiafeng, fanyixing, lanyanyan, cxq}@ict.ac.cn

extract sentences from the original document and then exploit sentence compression techniques to produce the headline. They have the advantage of producing ﬂuent sentence
and preserving the meaning of original documents, but also
inevitably suffer from generating less informative headlines.
Recently, thanks to the popularity of neural network models
and their ability to learn continuous representations without
preprocessing tools, abstractive methods have become popular in headline generation, which aim to generate the headline based on understanding the document.

Abstract
Headline generation is an important problem in natural language processing, which aims to describe a document by a
compact and informative headline. Some recent successes on
this task have been achieved by advanced graph-based neural
models, which marry the representational power of deep neural networks with the structural modeling ability of the relational sentence graphs. The advantages of graph-based neural
models over traditional Seq2Seq models lie in that they can
encode long-distance relationship between sentences beyond
the surface linear structure. However, since documents are
typically weakly-structured data, modern graph-based neural models usually rely on manually designed rules or some
heuristics to construct the sentence graph a prior. This may
largely limit the power and increase the cost of the graphbased methods. In this paper, therefore, we propose to incorporate structure learning into the graph-based neural models for headline generation. That is, we want to automatically learn the sentence graph using a data-driven way, so
that we can unveil the document structure ﬂexibly without
prior heuristics or rules. To achieve this goal, we employ a
deep & wide network to encode rich relational information
between sentences for the sentence graph learning. For the
deep component, we leverage neural matching models, either representation-focused or interaction-focused model, to
learn semantic similarity between sentences. For the wide
component, we encode a variety of discourse relations between sentences. A Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) is
then applied over the sentence graph to generate high-level
relational representations for headline generation. The whole
model could be optimized end-to-end so that the structure
and representation could be learned jointly. Empirical studies
show that our model can signiﬁcantly outperform the stateof-the-art headline generation models.

1

Without loss of generality, a good understanding of the
document should consist of not only the language modeling (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015), but also the structure
modeling, i.e., capturing the intrinsic relationships between
sentences. The headline generation task is generally formulated as a sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) learning problem
and a wide range of neural Seq2Seq models have been applied to solve it. Speciﬁcally, Seq2Seq models only capture
the surface linear structure of the document, which can not
model the long-distance relationship between sentences. To
address this issue, some recent studies (Yasunaga et al. 2017;
Fernandes, Allamanis, and Brockschmidt 2019) begin to focus on the graph-based neural models, which are inspired
by modeling highly-structured objects (e.g., entity relationships and molecules) using graphs (Kipf and Welling 2017).
These methods exploit the representational power of deep
neural networks and the structural modeling ability of the
relational sentence graphs, which can encode long-distance
relationship between sentences. However, since documents
are typically weakly-structured data, these graph-based neural models usually rely on manually designed rules (e.g., discourse relations) or some heuristics (e.g., tf-idf cosine similarity) to construct the sentence graph a prior. This may result in the limitation of ﬂexibility in modeling different relationships between sentences. Furthermore, it could increase
the cost of designing the sentence graph.

Introduction

Headline generation is a task to generate a ﬂuent and condensed headline for a document, with the constraint that only
a short sequence of words is allowed to generate. Previous
efforts on headline generation can be categorized to extractive and abstractive methods. Extractive methods directly

In this work, we propose a Structure Learning based
Generation model, named SLGen, which incorporates sentence graph learning into the graph-based neural models
for headline generation. We represent document sentences
as nodes in a graph with undirected edges as links between sentences. To learn the sentence graph, we employ

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9555

