The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reshaping Diverse Planning
Michael Katz, Shirin Sohrabi
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
1101 Kitchawan Rd, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA

sity measure (Bryce 2014), LPG-d and DIV focus on ﬁnding a set of plans with a particular minimum action distance (Nguyen et al. 2012; Coman and Muñoz-Avila 2011).
Goldman and Kuter (2015) propose a diversity metric based
on information retrieval literature. Roberts, Howe, and Ray
(2014) suggest another diversity metric, introducing several planners, such as itA∗ and MQA, which, in addition to
the diversity metrics, consider plan quality. Recently, Vadlamudi and Kambhampati (2016) suggested “cost-sensitive”
diverse planners, ﬁrst ﬁnding all cost sensitive plans and
then ﬁnding a diverse set of plans among these. Top-k planners (e.g., Katz et al. 2018b) or top-quality planners (Katz,
Sohrabi, and Udrea 2020) can also be viewed as diverse
planners, purely addressing the quality metric.

Abstract
The need for multiple plans has been established by various
planning applications. In some, solution quality has the predominant role, while in others diversity is the key factor. Most
recent work takes both plan quality and solution diversity
into account under the generic umbrella of diverse planning.
There is no common agreement, however, on a collection of
computational problems that fall under that generic umbrella.
This in particular might lead to a comparison between planners that have different solution guarantees or optimization
criteria in mind. In this work we revisit diverse planning literature in search of such a collection of computational problems, classifying the existing planners to these problems. We
formally deﬁne a taxonomy of computational problems with
respect to both plan quality and solution diversity, extending
the existing work. We propose a novel approach to diverse
planning, exploiting existing classical planners via planning
task reformulation and choosing a subset of plans of required
size in post-processing. Based on that, we present planners
for two computational problems, that most existing planners
solve. Our experiments show that the proposed approach signiﬁcantly improves over the best performing existing planners in terms of coverage, the overall solution quality, and the
overall diversity according to various diversity metrics.

1

Despite the large number of existing tools and diversity
metrics, there is no adopted collection of computational
problems in diverse planning, making the comparison of different approaches challenging. Further, mixing quality and
diversity creates an additional challenge for comparing various planners, especially if they have different optimality
guarantees. Even for the same computational problem, planner comparison can be challenging. Every planner can have
a different implementation of the same diversity metric, and
many planners produce a collection of plans without specifying the metric used, or the solution value under that metric.
To the best of our knowledge, there exists no external validation tool for a collection of plans, producing the solution
value under a given diversity metric. Additionally, most of
the diverse planning approaches compute the set of plans by
repeatedly solving the same task. To obtain a different behavior, planner’s heuristic guidance is modiﬁed to account
for already found plans, with a speciﬁc focus on a particular
metric. This requires (a) having an intimate familiarity with
the way a particular planner works, and (b) creating a separate modiﬁcation for each metric. However, the outcome is
not always as intended. Tweaking the heuristic function does
not necessarily result in a different plan and planners have to
discard many equal plans and repeat unnecessary iterations.

Introduction

Many applications of planning require generating multiple
plans rather than one. Some examples include malware detection (Boddy et al. 2005), automated analysis of streaming data (Riabov et al. 2015), and risk management (Sohrabi
et al. 2018). Planners that produce multiple plans were also
found useful in the context of re-planning and plan monitoring (Fox et al. 2006), user preferences (Myers and Lee 1999;
Nguyen et al. 2012), as well as the engine for plan recognition and its related applications (Sohrabi, Riabov, and Udrea
2016). All these applications justify the need for ﬁnding a
diverse set of plans while keeping quality in mind.
Many diverse planners were developed over the last
decade, each one focused on addressing a particular diversity metric. For example, while DLAMA focuses on ﬁnding a set of plans by considering a landmark-based diver-

In this work, we address the computational problems in
diverse planning as well as the diverse planner construction
paradigm. Similarly to the separation in classical planning,
we distinguish between optimal, bounded, and satisﬁcing

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9892

