The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Region Normalization for Image Inpainting
Tao Yu, Zongyu Guo, Xin Jin, Shilin Wu, Zhibo Chen,∗ Weiping Li, Zhizheng Zhang, Sen Liu
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-spatial Information Processing and Application System,
University of Science and Technology of China
{yutao666, guozy, jinxustc, shilinwu, zhizheng}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {chenzhibo, wpli}@ustc.edu.cn,
elsen@iat.ustc.edu.cn

Region Normalization

Abstract

1

H,W

Feature Normalization (FN) is an important technique to help
neural network training, which typically normalizes features
across spatial dimensions. Most previous image inpainting
methods apply FN in their networks without considering the
impact of the corrupted regions of the input image on normalization, e.g. mean and variance shifts. In this work, we show
that the mean and variance shifts caused by full-spatial FN
limit the image inpainting network training and we propose
a spatial region-wise normalization named Region Normalization (RN) to overcome the limitation. RN divides spatial
pixels into different regions according to the input mask, and
computes the mean and variance in each region for normalization. We develop two kinds of RN for our image inpainting
network: (1) Basic RN (RN-B), which normalizes pixels from
the corrupted and uncorrupted regions separately based on the
original inpainting mask to solve the mean and variance shift
problem; (2) Learnable RN (RN-L), which automatically detects potentially corrupted and uncorrupted regions for separate normalization, and performs global afﬁne transformation
to enhance their fusion. We apply RN-B in the early layers
and RN-L in the latter layers of the network respectively. Experiments show that our method outperforms current state-ofthe-art methods quantitatively and qualitatively. We further
generalize RN to other inpainting networks and achieve consistent performance improvements.

N
C

Figure 1: Illustration of our Region Normalization (RN)
with region number K = 2. Pixels in the same color (green
or pink) are normalized by the same mean and variance. The
corrupted and uncorrupted regions of the input image are
normalized by different means and variances.
2009; Xu and Sun 2010; Darabi et al. 2012) that copy similar
patches into them. The learning-based methods commonly
train neural networks to synthesize content in the corrupted
regions, which yield promising results and have signiﬁcantly
surpassed the traditional methods in recent years. Recent image inpainting works, such as (Yu et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018;
Yu et al. 2019; Nazeri et al. 2019), focus on the learningbased methods. Most of them design an advanced network
to improve the performance, but ignore the inherent nature
of image inpainting problem: unlike the input image of general vision task, the image inpainting input image has corrupted regions that are typically independent of the uncorrupted regions. Inputing a corrupted image as a general spatially consistent image into a neural network has potential
problems, such as convolution of invalid (corrupted) pixels and mean and variance shifts of normalization. Partial
convolution (Liu et al. 2018) is proposed to solve the invalid convolution problem by operating on only valid pixels,
and achieves a performance boost. However, none of existing methods solve the mean and variance shift problem of
normalization in inpainting networks. In particular, most existing methods apply feature normalization (FN) in their networks to help training, and existing FN methods typically
normalize features across spatial dimensions, ignoring the
corrupted regions and resulting in mean and variance shifts
of normalization.

Introduction

Image inpainting aims to reconstruct the corrupted (or missing) regions of the input image. It has many applications in
image editing such as object removal, face editing and image
disocclusion. A key issue in image inpainting is to generate
visually plausible content in the corrupted regions.
Existing image inpainting methods can be divided into
two groups: traditional and learning-based methods. The
traditional methods ﬁll the corrupted regions by diffusionbased methods (Bertalmio et al. 2000; Ballester et al. 2001;
Esedoglu and Shen 2002; Bertalmio et al. 2003) that propagate neighboring information into them, or patch-based
methods (Drori, Cohen-Or, and Yeshurun 2003; Barnes et al.
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12733

