The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Active Learning with Query Generation for Cost-Effective Text Classiﬁcation∗
Yi-Fan Yan,1,2 Sheng-Jun Huang,1,2 Shaoyi Chen,3 Meng Liao,3 Jin Xu3
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, 211106
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
3
Data Quality Team, WeChat, Tencent Inc., China
{yanyifan7, huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn, {shaoyichen, maricoliao, jinxxu}@tencent.com

thus an important challenge to achieve effective text classiﬁcation with lower annotation cost.

Abstract
Labeling a text document is usually time consuming because
it requires the annotator to read the whole document and
check its relevance with each possible class label. It thus becomes rather expensive to train an effective model for text
classiﬁcation when it involves a large dataset of long documents. In this paper, we propose an active learning approach
for text classiﬁcation with lower annotation cost. Instead of
scanning all the examples in the unlabeled data pool to select the best one for query, the proposed method automatically generates the most informative examples based on the
classiﬁcation model, and thus can be applied to tasks with
large scale or even inﬁnite unlabeled data. Furthermore, we
propose to approximate the generated example with a few
summary words by sparse reconstruction, which allows the
annotators to easily assign the class label by reading a few
words rather than the long document. Experiments on different datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach can
effectively improve the classiﬁcation performance while signiﬁcantly reduce the annotation cost.

Active learning, which iteratively selects the most valuable data examples to query their labels (Settles 2012), is
a primary approach to reduce the annotation cost. It has
been widely used in many tasks, such as image classiﬁcation (Wang et al. 2017), document categorization (Beatty,
Kochis, and Bloodgood 2018), etc. Although active learning
has achieved great success in various applications, there are
still some shortcomings by directly applying existing methods to text classiﬁcation. Firstly, existing methods mainly
focus on selecting the most important examples for reducing the number of queries, but less care about the annotation
cost of each query. This is not a problem for image related
tasks, where the annotator can correctly assign the label for
an image after a quick glance. However, in text classiﬁcation, to decide whether the document is related to a speciﬁc
label, the annotators may need to carefully read the whole
document. This may take several minutes or even hours for
a long document. It is thus also important to reduce the cost
for a single annotation, in addition to reducing the number
of annotations. Secondly, existing methods select the queries
from the unlabeled data pool by evaluating the utility of each
example based on some criteria, which could be not efﬁcient
for the tasks with huge unlabeled data. In text classiﬁcation,
the unlabeled documents are easy to collect, leading to a
large set from which the queries are selected. Selecting a
single query from such a huge pool will be time consuming,
which further limit the application of active learning in text
related tasks.

Introduction
Text classiﬁcation is a fundamental task in many related
applications, such as sentiment analysis (Cambria 2016;
Lei and Bing 2011), news topic labeling (Hashimoto et al.
2016), spam detection (Moura et al. 2013; Jindal and Bing
2007), etc. It tries to assign semantic labels to a text based
on its content. While many advanced classiﬁcation models have been proposed (Joulin et al. 2016; Conneau et al.
2017), the performance still heavily depends on the training data. To train an effective model for text classiﬁcation,
it usually requires a large data set with high-quality labels,
which are manually assigned by human annotators. To label
a text document, the annotator need to read the whole document and check its relevance with each possible class label,
which could be rather expensive and time consuming. It is

To overcome the above discussed shortcomings, in this
paper, we propose a novel Active Learning approach with
Query Generation for text classiﬁcation (ALQG). Instead of
scanning every unlabeled example to select the best one for
querying, the proposed method can automatically generate
the most informative examples, which makes the selection
process efﬁcient and independent to the size of unlabeled
pool. Further, the generated example is approximated by a
few summary words, which are presented to annotators for
labeling. In this way, the annotators can assign the class label
with a much lower cost, by reading a few words instead of a
long document.

∗

This research was supported by NSFC(61876081, 61732006,
61572252), the Aerospace Power Funds No. 6141B09050342 and
the Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization. Sheng-Jun Huang is the corresponding
author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6583

