The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adaptive Two-Dimensional Embedded Image Clustering
Zhihui Li,1,2 Lina Yao,2 Sen Wang,3 Salil Kanhere,2 Xue Li,3 Huaxiang Zhang1
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong Normal University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales
3
School of Information Technology and Electric Engineering, The University of Queensland
zhihuilics@gmail.com, {lina.yao, salil.kanhere}@unsw.edu.au, sen.wang@uq.edu.au, xueli@itee.uq.edu.au,
huaxzhang@163.com
2

of the whole dataset in a semi-supervised learning fashion.
Researchers have also successfully applied image clustering
algorithms in content based image retrieval (CBIR) systems.
In (Gordon, Greenspan, and Goldberger 2003), Gordon et
al. utilize the traditional clustering algorithm, k-means, as
a preprocessing approach. To represent the diverse views of
the landmarks, Kennedy et al. employ the clustering algorithms to select the most discriminative images (Kennedy
and Naaman 2008).

Abstract
With the rapid development of mobile devices, people are
generating huge volumes of images data every day for sharing on social media, which draws much research attention to
understanding the contents of images. Image clustering plays
an important role in image understanding systems. Often,
most of the existing image clustering algorithms ﬂatten digital images that are originally represented by matrices into 1D
vectors as the image representation for the subsequent learning. The drawbacks of vector-based algorithms include limited consideration of spatial relationship between pixels and
computational complexity, both of which blame to the simple
vectorized representation. To overcome the drawbacks, we
propose a novel image clustering framework that can work
directly on matrices of images instead of ﬂattened vectors.
Speciﬁcally, the proposed algorithm simultaneously learn the
clustering results and preserve the original correlation information within the image matrix. To solve the challenging objective function, we propose a fast iterative solution. Extensive experiments have been conducted on various benchmark
datasets. The experimental results conﬁrm the superiority of
the proposed algorithm.

Most of the existing clustering algorithms, however, only
work well when the sample’s dimensionality is low. Due
to the curse of dimensionality, the clustering performance
of thse algorithms is not guaranteed. For example, classical k-means clustering algorithm iteratively assigns each
sample to the cluster with the closest centroid based welldeﬁned metric learning method and updates the centroid
of the data points in each cluster. However, it is challenging for the metric learning method to be accurate, which
tends to deteriorate subsequent clustering performance. Inspired by the fact that high-dimensional data may exhibit
dense grouping in a low-dimensional subspace (Chang et al.
2016), researchers seek to project the high-dimensional data
into a low-dimensional subspace using some subspace learning algorithms, and then perform clustering with the learned
low-dimensional representation. An intuitive way is to employ principal components analysis (PCA) for dimension reduction, and classical k-means for clustering in the lowerdimensional space (Xu and II 2005). Some researchers, however, claim that linear discriminant analysis (LDA) is more
suitable than PCA for clustering because LDA is capable
of encoding discriminant information (Ding and Li 2007).
They show that better performance is obtained when integrating k-means and LDA into a single framework.

Introduction
Clustering has attracted increasingly interests in the ﬁelds of
computer vision and machine learning. Its goal is to partition data points into disjoint groups such that the data points
in the same group close to each other and those in different
groups far apart (Jain and Dubes 1988; Chang et al. 2015;
Abassi and Boukhris 2019). To effectively index, retrieve
and organize the explosively increasing multimedia data, researchers have employed many clustering algorithms for image clustering (Datta et al. 2008; Xia et al. 2016; Caron et
al. 2018).
To improve the performance of automatic image annotation systems, image clustering algorithms have been adopted
in various ways (Wang et al. 2018; Peng et al. 2018). For
example, Li et al. propose to ﬁrst cluster personal album
images represented by bags of weighted vectors, learn the
conceptual categories for the clusters using a web-based annotation approach, and then obtain the conceptual categories

Another direction of clustering is to consider the manifold
structure of data. The representative algorithms are spectral clustering (SC) algorithm, normalized cut (NCut), and
k-way NCut (Yu and Shi 2003), which have demonstrated
their superiority in terms of image segmentation and other
real-world applications. These clustering algorithms rely on
the graph construction, which is computed with the similarities among the data points. Therefore, these algorithms
are sensitive to the bandwidth parameter. To solve this prob-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4796

