The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DGE: Deep Generative Network
Embedding Based on Commonality and Individuality
Sheng Zhou,1,2,3 Xin Wang,4∗ Jiajun Bu,1,2,3† Martin Ester,5 Pinggang Yu,1,2
Jiawei Chen,1 Qihao Shi,1 Can Wang1
1

Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Service Robot, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, Hangzhou, China
3
Ningbo Research Institute, Zhejiang University, Ningbo 315100, China
4
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 5 Simon Fraser University,Canada
{zhousheng zju, bjj, pgyu, sleepyhunt, shiqihao321, wcan}@zju.edu.cn, xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn, ester@cs.sfu.ca
Most of existing attributed network embedding methods (Huang, Li, and Hu 2017b; 2017a; Liao et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2017b) project the observed data into the latent embedding space while preserving properties including ﬁrst/second order proximity (Tang et al. 2015), attribute
based similarity (Liao et al. 2018) and global structural role
(Zhang et al. 2018) etc. Although network topology and
node attributes are explicitly considered in existing methods,
they simply assume that adjacent nodes in a given network
tend to share similar attributes which is referred as commonality, ignoring more complex relationships between network
topology and node attributes. However, real-world network
topology and node attributes may exhibit an opposite pattern
where adjacent nodes have distinct attributes as well, which
is referred as individuality. Consider a social network whose
edges reﬂect the social connections between users and node
attributes reﬂect the preferences of users, due to the difﬁculty of collecting comprehensive data or the fact that entities are not exposed to each other (Wang et al. 2016), users
with similar preferences may be unknown to each other (i.e.
unconnected). In bibliographic networks, similar phenomena can be observed. Although one paper will (intuitively)
cite another paper with similar content, papers without citation relationships can also be similar due to limitations in
the scale of the corpus and the number of citations.

Abstract
Network embedding plays a crucial role in network analysis to provide effective representations for a variety of learning tasks. Existing attributed network embedding methods
mainly focus on preserving the observed node attributes and
network topology in the latent embedding space, with the assumption that nodes connected through edges will share similar attributes. However, our empirical analysis of real-world
datasets shows that there exist both commonality and individuality between node attributes and network topology. On
the one hand, similar nodes are expected to share similar attributes and have edges connecting them (commonality). On
the other hand, each information source may maintain individual differences as well (individuality). Simultaneously
capturing commonality and individuality is very challenging
due to their exclusive nature and existing work fail to do
so. In this paper, we propose a deep generative embedding
(DGE) framework which simultaneously captures commonality and individuality between network topology and node
attributes in a generative process. Stochastic gradient variational Bayesian (SGVB) optimization is employed to infer
model parameters as well as the node embeddings. Extensive
experiments on four real-world datasets show the superiority
of our proposed DGE framework in various tasks including
node classiﬁcation and link prediction.

Introduction

The above observations demonstrate that there indeed exists individuality in addition to commonality in networks
when depicting relationships among different nodes by network topology and node attributes. It is a challenging task
to capture commonality and individuality simultaneously in
latent embedding space since they are mutually exclusive
and merging them by force may limit the capability of the
learned representations. Some existing attributed network
embedding methods take care of the commonality by concatenating the embeddings from both information sources
(Li et al. 2017a) or directly preserving the properties of both
information sources in the objective function (Huang, Li,
and Hu 2017a), ignoring the individuality in each information source. Other methods (Kipf and Welling 2016) learn
node embeddings by transforming the input attributes to preserve the network topology, which ignores the commonality
between node attributes and network topology.

Networks are natural representations for a wide variety of
real-life data, from social rating networks, author/paper citation networks to gene interaction networks. As more and
more information becomes available, nodes in real-world
networks are often associated with attributes, which is referred as attributed network (Wang et al. 2017b). Attributed
network embedding is a powerful and increasingly popular
approach to conduct comprehensive analysis on attributed
networks. Tasks such as link prediction (Wang, Cui, and Zhu
2016) and node classiﬁcation (Tang, Qu, and Mei 2015) all
greatly beneﬁt from effective latent node representations obtained by good network embedding approaches.
∗

Corresponding Author
Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6949

