The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Automatic Fact-Guided Sentence Modiﬁcation
Darsh J Shah,∗ Tal Schuster,* Regina Barzilay
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{darsh, tals, regina}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract

Claim:

Online encyclopediae like Wikipedia contain large amounts
of text that need frequent corrections and updates. The new
information may contradict existing content in encyclopediae. In this paper, we focus on rewriting such dynamically
changing articles. This is a challenging constrained generation task, as the output must be consistent with the new
information and ﬁt into the rest of the existing document.
To this end, we propose a two-step solution: (1) We identify and remove the contradicting components in a target
text for a given claim, using a neutralizing stance model;
(2) We expand the remaining text to be consistent with the
given claim, using a novel two-encoder sequence-to-sequence
model with copy attention. Applied to a Wikipedia fact update dataset, our method successfully generates updated sentences for new claims, achieving the highest SARI score.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that generating synthetic data
through such rewritten sentences can successfully augment
the FEVER fact-checking training dataset, leading to a relative error reduction of 13%.1

1

Old
Wikipedia:

GSG considers 23 of 43 minority
stakeholdings to be signiﬁcant.

GSG considers 28 of their 42 minority stakeholdings
in operationally active companies
to be of particular signiﬁcance to the group.

GSG considers                             
in operationally active companies
to be of particular signiﬁcance to the group.

Updated
sentence:

GSG considers 23 of 43 minority stakeholdings
beginning in operationally active companies
to be of particular signiﬁcance to the group.

Figure 1: Our fact-guided update pipeline. Given a claim
which refutes incorrect information, a masker is applied to
remove the contradicting parts from the original text while
preserving the rest of the context. Then, the residual neutral text and claim are fused to create an updated text that is
consistent with the claim.

Introduction

Online text resources like Wikipedia contain millions of articles that must be continually updated. Some updates involve expansions of existing articles, while others modify
the content. In this work, we are interested in the latter scenario where the modiﬁcation contradicts the current articles.
Such changes are common in online sources and often cover
a broad spectrum of subjects ranging from the changing of
dates for events to modiﬁcations of the relationship between
entities. In these cases, simple solutions like negating the
original text or concatenating it with the new information
would not apply. In this work, our goal is to automate these
updates. Speciﬁcally, given a claim and an outdated sentence
from an article, we rewrite the sentence to be consistent with
the given claim while preserving non-contradicting content.
Consider the Wikipedia update scenario depicted in Figure 1. The claim, informing that 23 of 43 minority stakehold-

ings are signiﬁcant, contradicts the old information in the
Wikipedia sentence, requiring modiﬁcation. Directly learning a model for this task would demand supervision, i.e.
demonstrated updates with the corresponding claims. For
Wikipedia, however, the underlying claims which drive the
changes are not easily accessible. Therefore, we need to utilize other available sources of supervision.
In order to make the corresponding update, we develop a
two step solution: (1) Identify and remove the contradicting
segments of the text (in this case, 28 of their 42 minority
stakeholdings); (2) Rewrite the residual sentence to include
the updated information (e.g. fraction of signiﬁcant stakeholdings) while also preserving the rest of the content.
For the ﬁrst step, we utilize a neutrality stance classiﬁer
as indirect supervision to identify the polarizing spans in
the target sentence. We consider a sentence span as polarizing if its absence increases the neutrality of the claimsentence pair. To identify and mask such sentence spans,

∗

Order decided by a coin toss.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code: (1) https://github.com/TalSchuster/TokenMasker
(2) https://github.com/darsh10/split encoder pointer summarizer
8791

