The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Message Passing on Sets
Yifeng Shi, Junier Oliva, Marc Niethammer
Department of Computer Science, UNC-Chapel Hill, USA
{yifengs, joliva, mn}@cs.unc.edu

other tasks, one seeks to assign an output response to an entire set of elements in which the elements can themselves
be related to each other in a complex manner. Based on
this need for analysis approaches that can operate on sets
relationally, we develop a machine learning (ML) estimation technique that incorporates relational learning for setstructured data.

Abstract
Modern methods for learning over graph input data have
shown the fruitfulness of accounting for relationships among
elements in a collection. However, most methods that learn
over set input data use only rudimentary approaches to exploit intra-collection relationships. In this work we introduce
Deep Message Passing on Sets (DMPS), a novel method that
incorporates relational learning for sets. DMPS not only connects learning on graphs with learning on sets via deep kernel learning, but it also bridges message passing on sets and
traditional diffusion dynamics commonly used in denoising
models. Based on these connections, we develop two new
blocks for relational learning on sets: the set-denoising block
and the set-residual block. The former is motivated by the
connection between message passing on general graphs and
diffusion-based denoising models, whereas the latter is inspired by the well-known residual network. In addition to
demonstrating the interpretability of our model by learning
the true underlying relational structure experimentally, we
also show the effectiveness of our approach on both synthetic
and real-world datasets by achieving results that are competitive with or outperform the state-of-the-art. For readers who
are interested in the detailed derivations of serveral results
that we present in this work, please see the supplementary
material at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.09877.

Set-structured data in its general form presents fundamental challenges to many existing machine learning methods.
First, an appropriate method should be invariant to the order
of the elements in the input set; i.e., different permutations
should not inﬂuence the ﬁnal response since the underlying
instance is an unordered set. Second, a method should allow input sets of variable cardinalities; i.e., we should be
able to associate a single label with a variable number of
set elements. Both of these challenges render traditional approaches based on ordered inputs of ﬁxed dimension (e.g.,
vectors or images of given sizes) like standard multilayer
perceptrons (MLP) inapplicable. Some rectiﬁcations have
been proposed to cope with these challenges without directly addressing them. For example, one can train a recurrent neural network (RNN) to adapt to variable-sized input sets. However, there is no guarantee that a network can
learn to be permutation invariant (Vinyals, Bengio, and Kudlur 2015), especially in the context of input sets with large
cardinality and small sample sizes. Hence, in this work we
instead consider deep learning (DL) architectures that are
speciﬁcally constructed to handle set-structured data.

Introduction
Signiﬁcant effort in machine learning has been devoted to
methods that operate over ﬁxed-length, ﬁnite vectors. These
methods ultimately perform some variant of a classic functional estimation task where one maps one ﬁxed input vector x ∈ Rd to another ﬁxed output vector y ∈ Rp via an
estimated function fˆ : Rd → Rp . Notwithstanding the impressive progress of these approaches, the world we live in
is ﬁlled with data that does not come neatly pre-packaged
into ﬁxed ﬁnite vectors. Instead, often data is observed and
reasoned over in collections such as sets. For instance, when
performing object detection on point clouds, one assigns a
label (the object type) based on the underlying shape that is
inferred collectively using all observed points (as opposed
to labelling any one individual 3d point). In these, and many

Architectures that handle set-structured data exist. These
techniques use, for instance, global-pooling operations (Qi
et al. 2016) and intermediate equivariant mappings (Zaheer
et al. 2017) to produce estimators that are invariant to permutations. While these architectures are asymptotically universal, they are notably limited in the intra-set dependencies
they model. For instance, processing each set element independently using an MLP and aggregating features via max
pooling to produce a set-level feature representation, as proposed in (Qi et al. 2016), may have difﬁculty capturing pairwise relations among the set elements. This indicates that
the effectiveness of such methods may be limited for complex real-world data with ﬁnite samples. Hence, we propose
to explicitly incorporate relational learning on elements of

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5750

