The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Accelerating Primal Solution Findings for
Mixed Integer Programs Based on Solution Prediction
Jian-Ya Ding,1 Chao Zhang,1 Lei Shen,1 Shengyin Li,1 Bing Wang,1∗ Yinghui Xu,1 Le Song2,3
1

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Department, Zhejiang Cainiao Supply Chain Management Co., Ltd, Hangzhou, China
2
Ant Financial Services Group, Hangzhou, China
3
Georgia Institute of Technology, GA, USA
{jianya.djy, chao.zc, kenny.sl, shengyin.lsy, lingfeng.wb}@cainiao.com, renji.xyh@alibaba-inc.com, le.song@antﬁn.com

for heuristics design for CO problems. These heuristic methods are usually human-designed priority rules to guide the
search directions to promising regions in solution space. For
example, the nearest neighbor algorithm (Cook 2011) for the
traveling salesman problem (TSP) constructs a solution by
choosing the nearest unvisited node as the salesman’s next
move, based on the observation that two distantly distributed
nodes are unlikely to appear consecutively in the optimal
route. Similar examples include the shortest processing time
ﬁrst heuristic for ﬂow shop scheduling (Pinedo 2012), the
ﬁrst ﬁt algorithm for bin packing (Dósa and Sgall 2013),
among many others. A major drawback of human-designed
heuristics is the lack of generalization to other problems,
where new domain knowledge has to be re-identiﬁed.
MIP models can describe CO problems of various types using a standard formulation strategy z = minAx≤b,x∈X cT x,
differing only in model coefﬁcients A, b and c and integrality
constraints X . This makes it possible to explore connections
between problem structures and the resulting solution values
without prior domain knowledge. Notice that most MIP models are binary variables intensive1 , a natural way to explore
hidden information in the model is to treat solution value
prediction of binary variables as binary classiﬁcation tasks.
Major challenges in solution prediction lie in the implicit correlations among decision variables, since a feasible solution
x is restricted by constraints in MIP, i.e., Ax ≤ b. Rather
than predicting each decision variable value isolatedly, we
propose a tripartite graph representation of MIP, where each
MIP instance is encoded as an undirected graph with three
types of nodes: decision variables nodes, constraints nodes
and the objective node. Correlations among variables are
reﬂected in embeddings of the trigraph where each vertex
maintains aggregate feature information from its neighbors.
Incorporating solution prediction results in MIP solving
process is not trivial. Fixing a single false-predicted decision variable can sometimes lead to the infeasibility of the
entire problem. Instead of utilizing the predicted solutions

Abstract
Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) is one of the most widely
used modeling techniques for combinatorial optimization problems. In many applications, a similar MIP model is solved on
a regular basis, maintaining remarkable similarities in model
structures and solution appearances but differing in formulation coefﬁcients. This offers the opportunity for machine
learning methods to explore the correlations between model
structures and the resulting solution values. To address this
issue, we propose to represent a MIP instance using a tripartite
graph, based on which a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)
is constructed to predict solution values for binary variables.
The predicted solutions are used to generate a local branching
type cut which can be either treated as a global (invalid) inequality in the formulation resulting in a heuristic approach
to solve the MIP, or as a root branching rule resulting in an
exact approach. Computational evaluations on 8 distinct types
of MIP problems show that the proposed framework improves
the primal solution ﬁnding performance signiﬁcantly on a
state-of-the-art open-source MIP solver.

Introduction
Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) is widely used to solve
combinatorial optimization (CO) problems in the ﬁeld of Operations Research (OR). The existence of integer variables
endows MIP formulations with the ability to capture the discrete nature of many real-world decisions. Applications of
MIP include production scheduling (Chen 2010), vehicle routing (Laporte 2009), facility location (Farahani and Hekmatfar
2009), to mention only a few. In many real-world settings,
homogeneous MIP instances with similar scales and combinatorial structures are optimized repeatedly but treated as
completely new tasks. These instances share remarkable similarities in model structures and solution appearances, which
motivates us to integrate Machine Learning (ML) methods
to explore correlations between a MIP model’s structure and
its solution values to improve the solver’s performance.
Identifying correlations between problem structures and
solution values is not new, and is widely used as guidelines

1

Take the benchmark set of MIPLIB 2017 (miplib2017 2018) as
an example, among all 240 MIP benchmark instances, 164 of them
are Binary Integer Linear Programming (BILP) problems, and 44
out of the 76 remainings are imbalanced in the sense that binary
variables account for more than 90% of all integer variables.

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1452

