The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fine-Grained Recognition: Accounting for
Subtle Differences between Similar Classes
Guolei Sun,1 Hisham Cholakkal,2 Salman Khan,2 Fahad Shahbaz Khan,2 Ling Shao2
1

ETH Zurich, 2 Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
guolei.sun@vision.ee.ethz.ch, {hisham.cholakkal, salman.khan, fahad.khan, ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
The main requisite for ﬁne-grained recognition task is to focus on subtle discriminative details that make the subordinate
classes different from each other. We note that existing methods implicitly address this requirement and leave it to a datadriven pipeline to ﬁgure out what makes a subordinate class
different from the others. This results in two major limitations: First, the network focuses on the most obvious distinctions between classes and overlooks more subtle inter-class
variations. Second, the chance of misclassifying a given sample in any of the negative classes is considered equal, while in
fact, confusions generally occur among only the most similar
classes. Here, we propose to explicitly force the network to
ﬁnd the subtle differences among closely related classes. In
this pursuit, we introduce two key novelties that can be easily
plugged into existing end-to-end deep learning pipelines. On
one hand, we introduce “diversiﬁcation block” which masks
the most salient features for an input to force the network
to use more subtle cues for its correct classiﬁcation. Concurrently, we introduce a “gradient-boosting” loss function that
focuses only on the confusing classes for each sample and
therefore moves swiftly along the direction on the loss surface that seeks to resolve these ambiguities. The synergy between these two blocks helps the network to learn more effective feature representations. Comprehensive experiments are
performed on ﬁve challenging datasets. Our approach outperforms existing methods using similar experimental setting on
all ﬁve datasets.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of two novel components of our approach. Left: comparison between class activation maps obtained from the model with our diversiﬁcation block (DB)
and the one without DB. Our DB forces the network to
capture more discriminative regions. With DB (below), the
network ﬁnds beak, tail and feet of the bird as informative
regions, while without DB (middle), the network only focuses on beak. Right: visual comparison in terms of 2-d
tSNE (Van Der Maaten 2014) plot for features of 24 kinds of
Walbler (confusing and difﬁcult classes) in CUB-200-2011
between network trained with cross entropy (CE) (top) and
our gradient-boosting loss (below). By focusing on difﬁcult
classes, our gradient-boosting loss can distinguish between
hard classes which are not well separated by CE.

Introduction

Fine-grained recognition focuses on discriminating between
children classes of a main parent category (e.g., cars (Krause
et al. 2013), dogs (Khosla et al. 2011), birds (Wah et al.
2011), and aircrafts (Maji et al. 2013)). Deep CNNs have
excelled immensely on traditional visual recognition tasks
where categories greater differ from each other. However,
ﬁne-grained visual categorization (FGVC) poses a signiﬁcant challenge mainly due to the close resemblance between
subcategories e.g., different species of the same bird. The
challenge is compounded by the fact that the classiﬁer has to

be invariant to intra-class variations, e.g., pose, appearance
and lighting changes.
Common deep learning based approaches for FGVC learn
a mapping between input images and output labels. While
doing so, a natural tendency during learning is to focus on
only few distinguishing parts in an object to deal with confusing inter-class similarities and large intra-class variations
(see Fig. 1). The analysis of attention based models provides
the evidence that attention maps are often densely concentrated on a few parts, thus considering only a limited set of
cues. In contrast, here we propose to spread the attention to

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12047

