The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FLNet: Landmark Driven Fetching and Learning
Network for Faithful Talking Facial Animation Synthesis
Kuangxiao Gu, Yuqian Zhou,∗ Thomas Huang
Image Formation and Processing Group,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA, 61801
{kgu3, yuqian2, t-huang1}@illinois.edu

The recent advancements in generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) enable researchers
to generate much more realistic facial animations (Pham,
Wang, and Pavlovic 2018; Pumarola et al. 2018; Geng et al.
2018; Song et al. 2018; Zhou and Shi 2017). Such methods
utilize large-scale training data and high capacity neural networks to directly generate facial images from different input
modalities, such as audio, video, facial landmark or semantic labels like Facial Action Units (AUs). However, the generated result often suffers from artifacts such as blurriness,
missing or mismatching of facial details. Some facial characteristics of the subjects like tooth, eyeballs, lip shape, or
wrinkles are synthesized inaccurately with pure appearancebased or geometric-based methods.

Abstract
Talking face synthesis has been widely studied in either
appearance-based or warping-based methods. Previous works
mostly utilize single face image as a source, and generate
novel facial animations by merging other person’s facial features. However, some facial regions like eyes or teeth, which
may be hidden in the source image, can not be synthesized
faithfully and stably. In this paper, We present a landmark
driven two-stream network to generate faithful talking facial
animation, in which more facial details are created, preserved
and transferred from multiple source images instead of a single one. Speciﬁcally, we propose a network consisting of a
learning and fetching stream. The fetching sub-net directly
learns to attentively warp and merge facial regions from ﬁve
source images of distinctive landmarks, while the learning
pipeline renders facial organs from the training face space
to compensate. Compared to baseline algorithms, extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed method achieves
a higher performance both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Codes are at https://github.com/kgu3/FLNet AAAI2020.

To render more faithful facial details which are consistent with the source subject, one intuitive idea is to utilize
more face images of the person. It is feasible because of two
aspects. First, obtaining or collecting multiple instances of
a subject is not a hard task in practical applications. Second, for the task of synthesizing talking faces, no extreme
head motions or expression changes are required to model
or present, while great efforts should be focused on generating faithful facial details like eyes and mouth where humans are especially sensitive with. Therefore, in this work,
we propose to combine the warping-based and appearancebased methods and infer through multiple source images of
the subject.

Introduction
Facial animation generation has been an active research for
decades. Being able to generate realistic talking facial animation is a crucial step in human computer interaction. Studies (Azevedo et al. 2018) show that for healthcare services,
a face-to-face chat setting actually helps promote the effectiveness of communication and leads to better patient outcomes. A robust talking face synthetic system can also beneﬁt video compression and transmission for teleconference
systems or electronic healthcare systems. It also has wide
applications in entertainment and animation industry.
Traditional methods (Xie and Liu 2007; Blanz et al. 2003;
Yu, Garrod, and Schyns 2012; Blanz and Vetter 1999)
mainly focus on either building a statistical face representation using techniques like principal component analysis
(PCA), or constructing a 3D face model with textures from
an example image. Due to limited representation and generalization ability, few of them can achieve robust and satisfactory performance.

Speciﬁcally, we decouple the synthesis network into
two streams: warping-based fetching and appearance-based
learning. In the fetching stream, we select speciﬁc facial regions from the source image bank, and warp then merge
them to form the target face. In the learning stream, a pure
appearance-based method is applied to learn the facial appearance feature space from the training dataset. Finally, we
merge the two streams’ outputs to obtain the ﬁnal result.
These two streams will complement each other. Fetching
stream extracts useful facial characteristics from the input
source images to warp, and learning stream compensates to
generate other unseen appearance features which does not
exist on the source images. By combining the advantages
of the appearance-based learning and warping-based fetching streams, our method generates a smooth animation with

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10861

