The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

All You Need Is Boundary: Toward Arbitrary-Shaped Text Spotting
Hao Wang,1∗ Pu Lu,1∗ Hui Zhang,1∗ Mingkun Yang,1 Xiang Bai,1†
Yongchao Xu,1 Mengchao He,2 Yongpan Wang,2 Wenyu Liu1†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Alibaba Group
{wanghao4659, lupu, huizhang0110, yangmingkun, xbai, yongchaoxu, liuwy}@hust.edu.cn
mengchao.hmc@alibaba-inc.com, yongpan@taobao.com

Abstract
Recently, end-to-end text spotting that aims to detect and
recognize text from cluttered images simultaneously has received particularly growing interest in computer vision. Different from the existing approaches that formulate text detection as bounding box extraction or instance segmentation, we
localize a set of points on the boundary of each text instance.
With the representation of such boundary points, we establish a simple yet effective scheme for end-to-end text spotting, which can read the text of arbitrary shapes. Experiments
on three challenging datasets, including ICDAR2015, TotalText and COCO-Text demonstrate that the proposed method
consistently surpasses the state-of-the-art in both scene text
detection and end-to-end text recognition tasks.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 1: Illustrations of two kinds of methods for text region representation. (a) An oriented rectangle box is used
to represent the text region and cropped as (b); (c) A set of
boundary points are used to represent the text region, and it
can be transformed into a horizontal region like (d).

Introduction
Automatic reading text from natural images has attracted
great attention due to its wide practical applications such
as ofﬁce automation, network content security, intelligent
transportation system (Zhu et al. 2018; Rong, Yi, and Tian
2016), geo-location, and visual search (Bai et al. 2018).
In the past decade, scene text detection and recognition are extensively studied as two separated sub-tasks of
a reading system, but in fact, text detection and recognition are highly relevant and complementary to each other.
This assumption is conﬁrmed by the recent end-to-end text
spotting methods (Jaderberg et al. 2016; Liao et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2018; Li, Wang, and Shen 2017; He et al. 2018;
Busta et al. 2017; Lyu et al. 2018a) that combine the detection and recognition stages with an end-to-end trainable
neural network. These spotting methods follow a similar
pipeline. First, the horizontal/oriented bounding box of each
text instance is detected. Then, the image patches or CNN
features inside the detected bounding boxes are cropped and
fed to a sequence recognition model. Beneﬁting from feature sharing and joint optimization, the performances of detection and end-to-end recognition can be enhanced at the
same time.

Despite promising progress, most existing spotting methods (Liao et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018; Li, Wang, and Shen
2017; He et al. 2018; Busta et al. 2017; Jaderberg et al.
2016) suffer from dealing with text of irregular shapes, such
as curve text. For a general end-to-end OCR system, it is
inevitable to handle the text with arbitrary shapes, as curve
text and other types of irregular text are very common in our
real-world. In (Liu et al. 2018; Li, Wang, and Shen 2017;
He et al. 2018; Busta et al. 2017; Liu and Jin 2017;
He et al. 2017), the detected bounding box of each text
instance is represented with a rectangle, which only can
tightly cover straight text instances. Rectangular boxes have
high limitations in describing irregular text for an end-toend text spotter since it more or less contains background
information which brings difﬁculties to the text recognition
stage, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Recently, an end-to-end OCR
model (Lyu et al. 2018a) for spotting arbitrary-shaped text is
presented based on Mask RCNN, which tackles text detection and recognition via instance segmentation and achieved
state-of-the-art result. However, this method needs extra
character-level annotations for training, and its processes of
instance segmentation brings more computational burden.
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end trainable network
for spotting arbitrary-shaped text without character-level annotations. Instead of detecting a rectangle bounding box, our
detection is performed by localizing the boundary of a text

∗

Authors contribute equally.
Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12160

