The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weighted Sampling for Combined Model Selection and Hyperparameter Tuning
Dimitrios Sarigiannis, Thomas Parnell, Haralampos Pozidis
IBM Research
Säumerstrasse 4, 8803 Rüschlikon, Switzerland
saridimi@gmail.com, {tpa, hap}@zurich.ibm.com

(Hall, Kurka, and Bartz 2019) have appeared that offer exactly this functionality.

Abstract
The combined algorithm selection and hyperparameter tuning (CASH) problem is characterized by large hierarchical
hyperparameter spaces. Model-free hyperparameter tuning
methods can explore such large spaces efﬁciently since they
are highly parallelizable across multiple machines. When no
prior knowledge or meta-data exists to boost their performance, these methods commonly sample random conﬁgurations following a uniform distribution. In this work, we propose a novel sampling distribution as an alternative to uniform sampling and prove theoretically that it has a better
chance of ﬁnding the best conﬁguration in a worst-case setting. In order to compare competing methods rigorously in an
experimental setting, one must perform statistical hypothesis
testing. We show that there is little-to-no agreement in the automated machine learning literature regarding which methods
should be used. We contrast this disparity with the methods
recommended by the broader statistics literature, and identify a suitable approach. We then select three popular modelfree solutions to CASH and evaluate their performance, with
uniform sampling as well as the proposed sampling scheme,
across 67 datasets from the OpenML platform. We investigate the trade-off between exploration and exploitation across
the three algorithms, and verify empirically that the proposed
sampling distribution improves performance in all cases.

1

The CASH Problem At the heart of any automated machine learning framework is an optimization problem over
a large hierarchical parameter space. A machine learning
solution is typically structured as a pipeline comprising
multiple components. Each component has a different set
of hyperparameters that must be tuned to achieve best-inclass accuracy. In this work, we focus on a restricted set of
such pipelines, considering solely the problem of Combined
Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameter tuning (henceforth referred to as CASH). Speciﬁcally, this is a joint optimization problem involving selecting which machine learning model to use (e.g. random forest vs. gradient-boosted
decision trees) and how to tune the model hyperparameters. The hierarchical conﬁguration space associated with
the CASH problem is illustrated in Figure 1. Mathematically, the problem of ﬁnding the optimal model λ∗ and its
corresponding hyperparameter conﬁguration α∗ is deﬁned:
(λ∗ , α∗ ) =

arg min
λ∈{1,...,M },α∈A(λ)

Lvalid (λ, α),

(1)

where M is the total number of models, A(λ) is the set of
all possible hyperparameter conﬁgurations for model λ and
Lvalid is a loss function evaluated over a validation dataset.
Crucially, it is important that the solution found also generalizes to unseen data, which is typically veriﬁed by evaluating
the same loss function over a test set unseen to the optimization routine.

Introduction

In recent years, it has become apparent that the proliferation of skills required to develop end-to-end machine learning solutions has not kept pace with the rapid growth in
expectations surrounding the potential of such techniques.
This imbalance has led to the desire for automated machine
learning (AutoML) systems. The goal of an AutoML system is to automate the entire process of building a machine
learning model. Typically, this includes data cleaning, data
pre-processing, feature engineering, model selection, hyperparameter tuning and in some cases even ensemble-building.
In recent years, software frameworks such as Auto-WEKA
(Thornton et al. 2013), auto-sklearn (Feurer et al. 2015),
TPOT (Olson and Moore 2016) and H2O Driverless AI

Model-based vs. Model-free optimization. Solutions for
solving equation (1) fall roughly into two categories: modelbased and model-free. Model-based approaches are typically
based on Bayesian optimization (Hutter, Hoos, and LeytonBrown 2011; Bergstra et al. 2011): models and their hyperparameter conﬁgurations (henceforth jointly referred simply as a conﬁguration) are evaluated sequentially, whereby
the next conﬁguration to try is determined by maximizing
some acquisition function involving a surrogate model (often based on Gaussian processes). While model-based approaches often lead to superior accuracy, such methods are

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5595

