The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph-Based Reasoning over Heterogeneous
External Knowledge for Commonsense Question Answering
Shangwen Lv,1,2∗ Daya Guo,3∗ Jingjing Xu,4∗ Duyu Tang,5 Nan Duan,5
Ming Gong,5 Linjun Shou,5 Daxin Jiang,5 Guihong Cao,5 Songlin Hu1,2
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Sun Yat-sen University 4 Peking University 5 Microsoft Corporation
{lvshangwen, husonglin}@iie.ac.cn
guody5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, jingjingxu@pku.edu.cn
{dutang, nanduan, migon, lisho, djiang, gucao}@microsoft.com
Question: What do people typically do while playing guitar?
A. cry B. hear sounds C. singing (3) D. anthritis E. making music

Abstract
Commonsense question answering aims to answer questions
which require background knowledge that is not explicitly
expressed in the question. The key challenge is how to obtain evidence from external knowledge and make predictions
based on the evidence. Recent studies either learn to generate
evidence from human-annotated evidence which is expensive
to collect, or extract evidence from either structured or unstructured knowledge bases which fails to take advantages of
both sources simultaneously. In this work, we propose to automatically extract evidence from heterogeneous knowledge
sources, and answer questions based on the extracted evidence. Speciﬁcally, we extract evidence from both structured
knowledge base (i.e. ConceptNet) and Wikipedia plain texts.
We construct graphs for both sources to obtain the relational
structures of evidence. Based on these graphs, we propose a
graph-based approach consisting of a graph-based contextual
word representation learning module and a graph-based inference module. The ﬁrst module utilizes graph structural information to re-deﬁne the distance between words for learning
better contextual word representations. The second module
adopts graph convolutional network to encode neighbor information into the representations of nodes, and aggregates evidence with graph attention mechanism for predicting the ﬁnal
answer. Experimental results on CommonsenseQA dataset illustrate that our graph-based approach over both knowledge
sources brings improvement over strong baselines. Our approach achieves the state-of-the-art accuracy (75.3%) on the
CommonsenseQA dataset.

Evidence from ConceptNet
cry
eyes
playing guitar

RelatedTo

sound
HasPrerequisite

people

singing

Evidence from Wikipedia
A. cry

What can yearn, cry without tears?
What is to cry and to weep?

C. singing

She also performed them, playing guitar and singing.
Jakszyk led the band, playing guitar and singing.

E. making music

Making music and playing guitar are his hobbies.
He began making music when he started guitar lessons.

Figure 1: An example from the CommonsenseQA dataset
which requires multiple external knowledge to make the correct prediction. ConceptNet evidence helps pick up choices
(A, C) and Wikipedia evidence helps pick up choices (C,
E). Combining both evidence will derive the right answer
C. Words in blue are the concepts in the question. Words in
green are the relations from ConceptNet. Words in red are
the choices picked up by evidence.

case the important “evidence” of the datapoint from background knowledge is ignored.
In this work, we study commonsense question answering, a challenging task which requires machines to collect
background knowledge and reason over the knowledge to
answer questions. For example, an inﬂuential dataset CommonsenseQA (Talmor et al. 2019) is built in a way that
the answer choices share the same relation with the concept in the question while annotators are asked to use their
background knowledge to create questions so that only one
choice is the correct answer. Figure 1 shows an example
which requires multiple external knowledge sources to make
the correct predictions. The structured evidence from ConcepNet can help pick up the choices (A, C), while evidence
from Wikipedia can help pick up the choices (C, E). Com-

Introduction
Reasoning is an important and challenging task in artiﬁcial
intelligence and natural language processing, which is “the
process of drawing conclusions from the principles and evidence” (Wason and Johnson-Laird 1972). The “evidence” is
the fuel and the “principle” is the machine that operates on
the fuel to make predictions. The majority of studies typically only take the current datapoint as the input, in which
∗
Euqal Contributions. Work was done while this author was an
intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8449

