The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Capsule Routing via Variational Bayes
Fabio De Sousa Ribeiro, Georgios Leontidis, Stefanos Kollias
Machine Learning Group
School of Computer Science, University of Lincoln, UK
{fdesousaribeiro, gleontidis, skollias}@lincoln.ac.uk

Abstract
Capsule networks are a recently proposed type of neural network shown to outperform alternatives in challenging shape
recognition tasks. In capsule networks, scalar neurons are replaced with capsule vectors or matrices, whose entries represent different properties of objects. The relationships between
objects and their parts are learned via trainable viewpointinvariant transformation matrices, and the presence of a given
object is decided by the level of agreement among votes
from its parts. This interaction occurs between capsule layers and is a process called routing-by-agreement. In this paper, we propose a new capsule routing algorithm derived from
Variational Bayes for ﬁtting a mixture of transforming gaussians, and show it is possible transform our capsule network
into a Capsule-VAE. Our Bayesian approach addresses some
of the inherent weaknesses of MLE based models such as
the variance-collapse by modelling uncertainty over capsule
pose parameters. We outperform the state-of-the-art on smallNORB using ≃50% fewer capsules than previously reported,
achieve competitive performances on CIFAR-10, FashionMNIST, SVHN, and demonstrate signiﬁcant improvement in
MNIST to affNIST generalisation over previous works.1

1

Figure 1: Depiction of Variational Bayes (VB) routing between adjacent capsule layers: with lower layer capsules
i ∈ Li (orange) and higher layer capsules j ∈ Lj (blue).

Introduction

Capsule networks are a recently proposed method of learning part-whole relationships between observed entities in
data, by using groups of neurons known as capsules. These
entities could be anything that possesses a consistent underlying structure across viewpoints. Capsules attempt to encode intrinsic viewpoint-invariant properties, and learn to
adjust instantiation parameters as the entity varies across its
appearance manifold (Hinton, Krizhevsky, and Wang 2011).
CapsNets have shown to outperform standard Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) in speciﬁc tasks involving shape
recognition and overlapping digit segmentation. These tasks
are difﬁcult for standard CNNs, as they struggle to exploit
the frame of reference humans impose on objects, and thus
often fail to generalise knowledge to novel viewpoints. Although this drawback can often be mitigated by data augmentation during training, it does not address the underlying

issue directly. Nonetheless, CNNs perform remarkably well
in practice, partly because they make structural assumptions
that ring true with natural images. Capsules extend this rationale by assuming objects are composed of object parts, and
if we learn part-whole relationships perfectly then we can
better generalise to novel viewpoints and afﬁne transformations. In CNNs, the convolution operator and sparse weight
sharing provides the useful property of equivariance under
translation, enabling efﬁcient spatial transfer of knowledge.
CapsNets retain these beneﬁts and only do away with pooling operations in favour of learning more robust representations for disentangling factors of variation with routing-byagreement. Although promising, CapsNets remain underexplored, and few works thus far have proposed algorithmic
improvements to the original formulations. In this paper, we
propose a new capsule routing algorithm for ﬁtting a mixture
of transforming gaussians via Variational Bayes.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/fabio-deep/Variational-Capsule-Routing

Capsule Networks CapsNets are composed of at least one
layer of capsules in which capsules i from a lower layer Li
3749

