The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Grapy-ML: Graph Pyramid Mutual Learning for Cross-Dataset Human Parsing
Haoyu He,∗ Jing Zhang,∗ Qiming Zhang, Dacheng Tao
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science,
Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
{hahe7688, qzha250}@uni.sydney.edu.au, {jing.zhang1, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract


Human parsing, or human body part semantic segmentation,
has been an active research topic due to its wide potential applications. In this paper, we propose a novel GRAph
PYramid Mutual Learning (Grapy-ML) method to address
the cross-dataset human parsing problem, where the annotations are at different granularities. Starting from the prior
knowledge of the human body hierarchical structure, we devise a graph pyramid module (GPM) by stacking three levels of graph structures from coarse granularity to ﬁne granularity subsequently. At each level, GPM utilizes the selfattention mechanism to model the correlations between context nodes. Then, it adopts a top-down mechanism to progressively reﬁne the hierarchical features through all the levels. GPM also enables efﬁcient mutual learning. Speciﬁcally,
the network weights of the ﬁrst two levels are shared to exchange the learned coarse-granularity information across different datasets. By making use of the multi-granularity labels, Grapy-ML learns a more discriminative feature representation and achieves state-of-the-art performance, which is
demonstrated by extensive experiments on the three popular
benchmarks, e.g. CIHP dataset. The source code is publicly
available at https://github.com/Charleshhy/Grapy-ML.


" %




" %

  
 " %



# 

# 





# 


 

$
 

 !



 !












$






Figure 1: (a) Label discrepancy between different datasets.
(b) Multi-granularity lexical pyramid representation of the
human body.

with long short-term memory units (LSTM) (Liang et al.
2016b; 2016b; 2017), and graph convolutional neural network (GCN) (Gong et al. 2019). For instance, Ruan et al.
propose a context embedding with edge perceiving (CE2P)
network for single human parsing after identifying three key
factors affecting the parsing performance, including highresolution maintenance, global context embedding, and edge
perceiving (Ruan et al. 2019). However, multi-human parsing is a more common setting for real-world applications. To
this end, Li et al. introduce a multi-human parsing (MHP)
dataset and a novel bottom-up multi-human parser based
on graph-GAN model (Li et al. 2017). Besides, many researches use LSTM to model structural dependencies in
feature learning, such as local-global LSTM (Liang et al.
2016b), Graph LSTM (Liang et al. 2016a), and structureevolving LSTM (Liang et al. 2017). However, these methods do not utilize the strong hierarchical relations in body
parts. In contrast, Zhu et al. propose a progressive cognitive network (PCNet) to segment hierarchical human parts
using a component-aware region convolution structure (Zhu
et al. 2018). Although progressive cognitive human parsing
achieves better results than segmenting each part simultaneously, it still remains open that how to efﬁciently incorporate the hierarchically structural prior information into feature learning to further improve the parsing performance.
Another direction is to explore multiple datasets or heterogeneous annotations by utilizing multi-task learning,
transfer learning, or mutual learning (Xiao et al. 2018;
Nie, Feng, and Yan 2018; Gong et al. 2019). For instance,
Xiao et al. propose a multi-task learning framework to learn
visual concepts from heterogeneous image annotations for

Introduction
Human parsing, or human body part semantic segmentation,
refers to assigning dense pixel-wise category labels for each
human body parts. It is a fundamental computer vision task
and plays a critical role in human-centric analysis and potential down-stream applications, e.g., action recognition,
video surveillance and virtual reality. However, it is very
challenging due to the large appearance variance, the lack
of quality on labeled samples and the domain gap between
training and testing data.
To deal with these issues, prior methods have achieved
signiﬁcant progress based on the success of the deep neural network. Since human body is highly structural, many
methods have been proposed to model the context correlations efﬁciently between body parts using convolutional
neural network (CNN) (Liang et al. 2015b; Li et al. 2017;
Zhu et al. 2018; Ruan et al. 2019), recurrent network
∗

equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10949

