The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Balancing Spreads of Inﬂuence in a Social Network
Ruben Becker, Federico Corò, Gianlorenzo D’Angelo, Hugo Gilbert
Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila Italy
ruben.becker@gssi.it

was given by Conover et al. (2011) who studied the Twitter
network during the 2010 US congressional midterm elections. The authors demonstrated that the retweet network
had a highly segregated partisan structure with extremely
limited connectivity between left-wing and right-wing users.
More recently, a similar ﬁnding has been obtained by the
Electome project at the MIT Media Lab for the 2016 US
presidential elections. Indeed, several illustrations issued
from this research project and reported by Thompson (2016)
clearly demonstrate that the Twitter network (at the time of
the study) contained two clusters consisting of supporters
of D. Trump and H. Clinton, respectively, that had a strong
inner connectivity while being poorly connected to one another.

Abstract
The personalization of our news consumption on social media has a tendency to reinforce our pre-existing beliefs instead
of balancing our opinions. To tackle this issue, Garimella et
al. (NIPS’17) modeled the spread of these viewpoints, also
called campaigns, using the independent cascade model introduced by Kempe, Kleinberg and Tardos (KDD’03) and studied an optimization problem that aims to balance information
exposure when two opposing campaigns propagate in a network. This paper investigates a natural generalization of this
optimization problem in which μ different campaigns propagate in the network and we aim to maximize the expected
number of nodes that are reached by at least ν or none of the
campaigns, where μ ≥ ν ≥ 2. Following Garimella et al.,
despite this general setting, we also investigate a simpliﬁed
one, in which campaigns propagate in a correlated manner.
While for the simpliﬁed setting, we show that the problem
can be approximated within a constant factor for any constant
μ and ν, for the general setting, we give reductions leading to
several approximation hardness results when ν ≥ 3. For instance, assuming the gap exponential time hypothesis to hold,
we obtain that the problem cannot be approximated within a
factor of n−g(n) for any g(n) = o(1) where n is the number
of nodes in the network. We complement our hardness results
with an Ω(n−1/2 )-approximation algorithm for the general
setting when ν = 3 and μ is arbitrary.

1

Consequently, instead of giving users a diverse perspective and balancing users opinions by exposing them to challenging diverse ideas, social media platforms are likely to
make users more extreme by only exposing them to views
that reinforce their pre-existing beliefs (Conover et al. 2011;
Del Vicario et al. 2016).
To address this issue from an algorithmic perspective,
Garimella et al. (2017) introduced the problem of balancing information exposure in a social network. Following the
inﬂuence maximization paradigm going back to the seminal work of Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos (2003; 2005;
2015), their problem involves two opposing viewpoints or
campaigns that propagate in a social network following the
independent cascade model. Given initial seed sets for both
campaigns, they consider the optimization problem of selecting at most k additional seed nodes for both campaigns
in order to maximize the expected number of nodes that are
reached by either both or none of the campaigns. The authors
studied two different settings, namely the heterogeneous and
correlated settings. The heterogeneous setting corresponds
to the general case in which there is no restriction on the
probabilities with which the campaigns spread. Contrarily,
in the correlated setting, the probability distributions for different campaigns are identical and completely correlated.
After proving the NP -hardness of balancing information exposure, the authors designed efﬁcient approximation algorithms with an approximation ratio of (1 − 1/e − )/2 for
any  > 0 for both the correlated and heterogeneous settings.

Introduction

One of the promises of a highly connected world is that
of an impartial spread of opinions driven by free and unbiased sources of information leading to an equitable exposure
of opinions to the wide public. On the contrary, the social
network platforms that are currently governing news diffusion, while offering many seemingly-desirable features like
searching, personalization, and recommendation, are reinforcing the centralization of information spreading and the
creation of what is often termed echo chambers and ﬁlter
bubbles (Garimella et al. 2018). Stated differently, algorithmic personalization of news diffusion are likely to create homogeneous polarized clusters where users get less exposure
to conﬂicting viewpoints. A good illustration of this issue
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3

