The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Span Model for Open Information Extraction on Accurate Corpus
Junlang Zhan,1,2,3 Hai Zhao1,2,3,∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
longmr.zhan@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Sentence

Open Information Extraction (Open IE) is a challenging task
especially due to its brittle data basis. Most of Open IE systems have to be trained on automatically built corpus and
evaluated on inaccurate test set. In this work, we ﬁrst alleviate this difﬁculty from both sides of training and test sets.
For the former, we propose an improved model design to
more sufﬁciently exploit training dataset. For the latter, we
present our accurately re-annotated benchmark test set (ReOIE2016) according to a series of linguistic observation and
analysis. Then, we introduce a span model instead of previous adopted sequence labeling formulization for n-ary Open
IE. Our newly introduced model achieves new state-of-the-art
performance on both benchmark evaluation datasets.

Extraction

Repeat customers can purchase
luxury items at reduced prices.
(A0: repeat customers; can purchase;
A1: luxury items; A2: at reduced prices)

Table 1: An example of Open IE in a sentence. The extraction consists of a predicate (in bold) and a list of arguments,
separated by semicolons.

long short-term memory (BiLSTM) labeler and BIO tagging
scheme which built the ﬁrst supervised learning model for
Open IE. (Cui, Wei, and Zhou 2018) constructed a large but
noisy annotated corpus by using OpenIE4 to perform extractions on Wikipedia then kept only tuples with high conﬁdence score. They also built an Open IE system by using a
neural sequence to sequence model and copy mechanism to
generate extractions. However, this system can only perform
binary extractions.
In this work, we develop an Open IE system by adapting a modiﬁed span selection model which has been applied in Semantic Role Labeling (SRL)(Ouchi, Shindo,
and Matsumoto 2018; He et al. 2018b; Li et al. 2019;
Zhao, Zhang, and Kit 2013; Zhao, Chen, and Kit 2009;
Li et al. 2018b; Cai et al. 2018), coreference resolution(Shou
and Zhao 2012; Zhang, Wu, and Zhao 2012) and syntactic
parsing (Zhang, Zhao, and Qin 2016; Ma and Zhao 2012;
Li, Zhao, and Parnow 2020; Zhou and Zhao 2019; Zhao et
al. 2009; Li et al. 2018a). The advantage of a span model is
that span level features can be sufﬁciently exploited which
is hard to perform in token based sequence labeling models.
As far as we know, this is the ﬁrst attempt that applies span
model on Open IE.
As previous Open IE systems were mostly built on a loose
data basis, we thus intend to strengthen such a basis from
both sides of training and test sets. We constructed a large
training corpus following the method of (Cui, Wei, and Zhou
2018). The differences of our construction method and the
method of (Cui, Wei, and Zhou 2018) are two-fold: First, our
corpus is constructed for n-ary extraction instead of binary
extraction. Second, previous methods only keep extractions
with high conﬁdence score for training. However, the conﬁ-

Introduction
Open Information Extraction (Open IE) aims to generate a
structured representation of information from natural language text in the form of verbs (or verbal phrases) and
their arguments. An Open IE system is usually domainindependent and does not rely on a pre-deﬁned ontology
schema. An example of Open IE is shown in Table 1. Open
IE has been widely applied in many downstream tasks such
as textual entailment and question answering (Fader, Zettlemoyer, and Etzioni 2014). Some existing Open IE systems
are listed in Table 2. Most of these systems are built in unsupervised manner except that TextRunner and OLLIE are
built in a self-supervised manner.
To perform Open IE in supervised learning and to leverage the advantages of neural network, (Stanovsky et al.
2018) created the ﬁrst annotated corpus by an automatic
translation from Question-Answer Driven Semantic Role
Labeling (QA-SRL) annotations (He, Lewis, and Zettlemoyer 2015) and Question-Answer Meaning Representation
(QAMR) (Michael et al. 2018). Based on this corpus, they
developed an Open IE system RnnOIE using a bidirectional
∗
Corresponding author. This paper was partially supported
by National Key Research and Development Program of China
(No. 2017YFB0304100), Key Projects of National Natural Science
Foundation of China (U1836222 and 61733011).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9523

