The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Parallel AND/OR Search for Marginal MAP
Radu Marinescu, Akihiro Kishimoto
IBM Research
Dublin, Ireland
{radu.marinescu, akihirok}@ie.ibm.com

Adi Botea∗
Eaton
Dublin, Ireland
adibotea@eaton.com
space that is sensitive to the underlying problem structure.
Speciﬁcally, AOBB is a recent algorithm that traverses the
context minimal AND/OR search graph in a depth-ﬁrst manner and uses a heuristic evaluation function to prune the
search space in a typical branch and bound fashion (Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler 2014). AOBF is a memory intensive algorithm that explores the AND/OR search space
in a best-ﬁrst rather than depth-ﬁrst manner (Marinescu,
Dechter, and Ihler 2015). This enables AOBF to visit signiﬁcantly smaller search spaces than AOBB which sometimes translates into important time savings as well as considerably fewer conditional likelihood evaluations. The recursive best-ﬁrst search algorithm called RBFAOO uses a
threshold controlling mechanism to drive the search in a
depth-ﬁrst like manner and thus is able to operate within
restricted memory (Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler 2015).
These algorithms are most effective when guided by heuristics based on weighted mini-bucket elimination which is
enhanced with cost-shifting schemes (Liu and Ihler 2011;
Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler 2014).

Abstract
Marginal MAP is a difﬁcult mixed inference task for graphical models. Existing state-of-the-art algorithms for solving
exactly this task are based on either depth-ﬁrst or best-ﬁrst
sequential search over an AND/OR search space. In this paper,
we explore and evaluate for the ﬁrst time the power of parallel
search for exact Marginal MAP inference. We introduce a new
parallel shared-memory recursive best-ﬁrst AND/OR search
algorithm that explores the search space in a best-ﬁrst manner
while operating with limited memory. Subsequently, we develop a complete parallel search scheme that only parallelizes
the conditional likelihood computations. We also extend the
proposed algorithms into depth-ﬁrst parallel search schemes.
Our experiments on difﬁcult benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of the parallel search algorithms against current
sequential methods for solving Marginal MAP exactly.

Introduction
Graphical models provide a powerful framework for reasoning about conditional dependency structures over many
variables. The Marginal MAP (MMAP) query asks for the
optimal conﬁguration of a subset of variables that has the
highest marginal probability. More speciﬁcally, MMAP distinguishes between maximization variables (called MAP variables) and summation variables, and it is more difﬁcult than
either max- or sum-inference tasks alone primarily because
summation and maximization operations do not commute,
forcing processing along constrained variable orderings that
may have signiﬁcantly higher induced widths (Dechter 1999).
This implies larger search spaces for search algorithms or
larger messages when using message-passing schemes.
In general, MMAP is NPPP -complete and it can be NP-hard
even on tree structured models (Park 2002). Still, MMAP is
often the appropriate task where hidden variables or uncertain
parameters exist. It can also be treated as a special case of the
more complicated frameworks of decision networks (Howard
and Matheson 2005; Liu and Ihler 2013).
State-of-the-art exact algorithms for MMAP are based on
either depth-ﬁrst or best-ﬁrst search over an AND/OR search

Up until now, all these advanced search-based MMAP
solvers were developed primarily as sequential search algorithms. One way to extract substantial speed-ups from the
hardware and further improve the performance is to resort
to parallel processing. Indeed, parallel search has been successfully applied in several AI areas, such as planning (Kishimoto, Fukunaga, and Botea 2013), satisﬁability (Chrabakh
and Wolski 2003), and game playing (Campbell, Hoane, and
Hsu 2002; Silver et al. 2016). Solving graphical models in
parallel, especially in shared-memory multi-core architectures, has been explored recently in the context of pure MAP
queries only (Kishimoto, Marinescu, and Botea 2015).
In this paper, we explore and evaluate the power of sharedmemory parallel search for solving MMAP exactly, which
to the best of our knowledge has not been attempted before. More speciﬁcally, we develop SPRBFAOO-MMAP, a
new parallel recursive best-ﬁrst AND/OR search algorithm
for MMAP. The algorithm maintains a single cache table
which is shared amongst the threads so that each thread can
effectively reuse the search effort performed by the others.
In addition, the algorithm associates with each node a socalled virtual q-value that captures both the estimated cost

∗
This work was performed while the author was afﬁliated with
IBM Research, Ireland.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10226

