The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CASIE: Extracting Cybersecurity Event Information from Text
Taneeya Satyapanich, Francis Ferraro, Tim Finin
Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
Baltimore, MD 21250 USA
{taneeya1, ferraro, ﬁnin}@umbc.edu

or the development of neural networks to better capture information, such as dependency tree-based CNNs (Nguyen
and Grishman 2018). To overcome the data scarcity of labeled data, multiple sources of external knowledge, such as
semantic frame analyses (Liu et al. 2016; Li et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2017), consistent and complement information
to disambiguation from multilingual data (Liu et al. 2018),
and expert-level patterns from an open-source pattern-based
event extraction system called TABARI (Cao et al. 2018),
have been leveraged.
Most previous event detection research has focused on
common events in a person’s life, such as those deﬁned by
ACE (Walker et al. 2006) or the TAC Knowledge Base Population (Mitamura, Liu, and Hovy 2015). These life events
include things like “being born,” “getting married,” “starting
a job’ and “being charged with a crime.” One core difference
between extracting life events and cybersecurity events is the
required domain-relevant expertise. We share this difﬁculty
with other types of domain-speciﬁc information extraction,
such as extracting information about biomedical events. The
development of these rich event extraction datasets and tasks
has helped to spur innovation in the BioNLP area (Kim et al.
2009). One of our contributions is the analogous creation for
the cybersecurity domain.
A second difference between extracting life events and
cybersecurity events is the inherent complexity of cybersecurity events. A cyberattack event can consist of an attack
pattern with multiple actions, attempted or completed. Each
mention of one of these actions can be considered as a separate cybersecurity event description, which multiplies the
possible choices for a cybersecurity event reference. Comparing to life events, the challenge is among the homonym
and synonym sets of an event mention. Our work makes
three main contributions.
• We deﬁne and specify ﬁve cybersecurity events along
with their semantic roles and 20 types of arguments that
are candidates for role-ﬁllers.
• We present a novel, challenging corpus of newswire articles annotated with the cybersecurity events in them.
These annotations will be available upon publication.
• We present CASIE, a neural cybersecurity event extraction system that combines modern deep learning with lin-

Abstract
We present CASIE, a system that extracts information about
cybersecurity events from text and populates a semantic
model, with the ultimate goal of integration into a knowledge graph of cybersecurity data. It was trained on a new
corpus of 1,000 English news articles from 2017–2019 that
are labeled with rich, event-based annotations and that covers
both cyberattack and vulnerability-related events. Our model
deﬁnes ﬁve event subtypes along with their semantic roles
and 20 event-relevant argument types (e.g., ﬁle, device, software, money). CASIE uses different deep neural networks
approaches with attention and can incorporate rich linguistic
features and word embeddings. We have conducted experiments on each component in the event detection pipeline and
the results show that each subsystem performs well.

Introduction
Cyberattacks and cybercrimes are common today and their
frequency and severity are only expected to increase. They
are also evolving to exploit new vulnerabilities and environments, such as the Internet of Things and cyber-physical
systems. People and machines will be better able to defend against attacks if we can keep abreast of current trends
and vulnerabilities. We have developed CASIE (CyberAttack Sensing and Information Extraction) as a tool to help
do this by extracting information about cybersecurity events
from news articles. The results can be used to keep people
informed and also integrated into knowledge graphs of cybersecurity data to help automated systems.
The task of identifying instances of speciﬁc events in
text and extracting relevant information from them has been
studied for a long time but remains a challenging task. The
task was introduced in the second Message Understanding Conference in 1989 and has been part of many information extraction challenges since; see Grishman and
Sundheim (1996) for a history of MUC. Efforts to improve event detection performance have tended to focus on
adding new features or improving pattern matching algorithms (Ji and Grishman 2008; Li, Ji, and Huang 2013),
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8749

