The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AI for Explaining Decisions in Multi-Agent Environments∗
Sarit Kraus,1 Amos Azaria,2 Jelena Fiosina,3 Maike Greve,4 Noam Hazon,2
Lutz Kolbe,4 Tim-Benjamin Lembcke,4 Jörg P. Müller,3 Sören Schleibaum,3 Mark Vollrath5
1

Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Israel sarit@cs.biu.ac.il
2
Department of Computer Science, Ariel University, Israel
3
Department of Informatics, TU Clausthal, Germany
4
Chair of Information Management, Georg-August-Universitat Göttingen, Germany
5
Chair of Engineering and Trafﬁc Psychology, TU Braunschweig, Germany
ﬁnding ways of explaining to a user a decision made by an
AI system, e.g., a classiﬁcation choice made by a neural network. That is, explanations are usually given for black-box
algorithms, which aim at maximizing a well-agreed upon
function (e.g., maximizing accuracy, minimizing loss). Previous work has mainly focused on increasing users’ trust
in the black-box AI system. However, we believe that providing the users with explanations is even more important
in multi-agent environments, when even the maximization
function is not clear to the (human) agents. In such situations, explanations should aim to increase user satisfaction,
taking into account properties such as fairness, envy and privacy. Hence, we propose a new research direction of Explainable decisions in Multi-Agent Environments (xMASE).

Abstract
Explanation is necessary for humans to understand and accept
decisions made by an AI system when the system’s goal is
known. It is even more important when the AI system makes
decisions in multi-agent environments where the human does
not know the systems’ goals since they may depend on other
agents’ preferences. In such situations, explanations should
aim to increase user satisfaction, taking into account the system’s decision, the user’s and the other agents’ preferences,
the environment settings and properties such as fairness, envy
and privacy. Generating explanations that will increase user
satisfaction is very challenging; to this end, we propose a new
research direction: Explainable decisions in Multi-Agent Environments (xMASE). We then review the state of the art and
discuss research directions towards efﬁcient methodologies
and algorithms for generating explanations that will increase
users’ satisfaction from AI systems’ decisions in multi-agent
environments.

For example, in the ridesharing domain, an AI system
may suggest to a customer Bob to share a taxi with Alice
in a ride that will take 30 minutes. The taxi will ﬁrst drop
Alice off and it will cost Bob $25. Bob may be upset that
the taxi drops Alice off ﬁrst. An explanation could be that
Alice’s destination is on Bob’s route and will only add 5
minutes to his trip. The system can also say that Alice will
pay $30, or that dropping Bob off ﬁrst will add 15 minutes
to Alice’s trip, or that Alice teaches at 8am and will be late
if Bob is dropped ﬁrst. Bob can also be told that sharing a
taxi will save him $10.

Introduction
Many AI systems need to make decisions in multi-agent environments where the agents, including people and robots,
have possibly conﬂicting preferences. The system should
balance between these preferences when making decisions
regarding all agents. Such systems include, e.g., a scheduling algorithm assigning teachers to classes, or a ridesharing
application proposing joint rides to people. In such situations, the global decisions made by the system may not adhere to all people’s preferences: a decision may make some
people unhappy. Providing explanations about the system’s
decision may increase people’s satisfaction (Bradley and
Sparks 2009), and maintain acceptability of the AI system
(2018). The EU General Data Protection Regulation introduces a right of explanation (Goodman and Flaxman 2017)
for citizens to obtain “meaningful information of the logic
involved” for automated decisions.
Explainable AI (XAI) has recently been studied extensively (Core et al. 2006; Carvalho, Pereira, and Cardoso
2019; Rosenfeld and Richardson 2019), mainly focusing on

Generating explanations in multi-agent environments is
even more challenging than providing explanations in other
settings, e.g., for classiﬁcation results produced by deep
learning algorithms. In addition to identifying the technical
reasons that led to the decision, there is a need to convey
the preferences of the agents that were involved. It is necessary to decide what to reveal from other agents’ preferences
in order to increase the user’s satisfaction, taking the privacy of other agents into account, and how these preferences
led to the ﬁnal decision. It should also refer to issues such
as fairness. The inﬂuence of the explanation on user satisfaction changes from one user to the next; therefore, personalized explanations are beneﬁcial (Lakkaraju et al. 2019;
Bradley and Sparks 2009). Given that the task is very challenging, we propose to use AI tools, and in particular machine learning to generate the personalized explanations
that will maximize user satisfaction, while aiming to con-

∗

This work was partly supported by Volkswagen Foundation.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13534

