The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Camouﬂage Images
Qing Zhang,1 Gelin Yin,1 Yongwei Nie,2 Wei-Shi Zheng,1,3,4∗
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China
4
The Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{zhangqing.whu.cs, gelinyin}@gmail.com, nieyongwei@scut.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org
2

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of creating camouﬂage images. Such images typically contain one or more hidden objects embedded into a background image, so that viewers
are required to consciously focus to discover them. Previous methods basically rely on hand-crafted features and texture synthesis to create camouﬂage images. However, due to
lack of reliable understanding of what essentially makes an
object recognizable, they typically result in either complete
standout or complete invisible hidden objects. Moreover, they
may fail to produce seamless and natural images because of
the sensitivity to appearance differences. To overcome these
limitations, we present a novel neural style transfer approach
that adopts the visual perception mechanism to create camouﬂage images, which allows us to hide objects more effectively
while producing natural-looking results. In particular, we design an attention-aware camouﬂage loss to adaptively mask
out information that make the hidden objects visually standout, and also leave subtle yet enough feature clues for viewers
to perceive the hidden objects. To remove the appearance discontinuities between the hidden objects and the background,
we formulate a naturalness regularization to constrain the hidden objects to maintain the manifold structure of the covered
background. Extensive experiments show the advantages of
our approach over existing camouﬂage methods and state-ofthe-art neural style transfer algorithms.

Figure 1: Two camouﬂage images produced by our approach. Please zoom in to see details and try to ﬁnd the hidden objects. Answer keys are shown in Fig. 10.

perception works. Fortunately, the feature integration theory
proposed in (Treisman and Gelade 1980) provides a possible explanation. It suggests that the perception mechanism
of human vision system can be explained as a two-phase visual search process including feature search and conjunction
search (Treisman 1988; Wolfe 1994). Speciﬁcally, feature
search is an instant procedure in which we subconsciously
perceive the scene semantics by leveraging intuitive visual
features such as color and texture. While conjunction search
is a slow and delayed procedure, since it requires us to integrate scattered multiple features and perform inference to
achieve recognition. This theory explains why understanding camouﬂage images takes effort. Concretely, the reason
is that camouﬂage images foil our feature search by decorating the hidden objects with colors and textures similar to the
background, and thus force our perception system to employ
the slow conjunction search for recognition.
Currently, there is a paucity of literature on creating camouﬂage images. Based on the feature integration theory, Chu
et al. (Chu et al. 2010) presented the ﬁrst computational
approach for embedding 2D objects into an image, where
they designed an optimization consisting of two conﬂicting
terms corresponding to preventing feature search and allowing conjunction search, respectively. Although this approach
produces promising results, it is sensitive to appearance differences between the hidden objects and the background image, and may fail due to lack of reliable understanding of
what makes an object recognizable. Unlike (Chu et al. 2010),
Owens et al. (Owens et al. 2014) introduced a method to
completely hide a 3D object from multiple viewpoints. Despite the success of this technique, it is inapplicable in cre-

Introduction
Camouﬂage is a concept that stems from the biology. To survive in the wild, animals have developed an ability to hide
themselves from predators and preys by making colors and
textures on their bodies similar to those of their natural habitats. Artists gain inspiration from this phenomenon and create a new art form referred to as camouﬂage images. These
images usually contain one or more hidden ﬁgures or objects
that remain imperceptible to viewers for a while, unless under a closer scrutiny (see Fig. 1 for examples).
Camouﬂage images are widely favored as detecting hidden objects from these images can be challenging and entertaining. However, creating camouﬂage images is difﬁcult,
even for skilled artists, since fooling eyes with hidden objects involves reliable interpretation of how human visual
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12845

