The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Expressing Objects Just Like Words:
Recurrent Visual Embedding for Image-Text Matching
Tianlang Chen, Jiebo Luo
Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
{tchen45, jluo}@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract

4XHU\7ZRSHRSOHULGLQJVNLVWRJHWKHURQDVQRZ\VXUIDFH

Existing image-text matching approaches typically infer the
similarity of an image-text pair by capturing and aggregating the afﬁnities between the text and each independent object of the image. However, they ignore the connections between the objects that are semantically related. These objects
may collectively determine whether the image corresponds
to a text or not. To address this problem, we propose a Dual
Path Recurrent Neural Network (DP-RNN) which processes
images and sentences symmetrically by recurrent neural networks (RNN). In particular, given an input image-text pair,
our model reorders the image objects based on the positions
of their most related words in the text. In the same way as
extracting the hidden features from word embeddings, the
model leverages RNN to extract high-level object features
from the reordered object inputs. We validate that the highlevel object features contain useful joint information of semantically related objects, which beneﬁt the retrieval task. To
compute the image-text similarity, we incorporate a Multiattention Cross Matching Model into DP-RNN. It aggregates
the afﬁnity between objects and words with cross-modality
guided attention and self-attention. Our model achieves the
state-of-the-art performance on Flickr30K dataset and competitive performance on MS-COCO dataset. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our model.

Figure 1: An example to illustrate that the mismatch of an
image-text pair cannot be detected by any single object.

For the text branch, high-level semantic features are extracted from RNN, which captures the joint information of
adjacent and semantically related words. This becomes a
bridge to connect the “local” words and the “global” text.
However, for the image branch, current approaches based
on bottom-up attention consider each image object independently. Typically, they compute the image-text similarity as
the average or weighted average of the similarities between
the text and each image object. In this process, essential
joint information of semantically related objects cannot be
extracted, preventing the model from making more accurate predictions. Given the example of Figure 1, each object
in the green box will get a high predicted similarity score
to the query because it represents an important element of
the query, i.e. “people”. However, only by jointly modeling
these objects can the model predict that the image does not
correspond to the text, because the objects do not match the
description of “two people ride skis together”.
To address this problem, we propose a novel Dual Path
Recurrent Neural Network (DP-RNN) for image-text matching. In particular, we consider the relation between image
and objects in accordance with the relation between sentence
and words. Given an image-text pair as the input, DP-RNN
“reads” the image objects in the corresponding order as the
text indicates. More concretely, for each object, the model
ﬁrst searches its most related word in the text, regardless

Introduction
Image-text matching involves the task to measure the similarity between an image and a text. By image-text matching,
a system can retrieve the top corresponding images of a sentence query, or retrieve the top corresponding sentences of
an image query.
Currently, approaches based on bottom-up attention
achieve the best performance on this task. Given an image
and a text as the input, these approaches ﬁrst ﬁgure out
the afﬁnity between image objects and words. After getting these local matching informative snippets, they predict
the image-text similarity by aggregating them appropriately.
Approaches based on bottom-up attention perform much
better than directly extracting the global image and text features and compute their similarity.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10583

