The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Optimal Attack against Autoregressive Models by Manipulating the Environment
Yiding Chen, Xiaojin Zhu
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
{yiding, jerryzhu}@cs.wisc.edu

attack is sequential if the attacker take actions over time.
There are batch attacks against support vector machine (Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2012; Biggio et al. 2014), deep
neural networks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014;
Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015), differentially-private
learners (Ma, Zhu, and Hsu 2019), contextual bandits (Ma et
al. 2018), recurrent neural networks (Papernot et al. 2016),
online learning (Wang and Chaudhuri 2018) and reinforcement learning (Ma et al. 2019). Some of these victims are
sequential during deployment, but they can be trained from
batch ofﬂine data; hence they can be prone to batch attacks.
In contrast, (Jun et al. 2018) and (Zhang and Zhu 2019) study
sequential attacks against stochastic bandits and sequential
prediction. Our work studies sequential attack against autoregressive model, which is closer to these two papers. Meanwhile, control theory is receiving increasing attention from
the adversarial learning community (Recht 2018; Zhu 2018;
Lessard, Zhang, and Zhu 2018). Our work strengthens this
connection.
This paper makes three main contributions: (1) We present
an attack setting where the adversary must determine the attack sequentially. This generalizes the setting of (Alfeld, Zhu,
and Barford 2016; 2017), where the adversary can decide the
attack after observing all environmental state values used for
forecast. (2) We formulate the attacks as an optimal control
problem. (3) When the attacker knows the environmental
dynamics and forecast model (white-box setting), we solve
the optimal attacks with Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR)
for the linear case, or Model Predictive Control (MPC) and iterative LQR (iLQR) for the nonlinear case; when the attacker
does not know the environmental or forecaster(black-box
setting), we additionally perform system identiﬁcation.

Abstract
We describe an optimal adversarial attack formulation against
autoregressive time series forecast using Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR). In this threat model, the environment evolves
according to a dynamical system; an autoregressive model observes the current environment state and predicts its future values; an attacker has the ability to modify the environment state
in order to manipulate future autoregressive forecasts. The attacker’s goal is to force autoregressive forecasts into tracking
a target trajectory while minimizing its attack expenditure. In
the white-box setting where the attacker knows the environment and forecast models, we present the optimal attack using
LQR for linear models, and Model Predictive Control (MPC)
for nonlinear models. In the black-box setting, we combine
system identiﬁcation and MPC. Experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our attacks.

Introduction
Adversarial learning studies vulnerability in machine learning, see e.g. (Vorobeychik and Kantarcioglu 2018; Joseph
et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2017; Biggio and Roli 2017; Lowd
and Meek 2005). Understanding optimal attacks that might
be carried out by an adversary is important, as it prepares
us to manage the damage and helps us develop defenses.
Time series forecast, speciﬁcally autoregressive model, is
widely deployed in practice (Hamilton 1994; Box et al. 2015;
Fan and Yao 2008) but has not received the attention it deserves from adversarial learning researchers. Adversarial attack in this context means an adversary can subtly perturb
a dynamical system at the current time, hence inﬂuencing
the forecasts about a future time. Prior work (Alfeld, Zhu,
and Barford 2016; 2017) did point out vulnerabilities in autoregressive models under very speciﬁc attack assumptions.
However, it was not clear how to formulate general attacks
against autoregressive models.
There are extensive studies on batch adversarial attacks
against machine learning algorithms. But there is much less
work on sequential attacks. We say an attack is batch if the
attacker performs one attack action at training or test time
(the attacker is allowed to change multiple data points); an

The Attack Setting
Autoregressive Review
To ﬁx notation, we brieﬂy review time series forecasting
using autoregressive models. There are two separate entities:
1. The environment is a ﬁxed dynamical system with
scalar-valued states xt ∈ R at time t. The environment has a
(potentially non-linear) q-th order dynamics f and is subject
to zero-mean noise wt ∈ R with V(wt ) = σ 2 . Without
manipulations from the adversary, the environmental state

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3545

