The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Count-Based Exploration with the Successor Representation
Marlos C. Machado,1 Marc G. Bellemare,1 Michael Bowling,2,3
1

Google AI, Brain Team, 2 University of Alberta, 3 DeepMind Alberta
{marlosm, bellemare, bowlingm}@google.com

that is, environments where the agent observes a reward signal of value zero for the majority of states. In this paper
we introduce an approach for exploration in RL based on
the successor representation (SR; Dayan 1993). The SR is a
representation that generalizes between states using the similarity between their successors, that is, the states that follow
the current state given the agent’s policy. The SR is deﬁned
for any problem, it can be learned with temporal-difference
learning and, as we discuss below, it can be seen as implicitly estimating the transition dynamics of the environment.
The main contribution of this paper is to show that the
norm of the SR can be used as an exploration bonus. We
perform an extensive empirical evaluation to demonstrate
this and we introduce the substochastic successor representation (SSR) to also understand, theoretically, the behavior
of such a bonus. The SSR behaves similarly to the SR but
it is more amenable to theoretical analyses. We show that
the SSR implicitly counts state visitation, suggesting that
the exploration bonus obtained from the SR, while it is being learned, might also be incorporating some notion of state
visitation counts. We demonstrate this intuition empirically
and we use this result to introduce algorithms that, in the
tabular case, perform as well as traditional approaches with
PAC-MDP guarantees. Finally, we extend the idea of using
the norm of the SR as an exploration bonus to the function approximation case, designing a deep RL algorithm that
achieves state-of-the-art performance in hard exploration
Atari 2600 games when in a low sample-complexity regime.
The proposed algorithm is also simpler than traditional baselines such as pseudo-count-based methods because it does
not require domain-speciﬁc density models (Bellemare et al.
2016; Ostrovski et al. 2017).

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a simple approach for exploration
in reinforcement learning (RL) that allows us to develop theoretically justiﬁed algorithms in the tabular case but that is
also extendable to settings where function approximation is
required. Our approach is based on the successor representation (SR), which was originally introduced as a representation
deﬁning state generalization by the similarity of successor
states. Here we show that the norm of the SR, while it is being
learned, can be used as a reward bonus to incentivize exploration. In order to better understand this transient behavior of
the norm of the SR we introduce the substochastic successor
representation (SSR) and we show that it implicitly counts the
number of times each state (or feature) has been observed. We
use this result to introduce an algorithm that performs as well
as some theoretically sample-efﬁcient approaches. Finally,
we extend these ideas to a deep RL algorithm and show that
it achieves state-of-the-art performance in Atari 2600 games
when in a low sample-complexity regime.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) tackles sequential decision
making problems by formulating them as tasks where an
agent must learn how to act optimally through trial and error
interactions with the environment. The goal in these problems is to maximize the (discounted) sum of the numerical
reward signal observed at each time step. Because the actions taken by the agent inﬂuence not just the immediate reward but also the states and associated rewards in the future,
sequential decision making problems require agents to deal
with the trade-off between immediate and delayed rewards.
Here we focus on the problem of exploration in RL, which
aims to reduce the number of samples (i.e., interactions) an
agent needs in order to learn to perform well in these tasks
when the environment is initially unknown.
Surprisingly, the most common approach in the ﬁeld is to
select exploratory actions uniformly at random, with even
high-proﬁle success stories being obtained with this strategy
(e.g., Tesauro 1995; Mnih et al. 2015). However, random
exploration often fails in environments with sparse rewards,

2

Preliminaries

We consider an agent interacting with its environment in a
sequential manner. Starting from a state S0 ∈ S, at each step
the agent takes an action At ∈ A, to which the environment
responds with a state St+1 ∈ S according to a transition
function p(s |s, a) = Pr(St+1 = s |St = s, At = a), and
with a reward signal Rt+1 ∈ R, where r(s, a) indicates the
expected reward for a transition from state s under action a,
.
that is, r(s, a) = E[Rt+1 |St = s, At = a].

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5125

