The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Gradient Method for Continuous Inﬂuence
Maximization with Budget-Saving Considerations
Wei Chen,∗,1 Weizhong Zhang,2 Haoyu Zhao3
1
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
weic@microsoft.com, {zwz15, zhaohy16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2,3

CIM
 is the task of selecting a strategy mix x with constraint
i xi ≤ k where k is a budget constraint, such that the
total number of activated nodes after the diffusion process,
called inﬂuence spread and denoted as g(x), is maximized.
CIM is proposed in (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2015),
and recently followed up by a few studies (Yang et al. 2016;
Chen, Wu, and Yu 2019).

Abstract
Continuous inﬂuence maximization (CIM) generalizes the
original inﬂuence maximization by incorporating general
marketing strategies: a marketing strategy mix is a vector
x = (x1 , . . . , xd ) such that for each node v in a social network, v could be activated as a seed of diffusion with probability hv (x), where hv is a strategy activation function satisfying
DR-submodularity.
CIM is the task of selecting a strategy mix
x with constraint i xi ≤ k where k is a budget constraint,
such that the total number of activated nodes after the diffusion
process, called inﬂuence spread and denoted as g(x), is maximized. In this paper, we extend CIM to consider budget saving,
that is, each strategy mix x has a cost c(x) where c is a convex cost function, and we want to maximize the balanced sum
g(x) + λ(k − c(x)) where λ is a balance parameter, subject
to the constraint of c(x) ≤ k. We denote this problem as CIMBS. The objective function of CIM-BS is neither monotone,
nor DR-submodular or concave, and thus neither the greedy
algorithm nor the standard result on gradient method could
be directly applied. Our key innovation is the combination of
the gradient method with reverse inﬂuence sampling to design
algorithms that solve CIM-BS:
 Forthe general case, we give
an algorithm that achieves 12 − ε -approximation, and for
the case of independent strategy 
activations, we present an
algorithm that achieves 1 − 1e − ε approximation.

1

In this paper, we extend CIM to consider budget saving:
each strategy mix x has a cost c(x) where c is a convex
cost function, and we want to maximize the balanced sum
g(x) + λ(k − c(x)) where λ is a balance parameter, subject
to the constraint of c(x) ≤ k. We denote this problem as
CIM-BS. The objective reﬂects the realistic consideration of
balancing between increasing inﬂuence spread and saving
marketing budget. In general we have g(x) monotone (increasing) and DR-submodular (diminishing return property
formally deﬁned in Section 2), but λ(k − c(x)) is concave
and likely to be monotonically decreasing, and thus the objective function g(x) + λ(k − c(x)) is neither monotone,
nor DR-submodular or concave, and thus neither the greedy
algorithm nor the standard result on gradient method could
be directly applied for a theoretical guarantee.
In this paper, we apply the gradient method (Nesterov
2013; Parikh, Boyd, and others 2014) to solve CIM-BS with
theoretical approximation guarantees. This is the only case
we know of that the gradient method is applied to inﬂuence
maximization with a theoretical guarantee while the greedy
method cannot. The gradient method may be applied to the
original objective function g(x) + λ(k − c(x)), but g(x) is
a complicated combinatorial function and its exact gradient
is infeasible to compute. We could use stochastic gradient
instead, but it results in large variance and very slow convergence. Instead, we integrate the gradient method with the
reverse inﬂuence sampling (RIS) approach (Borgs et al. 2014;
Tang, Xiao, and Shi 2014; Tang, Shi, and Xiao 2015), which
is the main technical innovation in our paper. RIS is proposed
for improving the efﬁciency of the inﬂuence maximization
task, but when integrating with the gradient method, it brings
two additional beneﬁts: (a) it allows the efﬁcient computation
of the exact gradient of an estimator function of g(x), which
avoids slow convergence caused by the large variance in the
stochastic gradient, and (b) for a class of independent strat-

Introduction

Inﬂuence maximization is the task of selecting a small number of seed nodes in a social network such that the inﬂuence
spread from the seeds when following an inﬂuence diffusion
model is maximized. It models the viral marketing scenario
and has been extensively studied (cf. (Kempe, Kleinberg,
and Tardos 2015; Chen, Lakshmanan, and Castillo 2013;
Li et al. 2018)). Continuous inﬂuence maximization (CIM)
generalizes the original inﬂuence maximization by incorporating general marketing strategies: a marketing strategy mix
is a vector x = (x1 , . . . , xd ) such that for each node v in
a social network, v could be activated as a seed of diffusion with probability hv (x), where hv is a strategy activation function satisfying monotonicity and DR-submodularity.
∗

All authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
43

