The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Online Active Learning of Reject Option Classiﬁers
Kulin Shah, Naresh Manwani
Machine Learning Lab, KCIS, IIIT Hyderabad, India
kulin.shah@students.iiit.ac.in, naresh.manwani@iiit.ac.in

and asks for further recommendations or a credit bureau
score from the stakeholders. Application of reject option
classiﬁers include healthcare (Hanczar and Dougherty 2008;
da Rocha Neto et al. 2011), text categorization (Fumera, Pillai, and Roli 2003), crowdsourcing (Li et al. 2017) etc.
Let X ⊂ Rd be the feature space and {+1, −1} be the
label space. Examples of the form (x, y) are generated from
an unknown ﬁxed distribution on X × {+1, −1}. A reject
option classiﬁer can be described with the help of a function
f : X → R and a rejection width parameter ρ ∈ R+ as
below.

Abstract
Active learning is an important technique to reduce the number
of labeled examples in supervised learning. Active learning
for binary classiﬁcation has been well addressed in machine
learning. However, active learning of the reject option classiﬁer remains unaddressed. In this paper, we propose novel
algorithms for active learning of reject option classiﬁers. We
develop an active learning algorithm using double ramp loss
function. We provide mistake bounds for this algorithm. We
also propose a new loss function called double sigmoid loss
function for reject option and corresponding active learning algorithm. We offer a convergence guarantee for this algorithm.
We provide extensive experimental results to show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms. The proposed algorithms
efﬁciently reduce the number of label examples required.

1

hρ (f (x)) = 1.I{f (x)>ρ} − 1.I{f (x)<−ρ} − 0.I{|f (x)|≤ρ}
(1)
The goal is to learn f (.) and ρ simultaneously. For a given
example (x, y), the performance of reject option classiﬁer
hρ (f (.)) is measured using following loss function.

Introduction

In standard binary classiﬁcation problems, algorithms return
prediction on every example. For any misprediction, the algorithms incur a cost. Many real-life applications involve
very high misclassiﬁcation costs. Thus, for some confusing
examples, not predicting anything may be less costly than
any misclassiﬁcation. The choice of not predicting anything
for an example is called reject option in machine learning
literature. Such classiﬁers are called reject option classiﬁers.
Reject option classiﬁcation is very useful in many applications. Consider a doctor diagnosing a patient based on
the observed symptoms and preliminary diagnosis. If there
is an ambiguity in observations and preliminary diagnosis,
the doctor can hold the decision on the treatment. She can
recommend to take advanced tests or consult a specialist
to avoid the risk of misdiagnosing the patient. The holding response of the doctor is the same as to reject option
for the speciﬁc patient (da Rocha Neto et al. 2011). On the
other hand, the doctor’s misprediction can cost huge money
for further treatment or the life of a person. In another example, a banker can use the reject option while looking at
the loan application of a customer (Rosowsky and Smith
2013). A banker may choose not to decide based on the information available because of high misclassiﬁcation cost,

Ld (yf (x), ρ) = I{yf (x)≤−ρ} + dI{|f (x)|≤ρ}

(2)

where d ∈ (0, 0.5) is the cost of rejection. A reject option
classiﬁer is learnt by minimizing the risk (expectation of loss)
under Ld . As Ld is not continuous, optimization of empirical
risk under Ld is difﬁcult. Bartlett and Wegkamp; Wegkamp
and Yuan (2008; 2011) propose a convex surrogate of Ld
called generalized hinge loss. They learn the reject option
classiﬁer using risk minimization algorithms based on generalized hinge loss. Grandvalet et al. (2008) propose another
convex surrogate of Ld called double hinge loss and corresponding risk minimization approach for reject option
classiﬁcation. Manwani et al.; Shah and Manwani (2015;
2019) propose double ramp loss based approaches for reject option classiﬁcation. Double ramp loss is a non-convex
bounded loss function. All these approaches assume that we
have plenty of labeled data available.
In general, classiﬁers learned with a large amount of training data can give better generalization on testing data. However, in many real-life applications, it can be costly and difﬁcult to get a large amount of labeled data. Thus, in many cases,
it is desirable to ask the labels of the examples selectively.
This motivates the idea of active learning. Active learning
selects more informative examples and queries labels of those
examples. Active learning of standard binary classiﬁers has

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5652

