The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ConCare: Personalized Clinical Feature
Embedding via Capturing the Healthcare Context
Liantao Ma,1,3 Chaohe Zhang,1,3 Yasha Wang,1,2∗ Wenjie Ruan,4 Jiangtao Wang,4
Wen Tang,5 Xinyu Ma,1,3 Xin Gao,1,3 Junyi Gao1,2
1

Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
National Engineering Research Center of Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, UK
5
Division of Nephrology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China
{malt, wangyasha}@pku.edu.cn, {wenjie.ruan, jiangtao.wang}@lancaster.ac.uk, tanggwen@126.com
2

er

…

nc

We
igh
t

um

…

35.0

Ca

98 19/12/2015

Alb

te
Da

Pa

tie

nt

Predicting the patient’s clinical outcome from the historical
electronic medical records (EMR) is a fundamental research
problem in medical informatics. Most deep learning-based
solutions for EMR analysis concentrate on learning the clinical visit embedding and exploring the relations between visits. Although those works have shown superior performances
in healthcare prediction, they fail to explore the personal characteristics during the clinical visits thoroughly. Moreover,
existing works usually assume that the more recent record
weights more in the prediction, but this assumption is not suitable for all conditions. In this paper, we propose ConCare
to handle the irregular EMR data and extract feature interrelationship to perform individualized healthcare prediction.
Our solution can embed the feature sequences separately by
modeling the time-aware distribution. ConCare further improves the multi-head self-attention via the cross-head decorrelation, so that the inter-dependencies among dynamic features and static baseline information can be effectively captured to form the personal health context. Experimental results on two real-world EMR datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of ConCare. The medical ﬁndings extracted by
ConCare are also empirically conﬁrmed by human experts
and medical literature.

Physical lab test New-onset complications

in

ID

Blood lab test

UR
TI

Abstract

66.3

0

0

…

98 22/01/2016

38.2

65.2

1

0

118 09/07/2015

32.8

49.8

0

1

…

…

Figure 1: Dynamic medical features. The physician conducts
the necessary lab tests for the patient at each visit.

1

0

0

171.41

0

1

0

Pa

…

D
CH

tes
be

160.54

42.51

Dia

53.92

F

…

CG

M

Ge

98
118

tie

He

N

igh

t

Primary disease

Ag

e

er
nd

nt

ID

Demographic

…

…

Figure 2: Static baseline information. Such characteristics
are usually used to evaluate the basic condition of the patient
and the prognosis in the clinical practice.
Although the state-of-the-art performance has been demonstrated in these works, the personal characteristics through
clinical visits have not yet been fully taken into consideration on the healthcare prediction. Speciﬁcally, there are two
research challenges, i.e., how to extract the different meanings of the particular clinical features for patients in diverse
conditions, and how to evaluate the impact of irregular visit
time intervals in the healthcare prediction.

Introduction
Performing personal health evaluation for each individual
patient is always the goal that physicians pursue. Electronic
Medical Records (EMR) now provide the possibility to realize these goals. EMR is a type of multivariate time series data that records patients’ visits in hospitals (e.g., diagnoses, lab tests. As shown in Figure 1) and static baseline
information (e.g., gender, primary disease. As shown in Figure 2). Recently deep learning-based models have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in mining the massive
EMR data (Ma et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2018; 2019). Usually, existing works incorporate
multiple dynamic features (e.g., lab test values) to learn
the visit embedding and the health status through the entire clinical visits by sequential models (Ma et al. 2017).

• I1 : Extracting Personal Health Context: A certain
value of a clinical feature (e.g., blood glucose) may imply different meanings to patients with diverse static baselines (e.g., diagnosis of diabetes as a primary disease, as
shown in Figure 2). In order to evaluate the health status of the patient comprehensively, physicians need to
take a look at the static clinical baseline information. Besides, not only the static baseline information, but also
the dynamic clinical feature sequence (as shown in Figure 1) can be treated as the health context of the patient.
For example, when plasma concentrations of creatinine

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
833

