The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Estimating Early Fundraising Performance of
Innovations via Graph-Based Market Environment Model
Likang Wu,1 Zhi Li,1 Hongke Zhao,2 Zhen Pan,1 Qi Liu,1 Enhong Chen1∗
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China
2
College of Management and Economics, Tianjin University
{wulk, zhili03, pzhen}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {qiliuql, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn, hongke@tju.edu.cn

with early funding achieve 30% of corresponding goals are
most likely to succeed 4 . But it is hard for the founder to
ensure that the project has a good start due to the complex
and dynamic market environment. Thus, modeling the market environment is an essential issue for judging whether it
is a good time to start the project. Unfortunately, less effort
has been made towards this goal. To that end, in this paper,
we conduct a focused study on modeling and estimating the
early performance of innovations in a market view. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt in this area.
Indeed, it is very challenging to estimate the early performance of unpublished innovations. As mentioned above, the
project fundraising performance is largely inﬂuenced by the
market environment. On the one hand, once a project is published, it will face market competition from other projects after published. That is difﬁcult to model the complex competition relationships and estimate the competitiveness of the
target project. On the other hand, market evolution can also
have a huge impact on the fundraising process. Then, tracking market evolution is another challenge for estimating the
early performance of the target innovation.
To address the challenges mentioned above, in this paper,
we present a focused study on exploiting the project early
fundraising performance in a market modeling view. Along
this line, we propose a novel model, i.e., Graph-based Market Environment model (GME), to explore the market environment of online crowdfunding platforms and estimate the
early performance of the target project. Speciﬁcally, GME
consists of two components, i.e., Project Competitiveness
Modeling (PCM) and Market Evolution Tracking (MET).
In the PCM module, we apply a hybrid Graph Neural Network (GNN) to model the competitiveness pressure of the
target project by aggregating competitive inﬂuences of other
competitive projects in the market. Additionally, in the MET
module, we design a propagation structure to track the market evolution and apply a Gated Graph Neural Networks
(GG-NNs) (Li et al. 2015) to model the evolution process.
Next, we optimize our GME with a joint loss to learn the
fundraising performance of competitive projects and estimate the early performance of the target project, simultane-

Abstract
Well begun is half done. In the crowdfunding market, the early
fundraising performance of the project is a concerned issue
for both creators and platforms. However, estimating the early
fundraising performance before the project published is very
challenging and still under-explored. To that end, in this paper, we present a focused study on this important problem in
a market modeling view. Speciﬁcally, we propose a Graphbased Market Environment model (GME) for estimating the
early fundraising performance of the target project by exploiting the market environment. In addition, we discriminatively
model the market competition and market evolution by designing two graph-based neural network architectures and incorporating them into the joint optimization stage. Finally, we
conduct extensive experiments on the real-world crowdfunding data collected from Indiegogo.com. The experimental results clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
model for modeling and estimating the early fundraising performance of the target project.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of online crowdfunding platforms, such as Indiegogo 1 and Kickstarter 2 . More and more entrepreneurs and individuals create projects on these platforms to demonstrate their innovative ideas and solicit funding from the public.
The prevalence of crowdfunding platforms triggers many
research problems, such as project success prediction (Li,
Rakesh, and Reddy 2016), recommendations (Zhang et al.
2019) and funding dynamic tracking (Zhao et al. 2017b;
2019). Most of these existing studies focus on modeling the
fundraising process after the project published. However, for
creators and platform operators, they all want to understand
and estimate the early fundraising performance before the
project setup. Actually, according to the ofﬁcial statistics of
online crowdfunding platforms, the fundraising ability of the
project reached its peak in the ﬁrst 24 hours 3 , and projects
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.indiegogo.com/
2
https://www.kickstarter.com/
3
https://pse.is/KWP5T

4
https://www.startups.com/library/expert-advice/keycrowdfunding-statistics

6396

