The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Using Cloud Tools for Literate Programming to
Redesign an AI Course for Non-Traditional College Students
Maria Hwang, Calvin Williamson

{maria hwang, calvin williamson}@ﬁtnyc.edu
Fashion Institute of Technology

those non-traditional ones producing workforce that may not
be technically-oriented, must adapt to the changing world
and incorporate some fundamental CS courses to teach programming literacy. As a trade-school and community college, producing mostly non-computationally oriented students, Fashion Institute of Technology has been dealing with
this global demand, in spite of lacking support from the university to provide such programming literacy courses. Based
on our experience, we introduce a course design that can
be applied in similar non-traditional higher educational institutions. We share our experience on how we have been
improving our curriculum and reﬂect on future challenges
facing this sector of AI education.

Abstract
As more open source educational software applications become available, higher educational institutions have the opportunity to utilize these cost efﬁcient tools to deliver the instruction traditionally taught off line with heavy associated
costs. Here we introduce a machine learning course that uses
a simple, cloud computing approach to creating course materials. We see this type of serverless, cloud-based, literate
programming to be the future of computer science education
in non-traditional higher educational institutions in particular
serving students who will need the basic literacy for computing and computation but will not pursue the traditional computer scientist path.

Introduction

AI for Education

With the exploding abundance of available data, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) have taken a new
life on its own throughout every possible industry imaginable from genetics to fashion (Dashtban and Balafar 2017;
Liu et al. 2019). Not surprisingly, higher educational institutions are also grappling with the inevitable resurgence of
AI/ML (Eaton et al. 2018; Iles and Erturk 2017; Wollowski
et al. 2016). We report on our own experience with an introductory AI course for non-CS majors. We have redesigned
this course around cloud-based literate programming to
make the course more accessible to students with limited
prior computing experience, as well as non-traditional students, such as adult learners and commuting students.

In the last four years at Fashion Institute of Technology (FIT), for students those who need statistics requirements (there is no CS major at FIT), we have provided a
permutation of a statistics course incorporating ML techniques using the programming language R. In the old design of this course, students would download R on their
laptops or on a USB jumpdrive to use on campus computers (a work around the IT Department’s restriction of
installing software on campus computers). In the R console, students would start learning to code (who typically
have never coded before) based on instructors’ demonstrations, a series of YouTube tutorials created by one of
our own instructors (\textit{https://www.youtube.com/user/
rdjalayer/featured}), and any other resource they ﬁnd online. Topics that are typically covered include exploratory
data analysis, regression, decision trees (classiﬁcation and
regression), kNNs, and, text mining. However, due to the
limitation of the R console interface, often codes are not
saved properly, codes are hard to share in real time, and
students are less likely to collaborate and share their experiences debugging, arguably the core skill for becoming a
competent programmer and problem solver. As educators,
we have been struggling to ﬁnd a solution to address some
of the limitations with the R console interface as well as the
institutional infrastructure at our university. The following
introduces our solution to these problems by leaving the previous generation of installing any sort of software application and moving toward the truly cloud computing and user
friendly, literate programming interfaces.

Is Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Everybody?
Because applications of AI/ML are permeating every ﬁeld,
careers that are traditionally non-computationally oriented
increasingly require the ability to interact and communicate
with data scientists and developers. Therefore, institutions
of higher education are encouraging (and occasionally mandating) that even non-CS track students are prepared for this.
Students must have basic CS literacy (e.g., programming
and data analytics literacy) to be able to efﬁciently communicate without difﬁculty with the more technically-oriented
workforce. Despite the abundance of online materials available to all, higher educational institutions, and particularly
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13502

