The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Recurrent Nested Model for Sequence Generation∗
Wenhao Jiang,1 Lin Ma,1 Wei Lu2
1

Tencent AI Lab
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{cswhjiang, forest.linma}@gmail.com, luwei@uestc.edu.cn
2

tions (He et al. 2016; Srivastava, Greff, and Schmidhuber
2015) were proposed to ease the training and has achieved
great success in convolution neural networks (CNNs). Recently, dense connections among layers (Huang et al. 2017)
were found to be beneﬁcial for the training of very deep convolutional neural networks.
In recurrent neural networks, increasing the “depth” can
also increase the expressive power (Pascanu et al. 2013;
Zilly et al. 2017). In (Pascanu et al. 2013), the authors
observed that the relationship between consecutive hidden
states and that between the hidden states and outputs are not
deep enough. And alternative RNNs were proposed by making those shallow relationships to be modeled with deep neural networks. In addition to the methods mentioned above,
recurrent highway networks (RHN) (Zilly et al. 2017) made
the transition functions much deeper by adding more micro RNN steps and highway connections. Empirical evaluation showed that deeper RNN provide better performance.
Hence, increasing the depth also makes RNNs more powerful.
For an encoder-decoder model, except adopting the depth
increasing techniques from RNN mentioned before, we can
also inserts several transition steps between the encoder and
decoder to make the whole model deeper. It is the strategy
proposed by Review Net (Yang et al. 2016), and the additional transition steps are called review steps. The review
steps processes the information from encoder and passes the
results to the decoder. The hidden states from review steps
are used as inputs of attention in the decoder. Hence, review
steps provide the decoder with better source representations
and attention inputs. For Review Net, the best number of
review steps selected on validation set is usually around
8 (Yang et al. 2016). And if the number of review steps is
larger than that, performance will not be improved further
by adding review steps.
In this work, we explore deep extensions of the encoderdecoder model by increasing the number of non-linear transformations from source to target, without changing the designs of the encoder and decoder. Similarly to Review
Net (Yang et al. 2016), we insert an intermediate module
between the encoder and decoder, which contains several
RNN transition steps and learns a transformation for the en-

Abstract
Depth has been shown beneﬁcial to neural network models. In
this paper, we make an attempt to make the encoder-decoder
model deeper for sequence generation. We propose a module that can be plugged into the middle between the encoder
and decoder to increase the depth of the whole model. The
proposed module follows a nested structure, which is divided
into blocks with each block containing several recurrent transition steps. To reduce the training difﬁculty and preserve
the necessary information for the decoder during transitions,
inter-block connections and intra-block connections are constructed in our model. The inter-block connections provide
the thought vectors from the current block to all the subsequent blocks. The intra-block connections connect all the hidden states entering the current block to the current transition
step. The advantages of our model are illustrated on the image
captioning and code captioning tasks.

Introduction
The general encoder-decoder framework is usually a framework that learns a transformation of representations. In this
framework, an encoder is used to encode the input into a vector and a decoder generates the output based on the encoded
vector. Recently, the encoder-decoder framework has been
applied to the sequence learning problem based on recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014).
The decoder for sequence learning is usually a RNN, but the
encoder can be a RNN or a convolutional neural network
(CNN), depending on the speciﬁc tasks.
It is known that deep feedforward neural networks are
more expressive than shallow neural networks (Bengio and
others 2009; Pascanu, Montufar, and Bengio 2014). However, deep neural networks are difﬁcult to train. The gradient might vanish or explode. For recurrent neural networks,
long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) was proposed to solve this problem by introducing information gates. Inspired by LSTM, skip connec∗
This work is partly supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 71901050) and the General Programs of the Sichuan Province Social Science Association (Grant
No. SC19B035).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11117

