The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Thinking Globally, Acting Locally: Distantly Supervised
Global-to-Local Knowledge Selection for Background Based Conversation
Pengjie Ren,1 Zhumin Chen,2 Christof Monz,1 Jun Ma,2 Maarten de Rijke1
1

University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
Shandong University, Jinan, China
{p.ren, c.monz, derijke}@uva.nl, {chenzhumin, majun}@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Background Based Conversations (BBCs) have been introduced to help conversational systems avoid generating overly
generic responses. In a BBC, the conversation is grounded in
a knowledge source. A key challenge in BBCs is Knowledge
Selection (KS): given a conversational context, try to ﬁnd the
appropriate background knowledge (a text fragment containing related facts or comments, etc.) based on which to generate the next response. Previous work addresses KS by employing attention and/or pointer mechanisms. These mechanisms use a local perspective, i.e., they select a token at a time
based solely on the current decoding state. We argue for the
adoption of a global perspective, i.e., pre-selecting some text
fragments from the background knowledge that could help
determine the topic of the next response. We enhance KS
in BBCs by introducing a Global-to-Local Knowledge Selection (GLKS) mechanism. Given a conversational context
and background knowledge, we ﬁrst learn a topic transition
vector to encode the most likely text fragments to be used
in the next response, which is then used to guide the local
KS at each decoding timestamp. In order to effectively learn
the topic transition vector, we propose a distantly supervised
learning schema. Experimental results show that the GLKS
model signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in
terms of both automatic and human evaluation. More importantly, GLKS achieves this without requiring any extra annotations, which demonstrates its high degree of scalability.

Figure 1: Visualization of local knowledge selection. The
X-axes represent the background tokens; the top Y-axis represents KS probabilities and the spike indicates the ground
truth KS; the bottom Y-axis represents the decoding timestamp and darker blue means larger KS probabilities.

Background Based Conversations (BBCs) have demonstrated a potential for generating more informative responses
(Zhou, Prabhumoye, and Black 2018). Given some background knowledge (e.g., an article in the form of free text)
and a conversation, the BBC task is to generate responses
by referring to the background knowledge and considering
the dialogue history context at the same time. A key challenge in BBCs is Knowledge Selection (KS), which is the
task of ﬁnding the appropriate background knowledge (e.g.,
a text fragment about a movie plot) based on which the next
response is to be generated.
Existing methods for BBCs can be grouped into two
categories: extraction-based methods and generation-based
methods. The former addresses KS by learning two pointers to extract spans from the background material as responses, and outperforms generation-based methods in ﬁnding knowledge (Moghe et al. 2018). However, there are two
major issues with extraction-based methods. First, in most
cases the generated responses are not natural due to their extractive nature. Second, unlike, e.g., Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC), in BBCs there is no notion of standard
answer. For example, extraction-based methods cannot handle greetings in chitchats.
Today’s generation-based methods perform KS with a local perspective, i.e., by selecting one token at a time based

Introduction
Non-task-oriented conversational systems (a.k.a., chatbots)
aim to engage users in conversations for entertainment (Yan
2018) or to provide valuable information (Zhou, Prabhumoye, and Black 2018). Sequence-to-sequence models are
an effective framework that is commonly adopted in this
ﬁeld. However, a problem of vanilla sequence-to-sequence
based methods is that they tend to generate generic and
non-informative responses with bland and deﬁcient responses (Chen et al. 2017). Various methods have been
proposed to alleviate this issue, such as adjusting objective functions (Li et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2018b; Jiang et
al. 2019) or incorporating personal proﬁles (Zhang et al.
2018a).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8697

