The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Detecting Asks in Social Engineering Attacks:
Impact of Linguistic and Structural Knowledge
Bonnie J. Dorr,1 Archna Bhatia,1 Adam Dalton,1 Brodie Mather,1
Bryanna Hebenstreit,2 Sashank Santhanam,3 Zhuo Cheng,3
Samira Shaikh,3 Alan Zemel,2 Tomek Strzalkowski4

1

Institute for Human and Machine Cognition (IHMC), Ocala, FL, USA, {bdorr, abhatia, adalton, bmather}@ihmc.us
2
State University of New York, Albany, NY, USA, {bhebenstreit, azemel}@albany.edu
3
University of North Carolina, Charlotte, NC, USA, {sshaikh2, ssantha1, zcheng5}@uncc.edu
4
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA, tomek@rpi.edu
2019), focusing on critical conversational objectives beyond
NLP-based cyber-attack detection and prediction (Dalton et
al. 2017; Perera et al. 2018; Hollingshead et al. 2019) or
NLP-based generation of warnings and the explanations behind them (Kazakova et al. 2019). We implement a novel ask
detection approach with the ultimate goal of sustaining a believable conversation with a social engineer to extract their
true identity without putting valuable resources at risk.
Toward that end, we apply linguistic resources, including Lexical Conceptual Structure (e.g., relating verbs such
as give, donate) (Dorr and Olsen 2018; Dorr and Voss 2018)
and categorial variation (e.g., relating word variants such as
reference, refer) (Habash and Dorr 2003). We also leverage
structural clues such as links (URLs, email addresses) and
their proximity to identiﬁed asks. Although the email channel is our starting point, we adopt such techniques with an
eye toward extensibility to channels beyond email (e.g., texting), but at the same time we identify techniques speciﬁc to
email, such as email signature and quoted reply removal. No
training data are needed for the approach described herein.
Table 1 shows representative system output produced by
our approach for four (presumed) SE emails. Framing output
sets the stage for the ask, i.e., the purported threat (LOSE) or
beneﬁt (GAIN) that the social engineer wants the potential
victim to believe is dependent on compliance or lack thereof.
The output shows three PERFORM asks and one GIVE ask.
Information in parentheses () refers to one or more links that
the potential victim might choose to click.1 Links are detectable from html mark-up whether or not their textual form
is used in the email body. Information in brackets [] refers
to the ask/framing category of interest to the social engineer
(e.g., ﬁnance money, personal, credentials).2
We describe multiple experiments to determine the impact
of linguistic and structural knowledge on ask/framing detection. Two key ﬁndings are: (1) Both linguistically motivated
classes (e.g., Judge, Want, Send) and verbal processing (e.g.,
ﬁltering on the basis of part of speech) improve precision

Abstract
Social engineers attempt to manipulate users into undertaking actions such as downloading malware by clicking links
or providing access to money or sensitive information. Natural language processing, computational sociolinguistics, and
media-speciﬁc structural clues provide a means for detecting
both the ask (e.g., buy gift card) and the risk/reward implied
by the ask, which we call framing (e.g., lose your job, get a
raise). We apply linguistic resources such as Lexical Conceptual Structure to tackle ask detection and also leverage structural clues such as links and their proximity to identiﬁed asks
to improve conﬁdence in our results. Our experiments indicate that the performance of ask detection, framing detection,
and identiﬁcation of the top ask is improved by linguistically
motivated classes coupled with structural clues such as links.
Our approach is implemented in a system that informs users
about social engineering risk situations.

1

Introduction

Social engineering (SE) attacks are a signiﬁcant cybersecurity threat, putting individuals and organizations at risk.
Social engineers attempt to manipulate users into undertaking actions such as downloading malware by clicking
links (PERFORM) or providing access to money or sensitive information (GIVE). Such eliciting behaviors, or asks,
are not always explicitly stated in text (Drew and CouperKuhlen 2014a), but may be gleaned through automatic techniques that employ both linguistic and structural knowledge. Natural language processing (NLP), computational sociolinguistics, and media-speciﬁc structural clues provide a
means for detecting both the ask (e.g., buy gift card) and
the risk/reward (or LOSE/GAIN) implied by the ask, which
we call framing (e.g., lose your job, get a raise). These elements can be used in downstream operations for countering
attacks, e.g., through bot-produced responses and actions.
Interest in conversational intelligence has surged in recent
years as evidenced by the ConvAI2 NeurIPS competition
(Dinan et al. 2019; Yusupov and Kuratov 2018) and related
efforts in natural language dialogue (Perera et al. 2017). We
build on prior Cyber-related dialogue work (Dalton et al.

1
For space reasons, abbreviated forms “jw11@...” and “http...”
are used in the table.
2
Experiments reported herein do not focus on such categories,
but these are shown for illustrational purposes. (Future work will
investigate the impact of such categories on response generation.)

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7675

