The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Stage Self-Supervised Learning for Graph
Convolutional Networks on Graphs with Few Labeled Nodes
∗

Ke Sun,1 Zhouchen Lin,2,5 Zhanxing Zhu3,1,4
1

2

Center for Data Science, Peking University, China
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, China
3
School of Mathematical Science, Peking University, China
4
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research (BIBDR)
5
Samsung Research China - Beijing (SRC-B)
{ajksunke, zlin, zhanxing.zhu}@pku.edu.cn
urally integrate the connectivity patterns and feature attributes of graph-structured data and it has been demonstrated that GCNs and their variants (Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017; Velickovic et al. 2017; Dai et al. 2018;
Chen and Zhu 2017) signiﬁcantly outperform traditional
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) models and traditional graph
embedding approaches (Tang et al. 2015; Perozzi, Al-Rfou,
and Skiena 2014; Grover and Leskovec 2016).
Nevertheless, it is well known that deep neural networks
heavily depend on a large amount of labeled data. The requirement of large-scale data might not be met in many real
scenarios for graphs with sparse labeled nodes. GCNs and
their variants are mainly established on semi-supervised setting where the graph usually has relative plenty of labeled
data. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is hardly
any work about graphs focusing on weakly supervised setting (Zhou 2017), especially learning a classiﬁcation model
with few examples from each class. In addition, the GCNs
are usually with shallow architectures due to its intrinsic limitation (Li, Han, and Wu 2018), thereby restricting the efﬁcient propagation of label signals. To address this issue,
(Li, Han, and Wu 2018) proposed Co-Training and SelfTraining to enlarge training dataset in a boosting-like way.
Although these methods can partially improve the performance of GCNs with few labeled data, it is difﬁcult to pick
single one consistently efﬁcient algorithm in real applications since these proposed methods (Li, Han, and Wu 2018)
perform inconsistently across distinct training sizes.
On the other hand, a recent surge of interest has focused
on the self-supervised learning, a popular form of unsupervised learning, which uses pretext tasks to replace the labels annotated by humans by “pseudo-label” directly computed from the raw input data. On the basis of the analysis
above, there are mainly two issues worthy to explore further.
Firstly, since it is hard to change the innate shallow architectures of GCNs, how to design a consistently efﬁcient training algorithm based on GCNs to improve its generalization
performance on graphs with few labeled nodes? Secondly,
how to leverage the advantage of self-supervised learning
approaches based on a large amount of unlabeled data, to
reﬁne the performance of proposed training algorithm?
In this paper, we ﬁrstly analyze the Symmetric Laplacian

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) play a crucial role
in graph learning tasks, however, learning graph embedding with few supervised signals is still a difﬁcult problem. In this paper, we propose a novel training algorithm
for Graph Convolutional Network, called Multi-Stage SelfSupervised (M3S) Training Algorithm, combined with selfsupervised learning approach, focusing on improving the
generalization performance of GCNs on graphs with few labeled nodes. Firstly, a Multi-Stage Training Framework is
provided as the basis of M3S training method. Then we leverage DeepCluster technique, a popular form of self-supervised
learning, and design corresponding aligning mechanism on
the embedding space to reﬁne the Multi-Stage Training
Framework, resulting in M3S Training Algorithm. Finally,
extensive experimental results verify the superior performance of our algorithm on graphs with few labeled nodes
under different label rates compared with other state-of-theart approaches.

Introduction
With great expressive power, graphs have been employed
as the representation of a wide range of systems across
various areas, including social network (Kipf and Welling
2016; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017), physical systems (Battaglia et al. 2016; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. 2018),
protein-protein interaction networks (Hamaguchi et al.
2017) and knowledge graph (Fout et al. 2017). Recently, research of analyzing graphs with machine learning has been
received more and more attention, mainly focusing on node
classiﬁcation (Kipf and Welling 2016), link prediction (Zhu,
Song, and Chen 2016) and clustering tasks (Fortunato 2010).
Graph convolution can be regarded as the extension
of standard convolution from Euclidean to non-Euclidean
domain. Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf
and Welling 2016) generalize convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to graph-structured data from the perspective
of spectral theory based on prior works (Bruna et al. 2013;
Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016). GCNs nat∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5892

