The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generalization Error Bounds of Gradient Descent
for Learning Over-Parameterized Deep ReLU Networks
Yuan Cao, Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
{yuancao, qgu}@cs.ucla.edu

2018; Du et al. 2019b) proved that with proper random initialization, gradient descent (GD) and/or stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) provably ﬁnd the global minimum for training over-parameterized one-hidden-layer ReLU networks.
(Arora et al. 2018a) analyzed the convergence of GD to
global optimum for training a deep linear neural network
under a set of assumptions on the network width and initialization. (Du et al. 2019a; Allen-Zhu, Li, and Song 2019;
Zou et al. 2019) studied the convergence of gradient-based
method for training over-parameterized deep nonlinear neural networks. Speciﬁcally, (Du et al. 2019a) proved that gradient descent can converge to the global minima for overparameterized deep neural networks with smooth activation functions. (Allen-Zhu, Li, and Song 2019; Zou et al.
2019) independently proved the global convergence results
of GD/SGD for deep neural networks with ReLU activation
functions in the over-parameterization regime. However, in
such an over-parametrized regime, the training loss function of deep neural networks may have potentially inﬁnitely
many global minima, but not all of them can generalize well.
Hence, convergence to the global minimum of the training
loss is not sufﬁcient to explain the good generalization performance of GD/SGD.

Abstract
Empirical studies show that gradient-based methods can learn
deep neural networks (DNNs) with very good generalization performance in the over-parameterization regime, where
DNNs can easily ﬁt a random labeling of the training data.
Very recently, a line of work explains in theory that with overparameterization and proper random initialization, gradientbased methods can ﬁnd the global minima of the training
loss for DNNs. However, existing generalization error bounds
are unable to explain the good generalization performance of
over-parameterized DNNs. The major limitation of most existing generalization bounds is that they are based on uniform
convergence and are independent of the training algorithm. In
this work, we derive an algorithm-dependent generalization
error bound for deep ReLU networks, and show that under
certain assumptions on the data distribution, gradient descent
(GD) with proper random initialization is able to train a sufﬁciently over-parameterized DNN to achieve arbitrarily small
generalization error. Our work sheds light on explaining the
good generalization performance of over-parameterized deep
neural networks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning achieves great successes in almost all
real-world applications ranging from image processing
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), speech recognition (Hinton et al. 2012) to Go games (Silver et al. 2016).
Understanding and explaining the success of deep learning
has thus become a central problem for theorists. One of the
mysteries is that the neural networks used in practice are often heavily over-parameterized such that they can even ﬁt
random labels to the input data (Zhang et al. 2017), while
they can still achieve very small generalization error (i.e.,
test error) when trained with real labels.
There are multiple recent attempts towards answering the
above question and demystifying the success of deep learning. (Soudry and Carmon 2016; Safran and Shamir 2016;
Arora, Cohen, and Hazan 2018; Haeffele and Vidal 2015;
Nguyen and Hein 2017) showed that over-parameterization
can lead to better optimization landscape. (Li and Liang

There are only a few studies on the generalization theory
for learning neural networks in the over-parameterization
regime. (Brutzkus et al. 2018) showed that SGD learns overparameterized networks that provably generalize on linearly separable data. (Song, Montanari, and Nguyen 2018)
showed that when training two-layer networks in a suitable scaling limit, the SGD dynamic is captured by a certain non-linear partial differential equation with nearly ideal
generalization error. (Li and Liang 2018) relaxed the linear
separable data assumption and proved that SGD learns an
over-parameterized network with a small generalization error when the data comes from mixtures of well-separated
distributions. (Allen-Zhu, Li, and Liang 2019) proved that
under over-parameterization, SGD or its variants can learn
some notable hypothesis classes, including two and threelayer neural networks with fewer parameters. (Arora et al.
2019) provided a generalization bound of GD for two-layer
ReLU networks based on a ﬁne-grained analysis on how
much the network parameters can move during GD. Nev-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3349

