The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FastLAS: Scalable Inductive Logic Programming
Incorporating Domain-Speciﬁc Optimisation Criteria
Mark Law

Alessandra Russo

Elisa Bertino

Imperial College London, UK
mark.law09@imperial.ac.uk

Imperial College London, UK
a.russo@imperial.ac.uk

Purdue University, USA
bertino@purdue.edu

Krysia Broda

Jorge Lobo

Imperial College London, UK
k.broda@imperial.ac.uk

ICREA - Universitat Pompeu Fabra
jorge.lobo@upf.edu
more conservative policy. Equally, for access control where
the need for resources is time critical, wrongly denying access could be more dangerous than wrongly allowing access.
When learning such policies, and choosing between alternative hypotheses, it would be useful to specify whether the
search should be biased towards more or less general hypotheses.
In this paper, we introduce a new ILP system, called FastLAS, for learning Answer Set Programs (ASP) (Gelfond and
Lifschitz 1988; Brewka, Eiter, and Truszczyński 2011), targeted at solving a restricted version of the context-dependent
learning from answer sets tasks deﬁned in (Law, Russo, and
Broda 2016), in which tasks require only observational predicate learning. The FastLAS system has two main advantages. Firstly, it takes as input a learning task and a (domainspeciﬁc) scoring function for hypotheses. The idea is that if
there are alternative hypotheses that explain the examples,
the hypothesis with the lowest score is preferred. This generalises the standard ILP approach, where hypotheses with
the lowest number of literals are normally assumed to be
preferred. Secondly, it is speciﬁcally designed to be scalable with respect to the hypothesis space – the set of all rules
which can appear in a hypothesis. The FastLAS algorithm
uses the novel approach of computing a smaller subset of
the hypothesis space, called an OPT-sufﬁcient subset, that
is guaranteed to contain at least one optimal solution with
respect to the given scoring function. This smaller search
space can be orders of magnitude smaller than the full hypothesis space of a given learning task. We have shown that
FastLAS is guaranteed to return an optimal solution w.r.t. a
given scoring function.
We evaluated the effect of domain-speciﬁc scoring functions by applying FastLAS to real-world datasets for access
control policies. Results show that domain-speciﬁc scoring functions lead to higher accuracy than the standard ILP
bias. We evaluated the scalability of FastLAS against existing state-of-the-art ASP-based ILP systems on real-world
datasets, showing that FastLAS is signiﬁcantly faster than
these systems. FastLAS achieves the same if not higher accuracy by exploring, for the same dataset, a much larger hypothesis space.
The next section reviews the necessary background and
notation for the paper. In the next sections, (domain-

Abstract
Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) systems aim to ﬁnd a set
of logical rules, called a hypothesis, that explain a set of examples. In cases where many such hypotheses exist, ILP systems often bias towards shorter solutions, leading to highly
general rules being learned. In some application domains like
security and access control policies, this bias may not be desirable, as when data is sparse more speciﬁc rules that guarantee tighter security should be preferred. This paper presents a
new general notion of a scoring function over hypotheses that
allows a user to express domain-speciﬁc optimisation criteria.
This is incorporated into a new ILP system, called FastLAS,
that takes as input a learning task and a customised scoring
function, and computes an optimal solution with respect to
the given scoring function. We evaluate the accuracy of FastLAS over real-world datasets for access control policies and
show that varying the scoring function allows a user to target domain-speciﬁc performance metrics. We also compare
FastLAS to state-of-the-art ILP systems, using the standard
ILP bias for shorter solutions, and demonstrate that FastLAS
is signiﬁcantly faster and more scalable.

Introduction
Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) (Muggleton 1991) systems aim to ﬁnd a set of logical rules, called a hypothesis,
that, together with some existing background knowledge,
explain a set of examples. Often, many alternative hypotheses can explain the examples, and most systems employ a
bias towards shorter solutions, based on Occam’s razor (the
solution with the fewest assumptions is the most likely).
Choosing the shortest hypothesis often leads to very general hypotheses being learned from relatively few examples.
While this can be a huge advantage of ILP over other machine learning approaches that need larger quantities of data,
learning such general rules without sufﬁcient quantities of
data to justify them may not be desirable in every application domain. For example, in access control, wrongly allowing access to a resource may be far more dangerous than
wrongly denying access. So, learning a more general hypothesis, representing a more permissive policy, would be
more dangerous than a speciﬁc hypothesis, representing a
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2877

