The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

RDSNet: A New Deep Architecture for
Reciprocal Object Detection and Instance Segmentation
Shaoru Wang,1,4∗ Yongchao Gong,2 Junliang Xing,1 Lichao Huang,2
Chang Huang,2 Weiming Hu1,3,4
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Horizon Robotics Inc., 3 CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
wangshaoru2018@ia.ac.cn, {jlxing, wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {yongchao.gong, lichao.huang, chang.huang}@horizon.ai
2

Abstract
Object detection and instance segmentation are two fundamental computer vision tasks. They are closely correlated but
their relations have not yet been fully explored in most previous work. This paper presents RDSNet, a novel deep architecture for reciprocal object detection and instance segmentation. To reciprocate these two tasks, we design a two-stream
structure to learn features on both the object level (i.e., bounding boxes) and the pixel level (i.e., instance masks) jointly.
Within this structure, information from the two streams is
fused alternately, namely information on the object level introduces the awareness of instance and translation variance
to the pixel level, and information on the pixel level reﬁnes the localization accuracy of objects on the object level
in return. Speciﬁcally, a correlation module and a cropping
module are proposed to yield instance masks, as well as a
mask based boundary reﬁnement module for more accurate
bounding boxes. Extensive experimental analyses and comparisons on the COCO dataset demonstrate the effectiveness
and efﬁciency of RDSNet. The source code is available at
https://github.com/wangsr126/RDSNet.

1

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Localization errors in object detection. (a)(b)
Boxes do not fully enclose objects. (c)(d) Boxes do not enclose objects tightly. Most of these errors can be easily corrected if we fully leverage the reciprocal relations between
the object detection and instance segmentation tasks. Results
are obtained by Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017).

degrade their performance, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Localization error mainly results from the mechanism of using
regression method to obtain the bounding boxes, as pointwise regression is not directly aware of the whole object.
For this reason, it is more rational to cast object localization
into a pixel-level task, which is consistent with the deﬁnition of bounding box, i.e., the minimum enclosing rectangle
of the object mask. Therefore, if the object masks are provided, it will be more straightforward and accurate to obtain
the bounding boxes according to the masks.
Instance segmentation aims to further predict the perpixel binary mask of each object besides category. The core
idea of instance segmentation is to introduce instance-aware
pixel category. Currently, most existing approaches follow
a two-stage paradigm (e.g. Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017)),
that is, masks are generated separately for each detection
proposal. In this way, the masks are aware of individual object instances naturally. However, such step-by-step process
makes the masks heavily depend on the bounding boxes obtained by the detector and vulnerable to their localization
errors. Moreover, the utilization of the operator as ROI pooling (Girshick 2015) largely restricts the mask resolution for
large objects. The FCIS model (Li et al. 2017) introduces
position-sensitive map for instance-aware segmentation, but
the resulting masks are still restricted to the detection re-

Introduction

Object detection and instance segmentation are two fundamental and closely related tasks in computer vision, focusing
on progressive image understanding on the object level and
the pixel level respectively. Due to the application of deep
neural networks, recent years have witnessed signiﬁcant advances of these two tasks. However, their relations have not
yet been fully explored in most previous work. Therefore,
it remains meaningful and challenging to improve the performance of these two tasks by leveraging the interaction
between the object-level and pixel-level information.
The goal of object detection is to localize each object with
a rectangular bounding box and classify it into a speciﬁc category. In this task, one of the most critical challenges lies in
object localization, namely the speciﬁcation of an inclusive
and tight bounding box. As can be commonly observed in
many state-of-the-art methods, localization error can easily
∗
The work was done when Shaoru Wang was an intern in Horizon Robotics Inc.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12208

