The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fine-Tuning by Curriculum Learning for
Non-Autoregressive Neural Machine Translation
Junliang Guo,† Xu Tan,‡ Linli Xu,†∗ Tao Qin,‡ Enhong Chen,† Tie-Yan Liu‡

†
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
‡
Microsoft Research
†
guojunll@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {linlixu, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn, ‡ {xuta, taoqin, tyliu}@microsoft.com

the source sentence. Since AT model generates the target tokens sequentially, the inference speed is a natural bottleneck
for real-world machine translation systems.
Recently, non-autoregressive translation (NAT) models (Gu et al. 2017; Kaiser et al. 2018; Lee, Mansimov, and
Cho 2018; Guo et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019)
are proposed to reduce the inference latency by generating all target tokens independently and simultaneously. Instead of conditioning on previously generated target tokens,
NAT models generate target tokens by taking other targetindependent signals as the decoder input. In this way, the
generation of y can be written as:

Abstract
Non-autoregressive translation (NAT) models remove the dependence on previous target tokens and generate all target
tokens in parallel, resulting in signiﬁcant inference speedup
but at the cost of inferior translation accuracy compared to
autoregressive translation (AT) models. Considering that AT
models have higher accuracy and are easier to train than
NAT models, and both of them share the same model conﬁgurations, a natural idea to improve the accuracy of NAT
models is to transfer a well-trained AT model to an NAT
model through ﬁne-tuning. However, since AT and NAT models differ greatly in training strategy, straightforward ﬁnetuning does not work well. In this work, we introduce curriculum learning into ﬁne-tuning for NAT. Speciﬁcally, we design a curriculum in the ﬁne-tuning process to progressively
switch the training from autoregressive generation to nonautoregressive generation. Experiments on four benchmark
translation datasets show that the proposed method achieves
good improvement (more than 1 BLEU score) over previous
NAT baselines in terms of translation accuracy, and greatly
speed up (more than 10 times) the inference process over AT
baselines.

1

P (y|x) = P (Ty |x) ·

P (yt |y<t , x),

(2)

where P (Ty |x) is the explicit length prediction process for
NAT models, and z represents the decoder input which is
generated conditionally independent of y. As a result, the
inference speed can be signiﬁcantly boosted. However, the
context dependency within the target sentence is sacriﬁced
at the same time, which leads to a large degradation of the
translation quality of NAT models. Therefore, improving the
accuracy of NAT models becomes a critical research problem.
Considering that 1) NAT is a harder task than AT due to
that the decoder in the NAT model has to handle the translation task conditioned on less and weaker target-side information; 2) AT models are of higher accuracy than NAT
models; 3) NAT models (Gu et al. 2017; Guo et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2019) usually share the same encoder-decoder
framework with AT models (Vaswani et al. 2017), it is very
natural to ﬁne-tune a well-trained AT model for NAT, in order to transfer the knowledge learned in the AT model, especially the ability of target language modeling and generation
in the decoder. However, AT and NAT models differ a lot
in training, and thus directly ﬁne-tuning a well-trained AT
model does not lead to a good NAT model in general.
To effectively transfer an AT model and obtain a good
NAT model, we ﬁrst note that there are two major differences between NAT and AT models, as shown in Figure 1.
• Decoder input: The decoder in AT models leverages the
previous tokens as input while the decoder in NAT models

Neural machine translation (NMT) (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2014; Gehring et al. 2017; Shen et al. 2018; Vaswani
et al. 2017; He et al. 2018; Hassan et al. 2018) has made
rapid progress in recent years. The dominant approaches for
NMT are based on autoregressive translation (AT), where
the generation of the current token in the target sentence
depends on the previously generated tokens as well as the
source sentence. The conditional distribution of sentence
generation in AT models can be formulated as:
P (y|x) =

P (yt |z, x),

t=1

Introduction

Ty


Ty


(1)

t=1

where Ty is the length of the target sentence which is implicitly decided by predicting the [EOS] token, and y<t represents all generated target tokens before yt and x represents
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7839

