The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Trading Convergence Rate with Computational
Budget in High Dimensional Bayesian Optimization
Hung Tran-The, Sunil Gupta, Santu Rana, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute,Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
{hung.tranthe, sunil.gupta, santu.rana, svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

global maximum of a surrogate function called the acquisition function in order to suggest the next function evaluation
point. The acquisition function balances two conﬂicting requirements: evaluating the function at a location where the
function may peak as indicated by knowledge collected so
far (exploitation) and evaluating the function at a location
to reduce our uncertaiity about the function (exploration).
The acquisition function itself is a non-convex optimisation
problem in the original search space. With growing dimensions, any ﬁxed computational budget for this optimisation
becomes quickly insufﬁcient leading to inaccurate solutions.
This inaccuracy adversely affects both the convergence and
the efﬁciency of the BO algorithm.

Abstract
Scaling Bayesian optimisation (BO) to high-dimensional
search spaces is a active and open research problems particularly when no assumptions are made on function structure. The main reason is that at each iteration, BO requires
to ﬁnd global maximisation of acquisition function, which
itself is a non-convex optimization problem in the original
search space. With growing dimensions, the computational
budget for this maximisation gets increasingly short leading to inaccurate solution of the maximisation. This inaccuracy adversely affects both the convergence and the efﬁciency of BO. We propose a novel approach where the acquisition function only requires maximisation on a discrete set
of low dimensional subspaces embedded in the original highdimensional search space. Our method is free of any low dimensional structure assumption on the function unlike many
recent high-dimensional BO methods. Optimising acquisition
function in low dimensional subspaces allows our method to
obtain accurate solutions within limited computational budget. We show that in spite of this convenience, our algorithm
remains convergent. In particular, cumulative regret of our
algorithm only grows sub-linearly with the number of iterations. More importantly, as evident from our regret bounds,
our algorithm provides a way to trade the convergence rate
with the number of subspaces used in the optimisation. Finally, when the number of subspaces is ”sufﬁciently
√ large”,
our algorithm’s √
cumulative regret is at most O∗ ( T γT ) as
opposed to O∗ ( DT γT ) for the√GP-UCB of Srinivas et al.
(2012), reducing a crucial factor D where D being the dimensional number of input space. We perform empirical experiments to evaluate our method extensively, showing that its
sample efﬁciency is better than the existing methods for many
optimisation problems involving dimensions up to 5000.

In order to make the problem scalable, most of the current methods make restrictive structural assumptions such as
the function having an effective low-dimensional subspace
(Wang et al. 2013; Djolonga, Krause, and Cevher 2013;
Garnett, Osborne, and Hennig 2014; Eriksson et al. 2018;
Nayebi, Munteanu, and Poloczek 2019; Zhang, Li, and Su
2019), or being decomposable in subsets of dimensions
(Kandasamy 2015; Li 2016; Rolland et al. 2018; Mutný and
Krause 2018; Hoang et al. 2018). Through these assumptions, the acquisition function becomes easier to optimise
and the global optimum can be found. However, such assumptions are rather strong and since we are dealing with
unknown function, we have no way of knowing if such assumptions hold in reality.
Without these assumptions, the high-dimensional BO
problem is more challenging. There have been some recent attempts to develop scalable BO methods. For example,
(Rana et al. 2017) use an elastic Gaussian process model
to reduce the ”ﬂatness” of the acquistion function in high
dimensions and thus improve the solution. Although this
method helps obtains improved optimum of the acquistion
function, it still does not provide any way to scale BO to
high dimensions. (Oh, Gavves, and Welling 2018) devise
a method under the assumption that the solution does not
lie at the boundary of the search space and thus drive the
BO search towards the interior of the search space using
polar co-ordinate transformations. Thus, the convergence
analysis of (Oh, Gavves, and Welling 2018) depends on
whether their assumptions holds. Some other methods are

Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) offers an efﬁcient solution to
ﬁnd the global optimum of expensive black-box functions, a
problem that is all pervasive in real-world experimental design applications. However, the scalability of BO is particularly compromised in high dimensions (> 15 dimensions).
The main difﬁculty that a BO algorithm faces in high
dimensions is that at each iteration, it needs to ﬁnd the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2425

