The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

When AWGN-Based Denoiser Meets Real Noises
Yuqian Zhou,1 Jianbo Jiao,2∗ Haibin Huang,3 Yang Wang,4
Jue Wang,3 Honghui Shi,1 Thomas Huang1
1

IFP Group, UIUC, 2 University of Oxford, 3 Megvii Research, 4 Stony Brook University
{yuqian2, t-huang1}@illinois.edu, {jiaojianbo.i, shihonghui3}@gmail.com,
{huanghaibin, wangjue}@megvii.com, wang33@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Discriminative learning based image denoisers have achieved
promising performance on synthetic noises such as Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN). The synthetic noises
adopted in most previous work are pixel-independent,
but real noises are mostly spatially/channel-correlated and
spatially/channel-variant. This domain gap yields unsatisﬁed
performance on images with real noises if the model is only
trained with AWGN. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to boost the performance of a real image denoiser
which is trained only with synthetic pixel-independent noise
data dominated by AWGN. First, we train a deep model
that consists of a noise estimator and a denoiser with mixed
AWGN and Random Value Impulse Noise (RVIN). We then
investigate Pixel-shufﬂe Down-sampling (PD) strategy to
adapt the trained model to real noises. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization of the proposed approach. Notably, our method achieves state-of-theart performance on real sRGB images in the DND benchmark
among models trained with synthetic noises. Codes are available at https://github.com/yzhouas/PD-Denoising-pytorch.

Figure 1: Basic idea of the proposed adaptation method:
Pixel-shufﬂe Down-sampling (PD). Spatially-correlated
real noise (Left) is broken into spatially-variant pixelindependent noise (Middle) to approximate spatially-variant
Gaussian noise (Right). Then an AWGN-based denoiser can
be applied to such real noise accordingly.

Introduction
trained on, their performance degrades rapidly on real images, showing poor generalization ability in real world
applications. This indicates that these data-driven denoising models are highly domain-speciﬁc and non-ﬂexible to
transfer to other noise types beyond AWGN. To improve
model ﬂexibility, the recently-proposed FFDNet (Zhang,
Zuo, and Zhang 2018) trains a conditional non-blind denoiser with a manually adjusted noise-level map. By giving
high-valued uniform maps to FFDNet, only over-smoothed
results can be obtained in real image denoising. Therefore, blind denoising of real images is still very challenging due to the lack of accurate modeling of real noise
distribution. These unknown real-world noises are much
more complex than pixel-independent AWGN. They can be
spatially-variant, spatially-correlated, signal-dependent, and
even device-dependent.
To better address the problem of real image denoising,
current attempts can be roughly divided into the following categories: (1) realistic noise modeling (Shi Guo 2018;
Brooks et al. 2019; Abdelhamed, Timofte, and Brown 2019),

As a fundamental task in image processing and computer
vision, image denoising has been extensively explored in
the past several decades even for downstream applications (Zhou, Liu, and Huang 2018; Wang et al. 2019). Traditional methods including the ones based on image ﬁltering (Dabov et al. 2008), low rank approximation (Gu et
al. 2014; Xu et al. 2017; Yair and Michaeli 2018), sparse
coding (Elad and Aharon 2006), and image prior (Ulyanov,
Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2017) have achieved satisfactory results on synthetic noise such as Additive White Gaussian
Noise (AWGN). Recently, deep CNN has been applied to
this task, and discriminative-learning-based methods such as
DnCNN (Zhang et al. 2017a) outperform most traditional
methods on AWGN denoising.
Unfortunately, while these learning-based methods work
well on the same type of synthetic noise that they were
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13074

