The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

End-to-End Argumentation Knowledge Graph Construction
Khalid Al-Khatib,1 Yufang Hou,2 Henning Wachsmuth,3
Charles Jochim,2 Francesca Bonin,2 Benno Stein1
1

Bauhaus-Universitat Weimar, Germany
2
IBM Research, Ireland
3
Paderborn University, Germany

The goal of this paper is to study how to construct and
employ an argumentation knowledge graph that is adequate
to support computational argumentation tasks such as argument synthesis and argumentative question answering 1 . The
underlying process that we propose consists of three highlevel steps: (1) modeling the graph and identifying its basic
elements, (2) building the graph from texts in accordance
with the model in an end-to-end manner, and (3) exploiting
the graph for computational argumentation tasks. The paper
at hand focuses on the ﬁrst two steps, while showcasing the
potential of the third one.
Inspired by the theory of argumentation schemes (Walton,
Reed, and Macagno 2008) as well as by causality research
(Guo et al. 2018), we model a graph that captures knowledge
about effects between concepts encapsulated in many arguments. A node in the graph represents a concept instance,
and an edge represents one of two types of relation, either
positive effect or negative effect. We ground each node in a
concept from a knowledge base (Wikipedia) and represent
its good or bad consequence as an attribute. Figure 1 exempliﬁes the introduced model elements.
To demonstrate the beneﬁt of the proposed argumentation
knowledge graph, consider the following statements:
(a) Nuclear energy leads to emission decline.
(b) Nuclear energy undermines renewable solutions.
(c) Renewable solutions tackle climate change and help to
decline emission.
When modeling the knowledge encoded within these
statements in our graph, “nuclear energy” has a positive effect on “emission decline” through (a), and a negative effect
on “renewable solutions” through (b). The latter in turn has
a positive effect on “emission decline” through (c). Now, for
a claim such as “nuclear energy is good for emission decline”, one could hence derive evidence from the graph to
support the claim through (a), but also one could counterattack it through (b) and (c). Note that this counter-attack is
unlikely to be discovered without modeling the underlying
knowledge explicitly as proposed.

Abstract
This paper studies the end-to-end construction of an argumentation knowledge graph that is intended to support argument synthesis, argumentative question answering, or fake
news detection, among others. The study is motivated by the
proven effectiveness of knowledge graphs for interpretable
and controllable text generation and exploratory search. Original in our work is that we propose a model of the knowledge
encapsulated in arguments. Based on this model, we build a
new corpus that comprises about 16k manual annotations of
4740 claims with instances of the model’s elements, and we
develop an end-to-end framework that automatically identiﬁes all modeled types of instances. The results of experiments
show the potential of the framework for building a web-based
argumentation graph that is of high quality and large scale.

Introduction
People’s lives are packed with situations where they need
to form opinions, to shape beliefs, or to make decisions on
certain topics. To do so, they typically rely on one of the
fundamental types of communication: argumentation (Walton 2010). Lately, developing computational models for argumentation has attracted considerable attention (Stede and
Schneider 2018). While existing studies propose approaches
for the computational mining (Stab and Gurevych 2014),
the assessment (Wachsmuth et al. 2017), and the generation (Hua and Wang 2018) of argumentation, argumentation
knowledge-based approaches are still scarcely touched —
presumably, due to their complexity.
Constructing and employing knowledge graphs has been
proven to be effective for many computational tasks related
to linguistics and social science. For instance, structured
knowledge was utilized as a seed for generating interpretable
and controllable texts (Lebret, Grangier, and Auli 2016).
Also, knowledge graphs were applied with remarkable success to the identiﬁcation of fake news (Pan et al. 2018) and
to the answering of natural language questions (Huang et
al. 2019). Moreover, various studies harvested new knowledge (e.g., common sense) through knowledge graph construction, reasoning, and completion(Sap et al. 2019).

1

Argumentative questions are those which implicitly or explicitly elicit pro/con arguments toward an issue, such as ”Why Python
is powerful for text mining?”

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7367

