The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On the Discrepancy between the Theoretical Analysis and Practical
Implementations of Compressed Communication for Distributed Deep Learning
Aritra Dutta, El Houcine Bergou,∗ Ahmed M. Abdelmoniem,
Chen-Yu Ho, Atal Narayan Sahu, Marco Canini, Panos Kalnis
KAUST

A major drawback of distributed training across parallel
workers is that training time can negatively suffer from high
communication costs, especially at large scale, due to the
transmission of stochastic gradients. To alleviate this problem,
several lossy compression techniques have been proposed
(Seide et al. 2014; Dettmers 2016; Alistarh et al. 2017; Wen
et al. 2017; Alistarh et al. 2018; Bernstein et al. 2018; Tang
et al. 2018; Wangni et al. 2018; Horváth et al. 2019).
Two main classes of compression approaches are sparsiﬁcation and quantization. Sparsiﬁcation communicates only
a subset of gradient elements. For instance, this is obtained
by selecting uniformly at random k% elements or the top
k% elements by magnitude (Alistarh et al. 2018). Quantization, on the other hand, represents gradient elements with
lower precision, thus using fewer bits for each element. For
instance, this is done by transmitting only the sign of each
element (Bernstein et al. 2018), or by randomized rounding
to a discrete set of values (Alistarh et al. 2017).
In theory, such methods can reduce the amount of communication and their analysis reveal that they provide convergence guarantees (under certain analytic assumptions). Further, such methods preserve model accuracy across a range
of settings in practice.
However, we observe a discrepancy between the theoretical analysis and practical implementation of existing compression methods. To the best of our knowledge, the theoretical analysis of every prior method appears to assume
that compression is applied to the gradient values of the
entire model. However, from our study of existing implementations (Zhang et al. 2017; Shi, Wang, and Chu 2017;
Lim, Andersen, and Kaminsky 2019; Shi, Chu, and Li 2019;
Horváth et al. 2019) and experience with implementing compression methods, we observe that compression is applied
layer by layer, as illustrated in Figure 1. In fact, based on
the existing programming interfaces in modern distributed
machine learning toolkits such as PyTorch (pytorch.org ) and
TensorFlow (tensorﬂow.org ), a layer-wise implementation is
typically most straightforward because wait-free backpropagation (Zhang et al. 2017) – where gradients are sent as soon
as they are available – is a commonly used optimization.
Importantly, layer-wise compression in general differs
from entire-model compression (though for certain quantiza-

Abstract
Compressed communication, in the form of sparsiﬁcation or
quantization of stochastic gradients, is employed to reduce
communication costs in distributed data-parallel training of
deep neural networks. However, there exists a discrepancy
between theory and practice: while theoretical analysis of
most existing compression methods assumes compression is
applied to the gradients of the entire model, many practical
implementations operate individually on the gradients of each
layer of the model.
In this paper, we prove that layer-wise compression is, in theory, better, because the convergence rate is upper bounded
by that of entire-model compression for a wide range of biased and unbiased compression methods. However, despite the
theoretical bound, our experimental study of six well-known
methods shows that convergence, in practice, may or may not
be better, depending on the actual trained model and compression ratio. Our ﬁndings suggest that it would be advantageous
for deep learning frameworks to include support for both layerwise and entire-model compression.

1

Introduction

Despite the recent advances in deep learning and its widespread transformative successes, training deep neural networks (DNNs) remains a computationally-intensive and timeconsuming task. The continuous trends towards larger volumes of data and bigger DNN model sizes require to scale out
training by parallelizing the optimization algorithm across a
set of workers. The most common scale out strategy is data
parallelism where each worker acts on a partition of input
data. In each iteration of the optimization algorithm – typically the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm – every
worker processes a mini-batch of the input data and produces
corresponding stochastic gradients. Then, gradients from all
workers are aggregated to produce an update to model parameters to be applied prior to the next iteration. The gradient
aggregation process involves network communication and is
supported via a parameter-server architecture or collective
communication routines (e.g., all reduce).
∗
This author is also with INRA, France and has an equal contribution with the ﬁrst author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3817

