The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Brain-Mediated Transfer Learning of Convolutional Neural Networks
Satoshi Nishida,1 Yusuke Nakano,1 Antoine Blanc,1 Naoya Maeda,2
Masataka Kado,2 Shinji Nishimoto1
1

Center for Information and Neural Networks (CiNet),
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT) and Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
2
NTT DATA Corporation, Tokyo, Japan
{s-nishida, ynakano, blanc, nishimoto}@nict.go.jp, {naoya.maeda, masataka.kado}@nttdata.com

fact that the training of CNNs requires massive amounts
of labeled datasets, CNNs acquire generic feature representations available for various types of pattern recognition through TL (Cimpoi et al. 2016; Donahue et al. 2014;
Girshick et al. 2014; Oquab et al. 2014; Razavian et al. 2014;
Toshev and Szegedy 2014; Xiao et al. 2014). For example,
Donahue et al. (2014) used a CNN feature space, pre-learned
with an object recognition dataset, for tasks different from
the original challenge, such as scene classiﬁcation. Using
higher-layer features of the pre-trained CNN, they trained
classiﬁers for those new tasks and achieved state-of-theart performance. In this way, TL improves the generalization ability of machine learning more effectively when using
more generic feature representations. However, the generalization ability of machine learning is still much lower than
that of the human brain.

Abstract
The human brain can effectively learn a new task from a
small number of samples, which indicates that the brain can
transfer its prior knowledge to solve tasks in different domains. This function is analogous to transfer learning (TL)
in the ﬁeld of machine learning. TL uses a well-trained feature space in a speciﬁc task domain to improve performance
in new tasks with insufﬁcient training data. TL with rich feature representations, such as features of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), shows high generalization ability across
different task domains. However, such TL is still insufﬁcient
in making machine learning attain generalization ability comparable to that of the human brain. To examine if the internal representation of the brain could be used to achieve more
efﬁcient TL, we introduce a method for TL mediated by human brains. Our method transforms feature representations of
audiovisual inputs in CNNs into those in activation patterns
of individual brains via their association learned ahead using
measured brain responses. Then, to estimate labels reﬂecting human cognition and behavior induced by the audiovisual
inputs, the transformed representations are used for TL. We
demonstrate that our brain-mediated TL (BTL) shows higher
performance in the label estimation than the standard TL. In
addition, we illustrate that the estimations mediated by different brains vary from brain to brain, and the variability reﬂects
the individual variability in perception. Thus, our BTL provides a framework to improve the generalization ability of
machine-learning feature representations and enable machine
learning to estimate human-like cognition and behavior, including individual variability.

The human brain has a sophisticated ability to generalize the knowledge acquired through limited experiences to
cognition and behavior under novel situations. This indicates that the human brain can effectively use its own internal representations of cognitive information across different task domains. Furthermore, such representations can be
used as a medium of brain decoding that infers various types
of cognition from brain activity, such as semantic cognition
(Mitchell et al. 2008; Nishida and Nishimoto 2018), affections (Kim et al. 2015; Peelen, Atkinson, and Vuilleumier
2010), economic decision (Hampton and O’doherty 2007;
Knutson et al. 2007), human mass behavior (Dmochowski
et al. 2014; Falk, Berkman, and Lieberman 2012). Therefore, machine-learning feature representations may become
more generic by incorporating the brain representations into
them, leading to further improvements in the generalization
ability of machine learning through TL.

Introduction
Transfer learning (TL) is an effective framework that improves the generalization ability of machine learning in
pattern recognition (Pan and Yang 2009). In TL, feature
representations trained with large-scale, high-quality data
in a speciﬁc task are transferred to other tasks in different domains with insufﬁcient training data. Recently, TL
with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has received increasing attention owing to its high generalization ability
across various task domains (Tan et al. 2018). Despite the

Recently, several studies have proposed techniques to
guide pattern recognition with CNNs by combining CNN
features with human brain activity (Fong, Scheirer, and Cox
2018; Spampinato et al. 2017). For example, Fong et al.
(2018) trained a classiﬁer of images using higher-layer features of a CNN while guiding the training by voxel responses
to the images measured using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). To make the decision surface of the classiﬁer more consistent with brain representations, the train-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5281

