The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fast Learning of Temporal Action Proposal via Dense Boundary Generator
Chuming Lin,∗1 Jian Li,∗1 Yabiao Wang,1 Ying Tai,1
Donghao Luo, Zhipeng Cui,1 Chengjie Wang,1 Jilin Li,1 Feiyue Huang,1 Rongrong Ji2
1

1

Youtu Lab, Tencent, 2 Xiamen University, China
{chuminglin, swordli, caseywang, yingtai, michaelluo, zhipengcui, jasoncjwang, jerolinli, garyhuang}@tencent.com
rrji@xmu.edu.cn
https://github.com/TencentYoutuResearch/ActionDetection-DBG

Abstract
Generating temporal action proposals remains a very challenging problem, where the main issue lies in predicting precise temporal proposal boundaries and reliable action conﬁdence in long and untrimmed real-world videos. In this paper,
we propose an efﬁcient and uniﬁed framework to generate
temporal action proposals named Dense Boundary Generator (DBG), which draws inspiration from boundary-sensitive
methods and implements boundary classiﬁcation and action
completeness regression for densely distributed proposals.
In particular, the DBG consists of two modules: Temporal
boundary classiﬁcation (TBC) and Action-aware completeness regression (ACR). The TBC aims to provide two temporal boundary conﬁdence maps by low-level two-stream
features, while the ACR is designed to generate an action
completeness score map by high-level action-aware features.
Moreover, we introduce a dual stream BaseNet (DSB) to encode RGB and optical ﬂow information, which helps to capture discriminative boundary and actionness features. Extensive experiments on popular benchmarks ActivityNet-1.3 and
THUMOS14 demonstrate the superiority of DBG over the
state-of-the-art proposal generator (e.g., MGG and BMN).

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed method. Given an
untrimmed video, DBG densely evaluates all proposals by
producing simultaneously three score maps: starting conﬁdence score map, ending conﬁdence score map and action
completeness score map.

Introduction
Generating temporal action proposals in video is a fundamental task, which serves as a crucial step for various
tasks, like action detection and video analysis. In an optimal case, such proposals should well predict action intervals,
with precise temporal boundaries and reliable conﬁdence in
untrimmed videos. Despite the extensive endeavors (Lin et
al. 2018; 2019; Liu et al. 2019), temporal action proposal
generation retains as an open problem, especially when facing action duration variability, activity complexity, blurred
boundary, camera motion, background clutter and viewpoint
changes in real-world scenarios.
Previous works in temporal action proposals can be
roughly divided into two categories: anchor based (Buch
et al. 2017; Heilbron, Niebles, and Ghanem 2016; Gao

et al. 2017; Shou, Wang, and Chang 2016) and boundary
based (Zhao et al. 2017a; Lin et al. 2018; 2019). Anchorbased methods design a set of anchors at different scale for
each video segment, which are regularly distributed over the
video sequence. These candidate anchors are then evaluated
by a binary classiﬁer. However, anchor-based methods can
not predict precise boundaries and are not ﬂexible to cover
multi-duration actions.
Boundary-based methods evaluate each temporal location
over the video sequence. Such local information helps to
generate proposals with more precise boundaries and more
ﬂexible durations. As one of the pioneering works (Zhao
et al. 2017a) groups continuous high-score regions as proposal by actionness scores. (Lin et al. 2018) adopts a twostage strategy to locate locally temporal boundaries with
high probabilities, and then evaluate global conﬁdences of
candidate proposals generated by these boundaries. To explore the rich context for evaluating all proposals, (Lin et al.

∗

indicates equal contributions. This work was done when
Chuming Lin was an intern at Tencent Youtu Lab. Yabiao Wang
is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11499

