The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Practical Federated Gradient Boosting Decision Trees
Qinbin Li,1 Zeyi Wen,2 Bingsheng He1
1

National University of Singapore
The University of Western Australia
{qinbin, hebs}@comp.nus.edu.sg, zeyi.wen@uwa.edu.au
2

willing to share their own raw data records. Also, according to a recent survey (Yang et al. 2019), federated learning can be broadly categorized into horizontal federated
learning, vertical federated learning and federated transfer
learning. Much research efforts have been devoted to developing new learning algorithms in the setting of vertical
or horizontal federated learning (Smith et al. 2017; Takabi,
Hesamifard, and Ghasemi 2016; Liu, Chen, and Yang 2018;
Yurochkin et al. 2019). We refer readers for more recent surveys for details (Yang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019a).
On the other hand, Gradient Boosting Decision Trees
(GBDTs) have become very successful in recent years by
winning many awards in machine learning and data mining competitions (Chen and Guestrin 2016) as well as
their effectiveness in many applications (Richardson, Dominowska, and Ragno 2007; Kim et al. 2009; Burges 2010;
Li et al. 2019b). There have been several recent studies on
how to train GBDTs in the federated learning setting (Cheng
et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2018). For example,
SecureBoost (Cheng et al. 2019) developed vertical learning
with GBDTs. In contrast, this study focuses on horizontal
learning for GDBTs, where data samples with the same features are distributed among multiple parties.
There have been several studies of GDBT training in the
setting of horizontal learning (Liu et al. 2019; Zhao et al.
2018). However, those approaches are not effective or efﬁcient enough for practical use.
Model accuracy: The learned model may not have a good
predictive accuracy. A recent study adopted differential privacy to aggregate distributed regression trees (Zhao et al.
2018). This approach boosts each tree only with the local
data, which does not utilize the information of data from
other parties. As we will show in the experiments, the model
accuracy is much lower than our proposed approach.
Efﬁciency: The approach (Liu et al. 2019) has a prohibitively time-consuming learning process since it adopts
complex cryptographic methods to encrypt the data from
multiple parties. Due to a lot of extra cryptographic calculations, the approach brings prohibitively high overhead in
the training process. Moreover, since GBDTs have to traverse the feature values to ﬁnd the best split value, there is a
huge number of comparison operations even in the building

Abstract
Gradient Boosting Decision Trees (GBDTs) have become
very successful in recent years, with many awards in machine
learning and data mining competitions. There have been several recent studies on how to train GBDTs in the federated
learning setting. In this paper, we focus on horizontal federated learning, where data samples with the same features are
distributed among multiple parties. However, existing studies
are not efﬁcient or effective enough for practical use. They
suffer either from the inefﬁciency due to the usage of costly
data transformations such as secure sharing and homomorphic encryption, or from the low model accuracy due to differential privacy designs. In this paper, we study a practical
federated environment with relaxed privacy constraints. In
this environment, a dishonest party might obtain some information about the other parties’ data, but it is still impossible
for the dishonest party to derive the actual raw data of other
parties. Speciﬁcally, each party boosts a number of trees by
exploiting similarity information based on locality-sensitive
hashing. We prove that our framework is secure without exposing the original record to other parties, while the computation overhead in the training process is kept low. Our experimental studies show that, compared with normal training
with the local data of each party, our approach can signiﬁcantly improve the predictive accuracy, and achieve comparable accuracy to the original GBDT with the data from all
parties.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2016; Mirhoseini,
Sadeghi, and Koushanfar 2016; Shi et al. 2017; Yang et
al. 2019; Mohri, Sivek, and Suresh 2019; Li et al. 2019a)
has become a hot research area in machine learning. Federated learning addresses the privacy and security issues of
model training in multiple parties. In reality, data are dispersed over different areas. For example, people tend to go
to nearby hospitals, and the patient records in different hospitals are isolated. Ideally, hospitals may beneﬁt more if they
can collaborate with each other to train a model with the
joint data. However, due to the increasing concerns and more
regulations/policies on data privacy, organizations are not
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4642

