The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Kanji Workbook: A Writing-Based Intelligent Tutoring System for Learning
Proper Japanese Kanji Writing Technique with Instructor-Emulated Assessment
Paul Taele, Jung In Koh, Tracy Hammond
Sketch Recognition Lab
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Texas A&M University
{ptaele, jungin, hammond}@tamu.edu

In order to address these challenges, language instructors often employ various pedagogical approaches
through stroke writing techniques for enabling students
to improve their mastery in kanji script characters (Ye
2011), since such techniques are important in Japanese
language writing (Takezaki and Godin 2008). However,
for conventional classroom settings, instructors may not
have the resources to provide direct assistance on assessing
students’ character writing performance with large classes
or outside of class (Taele and Hammond 2009), and existing
educational applications for character writing practice
remain constrained on the depth of assessment that emulates
those of human language instructors.
In this work, we propose Kanji Workbook, a writingbased intelligent tutoring for supporting novice Japanese
foreign language students in their study and practice of
kanji script character writing. Our work not only allows
students to employ writing interactions for their study of
the characters, but also provides a variety of assessment
metrics that provide more granular feedback similarly to
human instructors. We designed our interface based on
qualitative insights from language instructors, and deployed
the interface onto novice university courses in Japanese
as a foreign language. From the classroom and interaction
studies for evaluating our interface, we observed that
students beneﬁted with improved academic performance
on their character writing capabilities, and discovered that
students found the interface to be intuitive and the learning
to be rewarding.

Abstract
Kanji script writing is a skill that is often introduced to novice
Japanese foreign language students for achieving Japanese
writing mastery, but often poses difﬁculties to students with
primarily English ﬂuency due to their its vast differences
with written English. Instructors often introduce various
pedagogical methods—such as visual structure and written
techniques—to assist students in kanji study, but may lack
availability providing direct feedback on students’ writing
outside of class. Current educational applications are also
limited due to lacking richer instructor-emulated feedback.
We introduce Kanji Workbook, a writing-based intelligent
tutoring system for students to receive intelligent assessment
that emulates human instructor feedback. Our interface not
only leverages students’ computing devices for allowing
them to learn, practice, and review the writing of prompted
characters from their course’s kanji script lessons, but also
provides a diverse set of writing assessment metrics—
derived from instructor interviews and classroom observation
insights—through intelligent scoring and visual animations.
We deployed our interface onto novice- and intermediatelevel university courses over an entire academic year, and
observed that interface users on average achieved higher
course grades than their peers and also reacted positively to
our interface’s various features.

Introduction
For students studying Japanese as a foreign language, one of
the main components for achieving mastery of the language
is ﬂuency in reading and writing the language. Unlike
in English and its sole script of the Latin alphabet, the
Japanese language heavily utilizes three separate scripts,
including the kanji script and its characters that differ greatly
from alphabet letters in English. Not only does do kanji
script characters have characteristics that challenge language
students such as their large number, diverse structure, and
tendency to have visual similarity among each other (Taele
and Hammond 2009), but is one of several factors that
makes the Japanese language one of the most challenging
languages for native English users to learn (National
Security Agency 2017).

Related Work
As a writing-based intelligent tutoring system, Kanji
Workbook relates to other educational applications in terms
of factors such as pedagogical goals, interface features,
and recognition techniques. These applications include
Mechanix (Valentine et al. 2012) for civil engineering,
iCanDraw (Dixon, Prasad, and Hammond 2010) for art
drawing, MathPad2 (LaViola, Jr. and Zeleznik 2004) for
mathematical formulas, and Maestoso (Taele, Barreto,
and Hammond 2015) for music composition. While such
applications share similar themes to Kanji Workbook, they
provide educational assistance for domains that are not

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13382

