The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TellTail: Fast Scoring and Detection of Dense Subgraphs
Bryan Hooi,1 Kijung Shin,2 Hemank Lamba,3 Christos Faloutsos3
1

National University of Singapore
2
KAIST
3
Carnegie Mellon University
bhooi@comp.nus.edu.sg, kijungs@kaist.ac.kr, {hlamba, christos}@cs.cmu.edu
of the same size being as dense as this one is 10−5 . Such a
probabilistic measure is useful for decision making: if a subgraph is very unlikely under normal variation, we can more
conﬁdently take action such as investigating these users.
The key challenge in this process is to accurately model
subgraph densities under normal behavior. In other words,
what is a good null model? The simplest approach would
be to assume an Erdős-Renyi model, as in (Jiang et al.
2016). However, the Erdős-Renyi model does not accurately model density patterns of real graphs: it ignores the
clustering structure of graphs, as well as dense subgraphs
caused by high degree nodes, such as ‘hyperbolic communities’ (Araujo et al. 2014) observed in real graphs.
Instead, our approach uses a novel application of extreme
value theory to the dense subgraph problem, with the goal of
probabilistically measuring how ‘extreme’ a dense subgraph
is. Extreme value theory is an elegant statistical approach
for modelling the distribution of extreme (or rare) events.
It was initially proposed to model the distribution of ﬂood
heights, with the goal of ﬁnding the minimal dike height
which would be tall enough to withstand ﬂoods with high
probability. Since then, it has been applied to many types
of extreme events, such as earthquakes, ﬁnancial crashes,
and network attacks. Extreme value theory allows us to accurately estimate the extreme tail of a distribution without
making strong assumptions about the distribution itself. This
allows us to theoretically characterize dense subgraph patterns without restrictive assumptions.
To improve its practicality, our method further makes use
of two novel empirical ﬁndings about the distribution of subgraph densities in real graphs. We use these empirical ﬁndings in our measure which assesses how surprising a subgraph is, then propose a fast pruning-based algorithm for detecting dense subgraphs using this measure, in quasi-linear
time. Figure 1a shows that our measure outperforms baselines in its accuracy of identifying injected subgraphs. Figure 1b shows that our search algorithm is fast and scales
quasi-linearly: it took 0.41s per subgraph to ﬁnd, on a graph
with 49 million edges, on a laptop computer.
Our contributions are:

Abstract
Suppose you visit an e-commerce site, and see that 50 users
each reviewed almost all of the same 500 products several
times each: would you get suspicious? Similarly, given a
Twitter follow graph, how can we design principled measures for identifying surprisingly dense subgraphs? Dense
subgraphs often indicate interesting structure, such as network attacks in network trafﬁc graphs. However, most existing dense subgraph measures either do not model normal
variation, or model it using an Erdős-Renyi assumption - but
this assumption has been discredited decades ago. What is
the right assumption then? We propose a novel application of
extreme value theory to the dense subgraph problem, which
allows us to propose measures and algorithms which evaluate the surprisingness of a subgraph probabilistically, without requiring restrictive assumptions (e.g. Erdős-Renyi). We
then improve the practicality of our approach by incorporating empirical observations about dense subgraph patterns in
real graphs, and by proposing a fast pruning-based search
algorithm. Our approach (a) provides theoretical guarantees
of consistency, (b) scales quasi-linearly, and (c) outperforms
baselines in synthetic and ground truth settings.

Introduction
Given an undirected, possibly weighted graph, how can we
measure how surprising or anomalous a subgraph is? How
can we do this in a way that exonerates subgraphs that are
within the range of normal variation, but catches only subgraphs which are truly surprising? Dense subgraph detection
is useful for detecting social network communities, protein
families (Saha et al. 2010), follower-boosting on Twitter, and
rating manipulation (Hooi et al. 2016). In these situations, it
is useful to measure how surprising a dense subgraph is, to
focus the user’s attention on surprising or anomalous subgraphs.
Many measures exist for identifying dense subgraphs,
such as average degree, modularity, etc. However, knowing
that a subgraph has, for example, an average degree of 10,
does not tell us how surprising it is, since we do not know
if this is plausible under normal variation. To quantify how
surprising a subgraph is, we need a probabilistic measure,
that tells us, e.g., that the probability of a random subgraph

• Theoretical underpinnings: we propose a probabilistic framework (Deﬁnition 5) for ﬁnding dense subgraphs
based on extreme value theory. Theorem 2 provides a
guarantee of consistency.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4150

