The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Automatic Building and Labeling of HD Maps with Deep Learning
Mahdi Elhousni, Yecheng Lyu, Ziming Zhang, Xinming Huang
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
{melhousni, ylyu, zzhang15, xhuang}@wpi.edu

sensors such as radars to mitigate the accuracy issue when
it comes to depth and 2D images. This helps the car drive
safely by avoiding obstacles on the road and obeying trafﬁc
rules represented by trafﬁc signs or trafﬁc lights.
This deep learning approach has multiple advantages that
revolve mostly around the real-time aspect and the use of
low-cost sensors. However, methods based solely on deep
learning and cameras (while being very performant in highway scenarios for example) are bound to fail when deployed
in urban scenarios because cameras have major weaknesses,
mostly related to brightness issues. These weakness could
be covered by fusing the camera data with other more powerful and accurate sensors, such as LiDARs. This introduces
the most accurate method to date to navigate and drive autonomously in urban areas, which is based on HD maps.
HD maps are a combination of 3D point clouds and relevant semantic information. 3D point clouds can be used for
localization by matching the incoming scans of the LiDAR
when driving, with the pre-build and stored 3D point clouds.
However, in order for these point clouds to be used for autonomous navigation, additional data has to be stacked on
top of it. Information such as the position of the lanes, roads
or trafﬁc signs has to be labelled in order for the car to navigate safely while obeying basic trafﬁc rules. The usual solution used today to incorporate this information on the maps
is to manually label them and store them. An obvious shortcomings of this method is the lack of accuracy. Since point
clouds do not have RGB values which makes lanes and lane
markings invisible, and the use of the intensity ﬁeld of the
pointcloud can lead to very noisy data. Also labeling point
clouds is known to be very tedious and can slow down the
HD maps building process signiﬁcantly.
Alternatively we can use the detection results generated
by neural networks to build and label HD maps ofﬂine before deploying them on cars. Therefore, we propose in this
paper to use deep learning to automate the labeling process
of HD maps, by combining them with other methods to improve the accuracy and robustness. Our contributions can be
summarized as a collection of algorithms and pipelines aiming to automatically build and label HD maps for urban autonomous driving.
This paper is organized as follows : Section II introduces

Abstract
In a world where autonomous driving cars are becoming increasingly more common, creating an adequate infrastructure
for this new technology is essential. This includes building
and labeling high-deﬁnition (HD) maps accurately and efﬁciently. Today, the process of creating HD maps requires a
lot of human input, which takes time and is prone to errors.
In this paper, we propose a novel method capable of generating labelled HD maps from raw sensor data. We implemented
and tested our methods on several urban scenarios using data
collected from our test vehicle. The results show that the proposed deep learning based method can produce highly accurate HD maps. This approach speeds up the process of building and labeling HD maps, which can make meaningful contribution to the deployment of autonomous vehicles.

I - Introduction
During the last couple of decades, autonomous driving has
become an important research topic in the scientiﬁc community. This stems from the fact that scientists, governments
and people in general are starting to realise the huge positive
impacts that autonomous driving could have on our daily
lives. According to a report by The Department of Transportation of the USA, self-driving cars could reduce trafﬁc
fatalities by up to 94% by eliminating the accidents that are
due to human errors.
The race toward fully autonomous driving cars, or level
5 autonomy as categorized by SAE International, has given
rise to multiple new ﬁelds and was the catalyst to launch or
greatly improve several new disciplines. This manifested itself in the ﬁeld of deep learning, which has made it possible
today to achieve a respectable level of autonomy when driving on roads that fall into the classic scenario box. Lanes and
roads (or driveable regions) detection can be achieved with
neural networks trained to excel in task related to pixel-wise
segmentation of images captured by cameras (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), making the car aware of where it
is safe to drive. Other types of networks are trained to detect
obstacles and classify them into several independent classes
(Redmon and Farhadi 2017), sometimes with the help other
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13255

