The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Joint Model for Deﬁnition Extraction
with Syntactic Connection and Semantic Consistency
Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh,1∗ Franck Dernoncourt,2 Dejing Dou,1 Thien Huu Nguyen1,3
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA
2
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA, USA
3
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
{apouranb, dou, thien}@cs.uoregon.edu, dernonco@adobe.com

resources such as dictionaries and glossaries are created
for both general and speciﬁc domains. However, manually
creating these resources from raw text is expensive, timeconsuming and requiring extensive domain and linguistic
knowledge. Thus, automatic deﬁnition extraction from raw
text has gained much attention from the computational linguistic community, ﬁnding its applications on many downstream tasks (e.g., Question Answering, Knowledge Base
Completion, and Taxonomy Learning).

Abstract
Deﬁnition Extraction (DE) is one of the well-known topics in
Information Extraction that aims to identify terms and their
corresponding deﬁnitions in unstructured texts. This task can
be formalized either as a sentence classiﬁcation task (i.e.,
containing term-deﬁnition pairs or not) or a sequential labeling task (i.e., identifying the boundaries of the terms and
deﬁnitions). The previous works for DE have only focused
on one of the two approaches, failing to model the interdependencies between the two tasks. In this work, we propose a novel model for DE that simultaneously performs the
two tasks in a single framework to beneﬁt from their interdependencies. Our model features deep learning architectures
to exploit the global structures of the input sentences as well
as the semantic consistencies between the terms and the definitions, thereby improving the quality of the representation
vectors for DE. Besides the joint inference between sentence
classiﬁcation and sequential labeling, the proposed model is
fundamentally different from the prior work for DE in that the
prior work has only employed the local structures of the input sentences (i.e., word-to-word relations), and not yet considered the semantic consistencies between terms and deﬁnitions. In order to implement these novel ideas, our model
presents a multi-task learning framework that employs graph
convolutional neural networks and predicts the dependency
paths between the terms and the deﬁnitions. We also seek
to enforce the consistency between the representations of the
terms and deﬁnitions both globally (i.e., increasing semantic consistency between the representations of the entire sentences and the terms/deﬁnitions) and locally (i.e., promoting
the similarity between the representations of the terms and the
deﬁnitions). The extensive experiments on three benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.1

Formally, the task of Deﬁnition Extraction (DE) aims to
detect term-deﬁnition pairs in raw text. In a coarse-grained
setting, the goal is to classify the input sentences as deﬁnitional or not (i.e., sequence classiﬁcation) where a sentence
is deﬁnitional if it contains a term-deﬁnition pair. On the
other hand, in a ﬁne-grained setting, DE aims to recognize
the terms and deﬁnitions within the sentences, usually casted
as a sequence labeling task. For instance, the sentence “The
phrase <Term>atoms and molecules</Term>is explained
in the dictionary by the expression of <Deﬁnition>building
blocks of materials</Deﬁnition>” is deﬁnitional as its
term and deﬁnition are speciﬁed by the corresponding tags.
The prior work has only formulated DE as either a sequence classiﬁcation or sequence labeling task, ignoring the
inter-dependencies between these two tasks. This is not desirable as there exist the mutual dependencies between the
two tasks for which the knowledge for one task can help to
improve the performance for the other. In particular, knowing the word-level labels of the words for terms and definitions (i.e., sequence labeling) would be sufﬁcient to infer the sentence level labels (i.e., sentence classiﬁcation) as
the latter task is a simpliﬁed version of the former. On the
other hand, predicting the sentence level label can also improve the knowledge of the models about the different templates/patterns to express/connect terms and deﬁnitions in
text that would be helpful to recognize the boundaries of the
terms and deﬁnitions. Consequently, in this paper, we propose to simultaneously predict the sentence labels and wordlevel labels for terms and deﬁnitions in the sentences based
on deep learning to beneﬁt from the inter-dependencies between the two tasks. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst work to jointly perform sequence classiﬁcation and
sequence labeling for DE in the literature.

Introduction
One of the cornerstones of human knowledge that can convey meaningful, concise and informative understanding of
different concepts are deﬁnitions. Due to their importance,
∗
This work was done when the ﬁrst author was an intern at
Adobe Research.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Source code is available at https://github.com/amirveyseh/
deﬁnition extraction.

9098

