The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Explainable Reinforcement Learning through a Causal Lens
Prashan Madumal, Tim Miller, Liz Sonenberg, Frank Vetere
Victoria, Australia
pmathugama@student.unimelb.edu.au, {tmiller, l.sonenberg, f.vetere}@unimelb.edu.au

people understand them. As humans, we view the world
through a causal lens (Sloman 2005), building mental models with causal relationships to act in the world, to understand new events and also to explain events. Importantly,
causal models give people the ability to consider counterfactuals — events that did not happen, but could have under different situations. Although this notion of causal explanation is also backed by literature in philosophy and social psychology (Hilton 2007), causality and counterfactuals are only just becoming more prevalent in XAI. Further,
compared to the burst of XAI research in supervised learning, explainability in model-free reinforcement learning is
hardly explored.

Abstract
Prominent theories in cognitive science propose that humans
understand and represent the knowledge of the world through
causal relationships. In making sense of the world, we build
causal models in our mind to encode cause-effect relations
of events and use these to explain why new events happen
by referring to counterfactuals — things that did not happen.
In this paper, we use causal models to derive causal explanations of the behaviour of model-free reinforcement learning
agents. We present an approach that learns a structural causal
model during reinforcement learning and encodes causal relationships between variables of interest. This model is then
used to generate explanations of behaviour based on counterfactual analysis of the causal model. We computationally evaluate the model in 6 domains and measure performance and task prediction accuracy. We report on a study
with 120 participants who observe agents playing a real-time
strategy game (Starcraft II) and then receive explanations of
the agents’ behaviour. We investigate: 1) participants’ understanding gained by explanations through task prediction; 2)
explanation satisfaction and 3) trust. Our results show that
causal model explanations perform better on these measures
compared to two other baseline explanation models.

We introduce an action inﬂuence model for model-free
reinforcement learning (RL) agents and provide a formalisation of the model using structural causal models (Halpern
and Pearl 2005). Action inﬂuence models approximate the
causal model of the environment relative to actions taken by
an agent. Our approach differs from previous work in explainable RL in that we use causal models to generate contrastive explanations for why and why not questions, which
previous models lack. Given assumptions about the direction
of causal relationships between variables, during the policy
learning process, we also learn the quantitative inﬂuences
that actions have on variables. Which enable our model to
reason approximately about counterfactual states and actions. We deﬁne how to generate explanations for ‘why?’
and ‘why not?’ questions from the action inﬂuence model.
We deﬁne minimally complete explanations taking inspiration from social psychology literature (McClure and Hilton
1997).

Driven by lack of trust from users and proposed regulations, there are many calls for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
systems to become more transparent, interpretable and explainable. This has renewed the interest in Explainable AI
(XAI), which has been explored since the expert systems
era (Chandrasekaran, Tanner, and Josephson 1989). A key
pillar of XAI is explanation, a justiﬁcation given for decisions and actions of the system.
However, much research and practice in XAI pays little
attention to people as intended users of these systems (Miller
2018b). If we are to build systems that are capable of providing ‘good’ explanations, it is plausible that explanation models should mimic models of human explanation (De Graaf
and Malle 2017). Thus, to build XAI models it is essential
to begin with a strong understanding of how people deﬁne,
generate, select and evaluate explanations.
There is a wealth of pertinent literature in cognitive psychology that explore the nature of explanations and how

We computationally evaluated our approach on 6 RL
benchmarks domains using 6 different RL algorithms. Results indicate that these models are robust and accurate
enough to perform task prediction (Hoffman et al. 2018,
p.12) with a negligible performance impact. We conducted
a human study using the implemented model for RL agents
trained to play the real-time strategy game Starcraft II. Experiments were run for 120 participants, in which we evaluated the participants’ performance in task prediction, explanation satisfaction, and trust. Results show that our model
performs better than the tested baseline, but its impact on

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2493

