The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Exploiting Cross-Lingual Subword
Similarities in Low-Resource Document Classiﬁcation
Mozhi Zhang

Yoshinari Fujinuma

Jordan Boyd-Graber∗

CS and UMIACS
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
mozhi@cs.umd.edu

Computer Science
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO, USA
fujinumay@gmail.com

CS, iSchool, LSC , and UMIACS

Yuan, Van Durme, and Boyd-Graber 2018), cross-lingual
word embeddings (Klementiev, Titov, and Bhattarai 2012,
CLWE), or multilingual contextualized embeddings (Wu and
Dredze 2019) to extract cross-lingual features. But these
methods may be impossible in low-resource languages, as
they require some combination of large parallel or comparable text, high-coverage dictionaries, and monolingual corpora from a shared domain.
However, as anyone who has puzzled out a Portuguese
menu from their high school Spanish knows, the task
is not hopeless, as languages do not exist in isolation.
Shared linguistic roots, geographic proximity, and history
bind languages together; cognates abound, words sound the
same, and there are often shared morphological patterns.
These similarities are often not found at word-level but
at character-level. Therefore, we investigate character-level
knowledge transfer for CLDC in truly low-resource settings,
where unlabeled or parallel data in the target language is also
limited or unavailable.
To study knowledge transfer at character level, we
propose a CLDC framework, Classiﬁcation Aided by
Convergent Orthography (CACO) that capitalizes on
character-level similarities between related language pairs.
Previous CLDC methods treat words as atomic symbols and
do not transfer character-level patterns across languages;
CACO instead uses a bi-level model with two components:
a character-based embedder and a word-based classiﬁer.
The embedder exploits shared patterns in related languages to create word representations from character sequences. The classiﬁer then uses the shared representation across languages to label the document. The embedder learns morpho-semantic regularities, while the classiﬁer
connects lexical semantics to labels.
To allow cross-lingual transfer, we use a single model
with shared character embeddings for both languages. We
jointly train the embedder and the classiﬁer on annotated
source language documents. The embedder transfers knowledge about source language words to target language words
with similar orthographic features.
While the model can be fairly accurate without any target
language data, it can also beneﬁt from a small amount of
additional information when available. If we have a dictionary, pre-trained monolingual word embeddings, or parallel
text, we can ﬁne-tune the model with multi-task learning.

Abstract
Text classiﬁcation must sometimes be applied in a lowresource language with no labeled training data. However,
training data may be available in a related language. We investigate whether character-level knowledge transfer from a
related language helps text classiﬁcation. We present a crosslingual document classiﬁcation framework (CACO) that exploits cross-lingual subword similarity by jointly training a
character-based embedder and a word-based classiﬁer. The
embedder derives vector representations for input words from
their written forms, and the classiﬁer makes predictions based
on the word vectors. We use a joint character representation for both the source language and the target language,
which allows the embedder to generalize knowledge about
source language words to target language words with similar forms. We propose a multi-task objective that can further
improve the model if additional cross-lingual or monolingual
resources are available. Experiments conﬁrm that characterlevel knowledge transfer is more data-efﬁcient than wordlevel transfer between related languages.

1

University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
jbg@umiacs.umd.edu

Introduction: Classiﬁers across Languages

Modern machine learning methods in natural language processing can learn highly accurate, context-based classiﬁers (Devlin et al. 2019). Despite this revolution for highresource languages such as English, some languages are
left behind because of the dearth of text data generally and
speciﬁcally labeled data. Often, the need for a text classiﬁer in a low-resource language is acute, as text classiﬁers can provide situational awareness in emergent incidents (Strassel and Tracey 2016). Cross-lingual document
classiﬁcation (Klementiev, Titov, and Bhattarai 2012, CLDC)
attacks this problem by using annotated dataset from a
source language to build classiﬁers for a target language.
CLDC works when it can ﬁnd a shared representation
for documents from both languages: train a classiﬁer on
source language documents and apply it on target language
documents. Previous work uses a bilingual lexicon (Shi,
Mihalcea, and Tian 2010; Andrade et al. 2015), machine
translation (Banea et al. 2008; Wan 2009; Zhou, Wan,
and Xiao 2016, MT), topic models (Mimno et al. 2009;
∗

Now at Google Research Zürich
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9547

