The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

LeDeepChef Deep Reinforcement
Learning Agent for Families of Text-Based Games
Leonard Adolphs, Thomas Hofmann
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
{ﬁrstname.lastname}@inf.ethz.ch

game (i.e., different recipes), as well as actions and tools
needed to succeed. TBGs are computer games where the
sole modality of interaction is text. In an iterative process,
the player issues commands in natural language and, in
return, is presented a (partial) textual description of the
environment. The player works towards goals that may or
may not be speciﬁed explicitly and receives rewards upon
completion. To frame it more formally, both the observation
and action-space are comprised of natural language and,
thus, inherit its combinatorial and compositional properties
(Côté et al. 2018). Training an agent to succeed in such
games requires overcoming several common research
challenges in reinforcement learning (RL), such as partial
observability, large and sparse state-, and action-space and
long term credit assignment. Moreover, the agent needs
several human-like abilities including understanding the
environment’s feedback (e.g., realize that some command
had no effect on the game’s state), and common sense
reasoning (e.g., extracting affordance verbs to an object in
the game) (Fulda et al. 2017).

Abstract
While Reinforcement Learning (RL) approaches lead to signiﬁcant achievements in a variety of areas in recent history,
natural language tasks remained mostly unaffected, due to the
compositional and combinatorial nature that makes them notoriously hard to optimize. With the emerging ﬁeld of TextBased Games (TBGs), researchers try to bridge this gap. Inspired by the success of RL algorithms on Atari games, the
idea is to develop new methods in a restricted game world and
then gradually move to more complex environments. Previous work in the area of TBGs has mainly focused on solving individual games. We, however, consider the task of designing an agent that not just succeeds in a single game,
but performs well across a whole family of games, sharing the same theme. In this work, we present our deep RL
agent—LeDeepChef —that shows generalization capabilities
to never-before-seen games of the same family with different
environments and task descriptions. The agent participated in
Microsoft Research's First TextWorld Problems: A Language
and Reinforcement Learning Challenge and outperformed all
but one competitor on the ﬁnal test set. The games from the
challenge all share the same theme, namely cooking in a modern house environment, but differ signiﬁcantly in the arrangement of the rooms, the presented objects, and the speciﬁc
goal (recipe to cook). To build an agent that achieves high
scores across a whole family of games, we use an actor-critic
framework and prune the action-space by using ideas from
hierarchical reinforcement learning and a specialized module
trained on a recipe database.

While TBGs reached their peak of popularity in the 1980s
with games like Zork (Infocom 1980), they provide an interesting test-bed for AI agents today. Due to the dialoglike structure of the game and the goal to ﬁnd a policy that
maximizes the player’s reward, they show great similarity
to real-world tasks like question answering and open dialogue generation. Games like Zork are usually contained
in a single environment that requires a variety of complex
problem-solving abilities. The TextWorld framework (Côté
et al. 2018) instead, generates a family of games with different worlds and properties but with straightforward and, most
importantly, similar tasks. One can argue, that it is, therefore, more similar to human skill acquisition: once learned,
a skill can easily be performed even in a slightly different
environment or with new objects (Yin and May 2019b). Recent research has mainly focused on either learning a single
TBG to high accuracy (Narasimhan, Kulkarni, and Barzilay 2015; He et al. 2015; Ammanabrolu and Riedl 2018) or
generalization to a completely new family of games (Kostka
et al. 2017) with only very poor performance. Microsoft’s
First TextWorld Problems: A Language and Reinforcement

Introduction
”You are hungry! Let’s cook a delicious meal. Check the
cookbook in the kitchen for the recipe. Once done, enjoy
your meal!”, that’s the starting instruction of every game
in Microsoft’s First TextWorld Problems: A Language
and Reinforcement Learning Challenge; a competition
that evaluates an agent on a family of unique and unseen
text-based games (TBGs). While all the games share a
similar theme—cooking in a modern house environment—
they differ in multiple aspects like the number of rooms,
connection, and arrangement of rooms, the goal of the
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7342

