The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Heuristic Black-Box Adversarial Attacks on Video Recognition Models
Zhipeng Wei,1 Jingjing Chen,2 Xingxing Wei,∗3 Linxi Jiang,2 Tat-Seng Chua,4
Fengfeng Zhou,5 Yu-Gang Jiang2
1

Jilin University, 2 Fudan University, 3 Beihang University, 4 National University of Singapore,
Health Informatics Lab, College of Computer Science and Technology, and Key Laboratory of Symbolic
Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China, 130012
weizp17@mails.jlu.edu.cn, {chenjingjing, lxjiang18, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, xxwei@buaa.edu.cn,
chuats@comp.nus.edu.sg, FengfengZhou@gmail.com
5

networks. In addition, investigating adversarial samples also
helps to understand the working mechanism of deep models
and provides opportunities to improve networks’ robustness.
Nevertheless, most of the existing works focus on exploring adversarial samples for image recognition models under white-box or black-box settings (Kurakin, Goodfellow,
and Bengio 2016; Szegedy et al. 2013; Papernot et al. 2016;
Carlini and Wagner 2017; Su, Vargas, and Sakurai 2019).
Adversarial attacks on video models, especially the blackbox attacks, have been seldom explored. Indeed, deep neural
network based real-time video classiﬁcation systems, e.g.,
video surveillance systems, are being increasing deploys in
real-world scenarios. Therefore, it is crucial to investigating
the adversarial samples for video models.
This paper studies the problem of generating adversarial
samples to attack video recognition models in the blackbox settings, where the model is not revealed and we can
only make queries to detect the predicted top-1 class and its
probability. The major obstacle for solving this problem is
how to reduce the number of queries to improve attack efﬁciency. Compare to statistic images, the dimensionality of
video data is much higher as videos have both temporal and
spatial dimensions. As results, directly extending the existing black-box attack methods proposed for image models to
video models will consume much more queries for gradient
estimation, leading to the low attack efﬁciency.
To this end, we propose an efﬁcient black-box attack
method specially for video models in this paper. Considering the fact that video data contains both temporal and
spatial redundancy, it is therefore not necessary to search
the adversarial perturbations for all the frames (Wei, Zhu,
and Su 2019). Besides, for a given video, different frames
and different regions in each frame contribute differently towards video classiﬁcation results (Peng, Zhao, and Zhang
2018). Intuitively, the key frames which contain the key evidence of one speciﬁc event, or the salient regions in the
key frame (usually the foreground regions), play a vital role
for the video classiﬁcation results. As results, generating adversarial perturbations on the salient regions of key frames
is the most effective way to attack video models. Motivated by this, we propose a heuristic-based method to select
the key frames for adversarial samples generation. Figure

Abstract
We study the problem of attacking video recognition models
in the black-box setting, where the model information is unknown and the adversary can only make queries to detect the
predicted top-1 class and its probability. Compared with the
black-box attack on images, attacking videos is more challenging as the computation cost for searching the adversarial perturbations on a video is much higher due to its high
dimensionality. To overcome this challenge, we propose a
heuristic black-box attack model that generates adversarial
perturbations only on the selected frames and regions. More
speciﬁcally, a heuristic-based algorithm is proposed to measure the importance of each frame in the video towards generating the adversarial examples. Based on the frames’ importance, the proposed algorithm heuristically searches a subset
of frames where the generated adversarial example has strong
adversarial attack ability while keeps the perturbations lower
than the given bound. Besides, to further boost the attack efﬁciency, we propose to generate the perturbations only on the
salient regions of the selected frames. In this way, the generated perturbations are sparse in both temporal and spatial
domains. Experimental results of attacking two mainstream
video recognition methods on the UCF-101 dataset and the
HMDB-51 dataset demonstrate that the proposed heuristic
black-box adversarial attack method can signiﬁcantly reduce
the computation cost and lead to more than 28% reduction in
query numbers for the untargeted attack on both datasets.

Introduction
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial samples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Szegedy et al.
2013). Recent works have shown that adding a small humanimperceptible perturbation to a clean sample can fool the
deep models, leading them to make wrong predictions with
high conﬁdence (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2017). As results,
it has raised serious security concerns for the deployment
of deep models in security-critical applications, such as face
recognition (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016), video
surveillance (Sultani, Chen, and Shah 2018), etc. Therefore,
it is crucial to study the adversarial examples for deep neural
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12338

