The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GTNet: Generative Transfer Network for Zero-Shot Object Detection
Shizhen Zhao,1 Changxin Gao,1∗ Yuanjie Shao,1 Lerenhan Li,1
Changqian Yu,1 Zhong Ji,2 Nong Sang1
1
Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University
Email: {zhaosz, cgao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a Generative Transfer Network (GTNet) for zeroshot object detection (ZSD). GTNet consists of an Object
Detection Module and a Knowledge Transfer Module. The
Object Detection Module can learn large-scale seen domain
knowledge. The Knowledge Transfer Module leverages a feature synthesizer to generate unseen class features, which are
applied to train a new classiﬁcation layer for the Object Detection Module. In order to synthesize features for each unseen
class with both the intra-class variance and the IoU variance,
we design an IoU-Aware Generative Adversarial Network
(IoUGAN) as the feature synthesizer, which can be easily integrated into GTNet. Speciﬁcally, IoUGAN consists of three unit
models: Class Feature Generating Unit (CFU), Foreground
Feature Generating Unit (FFU), and Background Feature Generating Unit (BFU). CFU generates unseen features with the
intra-class variance conditioned on the class semantic embeddings. FFU and BFU add the IoU variance to the results of
CFU, yielding class-speciﬁc foreground and background features, respectively. We evaluate our method on three public
datasets and the results demonstrate that our method performs
favorably against the state-of-the-art ZSD approaches.

Figure 1: Illustration of our feature generating process. Visual
features are ﬁrst synthesized conditioned on the semantic
embeddings. Then we further add the IoU variance to the
features.

class embeddings. However, mapping high-dimensional visual feature to low-dimensional semantic space tends to cause
the hubness problem due to the heterogeneity gap between
these two spaces (Zhang and Peng 2018). (2) Directly classifying an object in the visual feature space can address the
hubness problem. A number of zero-shot classiﬁcation methods (Xian et al. 2018; Verma et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019a;
Huang et al. 2019) have proved the effectiveness of the solution in the visual space. However, visual features contain not
only the intra-class variance but also the IoU variance, which
is a critical cue for object detection.
To address these problems, we propose a Generative Transfer Network (GTNet) for ZSD. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a
generative model to synthesize the visual features to solve
the hubness problem. Meanwhile, with the consideration of
the IoU variance, we design an IoU-Aware Generative Adversarial Network (IoUGAN) to generate visual features with
both the intra-class variance and the IoU variance.
The proposed GTNet consists of an Object Detection Module and a Knowledge Transfer Module. More speciﬁcally,
the Object Detection Module contains a feature extractor, a
bounding box regressor, and a seen category classiﬁer. In
addition, the feature extractor is used to extract features of
Region-of-Interest (RoI) from an image. The Knowledge
Transfer Module consists of a feature synthesizer and an unseen category classiﬁer. The feature synthesizer is utilized to
generate visual features for training the unseen category classiﬁer. The trained unseen category classiﬁer can be integrated
with the feature extractor and the bounding box regressor to

1. Introduction
In recent years, many deep learning methods have achieved
desirable performance in object detection (Girshick et al.
2014; Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2016; He et al. 2017). However, the performance of
the detectors relies on the large-scale detection datasets with
fully-annotated bounding boxes. It is impractical to collect
enough labeled data since the real world is overwhelmed with
an enormous amount of categories. In this case, these methods are challenged by the task of zero-shot object detection
(ZSD), which aims to simultaneously classify and localize
new classes in the absence of any training instances.
Zero-shot object detection can be addressed in two spaces:
the semantic embedding space and the visual feature space.
(1) Existing methods (Bansal et al. 2018; Rahman et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2019b) generally map the visual features from predicted bounding boxes to the semantic embedding space.
During the inference stage, a class label is predicted by ﬁnding the nearest class based on the similarity scores with all
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12967

