The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Progressive Boundary Reﬁnement Network for Temporal Action Detection
Qinying Liu, Zilei Wang
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China
lydyc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

instances, temporal action detection aims to identify pairs of
temporal frames to precisely segment action instances. Due
to such similarity, many efforts (Xu, Das, and Saenko 2017;
Lin, Zhao, and Shou 2017a) in action detection take advantage of the frameworks of image object detectors (Ren
et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016). In previous works of temporal action detection, the two-stage methods (Bai et al. 2018;
Chao et al. 2018) are usually superior in performance. Comparatively the one-stage approaches (Buch et al. 2017a)
are generally more efﬁcient due to eliminating the timeconsuming proposal generation. Actually, the one-stage architecture can also achieve good detection performance if
we can inherit the merits of two-stage methods.

Abstract
Temporal action detection is a challenging task due to vagueness of action boundaries. To tackle this issue, we propose an
end-to-end progressive boundary reﬁnement network (PBRNet) in this paper. PBRNet belongs to the family of one-stage
detectors and is equipped with three cascaded detection modules for localizing action boundary more and more precisely.
Speciﬁcally, PBRNet mainly consists of coarse pyramidal detection, reﬁned pyramidal detection, and ﬁne-grained detection. The ﬁrst two modules build two feature pyramids to perform the anchor-based detection, and the third one explores
the frame-level features to reﬁne the boundaries of each action instance. In the ﬁned-grained detection module, three
frame-level classiﬁcation branches are proposed to augment
the frame-level features and update the conﬁdence scores of
action instances. Evidently, PBRNet integrates the anchorbased and frame-level methods. We experimentally evaluate the proposed PBRNet and comprehensively investigate
the effect of the main components. The results show PBRNet achieves the state-of-the-art detection performances on
two popular benchmarks: THUMOS’14 and ActivityNet, and
meanwhile possesses a high inference speed.

Compared to the objects which have solid internal consistency, the boundary of an action is vague, because the variations of the consecutive frames are subtle. As addressed
in (Alwassel et al. 2018), incorrect localization of action
boundaries is the most impactful error which signiﬁcantly
impedes the performances of current approaches. To handle this issue, one thread of methods (Xu, Das, and Saenko
2017; Gao, Yang, and Nevatia 2017; Bai et al. 2018; Chao
et al. 2018; Gao, Chen, and Nevatia 2018) apply boundary
regression to reﬁne the boundaries. Among them, cascaded
boundary regression is a classic yet effective paradigm to
improve the localization accuracy. For example, CBR (Gao,
Yang, and Nevatia 2017) is proposed to apply boundary regression in an iterative manner–the output boundaries are
fed back as input to the network for the next time of reﬁnement. But CBR uses the same structures and features
in different steps of boundary regression, which is inconsistent with the requirements for progressive learning. Some
other regression-based works (Xu, Das, and Saenko 2017;
Bai et al. 2018; Chao et al. 2018) directly adapt the two-stage
object detector Faster R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015) to solve
the task of action detection, and thus are inborn two-stage
cascaded. However, all these methods fail to obtain precise
boundaries in a ﬁne granularity. Besides, the additional proposal stage severely slows down the detection speed. Another line of works (Shou et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2017;
Lin et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019) propose to densely evaluate frame-level scores, and then apply the thresholds on the
scores to determine the boundaries of action candidates. As

Understanding human actions in videos is a fundamental
issue in computer vision, including action recognition (Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Zhou et al. 2018), temporal action detection (Shou et al. 2017; Chao et al. 2018), actoraction analysis (Yan et al. 2017; Gavrilyuk et al. 2018), etc.
Currently these research topics have been active as they are
one of important components in extensive applications, e.g.,
video analysis, video surveillance and human computer interaction. In recent years, action recognition has made great
progress beneﬁted from the advances of deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). Compared with action
recognition, temporal action detection is still lagging behind
in technique and performance due to possessing much larger
challenges. Temporal action detection is required to not only
identify the class but also localize the start and end time of
each action instance in long untrimmed videos.
Temporal action detection, like object detection, belongs
to the visual detection family. While object detection aims to
produce spatial bounding boxes to precisely surround object
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11612

