The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Approval-Based Apportionment
Markus Brill,1 Paul Gölz,2 Dominik Peters,2 Ulrike Schmidt-Kraepelin,1 Kai Wilker1
1

Technische Universität Berlin, Chair of Efﬁcient Algorithms 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Computer Science Department
{brill, u.schmidt-kraepelin}@tu-berlin.de, {pgoelz, dominikp}@cs.cmu.edu, wilker@campus.tu-berlin.de

equally well represented by several political parties, there is
no way to express this preference within the voting system.
In the context of single-winner elections, approval voting
has been put forward as a solution to this problem as it strikes
an attractive compromise between simplicity and expressivity (Brams and Fishburn 2007; Laslier and Sanver 2010).
Under approval voting, each voter is asked to specify a set
of candidates she “approves of,” i.e., voters can arbitrarily
partition the set of candidates into approved candidates and
disapproved ones. Proponents of approval voting argue that
its introduction could increase voter turnout, “help elect the
strongest candidate,” and “add legitimacy to the outcome” of
an election (Brams and Fishburn 2007, pp. 4–8).
Due to the practical and theoretical appeal of approval voting in single-winner elections, a number of scholars have suggested to also use approval voting for multiwinner elections,
in which a ﬁxed number of candidates needs to be elected
(Kilgour and Marshall 2012). In contrast to the single-winner
setting, where the straightforward voting rule “choose the
candidate approved by the highest number of voters” enjoys
a strong axiomatic foundation (Fishburn 1978), several ways
of aggregating approval ballots have been proposed in the
multiwinner setting (e.g., Aziz et al. 2017; Janson 2016).
Most studies of approval-based multiwinner elections assume that voters directly express their preference over individual candidates; we refer to this setting as candidate-approval
elections. This assumption runs counter to widespread democratic practice, in which candidates belong to political parties
and voters indicate preferences over these parties (which induce implicit preferences over candidates). In this paper, we
therefore study party-approval elections, in which voters express approval votes over parties and a given number of seats
must be distributed among the parties. We refer to the process
of allocating these seats as approval-based apportionment.
We believe that party-approval elections are a promising
framework for legislative elections in the real world. Allowing voters to express approval votes over parties enables the
aggregation mechanism to coordinate like-minded voters. For
example, two blocks of voters might currently vote for parties that they mutually disapprove of. Using approval ballots
could reveal that the blocks jointly approve a party of more
general appeal; allocating more seats to this party leads to
mutual gain. This cooperation is particularly necessary for
small minority opinions that are not centrally coordinated. In

Abstract
In the apportionment problem, a ﬁxed number of seats must be
distributed among parties in proportion to the number of voters
supporting each party. We study a generalization of this setting,
in which voters cast approval ballots over parties, such that
each voter can support multiple parties. This approval-based
apportionment setting generalizes traditional apportionment
and is a natural restriction of approval-based multiwinner elections, where approval ballots range over individual candidates.
Using techniques from both apportionment and multiwinner
elections, we are able to provide representation guarantees
that are currently out of reach in the general setting of multiwinner elections: First, we show that core-stable committees
are guaranteed to exist and can be found in polynomial time.
Second, we demonstrate that extended justiﬁed representation
is compatible with committee monotonicity.

1

Introduction

The fundamental fairness principle of proportional representation is relevant in a variety of applications ranging from
recommender systems to digital democracy (Skowron et al.
2017). It features most explicitly in the context of political
elections, which is the language we adopt for this paper. In
this context, proportional representation prescribes that the
number of representatives championing a particular opinion
in a legislature be proportional to the number of voters who
favor that opinion.
In most democratic institutions, proportional representation is implemented via party-list elections: Candidates
are members of political parties and voters are asked to
indicate their favorite party; each party is then allocated
a number of seats that is (approximately) proportional to
the number of votes it received. The problem of transforming a voting outcome into a distribution of seats is known
as apportionment. Analyzing the advantages and disadvantages of different apportionment methods has a long and
illustrious political history and has given rise to a deep
and elegant mathematical theory (Balinski and Young 1982;
Pukelsheim 2014).
Unfortunately, forcing voters to choose a single party prevents them from communicating any preferences beyond
their most preferred alternative. For example, if a voter feels
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1854

