The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Embedding Convolution Neural Network-Based Defect Finder
for Deployed Vision Inspector in Manufacturing Company Frontec
Kyoung Jun Lee

Jun Woo Kwon

Big Data Research Center, Kyung Hee Univ. Dept. of Social Network Science
Benple Inc., Seoul, Korea
Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Korea
klee@khu.ac.kr
jwkwon@khu.ac.kr

Abstract
In collaboration with Frontec, which produces parts such as
bolts and nuts for the automobile industry, Kyung Hee University and Benple Inc. develop and deploy AI system for
automatic quality inspection of weld nuts. Various constraints to consider exist in adopting AI for the factory, such
as response time and limited computing resources available.
Our convolutional neural network (CNN) system using
large-scale images must classify weld nuts within 0.2 seconds with accuracy over 95%. We designed Circular
Hough Transform based preprocessing and an adjusted
VGG (Visual Geometry Group) model. The system showed
accuracy over 99% and response time of about 0.14 sec. We
use TCP / IP protocol to communicate the embedded classification system with an existing vision inspector using LabVIEW. We suggest ways to develop and embed a deep
learning framework in an existing manufacturing environment without a hardware change.

Introduction
Manufacturing industry is one of pioneering areas innovatively applying AI technologies in Korea as well as the
construction industry (Lee et al. 1995; Lee et al. 1998). We
introduce a Convolution Neural Network(CNN)-based system developed to distinguish the defect of weld nuts for a
manufacturing company of Korea. Prior to this system, the
company Frontec used an existing vision inspector to determine whether a weld nut is defective in size or it has no
thread with cameras. However, the customers of the company such as automobile manufacturers started to treat a
product as defective if its surface is a bit damaged even
though it has no functional defects. If such a defect was
found, the customers demanded investigation of all remaining products and Frontec’s staffs had to manually identify
defects to meet the request. However, it was not possible to
achieve consistent quality management because the inspecCopyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13164

Soohong Min Jungho Yoon
Frontec Co., Ltd.
Siheung City, Gyeonggi, Korea
{ft4161, yyunjungh}@hanmail.net

tion criteria were different for each employee and depended on the situation of the employee such as eye fatigue.
Therefore, it became necessary to automate the inspection
of the surface defect.
The speed of quality inspection should be within 0.2 seconds per weld nut and at least 95% defect classification
accuracy must be achieved. The size of the picture is 1920
× 1600. We develop a CNN-based system that satisfies
these requirements and can operate within constraints. Our
adjusted VGG (Visual Geometry Group)-based model has
an average accuracy of 98% or more on the normal/defect
classification problem.
By automating quality inspection, it was possible to
place the staff who had carried out the visual inspection,
which is a tiring task, into another task, and it was possible
to check products consistently through the equipment unlike the subjective person, thereby enhancing the reliability
of the product. This increases the efficiency and customer
satisfaction of manufacturing companies.
Quality inspection has used image processing techniques
and traditional machine learning, where extracting typical
domain characteristics requires various kinds of preprocessing using domain knowledge on the structure, statistics, filters, and model-based methodologies (Neogi et al.
2014). However, such manual designs of the traditional
machine learning methodologies may not be appropriate
for today's manufacturing companies, which have to switch
products frequently (Wang et al. 2018).
On the other hand, the performance of the CNN has become similar to or higher than that of humans in many domains (Weimer et al. 2016) and has been being tried in
product quality inspection (Masci et al. 2012). Since CNN
requires a lot of computations, it seemed difficult to be applied in environments with limited computing infrastructure or when product production is so fast.
Since the speed of quality inspection affects production
volume, the inspection should be carried out within the

