The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Task Learning with Generative Adversarial
Training for Multi-Passage Machine Reading Comprehension
Qiyu Ren, Xiang Cheng, ∗ Sen Su
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{qyren, chengxiang, susen}@bupt.edu.cn

MRC models are required to read these passages in order to
give the ﬁnal answer.

Abstract
Multi-passage machine reading comprehension (MRC) aims
to answer a question by multiple passages. Existing multipassage MRC approaches have shown that employing passages with and without golden answers (i.e. labeled and unlabeled passages) for model training can improve prediction accuracy. In this paper, we present MG-MRC, a novel approach
for multi-passage MRC via multi-task learning with generative adversarial training. MG-MRC adopts the extract-thenselect framework, where an extractor is ﬁrst used to predict
answer candidates, then a selector is used to choose the ﬁnal
answer. In MG-MRC, we adopt multi-task learning to train
the extractor by using both labeled and unlabeled passages.
In particular, we use labeled passages to train the extractor by
supervised learning, while using unlabeled passages to train
the extractor by generative adversarial training, where the extractor is regarded as the generator and a discriminator is introduced to evaluate the generated answer candidates. Moreover, to train the extractor by backpropagation in the generative adversarial training process, we propose a hybrid method
which combines boundary-based and content-based extracting methods to produce the answer candidate set and its representation. The experimental results on three open-domain
QA datasets conﬁrm the effectiveness of our approach.

Several recent multi-passage MRC approaches adopt an
extract-then-select framework (Wang et al. 2018b; 2018c;
2018d; Hu et al. 2019), where an extractor is ﬁrst used to
predict answer candidates from each retrieved passage, then
a selector is used to choose one of the answer candidates
as the ﬁnal answer. Some of them have shown that using
both labeled and unlabeled passages to train the extractor
can improve prediction accuracy. However, the usage of unlabeled passages for model training in these approaches has
the following drawbacks. The rule-based method, proposed
by Wang et al. (2018c), labels the answer candidates in unlabeled passages for training the extractor, which inevitably
incurs the wrong labeling problem. For the reinforcement
learning-based method proposed by Wang et al. (2018d), it
jointly trains the extractor and selector via policy gradient
using unlabeled passages and uses the correctness of the ﬁnal answer as the reward for each answer candidate. However, since there exist both right and wrong answer candidates in the answer candidate set, using the same reward for
them will introduce noises in the training process and degrade the performance of the extractor.
In this paper, we propose a novel multi-passage MRC
approach, called MG-MRC, which adopts the extract-thenselect framework and leverages labeled and unlabeled passages to train the extractor by multi-task learning (Ruder
2017) with generative adversarial training (Goodfellow et al.
2014). In MG-MRC, we adopt multi-task learning to train
the extractor by different tasks where labeled and unlabeled
passages are used respectively. In particular, we train the extractor to predict the golden answer from labeled passages.
Meanwhile, we regard the extractor as a generator and introduce a discriminator to train them by generative adversarial training using unlabeled passages, where the extractor is trained to obtain a higher score from the discriminator.
Thanks to the generative adversarial training, we do not have
to label the unlabeled passages and can evaluate each answer
candidate independently. As a result, we avoid the wrong labeling problem and the same reward problem. Existing study
(Goodfellow et al. 2014) has shown the advantage of adopting backpropagation in the generative adversarial training.

Introduction
Machine reading comprehension (MRC), which aims to
answer questions about one or more passages, is a longstanding objective in natural language processing. A significant milestone is that several MRC models have exceeded
the performance of human annotators on the SQuAD dataset
(Rajpurkar et al. 2016)1 . Considering the ultimate goal of
reading the whole web, however, this success is still not adequate while the SQuAD dataset only requires MRC models
to extract answer on single passage. Therefore, several latest datasets (Dunn et al. 2017; Dhingra, Mazaitis, and Cohen 2017; He et al. 2018) attempt to design MRC tasks in
more realistic settings. For each question, they use the search
engines to retrieve multiple passages and the multi-passage
∗
The corresponding author of this paper is Xiang Cheng.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer/

8705

