The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An ADMM Based Framework for AutoML Pipeline Conﬁguration
Sijia Liu,† Parikshit Ram,† Deepak Vijaykeerthy, Djallel Bouneffouf, Gregory Bramble,
Horst Samulowitz, Dakuo Wang, Andrew Conn, Alexander Gray
†

IBM Research AI
Equal contributions

method of multipliers (ADMM). ADMM offers a two-block
alternating optimization procedure that splits an involved
problem (with multiple variables & constraints) into simpler
sub-problems (Boyd and others 2011)
Contributions. Starting with a combinatorially large set
of algorithm candidates and their collective set of hyperparameters, we utilize ADMM to decompose the AutoML
problem into three problems: (i) HPO with a small set of
only continuous variables & constraints, (ii) a closed-form
Euclidean projection onto an integer set, and (iii) a combinatorial problem of algorithm selection. Moreover, we exploit the ADMM framework to handle any black-box constraints alongside the black-box objective (loss) function –
the above decomposition seamlessly incorporates such constraints while retaining almost the same sub-problems.
Our contributions are: (i) We explicitly model the coupling
between hyper-parameters and available algorithms, and exploit the hidden structure in the AutoML problem (Section
3). (ii) We employ ADMM to decompose the problem into
a sequence of sub-problems (Section 4.1), which decouple
the difﬁculties in AutoML and can each be solved more efﬁciently and effectively, demonstrating over 10× speedup and
10% improvement in many cases.(iii) We present the ﬁrst
AutoML framework that explicitly handles general black-box
constraints (Section 4.2). (iv) We demonstrate the ﬂexibility
and effectiveness of the ADMM-based scheme empirically
against popular AutoML toolkits Auto-sklearn (Feurer et al.
2015) & TPOT (Olson and Moore 2016) (Section 5), performing best on 50% of the datasets; Auto-sklearn performed
best on 27% and TPOT on 20%.

Abstract
We study the AutoML problem of automatically conﬁguring
machine learning pipelines by jointly selecting algorithms and
their appropriate hyper-parameters for all steps in supervised
learning pipelines. This black-box (gradient-free) optimization
with mixed integer & continuous variables is a challenging
problem. We propose a novel AutoML scheme by leveraging
the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM). The
proposed framework is able to (i) decompose the optimization
problem into easier sub-problems that have a reduced number
of variables and circumvent the challenge of mixed variable
categories, and (ii) incorporate black-box constraints alongside the black-box optimization objective. We empirically
evaluate the ﬂexibility (in utilizing existing AutoML techniques), effectiveness (against open source AutoML toolkits),
and unique capability (of executing AutoML with practically
motivated black-box constraints) of our proposed scheme on
a collection of binary classiﬁcation data sets from UCI ML
& OpenML repositories. We observe that on an average our
framework provides signiﬁcant gains in comparison to other
AutoML frameworks (Auto-sklearn & TPOT), highlighting
the practical advantages of this framework.

1

Introduction

Automated machine learning (AutoML) research has received increasing attention. The focus has shifted from hyperparameter optimization (HPO) for the best conﬁguration of a
single machine learning (ML) algorithm (Snoek, Larochelle,
and Adams 2012), to conﬁguring multiple stages of a ML
pipeline (e.g., transformations, feature selection, predictive
modeling) (Feurer et al. 2015), to AutoML user experience
in the real world (Wang and others 2019). Among the widerange of research challenges offered by AutoML, we focus on
the automatic pipeline conﬁguration problem (that is, joint
algorithm selection and HPO), and tackle it from the perspective of mixed continuous-integer black-box nonlinear
programming. This problem has two main challenges: (i)
the tight coupling between the ML algorithm selection &
HPO; and (ii) the black-box nature of optimization objective
lacking any explicit functional form and gradients – optimization feedback is only available in the form of function
evaluations. We propose a new AutoML framework to address these challenges by leveraging the alternating direction

2

Related work

Black-box optimization in AutoML. Beyond grid-search
for HPO, random search is a very competitive baseline because of its simplicity and parallelizability (Bergstra and
Bengio 2012). Sequential model-based optimization (SMBO)
(Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011) is a common technique with different ‘models’ such as Gaussian processes
(Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012), random forests (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011) and tree-parzen estimators (Bergstra et al. 2011). However, black-box optimization
is a time consuming process because the expensive blackbox function evaluation involves model training and scoring
(on a held-out set). Efﬁcient multi-ﬁdelity approximations

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4892

