The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Harmonious Coexistence of Structured Weight
Pruning and Ternarization for Deep Neural Networks
Li Yang, Zhezhi He, Deliang Fan
School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287
{lyang166, zhezhi he, dfan}@asu.edu

Table 1: Comparison of DNN compression techniques.
Comp. and Acc. are abbreviation of Compression and Accuracy. Speciﬁc values are reported in Table 6.

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural network (DNN) has demonstrated
phenomenal success and been widely used in many computer vision tasks. However, its enormous model size and
high computing complexity prohibits its wide deployment
into resource limited embedded system, such as FPGA and
mGPU. As the two most widely adopted model compression
techniques, weight pruning and quantization compress DNN
model through introducing weight sparsity (i.e., forcing partial weights as zeros) and quantizing weights into limited bitwidth values, respectively. Although there are works attempting to combine the weight pruning and quantization, we still
observe disharmony between weight pruning and quantization, especially when more aggressive compression schemes
(e.g., Structured pruning and low bit-width quantization) are
used. In this work, taking FPGA as the test computing platform and Processing Elements (PE) as the basic parallel computing unit, we ﬁrst propose a PE-wise structured pruning
scheme, which introduces weight sparsiﬁcation with considering of the architecture of PE. In addition, we integrate it
with an optimized weight ternarization approach which quantizes weights into ternary values ({−1, 0, +1}), thus converting the dominant convolution operations in DNN from
multiplication-and-accumulation (MAC) to addition-only, as
well as compressing the original model (from 32-bit ﬂoating point to 2-bit ternary representation) by at least 16 times.
Then, we investigate and solve the coexistence issue between PE-wise Structured pruning and ternarization, through
proposing a Weight Penalty Clipping (WPC) technique with
self-adapting threshold. Our experiment shows that the fusion
of our proposed techniques can achieve the best state-of-theart ∼ 21× PE-wise structured compression rate with merely
1.74%/0.94% (top-1/top-5) accuracy degradation of ResNet18 on ImageNet dataset.

Group-Lasso pruning
Weight ternarization
Naive combination
This work

Structured
sparsity





Quantized
weight





Comp.
rate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
High

Acc.
drop
Low
Low
Moderate
Low

connections. However, from the perspectives of hardware
acceleration, DNNs still suffer from the obstacle of lightweight hardware deployment owing to the massive cost
in both computation and storage. For instance, VGG-16
(Sung, Shin, and Hwang 2015) from ImageNet (ILSVRC
2014) requires 552MB parameters and 30.8 GFLOP per image, which is difﬁcult to deploy in resource-limited mobile
systems. Many recent works have been proposed to compress large DNNs, mainly including network quantization
(Hubara et al. 2017), low-rank approximation (Denton and
others 2014), weight pruning (Han et al. 2015) and knowledge distillation (Hinton and others 2015).
Weight pruning reduces model size via making partial
weights as zero-value. Previous studies of weight pruning
can be generally put into two categories: non-structured
pruning (Han et al. 2015; Han, Mao, and Dally 2015) and
structured pruning (Lebedev and Lempitsky 2016; Liu et al.
2015; Wen et al. 2016). The main difference between these
two counterparts is the regularity of sparse weight pattern after pruning. The non-structured pruning attempts to generate
highly irregular sparse weight pattern, targeting to achieve
highest sparsity, which makes it extremely difﬁcult to encode sparse weight efﬁciently due to the sparse indexing.
Even though the non-structured pruning normally shows less
compression accuracy degradation owing to its relatively
higher pruning ﬂexibility, its performance improvement on
hardware deployment is not quite tempting. In contrast to
that, the structured pruning introduces weight sparsiﬁcation
in a regular fashion (e.g., kernel-wise/channel-wise (Wen et
al. 2016)), which makes it more hardware friendly for hardware deployment.

Introduction
In the last couple of years, the climate of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, especially deep learning, has swept various domains owing to its prominent performance over traditional
methods (LeCun and others 2015). Nowadays, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) grow into more complex structures
consisting of deeper layers, larger model size, and denser
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6623

