The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GAN-Based Unpaired Chinese Character Image
Translation via Skeleton Transformation and Stroke Rendering
Yiming Gao, Jiangqin Wu
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{gor yatming, wujq}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The automatic style translation of Chinese characters (CHChar) is a challenging problem. Different from English or
general artistic style transfer, Chinese characters contain a
large number of glyphs with the complicated content and
characteristic style. Early methods on CH-Char synthesis are
inefﬁcient and require manual intervention. Recently some
GAN-based methods are proposed for font generation. The
supervised GAN-based methods require numerous image
pairs, which is difﬁcult for many chirography styles. In addition, unsupervised methods often cause the blurred and incorrect strokes. Therefore, in this work, we propose a threestage Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) architecture
for multi-chirography image translation, which is divided into
skeleton extraction, skeleton transformation and stroke rendering with unpaired training data. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst propose a fast skeleton extraction method (ENet). Secondly, we
utilize the extracted skeleton and the original image to train
a GAN model, RNet (a stroke rendering network), to learn
how to render the skeleton with stroke details in target style.
Finally, the pre-trained model RNet is employed to assist another GAN model, TNet (a skeleton transformation network),
to learn to transform the skeleton structure on the unlabeled
skeleton set. We demonstrate the validity of our method on
two chirography datasets we established.

Figure 1: The overview of our method. The middle shows
the translation of ”yong” in our method. The top and bottom
show the ground truths of ”yong”. The color boxes mean the
corresponding stroke details during the process. To visually
distinguish different strokes, we utilize different colors to
mark the relevant strokes in the ﬁgure.
2005; Zhang, Wu, and Yu 2010) and the image assemblybased methods(Xu et al. 2005; Du, Wu, and Xia 2016). However, these methods are inefﬁcient and dedicated, requiring
manual intervention, which also lead to unrealistic results.
Recently, many deep learning-based methods (Gatys,
Ecker, and Bethge 2016; Li and Wand 2016; Johnson, Alahi,
and Fei-Fei 2016) achieve satisfactory results in texture features transfer tasks such as photography to artwork, but
fail in large geometric variations. Moreover, a variety of
GAN-based methods, e.g. PixPix (Isola et al. 2017) and
CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017), offer the general-purpose solution for image-to-image translation. Subsequently, some
font generation methods based on them are proposed, such
as zi2zi(Tian 2017), MC-GAN(Azadi et al. 2018), CalliGAN(Gao and Wu 2019) etc.
However, it is difﬁcult and expensive to collect adequate
training pairs for the Pix2Pix-based methods in many cases,
e.g. calligraphy fonts, due to the damage and loss in the
long history and the complexity and diversity of CH-Chars.
Moreover, unlike the photo-to-artwork task, CH-Chars is
only black and white, so the subtle errors of skeleton and
stroke are obvious and unacceptable, while the CycleGANbased methods often cause falseness and blur. In order to

Introduction
Chinese characters (CH-Chars) are a complicated and ancient art with the carrier of Chinese culture, of which aesthetic value attracts calligraphy lovers to imitate the works
of famous calligraphers. To achieve visually-pleasing imitation, amounts of time and repetitive training are necessary. Unlike English, CH-Chars contain thousands of glyphs
and various chirography styles that have great differences in
the overall structure and stroke details. Therefore, automatic
multi-chirography style translation of CH-Chars from some
observed instances is a meaningful and challenging task.
Early researchs on CH-Char synthesis mainly include
the brush model-based methods(Wong and Ip 2000; Wu et
al. 2006), the rendering manuscript methods(Yu and Peng
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
646

