The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Automated Conversation Review to Surface Virtual
Assistant Misunderstandings: Reducing Cost and Increasing Privacy
Ian Beaver

Abdullah Mueen

Verint - Next IT
Spokane Valley, WA USA
ian.beaver@verint.com

Department of Computer Science
University of New Mexico, USA
mueen@unm.edu

is also subjective since reviewers may disagree on the user
intention for any given turn in a conversation. In addition,
as the IVA improves, errors in communication appear less
often in a random sample due to their dwindling numbers.
A recent challenge is public outcry over the human review
of IVA conversation logs for the purpose of language understanding veriﬁcation, due to privacy concerns. By the use of
an automated system for conversation review, problematic
interactions can still be surfaced without exposing the entire
set of logs to human reviewers, minimizing privacy invasion.
In this paper we discuss a scalable system to process
all conversations and autonomously mark the interactions
where the IVA is misunderstanding the user. Our system provides cost savings to companies deploying IVAs by reducing
the time human reviewers spend looking at conversations
with no misunderstandings present. It also enables a shorter
reﬁnement cycle as problems are surfaced quickly and more
reliably than a random sample or conﬁdence metric based
review. The core of our system was originally published
in (Beaver and Freeman 2016; Beaver 2018) and has been in
production as a commercial application for over three years.
Initially created as an application internal to our company,
recently we have made the system available to external partners due to its success at reducing annotation costs.

Abstract
With the rise of Intelligent Virtual Assistants (IVAs), there is a
necessary rise in human effort to identify conversations containing misunderstood user inputs. These conversations uncover error in natural language understanding and help prioritize and expedite improvements to the IVA. As human reviewer time is valuable and manual analysis is time consuming, prioritizing the conversations where misunderstanding
has likely occurred reduces costs and speeds improvement. In
addition, less conversations reviewed by humans mean less
user data is exposed, increasing privacy. We present a scalable system for automated conversation review that can identify potential miscommunications. Our system provides IVA
designers with suggested actions to ﬁx errors in IVA understanding, prioritizes areas of language model repair, and automates the review of conversations where desired.
Verint - Next IT builds IVAs on behalf of other companies
and organizations, and therefore analyzes large volumes of
conversational data. Our review system has been in production for over three years and saves our company roughly $1.5
million in annotation costs yearly, as well as shortened the reﬁnement cycle of production IVAs. In this paper, the system
design is discussed and performance in identifying errors in
IVA understanding is compared to that of human reviewers.

Introduction

Background

Intelligent Virtual Assistants (IVAs) such as Amazon’s
Alexa or Apple’s Siri along with specialized agents for customer service and sales support are exploding in popularity (Ram et al. 2018). The continued adoption of IVAs is
contributing to a growing problem. How do we reﬁne an
IVA’s knowledge effectively and efﬁciently? As IVA use as
well as the number of tasks an IVA is expected to perform
increases, there is a corresponding jump in the number of
human-computer interactions to be reviewed for quality assurance. Therefore, discovering a means to expedite review
and analysis of these interactions is critical.
Without scalable and efﬁcient methods of automated conversation review, IVA designers must rely solely on human
reviewers to validate expected behavior of the IVAs. As this
is a manual and time consuming process, the reviewers are
only able to view a limited number of interactions. The result

Common to all IVAs is a Natural Langauge Understanding
(NLU) component (Ram et al. 2018). The NLU maps user
inputs, or conversational turns, to a derived semantic representation commonly known as the intent, an interpretation of a statement or question that allows one to formulate
the ‘best’ response. The collection of syntax, semantics, and
grammar rules that deﬁnes how input language maps to an
intent within the NLU is referred to by us as a language
model. The language model may be trained through machine learning methods or manually constructed by human
experts (Zhao and Eskenazi 2016). Manually constructed
symbolic models requires humans to observe and formalize these language rules while machine-learned models use
algorithms to observe and approximate them.
Regardless of implementation details, to improve the language models and for quality assurance, human-computer
interactions need to be continuously reviewed. Improvements include the addition of vocabulary and new rules

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13140

