The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Swap Stability in Schelling Games on Graphs
Aishwarya Agarwal, Edith Elkind, Jiarui Gan, Alexandros A. Voudouris
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
aishwarya.agarwal@keble.ox.ac.uk, {edith.elkind, jiarui.gan, alexandros.voudouris}@cs.ox.ac.uk

proach. Variants of the model have also been rigorously analyzed in a series of papers (Young 2001; Zhang 2004a;
Brandt et al. 2012; Barmpalias, Elwes, and Lewis-Pye 2014;
Bhakta, Miracle, and Randall 2014; Barmpalias, Elwes, and
Lewis-Pye 2015; Immorlica et al. 2017), which showed that
the random behavior of the agents leads with high probability to the formation of large monochromatic regions.
While all these papers focused on settings where the
agents’ behavior is random, it is more realistic to assume instead that the agents are strategic and move only when they
have an opportunity to improve their situation. So far, only
a few papers have followed such a game-theoretic approach.
In particular, Zhang (2004b) considered a game where the
agents optimize a single-peaked utility function, and very
recently, Chauhan, Lenzner, and Molitor (2018), Elkind et
al. (2019) and Echzell et al. (2019) studied strategic settings
that are closer to the original model of Schelling, but capture
more than two agent types and richer graph topologies.
In particular, Chauhan, Lenzner, and Molitor (2018) study
a setting with two types of agents, who have preferred locations, and can either swap with other agents or jump to
empty positions. For a given tolerance threshold τ ∈ (0, 1],
each agent’s primary goal is to maximize the fraction of her
neighbors that are of her own type as long as this fraction is
below τ (with all fractions above τ being equally good); her
secondary goal is to be as close as possible to her preferred
location. For both types of games (swap and jump), Chauhan
et al. identify values of τ for which the best response dynamics of the agents leads to an equilibrium when the topology
is a ring or a regular graph. Echzell et al. (2019) strengthen
these results and extend them to more than two agent types,
as well as study the complexity of computing assignments
that maximize the number of happy agents.
Elkind et al. (2019) consider a similar model with k types;
however, they treat agents’ location preferences differently
from Chauhan et al. Namely, in their model each agent is
either stubborn (i.e., has a preferred location and is unwilling to move) or strategic (i.e., aims to maximize the fraction
of her neighbors that are of her own type; this corresponds
to setting τ = 1 in the model of Chauhan et. al.). They focus on jump games, i.e., games where agents may jump to
empty positions, and analyze the existence and complexity

Abstract
We study a recently introduced class of strategic games that
is motivated by and generalizes Schelling’s well-known residential segregation model. These games are played on undirected graphs, with the set of agents partitioned into multiple types; each agent either occupies a node of the graph and
never moves away or aims to maximize the fraction of her
neighbors who are of her own type. We consider a variant of
this model that we call swap Schelling games, where the number of agents is equal to the number of nodes of the graph, and
agents may swap positions with other agents to increase their
utility. We study the existence, computational complexity and
quality of equilibrium assignments in these games, both from
a social welfare perspective and from a diversity perspective.

1

Introduction

Segregation is observed in many communities; people tend
to group together on the basis of politics, religion, or socioeconomic status. This phenomenon has been extensively
documented in residential metropolitan areas, where people
may select where to live based on the racial composition
of the neighborhoods. To formalize and study how the motives of individuals lead to residential segregation, Thomas
Schelling (1969; 1971) proposed the following simple, yet
elegant model. There are two types of agents who are to be
placed on a line or a grid. An agent is happy with her location
if at least a fraction τ ∈ (0, 1] of the agents within a certain
radius are of the same type as her. Happy agents do not want
to move, but unhappy agents are willing to do so in hopes
of improving their current situation. Schelling described a
dynamic process where at each step unhappy agents jump
to random open positions or swap positions with other randomly selected agents, and showed that it can lead to a completely segregated placement, even if the agents themselves
are tolerant of mixed neighborhoods (τ < 1/2).
Over the years, Schelling’s work became very popular
among researchers in Sociology and Economics, who proposed and studied numerous variants of his model, mainly
via agent-based simulations; see the paper of Clark and Fossett (2008) and references therein for examples of this apc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1758

