The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

PARTNER: Human-in-the-Loop Entity Name Understanding with Deep Learning
Kun Qian, Poornima Chozhiyath Raman, Yunyao Li, Lucian Popa
IBM Research – Almaden
qian.kun@ibm.com, {pchozhi, yunyaoli, lpopa}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Entity name disambiguation is an important task for many
text-based AI tasks. Entity names usually have internal semantic structures that are useful for resolving different variations of the same entity. We present, PARTNER, a deep
learning-based interactive system for entity name understanding. Powered by effective active learning and weak supervision, PARTNER can learn deep learning-based models
for identifying entity name structure with low human effort.
PARTNER also allows the user to design complex normalization and variant generation functions without coding skills.

Figure 1: Structure of sample company entities
based on (Bhutani et al. 2018), an active learning based
system called LUSTRE (Qian et al. 2018) has been developed to automatically generate rule-based models that identify the semantic structures of named entities. The rules
learned by LUSTRE are sequences of regex-based matchers
and dictionary-based matchers that deﬁne different sequence
patterns. The availability of a list of comprehensive, accurate, and complete dictionaries is fundamental to the success
of LUSTRE, otherwise the learned rules do not take into account any semantic information and are sensitive to noisy
data (e.g., misspelling). Moreover, LUSTRE does not support incremental learning or transfer learning.
We present PARTNER (deeP leArning foR enTity
uNdERstanding), an interactive system that learns deep
learning-based models for parsing the semantic structures
of named entities. PARTNER has an intuitive user interface
for specifying sophisticated entity normalization and variant
generation functions with no coding skill needed.

Understanding entity name variations can be helpful for
many text-based AI tasks such as knowledge base curation, data integration, and information retrieval. Textbased similarity functions are widely used in these applications to resolve entity names (e.g., (Qian, Popa, and
Sen 2017)). However, entity names can be highly ambiguous and text-based similarity functions are not sophisticated enough for resolving complex entity variations. For
example, “General Electric (CN) Company” and
“General Electric Company” are textually similar
but referring to different entities. On the other hand, “GE
Co.” and “General Electric Company” are referring to the same entity even if they are textually dissimilar.
Entity names often have internal semantic structure consisting of various semantic units (see Figure 1), which
are crucial for entity normalization and variant generation
(Bhutani et al. 2018; Arasu and Kaushik 2009). Speciﬁcally, if we can identify that “General Electric” is
the corename unit and “Company” is the sufﬁx unit,
we can perform unit-level transformations such as creating initials for corename (e.g., General Electric
→ GE) and abbreviating sufﬁx (i.e., Company → Co.),
and eventually we get “GE Co.”. In this way, “General
Electric Company” and “GE Co.” can be resolved as
the same name even though they are textually dissimilar.
Although it is possible to let a programmer to manually
write type-speciﬁc algorithms to identify semantic structures
of entity names (e.g., (Arasu and Kaushik 2009)), it is laborintensive, time-consuming, and does not scale. Therefore,

Methodology
Learning framework. Parsing the semantic structures of
entity names can be viewed as a sequence tagging problem (see Figure 1). Deep BiLSTM-CRF models have been
shown to achieve state-of-the-art performance on sequence
tagging problems (Huang, Xu, and Yu 2015). However, deep
learning methods are known for data hungry. In our settings,
we initially do not have any annotated examples. To address
the data hungriness issue and minimize human effort, we
use active learning to iteratively ﬁnd the most “informative/uncertain” example to be labeled by the user; we also
use weak supervision to augment the training data by automatically generate a number of high-quality pseudo labels.
Our BiLSTM-CRF approach can use either use pretrained
fastText embeddings or use pretrained BERT models to gen-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13634

