The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation on Reading Comprehension
Yu Cao,1 Meng Fang,2∗ Baosheng Yu,1 Joey Tianyi Zhou3
1

UBTECH Sydney AI Center, School of Computer Science, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Australia
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Waikato, New Zealand
3
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore
ycao8647@uni.sydney.edu.au, meng.fang@waikato.ac.nz, baosheng.yu@sydney.edu.au, zhouty@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg

datasets (Yogatama et al. 2019). In fact, the same conclusion can be drawn for BERT according to our experiment,
e.g., the performance drops on CNN dataset using the model
trained on SQ UAD. Therefore, studies to eliminate such
performance gaps between various datasets deserve effort.

Abstract
Reading comprehension (RC) has been studied in a variety of
datasets with the boosted performance brought by deep neural networks. However, the generalization capability of these
models across different domains remains unclear. To alleviate
the problem, we investigate unsupervised domain adaptation
on RC, wherein a model is trained on the labeled source domain and to be applied to the target domain with only unlabeled samples. We ﬁrst show that even with the powerful BERT contextual representation, a model can not generalize well from one domain to another. To solve this, we
provide a novel conditional adversarial self-training method
(CASe). Speciﬁcally, our approach leverages a BERT model
ﬁne-tuned on the source dataset along with the conﬁdence
ﬁltering to generate reliable pseudo-labeled samples in the
target domain for self-training. On the other hand, it further
reduces domain distribution discrepancy through conditional
adversarial learning across domains. Extensive experiments
show our approach achieves comparable performance to supervised models on multiple large-scale benchmark datasets.

A potential direction to handle it is transferring knowledge from a labeled source domain to a different unlabeled
target domain, which is known as unsupervised domain
adaptation (Pan and Yang 2010), leveraging data from both
domains. However, very few works have studied unsupervised domain adaptation on RC tasks. Although Chung, Lee,
and Glass adapted models using a vanilla self-training, its
self-labeling approach cannot ensure the labeling accuracy
on the target domain that differs much from the source domain. Besides, it is only applied to some small RC datasets,
so its effectiveness on large-scale datasets remains unclear
and no general representation is learned. Research on large
datasets is more meaningful, since they contains more different patterns than small ones. They pose a greater challenge and better ﬁtting realistic conditions, being the basis
to build strong deep neural models. In addition, analyzing
the possible inﬂuential factors for transfer is also necessary,
which provides guide for adaptation. Nevertheless, very limited works contribute to it (Talmor and Berant 2019).

Introduction
Reading comprehension (RC) is a widely studied topic
in Natural Language Processing (NLP) due to its value
in human-machine interaction. In past relevant research,
a variety of large-scale RC datasets were proposed, e.g.,
CNN/DAILY M AIL (Hermann et al. 2015), SQ UAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), N EWS QA (Trischler et al. 2016),
C O QA (Reddy, Chen, and Manning 2018) and DROP (Dua
et al. 2019). With a large number of annotations, these
datasets make training end-to-end deep neural models possible (Wang et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2018). Recent studies also
show that BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) model achieves higher
answer accuracy than human on SQ UAD.
However, only unlabeled data is available in many realworld applications. It is a common challenge that machine
can learn knowledge well enough in one domain and then
answer questions in other domains without any labels. Unfortunately, the generalization capabilities of some existing
RC neural models were proven to be weak across different

In this paper, to make use of numerous unlabeled samples in real applications, we focus on unsupervised domain
adaptation on large RC datasets. We propose a novel adaptation method, named as Conditional Adversarial Self-training
(CASe). A ﬁne-tuned BERT model will be obtained on the
source domain ﬁrstly. Then speciﬁcally, in the adaptation
stage, an alternated training strategy is applied, containing
self-training and conditional adversarial learning in each
epoch. The pseudo-labeled samples of the target dataset generated by the last model along with low-conﬁdence ﬁltering will be used for self-training. Compared to the method
in (Chung, Lee, and Glass 2017), the ﬁltering prevent model
from learning error target domain distribution especially for
large datasets. The conditional adversarial learning, whose
discriminator input combines BERT features and ﬁnal output logits, is utilized because the conditioning generates
more comprehensive information than feature only. It encourages the model to learn generalized representations and

∗

Corresponding author: M.Fang (meng.fang@waikato.ac.nz)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7480

