The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Semi-Supervised Multi-Modal Learning with Balanced Spectral Decomposition
Peng Hu,1 Hongyuan Zhu,1 Xi Peng,2 Jie Lin1∗
1

Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
2
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
{penghu.ml, hongyuanzhu.cn, pengx.gm}@gmail.com, lin-j@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

namely cross-modal retrieval (Peng, Qi, and Yuan 2018;
Hu et al. 2019a). However, it is still challenging to correlate
different modalities because distinct modalities lie in completely disparate spaces. In other words, the different modalities cannot be directly compared with each other due to the
large cross-modal gap among them, i.e., the so-called “heterogeneous gap”.

Abstract
Cross-modal retrieval aims to retrieve the relevant samples
across different modalities, of which the key problem is
how to model the correlations among different modalities
while narrowing the large heterogeneous gap. In this paper,
we propose a Semi-supervised Multimodal Learning Network method (SMLN) which correlates different modalities
by capturing the intrinsic structure and discriminative correlation of the multimedia data. To be speciﬁc, the labeled
and unlabeled data are used to construct a similarity matrix
which integrates the cross-modal correlation, discrimination,
and intra-modal graph information existing in the multimedia data. What is more important is that we propose a novel
optimization approach to optimize our loss within a neural
network which involves a spectral decomposition problem
derived from a ratio trace criterion. Our optimization enjoys
two advantages given below. On the one hand, the proposed
approach is not limited to our loss, which could be applied
to any case that is a neural network with the ratio trace criterion. On the other hand, the proposed optimization is different from existing ones which alternatively maximize the
minor eigenvalues, thus overemphasizing the minor eigenvalues and ignore the dominant ones. In contrast, our method
will exactly balance all eigenvalues, thus being more competitive to existing methods. Thanks to our loss and optimization strategy, our method could well preserve the discriminative and instinct information into the common space and embrace the scalability in handling large-scale multimedia data.
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, extensive
experiments are carried out on three widely-used multimodal
datasets comparing with 13 state-of-the-art approaches.

To narrow the heterogeneous gap, some multimodal approaches proposed projecting multimedia data into a latent
common space in which the similarity between any two
samples from different modalities can be calculated. These
methods can be roughly classiﬁed into three categories: unsupervised (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015; Zhang et al. 2018a;
Gu et al. 2018), supervised (Kan et al. 2016; Hu et al.
2019b), and semi-supervised (Zhai, Peng, and Xiao 2014;
Zhang et al. 2018b) approaches. The unsupervised methods
attempt to learn multiple modality-speciﬁc transformations
by maximizing the correlations among different modalities,
which ignore some semantic information in the multimedia data. To use the label information, some supervised and
semi-supervised methods are proposed to preserve the discrimination into the latent common space (Kan et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2018b). Although supervised cross-modal methods have achieved promising performance by utilizing the
label information, they entirely rely on the labeled data and
have faced two problems: 1) it is time and cost-prohibitive
to collect well-annotated data (Zhang et al. 2018c; 2019).
Especially, considering the multimedia data, such a task is
more undesirable since multiple modalities will remarkably
increase the labeling workload; 2) a large number of unlabeled data are much easier to obtain, but they cannot be
used by the supervised approaches. Therefore, it is particularly important to boost the cross-modal retrieval performance by fully exploiting these unlabeled data. To the end,
some semi-supervised cross-modal methods have been proposed to employ the intrinsic structure of the multimedia
data and show promising performance in cross-modal retrieval (Zhai, Peng, and Xiao 2014; Zhang et al. 2018b).
However, they have to compute the graph matrix based on
the whole training dataset, which leads to high computational and space complexity, thus making difﬁculty in handling large-scale multimodal data. Furthermore, most ex-

Introduction
With the rapid growth of multimedia data such as image,
text, and audio on the Internet, there are increasing demands on developing various applications to handle this
data, such as classiﬁcation (Guan et al. 2015), clustering (Xu
et al. 2018; Peng et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019), and retrieval (Deng et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2019b). Over the past
decades, more and more attention has been attracted by retrieving the interested contents across different modalities,
∗

Corresponding author: Jie Lin.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
99

