The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Machine Number Sense: A Dataset of Visual
Arithmetic Problems for Abstract and Relational Reasoning
Wenhe Zhang,1,3 Chi Zhang,1,2 Yixin Zhu,1,2 Song-Chun Zhu1,2
1

UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy
2
International Center for AI and Robot Autonomy (CARA)
3
Peking University
wenhe@pku.edu.cn, {chi.zhang, yixin.zhu}@ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Dealing with numbers seems to be a simple task and an
innate competence: even newborn infants can discriminate
basic numerosities, expressing their surprise when the number of stimuli changes from two to three (Starkey and Cooper
1980). Meanwhile, processing numbers is also a painstaking
challenge and a learned skill; it always takes years of efforts
for students to practice calculations and more complicated
computations. Such a numerical competence is, in fact, very
unique; only few other animals possess similar capabilities
(and at a much smaller scale compared to human) (Davis
and Pérusse 1988; Gallistel 1989; 1990; Brannon and Terrace 1998; Dehaene, Dehaene-Lambertz, and Cohen 1998;
Cantlon and Brannon 2007; Jacob and Nieder 2008; Nieder
and Dehaene 2009). What is the underlying mechanism of
human numerical thinking and the concepts of number? And
how to endow a similar capability to machine intelligence?
The number sense (Dehaene 2011), a psychological terminology, provides an explanation about the cognitive process
of numbers for both human and animals. It refers to the understanding of number concepts, the competence of numerical
operations (including counting, comparison, estimation, and
calculation), and the ability to ﬂexibly solve mathematical
problems (Bobis 1996). People characteristic of good number
sense usually possess the abilities of ﬂuent magnitude perception, reasonable result expectation, ﬂexible mental computation, and appropriate presentation formulation (Kalchman,
Moss, and Case 2001). Below, we summarize four key observations from the vast body of literature on number sense.

Abstract
As a comprehensive indicator of mathematical thinking and
intelligence, the number sense (Dehaene 2011) bridges the induction of symbolic concepts and the competence of problemsolving. To endow such a crucial cognitive ability to machine
intelligence, we propose a dataset, Machine Number Sense
(MNS), consisting of visual arithmetic problems automatically
generated using a grammar model—And-Or Graph (AOG).
These visual arithmetic problems are in the form of geometric ﬁgures: each problem has a set of geometric shapes as its
context and embedded number symbols. Solving such problems is not trivial; the machine not only has to recognize the
number, but also to interpret the number with its contexts,
shapes, and relations (e.g., symmetry) together with proper
operations. We benchmark the MNS dataset using four predominant neural network models as baselines in this visual
reasoning task. Comprehensive experiments show that current neural-network-based models still struggle to understand
number concepts and relational operations. We show that a
simple brute-force search algorithm could work out some of
the problems without context information. Crucially, taking
geometric context into account by an additional perception
module would provide a sharp performance gain with fewer
search steps. Altogether, we call for attention in fusing the
classic search-based algorithms with modern neural networks
to discover the essential number concepts in future research.

1

Introduction

Number is the ruler of forms and ideas, and the cause of
gods and demons.
— Pythagoras, c. 300 (Taylor 1818)
Mathematics is arguably the most elegant and vivid reﬂection of human intelligence, covering the areas of geometry,
arithmetic, algebra, and analysis (Simpson and Weiner 1989).
It is the science of logic reasoning, the discipline of abstract
forms, and the realm of symbolic languages. Among all the
mathematical symbols, numbers are the most familiar and
vital elements to us. Although the opinions of Pythagoras that
“all is number” are controversial and extreme, the signiﬁcance
of the numbers can never be overestimated: people from all
walks of life embrace numbers every day.

Learned vs. Innate Number sense is developed in acquired environments in addition to our innate capability.
Five-month-old infants have already possessed the capacity to represent cardinality and can engage in rudimentary
arithmetics—basic addition and subtraction operations on
small sets of objects (Wynn 1992). Older children gradually
learn to establish the abstract connections between the magnitude of the quantities and the symbolic expression of the
numbers, which are the foundation of further comparisons
and calculations (Temple and Posner 1998). Symbolic numerical processing skills, different from the processing abilities
of countable non-symbolic objects, are more closely related
to mathematical competence (Schneider et al. 2017). As for

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1332

