The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CFGNN: Cross Flow Graph Neural
Networks for Question Answering on Complex Tables
Xuanyu Zhang
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
xyz@mail.bnu.edu.cn

Database:

Abstract

Column Name

…

Question answering on complex tables is a challenging task
for machines. In the Spider, a large-scale complex table
dataset, relationships between tables and columns can be easily modeled as graph. But most of graph neural networks
(GNNs) ignore the relationship of sibling nodes and use summation as aggregation function to model the relationship of
parent-child nodes. It may cause nodes with less degrees,
like column nodes in schema graph, to obtain little information. And the context information is important for natural
language. To leverage more context information ﬂow comprehensively, we propose novel cross ﬂow graph neural networks
in this paper. The information ﬂows of parent-child and sibling nodes cross with history states between different layers.
Besides, we use hierarchical encoding layer to obtain contextualized representation in tables. Experiments on the Spider
show that our approach achieves substantial performance improvement comparing with previous GNN models and their
variants.

1

department_store

Table Name
products product_id
product
product_
_id
suppliers

product_name

supplier
_id

supplier_
addresses supplier_id

product_price

total_
amount_
purchased

date_from

total_value
_purchased
date_to

Question: What are the average amount purchased and
value purchased for the supplier who supplies the
most products.

SQL:

Introduction

Table based question answering (TB-QA) is an important
branch of question answering on structured data. It is a
challenging task for machines to comprehend given tables
and answer corresponding questions. It can help people
obtain information easily without understanding complex
logic forms. Different from machine reading comprehension
(MRC), the answer in TB-QA may be some statistical ﬁgures, which can not be obtained directly from the origin text.
Based on this, semantic parsing (Zelle and Mooney 1996)
is used for this task. Once a natural language question is
mapped to a SQL query by semantic parsing, the answer
can be obtained indirectly by executing SQL queries on a
database engine.
Recently, with the rapid development of deep learning,
sequence-to-sequence (Cho et al. 2014) architectures are
used by many models (Yu et al. 2018a; Dong and Lapata 2018; Shi et al. 2018) for neural semantic parsing and
achieve state-of-the-art results on some datasets. However,
previous datasets, such as WikiSQL (Zhong, Xiong, and

SELECT avg(total_amount_purchased) ,
avg(total_value_purchased)
FROM product_suppliers
WHERE supplier_id =
(SELECT supplier_id
FROM Product_Suppliers
GROUP BY supplier_id
ORDER BY count(*) DESC LIMIT 1)

Figure 1: An example from the Spider dataset.
Socher 2018), usually contain one table in one database.
It is still difﬁcult for models to comprehend complex relations between tables. Fortunately, Yu et al. (2018c) have developed the Spider, a large-scale cross-domain text-to-SQL
dataset with complex tables. Here is an example from the
Spider in Figure 1. Considering the structure of the database
schema, graph neural network (GNN) (Scarselli et al. 2009)
is used by Bogin, Berant, and Gardner (2019) to obtain the
representation of components of tables. The names of tables
and columns in the database are nodes. And the relationships of table-column and primary-foreign key are edges in
the schema graph.
However, most of traditional GNNs (Li et al. 2016; Kipf
and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Velickovic et al. 2018) usually use summation as the function of neighborhood aggregation. Although it can reﬂect the
relationship between parent and child nodes, the relation-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9596

