The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

The HSIC Bottleneck: Deep Learning without Back-Propagation
Wan-Duo Kurt Ma, J.P. Lewis, W. Bastiaan Kleijn
Victoria University
{mawand, bastiaan.kleijn}@ecs.vuw.ac.nz, jplewis@google.com

thus provides a training objective that directly involves the
representation X, unlike cross entropy, which involves X
only through backpropagation.
As is the case with cross entropy, an algorithm trained
exclusively using mutual information is vulnerable to overﬁtting. To address this we train the network using an approximation of the information bottleneck (Tishby, Pereira,
and Bialek 1999). Due to the practical difﬁculties of calculating the mutual information among the random variables,
we adopt a non-parametric kernel-based method, the HilbertSchmidt independence criterion (HSIC), to characterize the
statistical (in)dependence of different layers. That is, for each
network layer we maximize HSIC between the layer activation and the desired output and minimize HSIC between that
layer activation and the input. In some cases, the ﬁnal-layer
representations resulting from this HSIC bottleneck training
are nearly one-hot and can be directly used for classiﬁcation after identifying a single ﬁxed permutation. Alternately,
following HSIC bottleneck training, we append a single classiﬁcation layer that is trained with SGD (without backpropagation), consistently obtaining performance competitive with
an architecturally equivalent network trained with backpropagation. We provide an informal discussion of the relation
between HSIC and mutual information in the Appendix.
Our work joins an increasing body of recent research that
explores deep learning fundamentals from an information
theoretical perspective ((Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby 2017; Saxe
et al. 2018; Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 1999; Belghazi et al.
2018) and others). Our contributions are as follows:
We demonstrate that it is possible to train deep classiﬁcation networks using an information bottleneck principle, without backpropagation, and obtain results competitive with the
standard backpropagation optimization of the cross-entropy
objective. The HSIC bottleneck approach1 mitigates the issue
of vanishing or exploding gradients in backpropagation. As
the HSIC-bottleneck operates directly on continuous random
variables, it is more attractive than conventional information
bottleneck approaches based on binning. Because the network training is explicitly based on an information bottleneck
principle, it addresses overﬁtting by design. It further addresses the weight transport and update locking problems of

Abstract
We introduce the HSIC (Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion) bottleneck for training deep neural networks. The HSIC
bottleneck is an alternative to the conventional cross-entropy
loss and backpropagation that has a number of distinct advantages. It mitigates exploding and vanishing gradients, resulting
in the ability to learn very deep networks without skip connections. There is no requirement for symmetric feedback or
update locking. We ﬁnd that the HSIC bottleneck provides performance on MNIST/FashionMNIST/CIFAR10 classiﬁcation
comparable to backpropagation with a cross-entropy target,
even when the system is not encouraged to make the output
resemble the classiﬁcation labels. Appending a single layer
trained with SGD (without backpropagation) to reformat the
information further improves performance.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has brought a new level of performance to an
increasingly wide range of tasks. In practice however, the
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm (and its variants)
and the associated error back-propagation algorithm underlying deep learning are time consuming, have problems of
vanishing and exploding gradients, require sequential computation across layers and update locking, and typically require
the exploration of learning rates and other hyperparameters.
At the same time, backpropagation is generally regarded as
being not biologically plausible. These considerations are
driving research into both theoretical and practical alternatives.
We propose a deep network training method that does
not use the cross-entropy loss or backpropagation. An alternate information-theoretic motivation of training a classiﬁer can be found in terms of the Fano inequality and
mutual information. In our context, Fano’s inequality indicates that the probability of classiﬁcation error depends
on the conditional entropy H(Y |X), with Y being the label and X some representation of the input. Additionally,
the mutual information I(X, Y ) can be written in the form
I(X, Y ) = H(Y ) − H(Y |X). Note that the entropy of the
labels is constant with respect to the network weights. When
the probability of mis-classiﬁcation is low, H(Y |X) is also
low, and the mutual information is high. Mutual information
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Our code is available at https://github.com/choasma/
HSIC-Bottleneck

5085

