The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Limitations of Incentive Compatibility on Discrete Type Spaces
Taylor Lundy, Hu Fu
University of British Columbia
{tlundy, hufu}@cs.ubc.ca

agents’ types or strategies. Partly thanks to this strong incentive guarantee, the two fundamental auctions, namely, the
VCG auction that maximizes social welfare (Vickrey 1961;
Clarke 1971; Groves 1973), and Myerson’s auction that
maximizes expected revenue for selling a single item (Myerson 1981), have been foundational in both the theory and
practice of mechanism design.
As the scope of mechanism design expands beyond the
classical settings, incentive compatible mechanisms that are
optimal for various objective often lack the simple structures that characterize the VCG and Myerson’s mechanisms.
By and large, there have been two approaches to the design
of incentive compatible mechanisms. The ﬁrst approach focuses on classes of mechanisms that, by their simple structures, have obvious incentive guarantees. For example, in
a multi-item auction, a sequential pricing mechanism puts
prices on items and asks each agent in turn to choose her
favorite items that remain; the bidders are not asked about
their values, and choosing utility-maximizing items (according to their true values) is the obvious strategy to adopt
(see, e.g., Chawla et al. 2010; Chawla, Malec, and Sivan
2010; Feldman, Gravin, and Lucier 2015). Another example
is to optimize over parameterized “VCG-like” mechanisms
which inherit incentive properties from the VCG mechanism
(e.g. Sandholm and Likhodedov 2015). This approach is often used to search for mechanisms whose performance is a
factor away from being optimal, since the optimal mechanism or its very close approximations are often not within
the class of mechanisms being searched over.
The second approach forgoes structures that are easily interpretable, and exhaustively searches for the optimal mechanism. This is exempliﬁed by solving mathematical programs (typically linear or convex programs) whose feasible
regions contain the set of all incentive compatible mechanisms (see, e.g. Conitzer and Sandholm 2002; Dobzinski, Fu, and Kleinberg 2015; Daskalakis, Deckelbaum, and
Tzamos 2017;Feng and Hartline 2018). Typically, incentive
requirements are hardwired as constraints in such programs.
Difﬁculty arises in the second approach when one would
like to adopt strong incentive guarantees such as DSIC,
which need at least one constraint per proﬁle of types to
specify. When the space of possible types is a continuum,
this gives rise to uncountably many constraints. While this
does not always make the program impossible to solve it

Abstract
In the design of incentive compatible mechanisms, a common approach is to enforce incentive compatibility as constraints in programs that optimize over feasible mechanisms.
Such constraints are often imposed on sparsiﬁed representations of the type spaces, such as their discretizations or samples, in order for the program to be manageable. In this work,
we explore limitations of this approach, by studying whether
all dominant strategy incentive compatible mechanisms on a
set T of discrete types can be extended to the convex hull
of T .
Dobzinski, Fu and Kleinberg (2015) answered the question
afﬁrmatively for all settings where types are single dimensional. It is not difﬁcult to show that the same holds when the
set of feasible outcomes is downward closed. In this work we
show that the question has a negative answer for certain nondownward-closed settings with multi-dimensional types. This
result should call for caution in the use of the said approach to
enforcing incentive compatibility beyond single-dimensional
preferences and downward closed feasible outcomes.

Introduction
Mechanism design studies optimization problems with private inputs from strategic agents. An agent’s input, known as
her type, is her private information including her valuation
for the social outcomes, which are to be decided upon by the
mechanism. A mechanism needs to solicit such information
to achieve certain goals, e.g. maximizing welfare, revenue,
surplus or fairness measures. It needs to provide its participants with correct incentives, via both social outcomes and
payments, so that the agents ﬁnd it in their best interests to
reveal their types.
Dominant strategy incentive compatibility (DSIC) is one
of the strongest and most widely used solution concepts that
guarantee such incentives. Under DSIC, every participant,
no matter what type she possesses and no matter what types
the other participants report to the mechanism, will maximize her utility by revealing her true type. Not only is this a
strong guarantee for the mechanism designer that true information should be reported and optimized over, it also alleviates the burden of strategizing from the participating agents
— telling truth is a dominant strategy regardless of the other
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2136

