The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Video Face Super-Resolution with Motion-Adaptive Feedback Cell
Jingwei Xin,† Nannan Wang,‡∗ Jie Li,† Xinbo Gao,† Zhifeng Li§

†
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
‡
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
§
Tencent AI Lab, China,

With the development of convolution neural networks, the
deep learning based single image super-resolution (SISR) has
received signiﬁcant attention from the research community
over the past few years (Kim, Kwon Lee, and Mu Lee 2016a;
He et al. 2016), which achieve the state-of-the-art performances in terms of the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR)
and the structural similarity index (SSIM) (Wang et al. 2004).
However, the SISR methods do not consider the temporal
relationship between frames, that make its results in video
super-resolution (VSR) is not satisfactory.
Recently, the multi-frame SR technology is proposed in
the ﬁeld of video super-resolution, in which the information
of the motion relationship between input frames is utilized
to improve the performance. It takes multiple LR frames as
inputs and output HR frames by taking into account subpixel motions between the neighboring LR frames. Usually,
most deep learning based VSR methods (Liao et al. 2015;
Kappeler et al. 2016; Caballero et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017;
Tao et al. 2017) follow a similar procedure that consists of
two steps: the ﬁrst step is the motion estimation and compensation, and the second one is an up-sampling process. The
motion estimation and compensation are the key of these
methods, it is a hard task, and especially when the complex
motion or parallax appear across the neighboring frames.
Caballero et.al.(Caballero et al. 2017) had proposed an efﬁcient spatial transformer network to compensate the motion
between frames fed to the SR network, but network performance decreases when the number of input frames exceeds 5.
Jo et.al.(Jo et al. 2018) had explored a method based on the
dynamic upsampling ﬁlters estimation which avoid explicit
motion compensation, but it is also hard to make full use of
the video’s motion information.
In addition, reducing the number of frames which input into the network at the same time, could effectively
improve the network’s ability to model the complex temporal dependencies(Sajjadi, Vemulapalli, and Brown 2018;
Haris, Shakhnarovich, and Ukita 2019). However, the decrease in the number of input frames also means that the
network be likely to receive less useful information, and the
performance of the network will be further limited.
In the deep-learning based VSR methods abovementioned,
the input images are connected in parallel and the network
has not treated them discriminately, which limits the ability
of networks to learn the useful information when the input

Abstract
Video super-resolution (VSR) methods have recently achieved
a remarkable success due to the development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN). Current state-of-the-art CNN
methods usually treat the VSR problem as a large number of
separate multi-frame super-resolution tasks, at which a batch
of low resolution (LR) frames is utilized to generate a single
high resolution (HR) frame, and running a slide window to
select LR frames over the entire video would obtain a series
of HR frames. However, duo to the complex temporal dependency between frames, with the number of LR input frames
increase, the performance of the reconstructed HR frames
become worse. The reason is in that these methods lack the
ability to model complex temporal dependencies and hard to
give an accurate motion estimation and compensation for VSR
process. Which makes the performance degrade drastically
when the motion in frames is complex. In this paper, we propose a Motion-Adaptive Feedback Cell (MAFC), a simple
but effective block, which can efﬁciently capture the motion
compensation and feed it back to the network in an adaptive
way. Our approach efﬁciently utilizes the information of the
inter-frame motion, the dependence of the network on motion
estimation and compensation method can be avoid. In addition,
beneﬁting from the excellent nature of MAFC, the network
can achieve better performance in the case of extremely complex motion scenarios. Extensive evaluations and comparisons
validate the strengths of our approach, and the experimental results demonstrated that the proposed framework is outperform
the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Image and video super-resolution (SR) is now an efﬁcient
method that could be widely used in many ﬁelds ranging
from the medical and satellite imaging (Thornton, Atkinson, and Holland 2006; Shi et al. 2013) to the security and
surveillance (Zou and Yuen 2011), it has attracted much more
attention in recent years. As a domain-speciﬁc of cross-modal
learning (Yu et al. 2019; 2018), SR technology aims to generate a High-Resolution (HR) image from a Low-Resolution
(LR) input one, which guarantees the restoration of the low
frequency information in the frequency band and predicts
the high frequency information above the cutoff frequency.
∗

Corresponding author: Nannan Wang (nnwang@xidian.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12468

