The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Instance-Wise Dynamic Sensor Selection for Human Activity Recognition
Xiaodong Yang,1,2,3 Yiqiang Chen,1,2,3∗ Hanchao Yu,1∗ Yingwei Zhang,1,2
Wang Lu,1,2,3 Ruizhe Sun1,2
1
The Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 100190
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 100049
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China, 518055
{yangxiaodong, yqchen, yuhanchao, zhangyingwei, luwang, sunruizhe18s}@ict.ac.cn

of massive data transmission, cumbersome computational
load, and large energy consumption, which limits the operational lifetime span (Kolamunna et al. 2016). Therefore,
to balance recognition accuracy and sensor number becomes
an emergent challenge for HAR.

Abstract
Human Activity Recognition (HAR) is an important application of smart wearable/mobile systems for many humancentric problems such as healthcare. The multi-sensor synchronous measurement has shown better performance for
HAR than a single sensor. However, the multi-sensor setting increases the costs of data transmission, computation
and energy. Therefore, the efﬁcient sensor selection to balance recognition accuracy and sensor cost is the critical challenge. In this paper, we propose an Instance-wise Dynamic
Sensor Selection (IDSS) method for HAR. Firstly, we formalize this problem as minimizing both activity classiﬁcation loss and sensor number by dynamically selecting a sparse
subset for each instance. Then, IDSS solves the above minimization problem via Markov Decision Process whose policy for sensor selection is learned by exploiting the instancewise states using Imitation Learning. In order to optimize the
parameters of the activity classiﬁcation model and the sensor selection policy, an algorithm named Mutual DAgger is
proposed to alternatively enhance their learning process. To
evaluate the performance of IDSS, we conduct experiments
on three real-world HAR datasets. The experimental results
show that IDSS can effectively reduce the overall sensor number without losing accuracy and outperforms the state-of-theart methods regarding the combined measurement of accuracy and sensor number.

Most existing HAR methods use a ﬁxed set of sensors
for data acquisition, which either collects redundant sensors
for highly discriminable instances or obtains unsatisfactory
accuracy for confusing instances. There are a few works
on seeking a dynamic sensor selection method. Gordon et
al. (Gordon et al. 2012) propose a method which weights
the sensors to the target activities, and then decides which
sensors should be activated based on the recent prediction.
Some works in camera networks (Spaan and Lima 2009;
Satsangi, Whiteson, and Oliehoek 2015) solve the dynamic
sensor selection problem with a discrete state Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP). They merely
take one of the predeﬁned states as input and return which
sensors should be active. These methods lack direct information from the instance, and cannot make the desired performance for balancing recognition accuracy and sensor number. Since sensor selection can be categorized into feature
selection, some methods (He, Daumé III, and Eisner 2012;
Karayev, Fritz, and Darrell 2013; Kolamunna et al. 2016) attempt to build an MDP to decide which feature to select next
or whether to stop acquiring features and make a prediction.
Although selecting features dynamically within a timestep,
these methods condition the choice of one feature on the observation generated by another one. This setting is not feasible in the real-time HAR where all selected sensors must be
chosen simultaneously.

Introduction
Human Activity Recognition (HAR) aims to recognize an
individual’s daily activities, such as standing, walking and
cycling. There is a considerable demand for applying HAR
on wearable devices to understand human behavior and provide services like activity tracker (Tang et al. 2018), healthcare monitoring (Chen et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2015), assisted
rehabilitation (Mazilu et al. 2013), et al. To deal with the
complexity and variety of daily activities, HAR in real-world
environments requires multi-sensor synchronous measurement, e.g., Body Sensor Networks (BSN), which contains
several sensors with different modalities and being worn on
different body parts. However, more sensors bring more cost

In this paper, we propose an effective method named
Instance-dependent Dynamic Sensor Selection (IDSS) for
HAR. Speciﬁcally, given a sequence of activity instances,
our goal is to select an appropriate subset of sensors for
each instance to predict the activity, so that recognition accuracy and sensor number are balanced in a desired way.
We formalize the problem as seeking an activity classiﬁcation model and a sensor selection policy that minimizes an
objective function of overall classiﬁcation loss and sensor
number. IDSS deﬁnes a continuous state MDP to address the
minimization problem, where the policy function for sensor

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1104

