The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Linear Bandits with Feature Feedback
Urvashi Oswal,1 Aniruddha Bhargava,∗ Robert Nowak2
1

Oracle Labs, Redwood Shores, CA
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
urvashi.oswal@oracle.com, aniruddha.j@gmail.com, rdnowak@wisc.edu
2

θ ∗ and exploiting this knowledge. Linear bandit algorithms
that exploit this special structure have been extensively studied and applied (Rusmevichientong and Tsitsiklis 2010;
Abbasi-Yadkori, Pal, and Szepesvari 2011).
Unfortunately, standard linear bandit algorithms suffer
from the curse of dimensionality. The regret grows linearly
with the feature dimension d. The dimension d may be quite
large in modern applications (e.g., 1000s of features in NLP
or image/vision applications). In the recommendations setting, the existing bounds easily require T > 100s of ratings to be meaningful, which is not realistic. The highdimensionality also makes it challenging to employ stateof-the-art algorithms since it involves maintaining and updating a d × d matrix at every stage. However, in many cases
the linear function may only involve a sparse subset of the
k < d features, and this can be exploited to partially reduce
dependence on d. In such cases,
√ the regret of sparse linear
bandit algorithms scales like dk (Abbasi-Yadkori, Pal, and
Szepesvari 2012; Lattimore and Szepesvári 2018).
We tackle the problem of linear bandits from a new perspective that incorporates feature feedback in addition to
reward feedback, mitigating the curse of dimensionality.
Speciﬁcally, we consider situations in which the algorithm
receives a stochastic reward and stochastic feedback indicating which, if any, feature-dimensions were relevant to the
reward value. For example, consider a situation in which
users rate recommended text documents and additionally
highlight keywords or phrases that inﬂuenced their ratings.
Figure 1(a) illustrates the idea. Obviously, the additional
“feature feedback” may signiﬁcantly improve an algorithm’s
ability to home-in on the relevant features. The focus of this
paper is the development of new theory and algorithms for
linear bandits with feature feedback. We show that the regret
of linear bandits with feature feedback scales linearly in k,
the number of relevant features, without prior knowledge of
which features are relevant nor the value of k. This leads to
large improvements in theory and practice.
The simple feedback model, where the user directly selects a subset of the relevant features, can be generalized
by allowing for an indirect form of feedback. For example,
the user can select a region of an image instead of a subset
of the standard deep neural network features. This form of

Abstract
This paper explores a new form of the linear bandit problem
in which the algorithm receives the usual stochastic rewards
as well as stochastic feedback about which features are relevant to the rewards, the latter feedback being the novel aspect. The focus of this paper is the development of new theory
and algorithms for linear bandits with feature feedback which
√
can achieve regret over time horizon T that scales like k T ,
without prior knowledge of which features are relevant nor
the number k of relevant features.
√ In comparison, the regret
of traditional linear bandits is d T , where d is the total number of (relevant and irrelevant) features, so the improvement
can be dramatic if k  d. The computational complexity
of the algorithm is proportional to k rather than d, making it
much more suitable for real-world applications compared to
traditional linear bandits. We demonstrate the performance of
the algorithm with synthetic and real human-labeled data.

1

Introduction

Linear stochastic bandit algorithms are used to sequentially
select actions to maximize rewards. For instance, (Deshpande and Montanari 2012) propose to model recommendation systems that help users navigate through a large collection of items (products, videos, documents) using linearly parameterized multi-armed bandits. This model strikes
a balance by allowing the user to explore the space of available items and probing the user’s preferences. The linear
bandit model assumes that the expected reward of each action is an (unknown) linear function of a (known) ﬁnitedimensional feature associated with the action. Mathematically, if xt ∈ Rd is the feature associated with the action
chosen at time t, then the stochastic reward is
yt = x 
t θ ∗ + ηt ,

(1)

where θ ∗ is the unknown linear functional (representing
the user’s preferences) and ηt is a zero mean random variable. The goal is to adaptively select actions to maximize
the rewards (corresponding to user’s assessment of the chosen item’s value). This involves (approximately) learning
∗
This research was performed when U.O. and A.B. were at University of Wisonsin-Madison.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5331

