The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Just Ask: An Interactive Learning
Framework for Vision and Language Navigation
Ta-Chung Chi∗

Mihail Eric

Carnegie Mellon University
tachungc@andrew.cmu.edu

Alexa AI
mihaeric@amazon.com

Seokhwan Kim

Minmin Shen

Dilek Hakkani-tur

Alexa AI
seokhwk@amazon.com

Alexa AI
shenm@amazon.com

Alexa AI
hakkanit@amazon.com

Abstract
In the vision and language navigation task (Anderson et al.
2018), the agent may encounter ambiguous situations that
are hard to interpret by just relying on visual information
and natural language instructions. We propose an interactive learning framework to endow the agent with the ability to ask for users’ help in such situations. As part of this
framework, we investigate multiple learning approaches for
the agent with different levels of complexity. The simplest
model-confusion-based method lets the agent ask questions
based on its confusion, relying on the predeﬁned conﬁdence
threshold of a next action prediction model. To build on this
confusion-based method, the agent is expected to demonstrate more sophisticated reasoning such that it discovers the
timing and locations to interact with a human. We achieve
this goal using reinforcement learning (RL) with a proposed
reward shaping term, which enables the agent to ask questions only when necessary. The success rate can be boosted
by at least 15% with only one question asked on average during the navigation. Furthermore, we show that the RL agent is
capable of adjusting dynamically to noisy human responses.
Finally, we design a continual learning strategy, which can be
viewed as a data augmentation method, for the agent to improve further utilizing its interaction history with a human.
We demonstrate the proposed strategy is substantially more
realistic and data-efﬁcient compared to previously proposed
pre-exploration techniques.

1

Figure 1: This is a real example from our trained agent. The
instruction is “...Walk straight, right before you reach the
bed.”. The navigable locations are visualized by blue cylinders. It is impossible to determine which bedroom to enter,
and our proposed agent asks for help in this situation.
then decide its next action by also considering the user’s response.
This scenario suggests that interactive robots can get simple advice from their users to improve completion of tasks,
in contrast to their passive counterparts that have no way
of getting feedback when problems occur. Indeed, we note
that the recent success of virtual assistants can be attributed
to their interactive ability with users, demonstrating several human-alike behaviors, such as asking for more information, clariﬁcation, and conﬁrmation, which is useful for
resolving ambiguities arising naturally in real-world tasks.
Unfortunately, we do not notice such interactive behavior
in physical robots. To the best of our knowledge, existing
works (MacMahon, Stankiewicz, and Kuipers 2006; Chen
and Mooney 2011; Blukis et al. 2018; Anderson et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2019) required the robot to complete tasks by itself after the input of preliminary goals and instructions. It
has no way to resolve confusions or ambiguities while executing its task, motivating this work’s proposed interactive
framework. We use the term robot and agent interchangeably hereafter since our robot lives in a simulator, which can
be viewed as a virtual agent.
We propose to extend the Vision and Language Naviga-

Introduction

Consider the situation in which you want a robot assistant to
get your wallet on the bed as in Figure 1 with two doors in
the scene and an instruction that only tells it to walk through
the doorway. In this situation, it is clearly difﬁcult for the
robot to know exactly through which door to enter. If, however, the robot is able to discuss the situation with the user,
the situational ambiguity can be resolved. For example, the
agent can ask the user “I am confused, please tell me which
door to take?” and displays a snapshot on the user’s smartphone of what it sees through its camera. The agent can
∗

Work done while the ﬁrst author was an intern at Alexa AI.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2459

