The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Attending to Entities for Better Text Understanding
Pengxiang Cheng

Katrin Erk

Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
pxcheng@utexas.edu

Department of Linguistics
The University of Texas at Austin
katrin.erk@utexas.edu

and human performance, including tasks that require knowledge of broader discourse (Paperno et al. 2016) or coreference (Dasigi et al. 2019), or that require identifying valid
reasoning (Niven and Kao 2019). For such tasks in particular, it is interesting to test whether explicit information about
linguistic structure can be helpful, how such structure should
be injected, and whether it can be helpful in addition to recent language models. Strubell et al. (2018) investigated how
to inject syntactic knowledge into a Transformer-style model
by applying supervision on self-attention weights. Intriguingly, their model, which they apply to semantic role labeling, beneﬁts from the use of ELMo embeddings, and improves over a benchmark that uses those embeddings but no
supervised self-attention.

Abstract
Recent progress in NLP witnessed the development of largescale pre-trained language models (GPT, BERT, XLNet, etc.)
based on Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), and in a range of
end tasks, such models have achieved state-of-the-art results,
approaching human performance. This clearly demonstrates
the power of the stacked self-attention architecture when
paired with a sufﬁcient number of layers and a large amount
of pre-training data. However, on tasks that require complex
and long-distance reasoning where surface-level cues are not
enough, there is still a large gap between the pre-trained models and human performance. Strubell et al. (2018) recently
showed that it is possible to inject knowledge of syntactic
structure into a model through supervised self-attention. We
conjecture that a similar injection of semantic knowledge, in
particular, coreference information, into an existing model
would improve performance on such complex problems. On
the LAMBADA (Paperno et al. 2016) task, we show that
a model trained from scratch with coreference as auxiliary
supervision for self-attention outperforms the largest GPT-2
model, setting the new state-of-the-art, while only containing a tiny fraction of parameters compared to GPT-2. We also
conduct a thorough analysis of different variants of model architectures and supervision conﬁgurations, suggesting future
directions on applying similar techniques to other problems.

1

In this paper, we consider a task that was explicitly designed to require long-distance knowledge, the LAMBADA
task (Paperno et al. 2016). LAMBADA is a language modeling task on narrative text passages, where test set data
points are chosen to be easily solvable for humans given a
larger preceding context of several sentences, but impossible to solve for humans given only a single sentence (see
Figure 1 for an example). In the paper that originally introduced LAMBADA, Paperno et al. (2016) report model
accuracies of only 7.3%. Since then, more recent models
(GPT-2) have improved performance to 63.24% (Radford et
al. 2019), while human performance is above 80%. So the
LAMBADA dataset clearly has the characteristic described
above, with a large gap between pre-trained models and human performance.

Introduction

When does it help performance on NLP tasks to explicitly take linguistic structure into account? Large-scale pretrained language models such as ELMo (Peters et al. 2018),
GPT (Radford et al. 2018), BERT (Devlin et al. 2019),
and XLNet (Yang et al. 2019) have recently achieved stateof-the-art results on a wide range of tasks. These models,
mostly built on a stacked self-attention architecture as in
the Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), are not explicitly
trained to take linguistic structure into account, but they have
been shown to encode some linguistic knowledge anyway,
in particular knowledge related to syntactic structure (Tenney et al. 2019; Jawahar, Sagot, and Seddah 2019). But on
some tasks that require complex and long-distance reasoning, there is still a large gap between the pre-trained models

We test whether an injection of linguistic knowledge in
a similar manner to Strubell et al. (2018), adding supervised self-attention to an existing, non-Transformer model,
will improve performance on this complex task. As LAMBADA focuses on narrative texts, we hypothesize that semantic knowledge about the entities mentioned in the passage will be particularly useful for solving the task (i.e., in
Figure 1, it is important to know that “you” refers to “Jon”
and “he” refers to “Tony” in the ﬁrst two sentences to make
the right prediction). We phrase entity knowledge as knowledge about the coreference chains in the passage. We ﬁnd
that a B I DAF-based (Seo et al. 2017) model trained with
coreference as auxiliary supervision achieves state-of-the-

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7554

