The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Multi-Unit Proﬁt Competitive Mechanism for Cellular Trafﬁc Ofﬂoading
Jun Wu,1 Yu Qiao,2 Lei Zhang,2 Chongjun Wang,2∗ Meilin Liu3
1

Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of E-Business, Nanjing University of Finance & Economics, Nanjing 210003, China
2
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology at Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435, USA
jwucie@nufe.edu.cn, {chjwang, lzhang}@nju.edu.cn, meilin.liu@wright.edu

exceeded cellular trafﬁc by a signiﬁcant margin; and nearly
three-ﬁfths of trafﬁc (59%) will be ofﬂoaded from cellular
networks by 2022. So, it is of great application value to study
how to optimally ofﬂoad the cellular trafﬁc.
In practice, such femtocell devices or WiFi hotspots
are usually owned by third-party entities (agents) such as
schools, restaurants, shopping malls, residences and so on.
Shifting cellular trafﬁc to these agents requires to consume
their own resources (e.g., bandwidth, data quota, electricity,
etc.), thus the agents need to be well motivated, and their
costs, which are privately known by themselves, should be
properly compensated (Zhang et al. 2016). Under such circumstances, ﬁnding a good ofﬂoading solution is no longer
a conventional optimization problem. Instead, what we need
is a well-designed mechanism, that generates an optimized
procurement solution which approximates the optimal one in
an ideal omniscient scenario. Essentially, this is an algorithmic mechanism design (Nisan and Ronen 2001) problem.
One common case is that the macrocell of a cellular service provider (CSP) is divided into several non-overlapping
small regions. Each agent is located inside one region and
can provide some units of ofﬂoading resources for this region each at a ﬁxed unit cost, and each agent’s capacity
and unit cost is her private information. The agents bid their
capacities and unit costs strategically to obtain utilities as
high as possible. The CSP can purchase some units from the
agents, and her valuation on the units is measured according
to her improvement in service quality. The question then is
how to decide the purchase quantity from each agent and the
associated payment in order to maximize the CSP’s proﬁt.
Basically, this is a novel prior-free optimal mechanism design problem characterized by the following features:
1) Multi-unit 2-parameter. Each agent sells multiple units
of a homogeneous item with privately known capacity
(inventory volume) and unit cost;
2) Local diminishing return (LDR) demand valuation. LDR
is a superset of concave additivity (Chan and Chen 2014)
and a subset of diminishing return (Chan and Chen
2014);
3) Competitive proﬁt. The objective is to guarantee a proﬁt,
which is deﬁned as “value - cost”, competitive to the omniscient single-price auction.

Abstract
Cellular trafﬁc ofﬂoading is nowadays an important problem
in mobile networking. We model it as a procurement problem
where each agent sells multi-units of a homogeneous item
with privately known capacity and unit cost, and the auctioneer’s demand valuation function is symmetric submodular. Based on the framework of random sampling and proﬁt
extraction, we aim to design a prior-free mechanism which
guarantees a proﬁt competitive to the omniscient single-price
auction. However, the symmetric submodular demand valuation function and 2-parameter setting present new challenges.
By adopting the highest feasible clear price, we successfully
design a truthful proﬁt extractor, and then we propose a mechanism which is proved to be truthful, individually rational and
constant-factor competitive in a ﬁxed market.

Introduction
In recent years, global mobile data trafﬁc has been explosively growing due to the proliferation and in-depth use of
smart mobile devices and applications. According to a white
paper newly updated by Cisco (Cisco 2019), global mobile
data trafﬁc reached 11.5 exabytes per month at the end of
2017, up from 6.7 exabytes per month at the end of 2016.
Moreover, it had grown 17-fold from 2012 to 2017, grown
71% in 2017, and would continue to increase another 7fold between 2017 and 2022. Such a surge of mobile trafﬁc
would certainly deteriorate existing cellular networks’ service quality if it is not handled properly.
One solution is to ofﬂoad the mobile data trafﬁc onto ﬁxed
networks through Wi-Fi or femtocell. Compared with updating the cellular network’s infrastructure or building more
towers, cellular trafﬁc ofﬂoading can ease the burden of cellular networks and enhance users’ experience in a timely
and economical manner (Balasubramanian, Mahajan, and
Venkataramani 2010; Dong et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2015;
Zhang et al. 2016), and it has already been widely applied
in practice. According to Cisco (Cisco 2019), 54% of total mobile data trafﬁc was ofﬂoaded onto the ﬁxed network
through Wi-Fi or femtocell in 2017, thus mobile ofﬂoad had
∗

Chongjun Wang is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2294

