The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarial Fence Patrolling: Non-Uniform Policies for Asymmetric Environments
Yaniv Oshrat, Noa Agmon, Sarit Kraus
Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University
oshblo@zahav.net.il, {agmon, sarit}@cs.biu.ac.il

Naturally, this problem is applicable in many security domains.
In this paper we focus on the problem of patrolling along
an open polyline track. Former studies presented policies
that assigned a uniform policy (probability value) to all of
the segments in the track. We suggest assigning each segment with a distinct probability value, according to the segment’s position in the track. We show analytically and empirically that the results obtained by this approach are signiﬁcantly better than those of the former approach.
Moreover, previous studies (e.g. Agmon, Kraus, and
Kaminka 2008) concentrated on symmetric tracks, i.e. all
of the parts of the track are similar in their parameters. This
similarity holds for both the physical properties of the line
and the algorithmic attributes of the robots’ motion. In this
work we challenge this symmetry, from practical considerations (reality often presents asymmetric structures that
should be dealt with) and for optimality calculations. We
show that, in many cases, non-uniform policies yield better
results than uniform ones.

Abstract
Robot teams are very useful in patrol tasks, where the robots
are required to repeatedly visit a target area in order to detect an adversary. In this work we examine the Fence Patrol problem, in which the robots must travel back and forth
along an open polyline and the adversary is aware of the
robots’ patrol strategy. Previous work has suggested nondeterministic patrol schemes, characterized by a uniform policy along the entire area, guaranteeing that the minimal probability of penetration detection throughout the area is maximized. We present a patrol strategy with a non-uniform policy
along different points of the fence, based on the location and
other properties of the point. We explore this strategy in different kinds of tracks and show that the minimal probability
of penetration detection achieved by this non-uniform (variant) policy is higher than former policies. We further consider
applying this model in multi-robot scenarios, exploiting robot
cooperation to enhance patrol efﬁciency. We propose novel
methods for calculating the variant values, and demonstrate
their performance empirically.

1

Introduction

2

The problem of multi-robot patrol has been thoroughly investigated during the past few years (Agmon et al. 2008;
Hefferan, Cliff, and Fitch 2016; Talmor and Agmon 2017;
Alam et al. 2017; Ivanová and Surynek 2017; Alam et al.
2019). In this problem, a team of robots is required to continuously travel in an area, in our case a line (fence), while
monitoring it in order to detect changes in state. Many of the
studies in this area have concentrated on assuring optimization of frequency criteria (Elmaliach, Agmon, and Kaminka
2009; Collins et al. 2013). However, we follow several studies that consider the problem of multi-robot patrol in adversarial environments: There is an adversary that wishes
to penetrate this line without being detected. We assume that
the adversary has full knowledge about the patrolling robots
(their capabilities, their locations and patrolling behavior),
and would take the optimal steps (in his view) in order to
penetrate successfully. Our goal is to set the patrol in a way
that would minimize the adversary’s probability of success.

Related Work

Systems of multiple robots cooperating in an arena to perform a joint mission were studied in recent years in various contexts. The arena might be an area that should
be watched over, cleaned or monitored (Chevaleyre 2004;
Alam et al. 2017). Alternatively the arena is a line that
should be monitored in order to detect intrusions or to prevent them (Lin 2019). The offered solutions differ in the
ways the quality of patrol is measured: Many of the works
focused on frequency-based patrolling – optimizing the frequency of robot visits in the various locations of the arena
(Almeida et al. 2004; Elmaliach, Agmon, and Kaminka
2009). Sometimes there are vital points that should be monitored in a more frequent manner than other points (Collins
et al. 2013). Other works concentrate on adversarial patrol
schemes (Basilico et al. 2009; Sless, Agmon, and Kraus
2014; Alam et al. 2019). This approach (also addressed in
this paper) assumes an adversary that wishes to penetrate
a line - either an open polyline or a closed perimeter. The
adversary has the time and knowledge to study and understand the properties of the patrol, and to aim its penetration

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10377

