The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ICD Coding from Clinical Text Using
Multi-Filter Residual Convolutional Neural Network
Fei Li,1 Hong Yu1,2,3,4
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, United States
2
Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research,
Bedford Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bedford, MA, United States
3
Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States
4
School of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, United States
{fei li, hong yu}@uml.edu
Abstract

Table 1: Examples of clinical text fragments and their corresponding ICD codes.

Automated ICD coding, which assigns the International Classiﬁcation of Disease codes to patient visits, has attracted
much research attention since it can save time and labor for
billing. The previous state-of-the-art model utilized one convolutional layer to build document representations for predicting ICD codes. However, the lengths and grammar of text
fragments, which are closely related to ICD coding, vary a
lot in different documents. Therefore, a ﬂat and ﬁxed-length
convolutional architecture may not be capable of learning
good document representations. In this paper, we proposed a
Multi-Filter Residual Convolutional Neural Network (MultiResCNN) for ICD coding. The innovations of our model
are two-folds: it utilizes a multi-ﬁlter convolutional layer
to capture various text patterns with different lengths and a
residual convolutional layer to enlarge the receptive ﬁeld. We
evaluated the effectiveness of our model on the widely-used
MIMIC dataset. On the full code set of MIMIC-III, our model
outperformed the state-of-the-art model in 4 out of 6 evaluation metrics. On the top-50 code set of MIMIC-III and the full
code set of MIMIC-II, our model outperformed all the existing and state-of-the-art models in all evaluation metrics. The
code is available at https://github.com/foxlf823/Multi-FilterResidual-Convolutional-Neural-Network.

998.32: Disruption of external operation wound
... wound infection, and wound breakdown ...
428.0: Congestive heart failure
... DIAGNOSES: 1. Acute congestive heart failure
2. Diabetes mellitus 3. Pulmonary edema ...
202.8: Other malignant lymphomas
... a 55 year-old female with non Hodgkin’s lymphoma
and acquired C1 esterase inhibitor deﬁciency ...
770.6: Transitory tachypnea of newborn
... Chest x-ray was consistent with transient tachypnea
of the newborn ...
424.1: Aortic valve disorders
... mild aortic stenosis with an aortic valve area of
1.9 cm squared and 2+ aortic insufﬁciency ...

et al. 2017; Xie and Xing 2018). In terms of data, prior work
utilized different domains of data such as radiology reports
(Pestian et al. 2007) and death certiﬁcates (Koopman et al.
2015), and different modal data such as structured (Perotte
et al. 2013) and unstructured text (Scheurwegs et al. 2017).
Moreover, some previous work adopted full ICD codes to
perform this task (Baumel et al. 2018) while other work
adopted partial codes (Xu et al. 2018). Due to such situation, it is difﬁcult to directly compare different work. In this
paper, we followed the line of predicting ICD codes from unstructured text of the MIMIC dataset (Johnson et al. 2016),
because it is widely studied and publicly available.
The state-of-the-art model for this line of work is the combination of the convolutional neural network (CNN) and the
attention mechanism (Mullenbach et al. 2018). However,
this model only contains one convolutional layer to build
document representations for subsequent layers to predict
ICD codes. As shown in Table 1, ICD-related text spans and
patterns vary in different examples. Therefore, it may not be
sufﬁcient to learn decent document representations from a
ﬂat and ﬁxed-length convolutional architecture.
In this paper, we proposed a Multi-Filter Residual
Convolutional Neural Network (MultiResCNN) for ICD
coding using clinical discharge summaries. Our Mul-

Introduction
The International Classiﬁcation of Diseases (ICD), which
is organized by the World Health Organization, is a common coding method used in various healthcare systems
such as hospitals. It includes many pre-deﬁned ICD codes
which can be assigned to patients’ ﬁles such as electronic
health records (EHRs). These codes represent diagnostic
and procedural information during patient visits. Healthcare
providers and insurance companies need these information
to diagnose patients and bill for services (Bottle and Aylin
2008). However, manual ICD coding has been demonstrated
to be labor-consuming and costly (O’malley et al. 2005).
The research community has investigated a number of approaches for automated ICD coding, including the models
based on both traditional machine learning (Perotte et al.
2013; Kavuluru, Rios, and Lu 2015) and deep learning (Shi
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8180

