The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Query Inseparable ELH Ontologies
Ana Ozaki, Cosimo Persia, Andrea Mazzullo
KRDB Research Centre, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano

an ontology engineer. Such an expert is normally familiar
with the tools, languages, and techniques necessary to design
an ontology through the communication with domain experts.
The ontology engineer must communicate and understand
the knowledge given by domain experts and then design an
ontology that captures what is relevant in the domain.
One of the main challenges in the process of building an
ontology is that it often relies on the communication between
the ontology engineer (or multiple ontology engineers) and
domain experts that, in order to share knowledge, use the
ambiguous natural language. Indeed, it can happen that some
errors are made while designing it due to the difﬁculty of sharing knowledge. The ontology engineer can misunderstand
the domain experts or they can inadvertently omit precious
details. Moreover, knowledge can be implicit and while designing an ontology it is not easy to understand what are
the real relationships between concepts and imagine all the
possible consequences of designing concepts and their relationships in a particular way. There are several aspects which
can inﬂuence the difﬁculty of creating an ontology.
Following the approach by (Konev et al. 2018; Konev,
Ozaki, and Wolter 2016), we focus on the problem of ﬁnding
how concepts should be logically related, assuming that the
relevant vocabulary is known by the domain experts, which
can share this information with the ontology engineer. In this
approach, the problem of building an ontology is treated as a
learning problem in which the ontology engineer plays the
role of a learner and communicates with the domain experts,
who play the role of a teacher (also called an oracle). We
assume that (1) the domain experts know the relevant knowledge about the domain and act in a consistent way as a single
teacher; (2) the vocabulary that should be used in the ontology is known by the teacher and the learner; (3) the learner
can pose queries to the teacher in order to acquire missing
knowledge or check if it has learned enough in order to stop
learning. The described model can be seen as an instance of
Angluin’s exact learning model (Angluin 1988) with membership and equivalence queries. The queries asked by the
learner in order to acquire knowledge can be considered as
membership queries and the queries that ask if the hypothesis
of the learner correctly represents the relevant knowledge of
the domain experts can be treated as equivalence queries.
In the exact learning literature, one of the main goals is
to determine the complexity of learning an abstract target.

Abstract
We investigate the complexity of learning query inseparable
ELH ontologies in a variant of Angluin’s exact learning model.
Given a ﬁxed data instance A∗ and a query language Q, we are
interested in computing an ontology H that entails the same
queries as a target ontology T on A∗ , that is, H and T are
inseparable w.r.t. A∗ and Q. The learner is allowed to pose two
kinds of questions. The ﬁrst is ‘Does (T , A) |= q?’, with A an
arbitrary data instance and q and query in Q. An oracle replies
this question with ‘yes’ or ‘no’. In the second, the learner asks
‘Are H and T inseparable w.r.t. A∗ and Q?’. If so, the learning
process ﬁnishes, otherwise, the learner receives (A∗ , q) with
q ∈ Q, (T , A∗ ) |= q and (H, A∗ ) |= q (or vice-versa).
Then, we analyse conditions in which query inseparability
is preserved if A∗ changes. Finally, we consider the PAC
learning model and a setting where the algorithms learn from
a batch of classiﬁed data, limiting interactions with the oracles.

Introduction
Ontologies are a formal and popular way of representing
knowledge. Taxonomies, categorisation of websites, products
and their features, as well as more complex and specialized
domain knowledge, can be represented with ontologies. Domain experts use ontologies while sharing and annotating
information in their ﬁelds because in this way knowledge
can be unambiguously understood and easily distributed.
Medicine, for example, has produced large, standardised, and
scalable ontologies (e.g. Galen and SNOMED CT). Broad
and general so called knowledge graphs are emerging such
as DBPedia (Bizer et al. 2009), Wikidata (Vrandečić and
Krötzsch 2014), YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum
2008). An ontology enables machines to process relations
and deﬁnitions and reason about that knowledge. Sharing
information, formalising a domain, and making assumptions
explicit are some of the main reasons for using an ontology.
Designing ontologies is a hard and error-prone task. The
research community has approached the problem by developing editors that help ontology engineers to build ontologies
manually (Knublauch et al. 2004) and deﬁned design principles (Stuckenschmidt, Parent, and Spaccapietra 2009). Even
with tools, building ontologies is a laborious task that also
needs expertise. An expert in designing ontologies is called
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2959

