The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Label Error Correction and Generation through Label Relationships
Zijun Cui,1 Yong Zhang,2 Qiang Ji1
1

Department of Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
1
{cuiz3, jiq}@rpi.edu
2
Tencent AI Lab
2
zhangyong201303@gmail.com

To illustrate how label errors are introduced in real-world
datasets, we consider the annotation of facial action units
(AUs) as an example. According to the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) (Friesen and Ekman 1978), AUs are deﬁned as a contraction or relaxation of one or a group of facial
muscles. Since the physical movements of muscles are continuous, there are boundary regions where the appearance of
AUs is close to both inactive and active states. The ﬁnal label depends on the personal interpretation, which varies with
experts. An annotation error is illustrated in Figure 1. The
consequences of label errors on the performance and on the
complexity of classiﬁers have been widely studied, including theoretical analysis (Bootkrajang and Kabán 2012) and
empirical assessment (Pantic et al. 2005). Besides labelling
errors, another issue is inadequate annotation. Since manual
annotation is often time-consuming and requires expertise,
data is often labelled sparsely or not labelled at all.

Abstract
For multi-label supervised learning, the quality of the label
annotation is important. However, for many real world multilabel classiﬁcation applications, label annotations often lack
quality, in particular when label annotation requires special
expertise, such as annotating ﬁne-grained labels. The relationships among labels, on other hand, are usually stable and
robust to errors. For this reason, we propose to capture and
leverage label relationships at different levels to improve ﬁnegrained label annotation quality and to generate labels. Two
levels of labels, including object-level labels and propertylevel labels, are considered. The object-level labels characterize object category based on its overall appearance, while
the property-level labels describe speciﬁc local object properties. A Bayesian network (BN) is learned to capture the
relationships among the multiple labels at the two levels. A
MAP inference is then performed to identify the most stable and consistent label relationships and they are then used
to improve data annotations for the same dataset and to generate labels for a new dataset. Experimental evaluations on
six benchmark databases for two different tasks (facial action
unit and object attribute classiﬁcation) demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in improving data annotation
and in generating effective new labels.

Different methods have been proposed to deal with label
errors. The natural approach is to correct the errors before
learning. It ﬁrst detects incorrect labels and then either removes (Segata et al. 2010) or ﬂips them (Xiao et al. 2015).
Another approach is to design robust models to handle label
errors, either using an error tolerant loss function (Natarajan
et al. 2013) or explicitly modeling label errors with probabilistic models (Ruiz et al. 2008). However, these methods
are only applicable to a single binary classiﬁcation problem.

Introduction
The performance of supervised multi-label learning heavily relies on the quality and the quantity of label annotations. Most existing learning algorithms assume the correctness of the annotated labels which is not always true.
Real-world datasets are annotated manually by human experts. Label error is deﬁned as the discrepancy between
the actual labels and the assigned labels. The presence of
bias and inconsistency with human annotation has been
demonstrated in (Beigman Klebanov and Beigman 2010;
Passonneau and Carpenter 2014; Torralba and Efros 2011).
Three factors contribute to incorrect annotations, including
the imperfect evidence, confusion among similar patterns
and perceptual errors, in particular for ﬁne grain level annotations.

In this work, we propose a method to exploit relationships
among labels at different levels to reduce the annotation errors for multi-label learning problems. Speciﬁcally, we propose to use a Bayesian network to capture the structural relationships among labels at two different levels, i.e. objectlevel (meta-level) and property-level. The object-level labels
capture the overall class such as object category, while the
property-level labels represent speciﬁc local object properties or attributes. Our goal is to systemically capture the inherent dependencies between object-level and property-level
labels and leverage such dependencies to correct the bias
and inconsistencies in manual annotations. The underlying
assumption is that despite the labeling errors, the dominant
relationships among labels at different levels remain accurate and robust to labeling errors, and that the object-level
labelling is easier to label and hence is less susceptible to la-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3693

