The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Revisiting the Foundations of Abstract Argumentation –
Semantics Based on Weak Admissibility and Weak Defense
Ringo Baumann

Gerhard Brewka

Markus Ulbricht

Department of Computer Science
Leipzig University
Germany

Department of Computer Science
Leipzig University
Germany

Department of Computer Science
Leipzig University
Germany

reﬂect different ways of resolving conﬂicts among arguments.
In the meantime, several additional semantics have been
deﬁned, see (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2018) for an
overview.
At the end of his seminal paper (Dung 1995) Dung points
out an issue he left open in his approach. He writes (p. 351):

Abstract
In his seminal 1995 paper, Dung paved the way for abstract
argumentation, a by now major research area in knowledge
representation. He pointed out that there is a problematic issue with self-defeating arguments underlying all traditional
semantics. A self-defeat occurs if an argument attacks itself
either directly or indirectly via an odd attack loop, unless
the loop is broken up by some argument attacking the loop
from outside. Motivated by the fact that such arguments represent self-contradictory or paradoxical arguments, he asked for
reasonable semantics which overcome the problem that such
arguments may indeed invalidate any argument they attack.
This paper tackles this problem from scratch. More precisely,
instead of continuing to use previous concepts deﬁned by
Dung we provide new foundations for abstract argumentation,
so-called weak admissibility and weak defense. After showing
that these key concepts are compatible as in the classical case
we introduce new versions of the classical Dung-style semantics including complete, preferred and grounded semantics.
We provide a rigorous study of these new concepts including
interrelationships as well as the relations to their Dung-style
counterparts. The newly introduced semantics overcome the
issue with self-defeating arguments, and they are semantically
insensitive to syntactic deletions of self-attacking arguments,
a special case of self-defeat.

1

“An interesting topic of research is the problem of
self-defeating arguments as illustrated in the following example. Consider the argumentation framework
({A, B}, {(A, A), (A, B)}). The only preferred extension here is empty though one can argue that since A
defeats itself, B should be acceptable.”
The goal of this paper is to address exactly this problem.
We will do so by introducing modiﬁed versions of some
of the central notions in Dung’s approach. Besides conﬂictfreeness, one of these notions is admissibility. According
to Dung, a conﬂict-free set of arguments is admissible if it
defends itself against all attackers. In other words, a set of
arguments S is admissible whenever each argument attacking
S from the outside is itself attacked by some element of S.
An admissible set can thus not contain any argument which
is attacked without at the same time being defended.
We will show in this paper that alternative and, as we claim,
reasonable modiﬁcations of this and other fundamental notions of abstract argumentation exist. Our motivation is as
follows. It is indeed important that a set of arguments defends
itself. However, does it have to defend itself against all attackers? Isn’t it sufﬁcient to counterattack those arguments
which have the slightest chance of being accepted? Let us
illustrate this using the following simple examples.

Introduction

Computational models of argumentation have received a lot
of attention in AI for more than two decades now. The seminal paper boosting this interest was Dung’s paper on abstract
argumentation frameworks (AFs) (Dung 1995). Dung’s work
is based on the observation that argument evaluation, more
precisely the selection of reasonable sets of arguments constituting a coherent world view, can be done without taking
into account the internal structure of arguments. Arguments
can be treated as abstract, atomic entities. All that is needed
is information about the attack relation among such arguments. Consequently, Dung’s AFs are just directed graphs.
The nodes in this graph represent abstract arguments, the
edges describe attacks among arguments.
Dung deﬁnes various semantics for AFs. Here, a semantics
assigns to each AF a collection of extensions, that is jointly
acceptable subsets of the arguments. The different semantics

Example 1.1 (Self-Defeat and Acceptance). Consider the
AF F . According to Dung’s deﬁnition {b} is not admissible1
because it does not defend itself against a.
a2
F:

a

b

G:

a3

b

a1
But what kind of attacker is a? Does b really have to defend
itself against an argument that ”kills” itself, so-to-speak? Why

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2742

We refer to the background section for precise deﬁnitions.

