The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Model Checking Temporal Epistemic Logic under Bounded Recall
Francesco Belardinelli,1 Alessio Lomuscio,1 Emily Yu1,2
1

2

Imperial College London, UK
Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria

In particular, a large body of research has focused on the
veriﬁcation of MAS against temporal-epistemic properties
(van der Meyden and Shilov 1999; Lomuscio and Penczek
2007). In all these approaches agents in a MAS are assumed
to have incomplete information, i.e., they do not perceive the
whole of the global state.
Approaches, however, differ in terms of the underlying
assumptions made in terms of the memory of the agents in
the system. Tools such as MCMAS (Lomuscio, Qu, and Raimondi 2017) and Verics (Meski et al. 2014) focus on observational semantics only, i.e., an assumption is made that the
successor local state of an agent depends on the present local
state and the action taken by all the agents in the system. In
contrast to this, MCK (Gammie and van der Meyden 2004)
supports both observational semantics and a limited form of
recall. Under the latter each agent in a run remembers all its
past states up to that point. It follows that an agent’s successor local state depends not only on her present local state,
but on the whole of her local history up to that local state
and the action performed by all agents in the system.
The perfect recall assumption is of interest in a number of applications including security, where the intruder
is normally assumed to recall all messages that she has
observed. Perfect recall, or memoryful semantics, is also
widely used in game theoretical settings and beyond. The
key difﬁculty in combing imperfect information and perfect
recall is the resulting high complexity. It is known that model
checking systems against temporal-epistemic speciﬁcations
under incomplete information and perfect recall is NON ELEMENTARY without the common knowledge modality
(Dima 2008). The resulting complexity is so high that it inhibits any practical use of model checking.
To overcome this difﬁculty in this paper we put forward
and study an approximation of perfect recall in terms of
bounded recall. Speciﬁcally we consider agents as being endowed with bounded memory and their local state to be local
histories of a ﬁnite and previously determined length. This
work exploits the intuition that bounded recall semantics is
equivalent to perfect recall whenever the properties to be expressed involve ﬁnite traces whose length is smaller than the
size of the history.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section

Abstract
We study the problem of verifying multi-agent systems under the assumption of bounded recall. We introduce the
logic CTLK BR , a bounded-recall variant of the temporalepistemic logic CTLK. We deﬁne and study the model checking problem against CTLK speciﬁcations under incomplete
information and bounded recall and present complexity upper bounds. We present an extension of the BDD-based
model checker MCMAS implementing model checking under bounded recall semantics and discuss the experimental
results obtained.

Introduction
An important aspect in the ﬁeld of multi-agent systems
(MAS) is the safety guarantee relating to the system correctness. Model checking (Clarke et al. 2018; Baier and
Katoen 2008) has been put forward as a key technique
for the formal veriﬁcation of multi-agent systems (Gammie and van der Meyden 2004). A well-known difﬁculty
with model checking is the state explosion problem (Clarke
and Grumberg 1987), i.e., the fact that the size of the system state space grows exponentially in the number of state
variables used to describe the system. Several approaches
have focused on mitigating this difﬁculty. The leading methods include abstractions (Denning et al. 1989), binary decision diagrams (Bryant 1986), and bounded model checking (Biere et al. 1999). All of these have been employed
in model checking MAS (Lomuscio, Qu, and Russo 2010;
Penczek and Lomuscio 2003; Gammie and van der Meyden
2004).
A key difference between the use of model checking in
hardware or reactive systems and in MAS is the speciﬁcation languages typically employed. While in reactive and
hardware systems, speciﬁcations of interest are generally
limited to reachability or temporal properties, more expressive languages such as temporal-epistemic logics (Fagin et
al. 1997) or logics for strategic abilities (Alur, Henzinger,
and Kupferman 1997; Mogavero, Murano, and Vardi 2010)
are normally considered for MAS.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7071

