The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Iterative Data Programming for Expanding Text Classiﬁcation Corpora
Neil Mallinar,†∗ Abhishek Shah, Tin Kam Ho, Rajendra Ugrani, Ayush Gupta
IBM Watson, New York, NY, † Pryon Research, New York, NY

and Zhou 2010). Active learning utilizes a query-selection
strategy and an oracle (e.g., a domain expert) to select an
important subset of the unlabeled examples to send to the oracle for labeling. The learner is retrained with the newly obtained labels and the process repeats. Without using an oracle, self-training and co-training leverage the more conﬁdent
decisions of classiﬁers trained with available examples to
provide additional examples to retrain the classiﬁers. In selftraining, an automatic learner is ﬁrst trained on any available
labeled data and evaluated on the unlabeled data. Any unlabeled examples that the learner can classify with conﬁdence
passing a threshold are labeled by the decision and used in
retraining, and the process repeats. In co-training, multiple
classiﬁers are trained on different views of the labeled data,
and the decision with highest conﬁdence on the unlabeled
data from the consensus is added to the labeled set.
Semi-supervised learning methods seek to utilize available labels to maximum effect. Examples are techniques
like Expectation-Maximization (Nigam et al. 2011) to assist
class discovery, and training generative models through data
programming (Ratner et al. 2016; Nashaat et al. 2018) with
large amounts of unlabeled text data. In this paper, we aim
to explore the latter, data programming, in an iterative procedure for the purpose of expanding labeled data efﬁciently.
We design an iterative expansion process that does not utilize the downstream classiﬁer (for which the training data is
built) in any way, so as to stay generally applicable to many
choices for the classiﬁer, and to avoid computationally expensive training of that classiﬁer over many iterations of expansion. We experiment with the process using public and
private text corpora and conﬁrm that the approach is effective and superior to simpler iterative expansion techniques.

Abstract
Real-world text classiﬁcation tasks often require many labeled training examples that are expensive to obtain. Recent
advancements in machine teaching, speciﬁcally the data programming paradigm, facilitate the creation of training data
sets quickly via a general framework for building weak models, also known as labeling functions, and denoising them
through ensemble learning techniques. We present a fast, simple data programming method for augmenting text data sets
by generating neighborhood-based weak models with minimal supervision. Furthermore, our method employs an iterative procedure to identify sparsely distributed examples from
large volumes of unlabeled data. The iterative data programming techniques improve newer weak models as more labeled
data is conﬁrmed with human-in-loop. We show empirical results on sentence classiﬁcation tasks, including those from a
task of improving intent recognition in conversational agents.

Introduction
A chat bot that automates handling of common customer
service requests often uses a text classiﬁer to identify the
intent in incoming requests. Many machine learning techniques are suitable for building these classiﬁers. The biggest
bottleneck in applying such classiﬁers is the availability of
labeled training data.
Labeling vast amounts of text data is expensive, involving
manual annotation by domain experts with complex background knowledge. It is even more challenging when the
classes are highly skewed, which renders a sequential process to look for each class largely ineffective, as examples
of the minority class are buried in much larger amounts of
data of other classes. Deciding between multiple classes for
each example, on the other hand, is also stressful as the annotator has to recall the deﬁnitions of all classes all the time.
Much work has been done to make the labeling effort
easier by expanding the manually provided labels in some
automated way. Commonly used data expansion methods
include active learning (Karlos et al. 2017) , self-training
(Guzmán-Cabrera et al. 2009), and co-training (Du, Ling,

Data Programming, Weak Supervision, and
Machine Teaching
Previous work has shown that interactive procedures aid creation and bootstrapping of new class-labeled data (Williams
et al. 2015). They show that domain experts, who are not
necessarily knowledgeable about machine learning systems,
are able to effectively build classes through a combination
of model deﬁnition, labeling, active learning, and more. Domain experts are often expensive and their time is valuable.

∗

Work done while at IBM Watson
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13332

