The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Distributed Multi-Sensor Machine
Learning Approach to Earthquake Early Warning
Kevin Fauvel,1 Daniel Balouek-Thomert,2 Diego Melgar,3 Pedro Silva,1 Anthony Simonet,2
Gabriel Antoniu,1 Alexandru Costan,1 Véronique Masson,1
Manish Parashar,2 Ivan Rodero,2 Alexandre Termier1
1
Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA, Rennes, France
Rutgers Discovery Informatics Institute, Rutgers University, New Jersey, USA
3
Department of Earth Sciences, University of Oregon, Oregon, USA
{kevin.fauvel, gabriel.antoniu}@inria.fr, {pedro.silva, alexandru.costan, veronique.masson, alexandre.termier}@irisa.fr,
{daniel.balouek, anthony.simonet, parashar, irodero}@rutgers.edu, dmelgarm@uoregon.edu
2

acterize earthquakes as they happen, and to deliver alerts before the ground motion actually reaches sensitive areas so
that protective measures could be taken.

Abstract
Our research aims to improve the accuracy of Earthquake
Early Warning (EEW) systems by means of machine learning. EEW systems are designed to detect and characterize
medium and large earthquakes before their damaging effects
reach a certain location. Traditional EEW methods based on
seismometers fail to accurately identify large earthquakes due
to their sensitivity to the ground motion velocity. The recently introduced high-precision GPS stations, on the other
hand, are ineffective to identify medium earthquakes due to
its propensity to produce noisy data. In addition, GPS stations
and seismometers may be deployed in large numbers across
different locations and may produce a signiﬁcant volume of
data consequently, affecting the response time and the robustness of EEW systems.
In practice, EEW can be seen as a typical classiﬁcation problem in the machine learning ﬁeld: multi-sensor data are given
in input, and earthquake severity is the classiﬁcation result. In
this paper, we introduce the Distributed Multi-Sensor Earthquake Early Warning (DMSEEW) system, a novel machine
learning-based approach that combines data from both types
of sensors (GPS stations and seismometers) to detect medium
and large earthquakes. DMSEEW is based on a new stacking ensemble method which has been evaluated on a realworld dataset validated with geoscientists. The system builds
on a geographically distributed infrastructure, ensuring an efﬁcient computation in terms of response time and robustness
to partial infrastructure failures. Our experiments show that
DMSEEW is more accurate than the traditional seismometeronly approach and the combined-sensors (GPS and seismometers) approach that adopts the rule of relative strength.

1

A recent review by (Allen and Melgar 2019) identiﬁed
the detection of the whole spectrum of earthquakes with
damaging potential and particularly large earthquakes as an
outstanding problem in the ﬁeld of EEW. An EEW system needs to be able to detect both medium (5 ≤ magnitude < 6, Richter scale) and large earthquakes (6 ≤ magnitude, Richter scale). Depending on the distance from the
origin of the earthquake, both of these can cause serious
damages. Seismometers, which have long been the bulwark
of seismology to detect earthquakes, have a difﬁculty to detect and characterize large earthquakes (Melgar et al. 2013)
due to a well-known saturation issue caused by their sensitivity to ground motion velocity. As a result, earthquakes
over magnitude 7.5 tend to be underestimated. A promising solution to this issue (Melgar et al. 2015) emerged with
novel high-precision Global Positioning System (GPS) sensors, with their millimeter to centimeter accuracy when measuring high ground motion velocity. However, GPS are unable to characterize medium earthquakes, as they are prone
to containing signiﬁcant signals from a variety of noise
sources, mostly of atmospheric origin. Consequently, multisensor solutions (leveraging both GPS and seismometers)
appear as a promising approach. As EEW can be assimilated as a classiﬁcation problem, where the input is sensor data and the ouput is a class (normal activity/medium
earthquake/large earthquake); recent machine learning approaches designed to combine large volumes of data from
multiple data sources can be applied.

Introduction

Integrating and processing high-frequency data streams
from multiple sensors scattered over a large territory in a
timely manner requires high-performance computing techniques and equipments. Thus, a machine learning earthquake detection solution has to be designed jointly with experts in distributed computing and cyberinfrastructure to enable real-time alerts. Because of the large number of sensors and their high sampling rate, a traditional centralized
approach which transfers all data to a single point may
be impractical. We therefore design a distributed machine
learning-based approach.

Earthquakes cause substantial loss of life and damage to the
built environment across areas spanning hundreds of kilometers from their origins. These large ground motions often lead to hazards such as tsunamis, ﬁres and landslides.
To mitigate the disastrous effects, a number of Earthquake
Early Warning (EEW) systems have been built around the
world (Allen and Melgar 2019). These critical systems, operating 24/7, are expected to automatically detect and charc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
403

