The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dynamic Sampling Network for Semantic Segmentation
Bin Fu,1,2 Junjun He,1,2 Zhengfu Zhang,1,3 Yu Qiao∗1,2
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
3
University of Chinese Academy of Science
{bin.fu, jj.he, zf.zhang, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Sampling is a basic operation of modern convolutional neural networks (CNN) since down-sampling operators are employed to enlarge the receptive ﬁeld while up-sampling operators are adopted to increase resolution. Most existing deep
segmentation networks employ regular grid sampling operators, which can be suboptimal for semantic segmentation task
due to large shape and scale variance. To address this problem, this paper proposes a Context Guided Dynamic Sampling (CGDS) module to obtain an effective representation
with rich shape and scale information by adaptively sampling
useful segmentation information in spatial space. Moreover,
we utilize the multi-scale contextual representations to guide
the sampling process. Therefore, our CGDS can adaptively
capture shape and scale information according to not only
the input feature map but also the multi-scale semantic context. CGDS provides a plug-and-play module which can be
easily incorporated in deep segmentation networks. We incorporate our proposed CGDS module into Dynamic Sampling Network (DSNet) and perform extensive experiments
on segmentation datasets. Experimental results show that our
CGDS signiﬁcantly improves semantic segmentation performance and achieves state-of-the-art performance on PASCAL
VOC 2012 and ADE20K datasets. Our model achieves 85.2%
mIOU on PASCAL VOC 2012 test set without MS COCO
dataset pre-trained and 46.4% on ADE20K validation set.
The codes will become publicly available after publication.

Figure 1: The shape and scale variance problem in semantic
segmentation task. In above image, the shape and scale of
plant, chair and table are different. The small convolution
kernel can produce subtle segmentation boundaries for plant
and a fragmentary map for table. While a large convolution
kernel will give an unbroken map for table and a coarse map
for plant.

Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016; Szegedy et al.
2017) pre-trained on ImageNet dataset (Russakovsky et al.
2015) to produce the segmentation map by replacing fully
connected layers with convolutional layers and adapting several up-sampling layers to gradually recover original resolution of the input image. Although this straight-forward
approach has obtained impressive performance on semantic
segmentation task, the inherent difference between classiﬁcation and segmentation tasks limits further improvement of
segmentation performance. Since the holistic representation
with large receptive ﬁeld is essential for classiﬁcation problem, the classiﬁcation network employs convolutional and
down-sampling layers to extract global information into a
feature vector and then pass it to a classiﬁcation sub-network
to estimate class label. However, semantic segmentation task
requires the model to assign category labels for every pixel
in input image, thus both global information and local details
are important for this task. Following this guidance, several approaches have been adopted to enlarge context ﬁeld
while preserve high resolution. For example, atron convolution (Chen et al. 2018a) introduces ’dilation’ into convolution operator which can enlarge the receptive ﬁeld without extra parameters. Although this approach can effectively
enlarge receptive ﬁelds, the inherent limitation of CNN ar-

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental and challenging
task in computer vision, which aims at assigning one of predeﬁned categories to each pixel in an image. It is a central task for various applications such as autonomous driving, image generation and robot sensing. In recent years, the
performance has been signiﬁcantly improved since various
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNN) based methods have been developed such as Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), DeepLab
(Chen et al. 2018a; 2017; 2018b) and PSPNet (Zhao et al.
2017). The standard philosophy of these models is to modify several successful classiﬁcation networks (Krizhevsky,
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10794

