The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Monte-Carlo Tree Search in Continuous Action Spaces with Value Gradients
Jongmin Lee,1 Wonseok Jeon,3,4 Geon-Hyeong Kim,1 Kee-Eung Kim1,2
1

School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
3
Mila, Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, Canada
4
McGill University, Montreal, Canada
{jmlee, ghkim}@ai.kaist.ac.kr, jeonwons@mila.quebec, kekim@kaist.ac.kr
2

possible actions is inﬁnite, thus coarse-grained discretization of the action space is unavoidable for a straightforward
tree search. Taking only rough actions can render the search
useless in many real-world problems that require precise
control.
Existing MCTS methods deal with continuous actions
in two main ways. Progressive widening (Coulom 2007;
Couëtoux et al. 2011a), also known as progressive unpruning (Chaslot et al. 2008), gradually increases the number
of available actions at each node based on the visitation
count. The other approach is hierarchical optimistic optimization (HOO) (Bubeck et al. 2009; Mansley, Weinstein,
and Littman 2011), which splits the action space and gradually increases the resolution of actions. While these approaches may show sufﬁcient performance for selecting
moderately good actions, they require a huge number of
samples to achieve highly accurate controls. In contrast,
gradient-based optimization is very effective for ﬁnding exact local optima but cannot be made reachable to global optima without careful initialization.
In this paper, we present Value-Gradient UCT (VGUCT), an MCTS algorithm equipped with the gradientbased ﬁne-tuning of the ﬁnite set of action samples. The algorithm jointly performs global (but coarse-grained) search
via MCTS and local (but ﬁne-grained) search via actionvalue gradient ascent. Our algorithm is based on the observation that many real-world problems with continuous action
space have locally differentiable dynamics (with respect to
state and action) thus make gradient ascent highly effective.
In addition, it has been shown that the domain-speciﬁc
knowledge can be leveraged to signiﬁcantly improve the
performance of MCTS (Enzenberger et al. 2010; Arrington,
Langley, and Bogaerts 2016). One of the promising algorithms is kernel-regression UCT (KR-UCT) (Yee, Lisy, and
Bowling 2016; Lee et al. 2018), which has been successfully
applied to challenging continuous action problems such as
curling. KR-UCT can be regarded as leveraging the smoothness in continuous dynamical systems, i.e. similar actions
have similar values thus it is a good idea to share information of values between actions. In VG-KR-UCT, we further
incorporated our idea of using the ﬁrst-order (i.e. gradient)
information of values to boost the performance of KR-UCT.

Abstract
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is the state-of-the-art online planning algorithm for large problems with discrete action spaces. However, many real-world problems involve continuous action spaces, where MCTS is not as effective as in
discrete action spaces. This is mainly due to common practices such as coarse discretization of the entire action space
and failure to exploit local smoothness. In this paper, we
introduce Value-Gradient UCT (VG-UCT), which combines
traditional MCTS with gradient-based optimization of action
particles. VG-UCT simultaneously performs a global search
via UCT with respect to the ﬁnitely sampled set of actions
and performs a local improvement via action value gradients.
In the experiments, we demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing MCTS methods and other strong baseline
algorithms for continuous action spaces.

1

Introduction

Many real-world problems require planning to select actions sequentially in continuous action spaces. For example,
robotic manipulation is achieved by the torque command sequence, playing billiards requires computing precise force
and angle of the cue, and aerospace navigation needs to
choose target velocities. Physical systems often involve differential equations for their dynamics that are differentiable
with respect to states and actions.
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Kocsis and
Szepesvári 2006; Coulom 2006; Browne et al. 2012)
is a highly effective online closed-loop planning algorithm for large search space problems and has shown
great promise especially when the action space is discrete such as playing board games (Silver et al. 2016;
2017), real-time games (Balla and Fern 2009;
Pepels, Winands, and Lanctot 2014) and combinatorial
optimization (Sabharwal, Samulowitz, and Reddy 2012).
MCTS performs quite well with a black-box simulator,
without any heuristic function. However, it is generally not
a method of preferred choice when it comes to planning in
continuous actions. This is mainly because the number of
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4561

