The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SetRank: A Setwise Bayesian Approach
for Collaborative Ranking from Implicit Feedback
Chao Wang,1,2 Hengshu Zhu,2∗ Chen Zhu,2 Chuan Qin,1,2 Hui Xiong1,2,3∗
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Baidu Talent Intelligence Center, Baidu Inc.
3
Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Research
wdyx2012@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhuhengshu@baidu.com, {zc3930155, chuanqin0426, xionghui}@gmail.com

and Dhillon 2015). Therefore, collaborative ranking from
implicit feedback has been attracting more and more attention in recent years (Rendle et al. 2009; Shi, Larson, and
Hanjalic 2010; Huang et al. 2015; Xia 2019).

Abstract
The recent development of online recommender systems has
a focus on collaborative ranking from implicit feedback, such
as user clicks and purchases. Different from explicit ratings,
which reﬂect graded user preferences, the implicit feedback
only generates positive and unobserved labels. While considerable efforts have been made in this direction, the wellknown pairwise and listwise approaches have still been limited by various challenges. Speciﬁcally, for the pairwise approaches, the assumption of independent pairwise preference
is not always held in practice. Also, the listwise approaches
cannot efﬁciently accommodate “ties” due to the precondition of the entire list permutation. To this end, in this paper,
we propose a novel setwise Bayesian approach for collaborative ranking, namely SetRank, to inherently accommodate the
characteristics of implicit feedback in recommender system.
Speciﬁcally, SetRank aims at maximizing the posterior probability of novel setwise preference comparisons and can be
implemented with matrix factorization and neural networks.
Meanwhile, we also present the theoretical analysis of SetRank to 
show that the bound of excess risk can be proportional to M/N , where M and N are the numbers of items
and users, respectively. Finally, extensive experiments on four
real-world datasets clearly validate the superiority of SetRank
compared with various state-of-the-art baselines.

While considerable efforts have been made in this direction (Rendle et al. 2009; Chen et al. 2009; Weimer et
al. 2008), represented by the well-known pairwise and listwise approaches, some critical challenges still exist. As
for the family of pairwise approaches (Rendle et al. 2009;
Freund et al. 2003; Chapelle and Keerthi 2010; Wu, Hsieh,
and Sharpnack 2017; Krohn-Grimberghe et al. 2012), which
take the item pair as the basic element to model the preference structure in implicit feedback, they are prone to the inconsistency problem between assumption and practice. For
example, Bayesian Personalized Ranking (BPR) (Rendle et
al. 2009), one of the most widely used collaborative pairwise
approaches, tries to maximize the probability of binary comparison between positive and unobserved feedback. Such
treatment requires the strict assumption of independent pairwise preference over two items as the basis for constructing
pairwise loss. However, as shown in Figure 1, if there exist the item preference pairs “A>B” and “C>D” for user 1,
the pairs “A>D” and “C>B” must also exist for user 1 due
to the binary value of implicit feedback. In other words, we
have p(A>D,C>B|A>B,C>D) = 1 in the practical pair
construction process, which breaks the independence among
pairs and thus inﬂuences the optimization result of the pairwise loss. Some follow-up studies chose to relax the independence assumption by considering group information. For
example, GBPR (Pan and Chen 2013b) introduced richer
users’ interactions and Coﬁset (Pan and Chen 2013a) deﬁned a user’s preference on the item group to consider the
composition effect. However, the inconsistency problem remains to some extent.

Introduction
Recommender systems have been widely deployed in many
popular online services for enhancing user experience and
business revenue (Wang, Wang, and Yeung 2015; Liu et al.
2019a; 2019b; Zhu et al. 2018). As one representative task
of personalized recommendation, collaborative ranking aims
at providing a user-speciﬁc item ranking for users based on
their preferences learned from historical feedback. Indeed,
in real-world scenarios, most of the user feedback is implicit (e.g., clicks and purchases) but not explicit (e.g., 5-star
ratings). Different from explicit ratings, the implicit feedback only contains positive and unobserved labels instead
of graded user preferences, which brings new research challenges for building recommender systems (Hsieh, Natarajan,

As for the listwise approaches, the key challenge is how
to efﬁciently accommodate “ties” (items with the same rating value) due to the precondition of entire list permutation,
since there is no clear sequential relationship but binary rating in implicit feedback. Besides, they measure the uncertainty between the top-P items on the observed and predicted list by calculating the cross-entropy (Cao et al. 2007;
Shi, Larson, and Hanjalic 2010; Huang et al. 2015; Wang

∗

Hui Xiong and Hengshu Zhu are corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6127

