The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Tree-Structured Policy Based Progressive
Reinforcement Learning for Temporally Language Grounding in Video
Jie Wu,1 Guanbin Li,1∗ Si Liu,2 Liang Lin1,3
1

Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Beihang University, 3 DarkMatter AI Research.
wujie23@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, liusi@buaa.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

description in a video, they tend to assume an initial temporal interval ﬁrst, and achieve precise time boundary localization through cross-modal semantic matching analysis and
sequential boundary adjustment (e.g., scaling or shifting).

Abstract
Temporally language grounding in untrimmed videos is a
newly-raised task in video understanding. Most of the existing methods suffer from inferior efﬁciency, lacking interpretability, and deviating from the human perception mechanism. Inspired by human’s coarse-to-ﬁne decision-making
paradigm, we formulate a novel Tree-Structured Policy based
Progressive Reinforcement Learning (TSP-PRL) framework
to sequentially regulate the temporal boundary by an iterative reﬁnement process. The semantic concepts are explicitly
represented as the branches in the policy, which contributes
to efﬁciently decomposing complex policies into an interpretable primitive action. Progressive reinforcement learning provides correct credit assignment via two task-oriented
rewards that encourage mutual promotion within the treestructured policy. We extensively evaluate TSP-PRL on the
Charades-STA and ActivityNet datasets, and experimental results show that TSP-PRL achieves competitive performance
over existing state-of-the-art methods.

Looking deep into human’s thinking paradigm (Mancas
et al. 2016), people usually deduce a coarse-to-ﬁne deliberation process to render a more reasonable and interpretable
decision in daily life. Namely, people will ﬁrst roughly determine the selection range before making a decision, then
choose the best one among the coarse alternatives. This topdown coarse-to-ﬁne deliberation has been explored in the
task of machine translation, text summarization and so on
(Xia et al. 2017). Intuitively, embedding this mode of thinking into our task can efﬁciently decompose complex action
policies, reduce the number of search steps while increasing the search space, and obtain more impressive results in
a more reasonable way. To this end, we formulate a TreeStructured Policy based Progressive Reinforcement Learning framework (TSP-PRL) to imitate human’s coarse-to-ﬁne
decision-making scheme. The tree-structured policy in TSPPRL consists of root policy and leaf policy, which respectively correspond to the process of coarse and ﬁne decisionmaking stage. And a more reasonable primitive action is proposed via these two-stages selection. The primitive actions
are divided into ﬁve classes related to semantic concepts according to the moving distance and directions: scale variation, markedly left shift, markedly right shift, marginally left
adjustment and marginally right adjustment. The above semantic concepts are explicitly represented as the branches
into the tree-structured policy, which contributes to efﬁciently decomposing complex policies into an interpretable
primitive action. In the reasoning stage, the root policy ﬁrst
roughly estimates the high-level semantic branch that can reduce the semantic gap to the most extent. Then the leaf policy reasons a reﬁned primitive action based on the selected
branch to optimize the boundary. We depict an example of
how TSP-PRL addresses the task in Figure 1. As can be seen
in the ﬁgure, the agent ﬁrst markedly right shift the boundary to eliminate the semantic gap. Then it resorts to scale
contraction and marginally adjustment to obtain an accurate
boundary.

Introduction
We focus on the task of temporally language grounding in
a video, whose goal is to determine the temporal boundary of the segments in the untrimmed video that corresponds to the given sentence statement. Most of the existing competitive approaches (Anne Hendricks et al. 2017;
Gao et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018; Ge et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2019) are based on extensive temporal sliding windows to
slide over the entire video or rank all possible clip-sentence
pairs to obtain the grounding results. However, these sliding
window based methods suffer from inferior efﬁciency and
deviate from the human perception mechanism. When humans locate an interval window associated with a sentence
∗
Corresponding author is Guanbin Li. This work was supported
in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of
China under Grant No. 2018YFC0830103, in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.61976250
and No.61876177, in part by the National High Level Talents Special Support Plan (Ten Thousand Talents Program). This work
was also supported by sponsored by CCF-Tencent Open Research
Fund (CCF-Tencent IAGR20190106).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The tree-structured policy is optimized via progressive re12386

