The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SPSTracker: Sub-Peak Suppression of Response Map for Robust Object Tracking
Qintao Hu,1,2,3∗ Lijun Zhou,2,3,4∗ Xiaoxiao Wang,5 Yao Mao,1,2† Jianlin Zhang,1,2 Qixiang Ye3†
1

Key Laboratory of Optical Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu , China
2
Institute of Optics and Electronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu , China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing , China
4
TU Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany
5
University of California, Davis, USA
{huqintao16, zhoulijun16}@mails.ucas.edu.cn, xxwa@ucdavis.edu, {maoyao, jlin}@ioe.ac.cn, qxye@ucas.ac.cn
Frame 2

Abstract
Modern visual trackers usually construct online learning
models under the assumption that the feature response has
a Gaussian distribution with target-centered peak response.
Nevertheless, such an assumption is implausible when there
is progressive interference from other targets and/or background noise, which produce sub-peaks on the tracking response map and cause model drift. In this paper, we propose a rectiﬁed online learning approach for sub-peak response suppression and peak response enforcement and target at handling progressive interference in a systematic way.
Our approach, referred to as SPSTracker, applies simple-yetefﬁcient Peak Response Pooling (PRP) to aggregate and align
discriminative features, as well as leveraging a Boundary Response Truncation (BRT) to reduce the variance of feature response. By fusing with multi-scale features, SPSTracker aggregates the response distribution of multiple sub-peaks to a
single maximum peak, which enforces the discriminative capability of features for robust object tracking. Experiments on
the OTB, NFS and VOT2018 benchmarks demonstrate that
SPSTrack outperforms the state-of-the-art real-time trackers
with signiﬁcant margins1

GroundTruth

153

SPSTracker

165

167

ATOM

Figure 1: Comparison of our approach with the state-ofthe-art ATOM tracker (Danelljan et al. 2019). For the interference from multiple targets, ATOM (ﬁrst row) produces
response maps of multiple sub-peaks (frame 153 to frame
165), which cause model drift. In contrast, our approach
(second row) aggregates the response distribution of multiple sub-peaks to a single maximum peak, which leads to
robust target tracking. (Best viewed in color and with zoom
in)
To mitigate the interference, the Siamese network structure was introduced to improve the discriminative capacity
of trackers by extensively training the network (Tao, Gavves,
and Smeulders 2016; Xu et al. 2017). EArly-Stopping
Tracker incorporates object representation decision-making
policies with the reinforcement learning method (Huang,
Lucey, and Ramanan 2017). Nevertheless, these approaches
usually rely on using additional data for ofﬂine training and
lack the capability to adapt trackers adaptability in complex
conditions.
To conquer the issue, the dynamic Siamese network (Guo
et al. 2017) uses a fast transformation learning method
to model target appearance variation and handles background suppression from previous frames. The ATOM
tracker (Danelljan et al. 2019) combines ofﬂine pre-training
with online learning in a multi-task learning framework by
incorporating the objectives of target localization and targetbackground classiﬁcation. While incorporating high-level
knowledge into the target estimation through extensive ofﬂine learning, these methods remain overlooking the progressive interference from context area in a systematic manner. How to directly model the interference and regularize
the tracking response distribution is still a open problem.
In this paper, we propose a simple-yet-effective approach,

Introduction
In the past few years, deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have signiﬁcantly improved the performance of visual object tracking, by providing frameworks for end-toend representation learning (Ma et al. 2016; Danelljan et al.
2016a), online correlation ﬁlter learning (Henriques et al.
2015; Danelljan et al. 2016b), and discriminative classiﬁer
learning (Danelljan et al. 2017; Qi et al. 2016; Nam and Han
2015; Nam et al. 2016; Han, Sim, and Adam 2017). However, CNN-based trackers suffer the performance degradation caused by the multi-target occlusion, appearance variance and/or background noise. Especially during the tracking procedure, the neighboring targets and background noise
could introduce progressive interference and result in the vital model drift, as shown in Fig. 1(up), particularly when
objects have scale variations and complex motions.
∗

Both authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code is available at. github.com/TrackerLB/SPSTracker
†

10989

