The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Understanding and Improving Proximity
Graph Based Maximum Inner Product Search
Jie Liu,* Xiao Yan,* Xinyan Dai, Zhirong Li, James Cheng, Ming-Chang Yang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{jliu, xyan, xydai, zrli6, jcheng, mcyang}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

and ﬁnding approximate MIPS (i.e., items with inner product close to the maximum) sufﬁces for most applications.
Therefore, we focus on approximate MIPS in this paper.
Related work. Due to its broad range of applications,
many algorithms for MIPS have been proposed. Tree-based
methods such as cone tree (Ram and Gray 2012) and PCA
tree (Bachrach et al. 2014) were ﬁrst used but they suffer
from poor performance on high dimensional datasets. Locality sensitive hashing (LSH) based methods are widely used
for similarity search (Li et al. 2018). ALSH (Shrivastava and
Li 2014), Simple-LSH (Neyshabur and Srebro 2015) and
Norm-Range LSH (Yan et al. 2018), transform MIPS into
Euclidean or angular similarity search and reuse existing
hash functions. LEMP (Teﬂioudi, Gemulla, and Mykytiuk
2015) and FEXIPRO (Li et al. 2017) target exact MIPS and
adopt various pruning rules to avoid unnecessary computation. Maximus (Abuzaid et al. 2019) shows that the pruningbased methods do not always outperform brute-force linear
scans using optimized computation libraries.
ip-NSW. In a proximity graph, each item is connected to
some items that are most similar to it w.r.t. a given similarity function (Hajebi et al. 2011). A similarity search query
is processed by a walk in the graph, which keeps moving
towards items that are most similar to the query. Proximity graph based methods achieve excellent recall-time performance1 for Euclidean distance nearest neighbor search
(Euclidean NNS) and an number of variants have been
proposed (Fu et al. 2019; Harwood and Drummond 2016;
Wang et al. 2013). Among them, the navigable small word
graph (NSW) (Malkov et al. 2014) and its hierarchical version (HNSW) (Malkov and Yashunin 2018) represent the
state-of-the-art and we introduce NSW in greater details in
Section 3. Morozov and Babenko (2018) showed that NSW
also works well for MIPS. They proposed the ip-NSW algorithm, which directly uses inner product as similarity function to construct and search NSW. ip-NSW outperforms all
existing MIPS algorithms (including those mentioned in the
related work) by a large margin in terms of recall-time performance and the speedup can be an order of magnitude for
achieving the same recall (Morozov and Babenko 2018).

Abstract
The inner-product navigable small world graph (ip-NSW)
represents the state-of-the-art method for approximate maximum inner product search (MIPS) and it can achieve an
order of magnitude speedup over the fastest baseline. However, to date it is still unclear where its exceptional performance comes from. In this paper, we show that there is a
strong norm bias in the MIPS problem, which means that
the large norm items are very likely to become the result of
MIPS. Then we explain the good performance of ip-NSW as
matching the norm bias of the MIPS problem — large norm
items have big in-degrees in the ip-NSW proximity graph and
a walk on the graph spends the majority of computation on
these items, thus effectively avoids unnecessary computation
on small norm items. Furthermore, we propose the ip-NSW+
algorithm, which improves ip-NSW by introducing an additional angular proximity graph. Search is ﬁrst conducted on
the angular graph to ﬁnd the angular neighbors of a query and
then the MIPS neighbors of these angular neighbors are used
to initialize the candidate pool for search on the inner-product
proximity graph. Experiment results show that ip-NSW+ consistently and signiﬁcantly outperforms ip-NSW and provides
more robust performance under different data distributions.

1

Introduction

For a query q, maximum inner product search (MIPS)
ﬁnds an item that maximizes q  xi in a dataset X = {xi ∈
Rd |i = 1, · · · , n} containing n items (Ram and Gray 2012).
MIPS has a number of applications in recommender systems, computer vision and machine learning. Examples include recommendation based on user and item embeddings
learned via matrix factorization (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky
2009), object matching with visual descriptor (Felzenszwalb
et al. 2010), memory network training (Chandar et al. 2016)
and reinforcement learning (Jun et al. 2017). In practice, it
is usually required to ﬁnd the top-k items having the largest
inner product with q. When the dataset is large and the dimension (i.e., d) is high, exact MIPS is usually too costly
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Co-ﬁrst authors are ranked alphabetically. Correspondence to
Xiao Yan.

1
Recall-time performance measures the time taken to reach a
given recall for query processing.

139

