The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-View Spectral Clustering with Optimal Neighborhood Laplacian Matrix
∗

Sihang Zhou,1 Xinwang Liu,1 Jiyuan Liu,1 Xifeng Guo,1 Yawei Zhao,1
En Zhu,1 Yongping Zhai,2 Jianping Yin,3 Wen Gao4
1

2

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
College of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
3
School of Cyberspace Science, Dongguan University of Technology, Guangdong 523808, China
4
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China, 100871
sihangjoe@gmail.com, xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn
assuming that the optimal Laplacian matrix is a linear aggregation of the base Laplacian matrices from each view,
the third category of methods optimize the combination coefﬁcients of the base Laplacian matrices by minimizing the
normalized cut of the combined matrix (Xia et al. 2010).
Methods in the third category have received intensive attention during the past few years, and progress continues
being made along this line of research (Li et al. 2015;
Nie et al. 2016; Zhao, Ding, and Fu 2017; Zong et al. 2018;
Huang, Kang, and Xu 2018; Kang et al. 2018; Zhou et
al. 2020). The work in (Li et al. 2015) approximates the
similarity graphs with bipartite graphs and makes the proposed algorithm applicable to large-scale problems. In (Nie
et al. 2016), researchers introduce a parameter-free framework which could serve for both unsupervised and semisupervised learning circumstances. To propose a more appropriate view-weighting scheme, (Zong et al. 2018) adopts
the largest canonical angle to measure the difference between spectral clustering results of different views. Our
work also falls into the third category.

Abstract
Multi-view spectral clustering aims to group data into different categories by optimally exploring complementary information from multiple Laplacian matrices. However, existing methods usually linearly combine a group of pre-speciﬁed
ﬁrst-order Laplacian matrices to construct an optimal Laplacian matrix, which may result in limited representation capability and insufﬁcient information exploitation. In this paper, we propose a novel optimal neighborhood multi-view
spectral clustering (ONMSC) algorithm to address these issues. Speciﬁcally, the proposed algorithm generates an optimal Laplacian matrix by searching the neighborhood of both
the linear combination of the ﬁrst-order and high-order base
Laplacian matrices simultaneously. This design enhances the
representative capacity of the optimal Laplacian and better
utilizes the hidden high-order connection information, leading to improved clustering performance. An efﬁcient algorithm with proved convergence is designed to solve the resultant optimization problem. Extensive experimental results
on 9 datasets demonstrate the superiority of our algorithm
against state-of-the-art methods, which veriﬁes the effectiveness and advantages of the proposed ONMSC.

Although various improvements have been achieved by
existing algorithms, we observe that algorithms from the
third category bear the following drawbacks. First, these
algorithms share a common assumption that the optimal
Laplacian matrix lies in the linear space spanned by the
base Laplacian matrices. This assumption, on one hand, simpliﬁes the optimization procedure. On the other hand, it
is uncovered in recent work that it might over-reduce the
feasible set of the optimal Laplacian matrix and could result in limited representation capacity of the learned matrix (Bach 2009; Cortes, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2009;
Liu et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018). Second, existing algorithms
do not sufﬁciently consider the high-order afﬁnity information, which is important to reveal hidden neighborhood relation among samples. Both factors could adversely affect the
learned Laplacian matrix, leading to unsatisfying clustering
performance.

Introduction
Multi-view spectral clustering (MVSC), which makes use
of the information of multi-view data to improve clustering accuracy, has become an important research topic in
the past decades (De Sa 2005; Yang and Wang 2018). According to the complementary information extraction mechanism, current algorithms can be roughly grouped into three
categories. The ﬁrst category adopts a co-training mechanism and forces the clustering results of different views to
be consistent with each other (Kumar and Daumé 2011;
Huang et al. 2015). The second category assumes that the
predeﬁned afﬁnity matrices are perturbation of an optimal afﬁnity matrix. Then, by utilizing low-rank or sparse
optimization, these algorithms construct an optimal consensus afﬁnity matrix from all views (Nie et al. 2017;
Zhan et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2019). By

In this paper, we propose an optimal neighborhood multiview spectral clustering algorithm to address both issues.
Speciﬁcally, instead of restricting the optimal Laplacian matrix exactly being a linear combination of base matrices, our
algorithm allows the optimal matrix to lie in the neighbor-

∗

corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6965

