The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Part Generation and Assembly for Structure-Aware Shape Synthesis
Jun Li, Chengjie Niu, Kai Xu*
National University of Defense Technology
Abstract
Learning powerful deep generative models for 3D shape synthesis is largely hindered by the difﬁculty in ensuring plausibility encompassing correct topology and reasonable geometry. Indeed, learning the distribution of plausible 3D shapes
seems a daunting task for the holistic approaches, given the
signiﬁcant topological variations of 3D objects even within
the same category. Enlightened by the fact that 3D shape
structure is characterized as part composition and placement,
we propose to model 3D shape variations with a part-aware
deep generative network, coined as PAGENet. The network
is composed of an array of per-part VAE-GANs, generating
semantic parts composing a complete shape, followed by a
part assembly module that estimates a transformation for each
part to correlate and assemble them into a plausible structure. Through delegating the learning of part composition and
part placement into separate networks, the difﬁculty of modeling structural variations of 3D shapes is greatly reduced. We
demonstrate through both qualitative and quantitative evaluations that PAGENet generates 3D shapes with plausible, diverse and detailed structure, and show two applications, i.e.,
semantic shape segmentation and part-based shape editing.

1

(a) Part-wise generation

(b) After assembling

(c) Holistic generation

(d) Part-based editing

Figure 1: PAGENet ﬁrst generates the semantic parts (a) and
then assembles them with proper transformations, forming
a structurally valid 3D shape (b) in contrast to the results
by holistic generation (c). The learned model supports partbased shape editing (d): The anchor part (the pink parts in
the inset) is edited by the user and all parts are automatically
deformed and re-assembled into a plausible shape.
modeling of structural variations of 3D shapes through
learning a part-aware generative network, named as PAGENet. The model is thus aware of what parts it is generating, through a semantic-part-wise generation process. On
the other hand, the model should be able to preserve the relative spatial placement between the generated parts, according to some learned part placement prior. Such placement
determines how adjacency semantic parts assemble together
in forming a structurally valid shape.
PAGENet is composed of an array of part generators,
each of which is a combination of variational auto-encoder
(VAE) and generative adversarial network (GAN) trained for
generating a speciﬁed semantic part of the target shape category, followed by a part assembler that estimates a transformation for each part used to assemble them into a valid
shape structure (Figure 1(a,b)). In this work, PAGENet is realized in the volumetric setting; it can be easily extended to
other representations such as point cloud.
Our model delegates the generation of parts and relations
on separate networks, greatly reducing the modeling difﬁculty of 3D shape structures. 3D structure variation is modeled by the concatenation of the latent vectors of all part
generators, forming a structured latent space of 3D shapes
with different dimensions of the latent vector controlling
the generation of different parts. This facilitates part-based
shape editing and latent-space part reshufﬂing of the generated shapes with structure preservation. Figure 1(d) shows
two examples of part-based editing: Based on our part assembler, edit over anchor parts can be propagated to other
parts, resulting in structurally reasonable edited shapes.

Introduction

Learning deep generative models for 3D shape synthesis has
been attracting increasing research interest lately. Despite
the notable progress made since the seminal work of (Wu et
al. 2016), one major challenge still demanding more attention is how to ensure the structural correctness of the generated shapes. Most existing generative models are structureoblivious. They tend to generate 3D shapes in a holistic manner, without comprehending its compositional parts explicitly. Consequently, when generating 3D shapes with detailed
structures, the details of complicated part structures are often blurred or even messed up (see Figure 1(c)).
To alleviate this issue, one common practice is to increase
the shape resolution to better capture ﬁne-grained details,
with the cost of increased training examples and learning
time. The main reason behind is that the 3D shape representation employed by those models, e.g., volume or point
cloud, are oblivious to shape structures. With such representations, part information is not encoded and thus cannot be
decoded either during the generation process.
In the ﬁeld 3D shape analysis, a consensus about the
“structure” of a shape is the combination of part composition
and the relative positioning between parts (Mitra et al. 2013;
Xu et al. 2016). Following that insight, we approach the
* Corresponding author: Kai Xu (kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com)
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11362

