The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weakly-Supervised Opinion Summarization by Leveraging External Information
Chao Zhao, Snigdha Chaturvedi
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
zhaochaocs@gmail.com, snigdha@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

Feature descriptions:
• ENHANCED QUALITY : With the X1 Extreme Processor
enjoy controlled contrast & wide range of brightness
• BEYOND HIGH DEFINITION : 4K HDTV picture offers
stunning clarity & high dynamic range color & detail.
• PREMIUM DISPLAY : Enjoy vibrant colors with TRILUMINOS & clear on-screen action with X-Motion Clarity.
• VOICE COMPATIBILITY : 55in tv is compatible with Amazon Alexa & Google Home to change channels & more.

Opinion summarization from online product reviews is a
challenging task, which involves identifying opinions related
to various aspects of the product being reviewed. While previous works require additional human effort to identify relevant aspects, we instead apply domain knowledge from external sources to automatically achieve the same goal. This
work proposes A SP M EM, a generative method that contains
an array of memory cells to store aspect-related knowledge.
This explicit memory can help obtain a better opinion representation and infer the aspect information more precisely. We
evaluate this method on both aspect identiﬁcation and opinion
summarization tasks. Our experiments show that A SP M EM
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods even though, unlike
the baselines, it does not rely on human supervision which is
carefully handcrafted for the given tasks.

1

Review 1: Set up was extremely easy and the remote is simple
to use. Simply plug it in and tune to a channel. It gets 4 stars
because I don’t think its worth the price.
Review 2: The color and definition are excellent. We wanted a
small TV for our kitchen counter...and it ﬁt the bill, it seemed.
Review 3: I have owned this TV for 10 months and am looking
to replace it. The sound is TERRIBLE. The picture quality
is also very rapidly decreasing.
Review n: ...

Introduction

Opinion summarization aims to generate a concise and digestible summary of user opinions, like those from the internet sources, such as blogs, social media, e-commerce websites, etc. It is especially helpful when the large and growing
number of such opinions becomes overwhelming for users
to read and process (Kim et al. 2011; Ding and Jiang 2015).
In this work, we focus on extractive opinion summarization
from online product reviews. The goal of this task is to take a
collection of reviews of the target product (e.g., a television)
as input and selects a subset of review excerpts as a summary. The last two boxes of Figure 1 show an example of
user reviews of a television and a corresponding extractive
summary.
This example illustrates that opinion summarization differs from the more general task of multi-document summarization (Lin and Hovy 2002) in two major ways. First,
while general summarization aims to retain the most important content, opinion summarization needs to cover a range
of popular opinions and reﬂect their diversity (Di Fabbrizio,
Stent, and Gaizauskas 2014). Second, opinion summary is
more centered on the various aspects (i.e., components, attributes, or properties) of the target product, and their corresponding sentiment polarities (Liu 2015). For example,

Summary: Set up was extremely easy and the remote is simple to use. The color and definition are excellent . It’s great for
casual TV watching. The sound is TERRIBLE. The picture
quality is also very rapidly decreasing .

Figure 1: An example of the extractive summary from multiple reviews. A review may express opinions about multiple
aspects of the target product. These are shown in the ﬁgure
as highlighted texts in different colors.
highlighted sentences in Review 3 of Figure 1 express reviewer’s negative opinions about the aspects of S OUND and
I MAGE. To reﬂect these differences, Hu and Liu(2004) introduced a three-step pipeline to create an opinion summary by
1) mining product-related aspects and identifying sentences
related to those aspects; 2) analyzing the sentiment of the
identiﬁed sentences; and 3) summarizing the results. Each of
these three tasks has often been addressed using supervised
methods. Despite the fairly high performance, these methods require the corresponding human-annotated data. Even
worse, they suffer from the inability to adapt across different
domains or product categories (e.g., televisions and backpacks have different aspects). In this paper, we address these
problems without the usage of human annotation.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9644

