The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graduate Employment Prediction with Bias
Teng Guo,1 Feng Xia,1,2 Shihao Zhen,1 Xiaomei Bai,3 Dongyu Zhang,1∗ Zitao Liu,4 Jiliang Tang5
1

Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province,
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116620, China
2
School of Science, Engineering and Information Technology, Federation University Australia, Ballarat, VIC 3353, Australia
3
Computing Center, Anshan Normal University, Anshan 114007, China
4
TAL AI Lab, TAL Education Group, Beijing 100080, China
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA

the best employees. However, in addition to academic performance (Kong et al. 2018), recruitment decisions can be
affected by unconscious biases, such as gender (Clauset,
Arbesman, and Larremore 2015). These biases not only lead
to imbalance in the hiring process, resulting in uniformity
in the workplace instead of diversity, but also result in the
inequality of employment (Giannakas, Fulton, and Awada
2017; Ford et al. 2018; Liang, Hong, and Gu 2018), especially for fresh graduates who have no work experience.
Therefore, it is necessary to understand biases in recruitment, which can further be exploited for the prediction of
graduates’ employment. Nevertheless, previous related researches have been mainly based on questionnaires, which
are time- and cost-consuming and hardly applicable to largescale students.

Abstract
The failure of landing a job for college students could cause
serious social consequences such as drunkenness and suicide.
In addition to academic performance, unconscious biases can
become one key obstacle for hunting jobs for graduating students. Thus, it is necessary to understand these unconscious
biases so that we can help these students at an early stage
with more personalized intervention. In this paper, we develop a framework, i.e., MAYA (Multi-mAjor emploYment
stAtus) to predict students’ employment status while considering biases. The framework consists of four major components. Firstly, we solve the heterogeneity of student courses
by embedding academic performance into a uniﬁed space.
Then, we apply a generative adversarial network (GAN) to
overcome the class imbalance problem. Thirdly, we adopt
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) with a novel dropout
mechanism to comprehensively capture sequential information among semesters. Finally, we design a bias-based regularization to capture the job market biases. We conduct extensive experiments on a large-scale educational dataset and the
results demonstrate the effectiveness of our prediction framework.

1

Thanks to the advance of information technology, we are
able to digitalize records of students in schools which product rich data about students. It enables the data-driven development(Wu et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2018) and provides
us an opportunity to deepen our understandings on the employment of students. However, to achieve the goal, we face
tremendous challenges. First, such data is much more complex than that based on questionnaires, thus advanced techniques are needed. Second, the number of graduates that
cannot land a job is much smaller compared to these who
can successful obtain jobs, thus employment analysis and
prediction are highly imbalanced. Third, there may exist biases in employment that can be varied by majors; while the
majority of existing algorithms seldom consider possible biases.

Introduction

Education, as the basic means of improving individual abilities, makes students competitive in recruitment. However,
not every graduate can succeed in job hunting. The data from
the statistical ofﬁce of the European Union (EU) shows that
the employment rate in the EU of 20-34 years old is 83.4%
for tertiary education and 65.8% for upper secondary general
education in 2018 (Eurostat 2019). The failure of job hunting could cause serious consequences like suicide (Drum et
al. 2009; Westefeld et al. 2005). Therefore, detecting students with trouble in landing a job timely and providing
personalized intervention and guidance at an early stage are
greatly desired.
However, detecting these students faces tremendous challenges because recruitment might be impacted by various
factors (Luo and Pardos 2018). Every recruiter aims to hire

In this paper, we are devoted to exploring the biases in
different majors from demographics aspects, and predicting
students with trouble in landing a job at an early stage. First,
we analyze the employment biases for each major from 4
aspects including gender, nation, hometown, and enroll status. Second, based on possible employment biases, we propose a MAYA (Multi-mAjor emploYment stAtus) prediction framework, with four important components. In the ﬁrst
component, we solve the heterogeneity of students’ courses
through embedding academic performance into a space of
uniﬁed dimension by autoencoder. Then GAN (Generative
Adversarial Networks) is applied to generate data of the mi-

∗
Corresponding author: Dongyu Zhang (email: zhangdongyu@dlut.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

670

