The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Automatic Generation of Headlines for Online Math Questions
Ke Yuan,1,2 Dafang He,2 Zhuoren Jiang,3 Liangcai Gao,1∗ Zhi Tang,1∗ C. Lee Giles2
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, 100080, China
2
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
3
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510006, China
{yuanke, glc, tangzhi}@pku.edu.cn, duh188@psu.edu, jiangzhr3@mail.sysu.edu.cn, giles@ist.psu.edu

Abstract

Detailed Math Question:
While studying the proof of the existence theorem for weak solutions for parabolic equations
using the Galerkin approximation I encountered the following problem:
∞
2
Assume that Ω ⊆ ℝd is an open set and {wk}k=1 is an orthonormal basis of L (Ω) such that
∞
l{wk }
is also orthogonal in W 1,2 (Ω) . For every n ∈ ℕ let Pn be the L 2-orthogonal
k=1
0
n
projection onto span{wk }
, i.e.
k=1

Mathematical equations are an important part of dissemination and communication of scientiﬁc information. Students,
however, often feel challenged in reading and understanding math content and equations. With the development of
the Web, students are posting their math questions online.
Nevertheless, constructing a concise math headline that gives
a good description of the posted detailed math question is
nontrivial. In this study, we explore a novel summarization
task denoted as geNerating A concise Math hEadline from a
detailed math question (NAME). Compared to conventional
summarization tasks, this task has two extra and essential
constraints: 1) Detailed math questions consist of text and
math equations which require a uniﬁed framework to jointly
model textual and mathematical information; 2) Unlike text,
math equations contain semantic and structural features, and
both of them should be captured together. To address these
issues, we propose MathSum, a novel summarization model
which utilizes a pointer mechanism combined with a multihead attention mechanism for mathematical representation
augmentation. The pointer mechanism can either copy textual
tokens or math tokens from source questions in order to generate math headlines. The multi-head attention mechanism
is designed to enrich the representation of math equations
by modeling and integrating both its semantic and structural
features. For evaluation, we collect and make available two
sets of real-world detailed math questions along with humanwritten math headlines, namely EXEQ-300k and OFEQ-10k.
Experimental results demonstrate that our model (MathSum)
signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art models for both the
EXEQ-300k and OFEQ-10k datasets.

n
n
u (x )wk (x )d x wk ,
Pn (u ) =
u , wk ) 2
w =
∑(
∑ ∫
L (Ω) k
k =1
k =1 Ω

u ∈ L 2 (Ω) .

It is clear that ∥Pn (u)∥L 2 (Ω) ≤ ∥u∥L 2 (Ω) for every n ∈ ℕ and u ∈ L 2 (Ω) . However, what
I need is the following:
∃ C > ; 0 ∀ n ∈ ℕ ∀ u ∈ W 1,2 (Ω) : ∥Pn (u)∥ 1,2
≤ C ∥u∥ 1,2 .
0
W0 (Ω)
W0 (Ω)
I'm not even sure it is true, but I need it to obtain some a priori estimates.
Complex and Long
I'll appreciate any help.

Math Headline:

Orthogonal projection in L 2 (Ω) and W01,2 (Ω)

Clear and Brief

Figure 1: Example of a detailed math question along with its
headline. The question is complex and long and the headline
is clear and brief.
Exchange1 and MathOverﬂow2 , attempt to address this need.
From the viewpoint of questioners, the contents of detailed
math questions are usually complex and long. In order to
efﬁciently help those who pose the question, it would be
helpful to have a headline which is concise and to the point.
Correspondingly, those who will answer the question (answerers) also need a clear and brief headline to quickly determine if they should bother to respond. Therefore, giving
a concise math headline to a detailed question is important
and meaningful. Figure 1 illustrates an example of the question along with its headline posted in Mathematics Stack Exchange3 . It’s clear that, a complicated question can make it
difﬁcult for answerers to understand the intent of the questioner, while a concise headline can effectively reduce the
cost of this operation.
To this end, we explore a novel approach for geNerating
A Math hEadline for detailed questions (NAME). Here,
we deﬁne the NAME task as a summarization task. Compared to conventional summarization tasks, the NAME task

Introduction
Math equations are widely used in the ﬁelds of Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). However, it is often daunting for students to understand math
content and equations when they are reading STEM publications (Liu and Qin 2014; Jiang et al. 2018). Because of
the Web, students post detailed math questions online for
help. Recent question systems, such as Mathematics Stack

1

∗

https://math.stackexchange.com
https://mathoverﬂow.net
3
https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/3331385

are the corresponding authors
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

9490

