The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Is BERT Really Robust? A Strong Baseline for
Natural Language Attack on Text Classiﬁcation and Entailment
Di Jin,1∗ Zhijing Jin,2∗ Joey Tianyi Zhou,3 Peter Szolovits1
1

Computer Science & Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT
2
University of Hong Kong
3
A*STAR, Singapore
{jindi15, psz}@mit.edu, zhijing.jin@connect.hku.hk, zhouty@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg

deal with text data due to its discrete nature. Formally, besides the ability to fool the target models, outputs of a natural
language attacking system should also meet three key utilitypreserving properties: (1) human prediction consistency—
prediction by humans should remain unchanged, (2) semantic similarity—the crafted example should bear the same
meaning as the source, as judged by humans, and (3) language ﬂuency—generated examples should look natural and
grammatical. Previous works barely conform to all three
requirements. For example, methods such as word misspelling (Li et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2018), single-word erasure (Li, Monroe, and Jurafsky 2016), and phrase insertion
and removal (Liang et al. 2017) result in unnatural sentences. Moreover, there is almost no work that attacks the
newly-risen BERT model on text classiﬁcation.
In this work, we present T EXT F OOLER, a simple but
strong baseline for natural language attack in the blackbox setting, a common case where no model architecture
or parameters are accessible. We design a more comprehensive paradigm to create both semantically and syntactically
similar adversarial examples that meet the aforementioned
three desiderata. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst identify the important words for the target model and then prioritize to replace
them with the most semantically similar and grammatically
correct words until the prediction is altered. We successfully
applied this framework to attack three state-of-the-art models in ﬁve text classiﬁcation tasks and two textual entailment
tasks, respectively. On the adversarial examples, we can reduce the accuracy of almost all target models in all tasks to
below 10% with only less than 20% of the original words
perturbed. In addition, we validate that the generated examples are (1) correctly classiﬁed by human evaluators, (2) semantically similar to the original text, and (3) grammatically
acceptable by human judges.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

Abstract
Machine learning algorithms are often vulnerable to adversarial examples that have imperceptible alterations from the
original counterparts but can fool the state-of-the-art models. It is helpful to evaluate or even improve the robustness
of these models by exposing the maliciously crafted adversarial examples. In this paper, we present T EXT F OOLER, a
simple but strong baseline to generate adversarial text. By
applying it to two fundamental natural language tasks, text
classiﬁcation and textual entailment, we successfully attacked
three target models, including the powerful pre-trained BERT,
and the widely used convolutional and recurrent neural networks. We demonstrate three advantages of this framework:
(1) effective—it outperforms previous attacks by success rate
and perturbation rate, (2) utility-preserving—it preserves semantic content, grammaticality, and correct types classiﬁed
by humans, and (3) efﬁcient—it generates adversarial text
with computational complexity linear to the text length.1

Introduction
In the last decade, Machine Learning (ML) models have
achieved remarkable success in various tasks such as classiﬁcation, regression and decision making. However, recently
they have been found vulnerable to adversarial examples that
are legitimate inputs altered by small and often imperceptible perturbations (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016a;
2016b; Papernot et al. 2017; Zhao, Dua, and Singh 2017).
These carefully curated examples are correctly classiﬁed by
a human observer but can fool a target model, raising serious concerns regarding the security and integrity of existing
ML algorithms. On the other hand, it is showed that robustness and generalization of ML models can be improved by
crafting high-quality adversaries and including them in the
training data (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015).
While existing works on adversarial examples have obtained success in the image and speech domains (Szegedy et
al. 2013; Carlini and Wagner 2018), it is still challenging to

• We propose a simple but strong baseline, T EXT F OOLER,
to quickly generate high-proﬁle utility-preserving adversarial examples that force the target models to make
wrong predictions under the black-box setting.
• We evaluate T EXT F OOLER on three state-of-the-art deep
learning models over ﬁve popular text classiﬁcation tasks
and two textual entailment tasks, and it achieved the state-

∗
Equal Contribution. Order determined by swapping that in the
previous paper at https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.11333.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code, pre-trained target models, and test examples are
available at https://github.com/jind11/TextFooler.

8018

