The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Sanity Checks for Saliency Metrics
Richard Tomsett,1∗ Dan Harborne,2∗ Supriyo Chakraborty,3 Prudhvi Gurram,4 Alun Preece2
1

Emerging Technology, IBM Research, Hursley, UK
Crime and Security Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
3
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
4
Booz Allen Hamilton and CCDC Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA
rtomsett@uk.ibm.com, {harborned, preecead}@cardiff.ac.uk, supriyo@us.ibm.com, gurram prudhvi@bah.com
2

methods. Different saliency methods provide different maps
for the same image and corresponding DNN output, so human analysts need some way to decide which method provides the best estimates of the true pixel relevance values in
order to choose between them.

Abstract
Saliency maps are a popular approach to creating post-hoc
explanations of image classiﬁer outputs. These methods produce estimates of the relevance of each pixel to the classiﬁcation output score, which can be displayed as a saliency
map that highlights important pixels. Despite a proliferation
of such methods, little effort has been made to quantify how
good these saliency maps are at capturing the true relevance
of the pixels to the classiﬁer output (i.e. their “ﬁdelity”). We
therefore investigate existing metrics for evaluating the ﬁdelity of saliency methods (i.e. saliency metrics). We ﬁnd that
there is little consistency in the literature in how such metrics
are calculated, and show that such inconsistencies can have a
signiﬁcant effect on the measured ﬁdelity. Further, we apply
measures of reliability developed in the psychometric testing
literature to assess the consistency of saliency metrics when
applied to individual saliency maps. Our results show that
saliency metrics can be statistically unreliable and inconsistent, indicating that comparative rankings between saliency
methods generated using such metrics can be untrustworthy.

Several authors have proposed axioms that explanation
methods should adhere to in order to be produce appropriate explanations (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Kindermans et al. 2017). These can be assessed by inspecting
the mathematics behind the explanation methods, and working out if the method is consistent with the axioms. However, it is quite possible for useless explanation methods to
be consistent with currently proposed axioms. For example,
assigning uniform relevance scores to every pixel produces
an explanation that is conservative, continuous, and implementation invariant (Montavon 2019). To ensure that an explanation method actually assigns suitable relevance scores,
we must assess whether the method truly discriminates appropriately between more and less relevant features in the
input. This property has been referred to as the selectivity (Bach et al. 2015) or ﬁdelity (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola
2018) of an explanation: how well it agrees with the way the
model actually works. Put another way, a method with high
ﬁdelity will assign high relevance to features that, when removed, greatly reduce the DNN’s output conﬁdence in the
class assignment, while assigning low relevance to features
that do not greatly affect the conﬁdence when removed. Fidelity cannot be established axiomatically, and so must be
estimated using implementations of the explanation method
with the DNN model and dataset under investigation.

Introduction
Despite their popularity, deep neural networks (DNNs) are
widely acknowledged to lack interpretability: their complex
internals, with thousands or millions of parameters and nonlinear elements, make it difﬁcult to explain how and why a
DNN maps inputs to outputs. This has led to many groups
of researchers developing a variety of methods to help improve DNN interpretability. Saliency maps represent a popular class of explanation methods aimed at achieving this
goal for DNNs operating on image data. They are designed
to provide a measure of the relevance of each pixel to the
DNN’s output (Montavon, Samek, and Müller 2018). Many
methods have been proposed in the recent past for generating saliency map type explanations (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and
Zisserman 2013; Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Bach et al. 2015;
Montavon et al. 2017; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016;
Lundberg and Lee 2017). However, most of this prior work
focuses on developing new methods to generate the saliency
maps, without much work evaluating the quality of these

In this paper, we investigate the properties of different approaches for measuring explanation method ﬁdelity, focusing on saliency map explanations for image classiﬁers. We
make the distinction between estimating the ﬁdelity of an
explanation method, and estimating the ﬁdelity of an individual explanation. While currently proposed metrics assess
the former, it is the latter that we are often interested in —
especially if we intend to use individual model outputs for
decision making. Inspired by (Adebayo et al. 2018), who
introduced a set of “sanity checks” (NB: not metrics) for
testing saliency methods, we propose a corresponding set of
sanity checks for saliency metrics based on measures of reli-

∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6021

