The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Domain Adaptive Attention Learning for Unsupervised Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Yangru Huang,1∗ Peixi Peng,2∗ Yi Jin,1† Yidong Li,1 Junliang Xing,2 Shiming Ge3
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{yrhuang, yjin, ydli}@bjtu.edu.cn, peixi.peng@ia.ac.cn
jlxing@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, geshiming@iie.ac.cn

0DUNHW

Abstract
Person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) across multiple datasets is a
challenging task due to two main reasons: the presence of
large cross-dataset distinctions and the absence of annotated
target instances. To address these two issues, this paper proposes a domain adaptive attention learning approach to reliably transfer discriminative representation from the labeled
source domain to the unlabeled target domain. In this approach, a domain adaptive attention model is learned to separate the feature map into domain-shared part and domainspeciﬁc part. In this manner, the domain-shared part is used
to capture transferable cues that can compensate cross-dataset
distinctions and give positive contributions to the target task,
while the domain-speciﬁc part aims to model the noisy information to avoid the negative transfer caused by domain
diversity. A soft label loss is further employed to take full use
of unlabeled target data by estimating pseudo labels. Extensive experiments on the Market-1501, DukeMTMC-reID and
MSMT17 benchmarks demonstrate the proposed approach
outperforms the state-of-the-arts.

'XNH070&UH,'


D

E


F

D

E


D

E

F


F

D

E

F

Figure 1: The visualizations of the proposed DAAM. The
DAAM (the warmer color means the greater weight) separates the original image (a) into two parts: the domain-shared
part (b) and the domain-speciﬁc part (c). The former is discriminative and useful to the person Re-ID task, and the latter is used to model the domain-speciﬁc information (such
as background) caused by the domain divergence.

Introduction
The task of person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) is to match people across non-overlapping camera views. It has become one
of the most studied problems in video surveillance due to its
great potential for security and safety management applications. It is a challenging task because a person’s appearance
often changes dramatically across camera views caused by
changes in body pose, view angle, occlusion and illumination condition.
In order to address these issues, most of the existing
person Re-ID methods are designed on supervised learning (Sun et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018a; Li, Zhu, and Gong
2018) and have obtained signiﬁcant performance improvement by the deep learning (Huang et al. 2017; Chollet 2017;
He et al. 2016). However, these methods require a large
number of labeled data to train the Re-ID model, which are
limited in many real-world applications (Peng et al. 2016).
In order to make person Re-ID method more scalable, one

solution is to formulate the person Re-ID task as an unsupervised domain adaption problem (UDA) (Fernando et al.
2013; Gong et al. 2012; Gopalan, Li, and Chellappa 2011;
Long et al. 2016), where the existing labeled dataset and the
current unlabeled dataset are modeled as source and target
domains, respectively. The source and target domains contain the identical feature space with the same dimension but
totally different person identities (IDs). It is a challenging
task to transfer a Re-ID model from the source domain to the
target domain due to two reasons: Firstly, since the source
and target datasets are often collected from totally different
environments which contains various illuminations, backgrounds and image qualities, the data distributions of the
source and target data are different with a large probability and the domain divergence (Ben-David et al. 2007;
2010) may cause negative transfer. Secondly, the target
dataset is unlabeled, while most of the existing loss functions of Re-ID are designed for the supervised learning and
cannot be employed directly.

∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11069

