The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AlignFlow: Cycle Consistent Learning
from Multiple Domains via Normalizing Flows
Aditya Grover,∗ Christopher Chute,∗ Rui Shu, Zhangjie Cao, Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{adityag, chute, ruishu, caozj, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

et al. 2017b). This task can be used as a subproblem in the
domain adaptation setting, where the goal is to learn a classiﬁer for the unlabeled domain given labeled data from a
related source domain (Saenko et al. 2010). Many of these
problems are underconstrained due to the limitations on the
labelled supervision available for target domain. An amalgam of inductive biases need to be explicitly enforced to
learn meaningful solutions, e.g., cycle-consistency (Zhu et
al. 2017b), entropic regularization (Courty et al. 2017) etc.
These inductive biases can be speciﬁed via additional loss
terms or by specifying constraints on the model family.

Abstract
Given datasets from multiple domains, a key challenge is to
efﬁciently exploit these data sources for modeling a target
domain. Variants of this problem have been studied in many
contexts, such as cross-domain translation and domain adaptation. We propose AlignFlow, a generative modeling framework
that models each domain via a normalizing ﬂow. The use of
normalizing ﬂows allows for a) ﬂexibility in specifying learning objectives via adversarial training, maximum likelihood
estimation, or a hybrid of the two methods; and b) learning
and exact inference of a shared representation in the latent
space of the generative model. We derive a uniform set of
conditions under which AlignFlow is marginally-consistent
for the different learning objectives. Furthermore, we show
that AlignFlow guarantees exact cycle consistency in mapping
datapoints from a source domain to target and back to the
source domain. Empirically, AlignFlow outperforms relevant
baselines on image-to-image translation and unsupervised domain adaptation and can be used to simultaneously interpolate
across the various domains using the learned representation.

1

We present AlignFlow, a latent variable generative framework that seeks to discover the shared structure across
multiple data domains using normalizing ﬂows (Rezende
and Mohamed 2015; Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio 2014;
Dinh, Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio 2017). Latent variable
generative models are highly effective for inferring hidden
structure within observed data from a single domain. In AlignFlow, we model the data from each domain via an invertible
generative model with a single latent space shared across all
the domains. If we let the two domains to be A and B with a
shared latent space, say Z, then the latent variable generative
model for A may additionally share some or all parameters
with the model of domain B. Akin to a single invertible model,
the collection of invertible models in AlignFlow provide great
ﬂexibility in specifying learning objectives and can be trained
via maximum likelihood estimation, adversarial training or a
hybrid variant accounting for both objectives.

Introduction

In recent years, there has been an increase in the availability of both labeled and unlabeled datasets from multiple sources. For example, many variants of face datasets
scraped from sources such as Wikipedia and IMDB are
publicly available. Given data from two or more domains,
we expect sample-efﬁcient learning algorithms to be able
to learn and align the shared structure across these domains for accurate downstream tasks. This perspective has
a broad range of applications across machine learning, including relational learning (Kim et al. 2017), domain adaptation (Taigman, Polyak, and Wolf 2016; Hoffman et al. 2017;
Bousmalis et al. 2017), image and video translation for computer vision (Isola et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018), and machine
translation for low resource languages (Gu et al. 2018).
Many variants of the domain alignment problem have been
studied in prior work. For instance, unpaired cross-domain
translation refers to the task of learning a mapping from one
domain to another given datasets from the two domains (Zhu

By virtue of an invertible design, AlignFlow naturally
extends as a cross-domain translation model. To translate
data across two domains, say A to B, we can invert a data
point from A → Z ﬁrst followed by a second inversion from
Z → B. Appealingly, we show that this composition of invertible mappings is exactly cycle-consistent, i.e., translating
a datapoint from A to B using the forward mapping and
backwards using the reverse mapping gives back the original datapoint and vice versa from B to A. Cycle-consistency
was ﬁrst introduced in CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017a) and
has been shown to be an excellent inductive bias for underconstrained problems, such as unpaired domain alignment. While models such as CycleGAN only provide approximate cycle-consistency by incorporating additional loss

∗

Equal Contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4028

