The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Controlling Neural Machine Translation Formality with Synthetic Supervision
Xing Niu,1 Marine Carpuat2
1

Amazon AWS AI, 2 University of Maryland
xingniu@amzon.com, marine@cs.umd.edu

not come with formality annotations, and parallel corpora
of a given provenance do not have a uniform style. Previously, we took a multi-task approach based on sequenceto-sequence models that were trained to perform FrenchEnglish translation and English formality transfer (Rao and
Tetreault 2018) jointly (Niu, Rao, and Carpuat 2018). The
resulting multi-task model performs zero-shot FSMT as it
has never been exposed to training samples annotated with
both reference translation and formality labels.
In this work, we hypothesize that exposing multi-task
models to training samples that directly match the FSMT
task can help generate formal and informal outputs that differ from each other, and where formality rewrites do not introduce translation errors. We introduce Online Style Inference, an approach to simulate direct supervision by predicting the target formality of parallel sentence pairs on the ﬂy
at training time, thus enabling end-to-end training. We also
present a variant of side constraints (Sennrich, Haddow, and
Birch 2016a) that improves formality control given inputs of
arbitrary formality level.2
We conduct a comprehensive automatic and human evaluation of the resulting FSMT systems. First, we show that
Online Style Inference introduces more differences between
formal and informal translations of the same input, using
automatic metrics to quantify lexical and positional differences. Second, we conduct a human evaluation which shows
that Online Style Inference preserves the meaning of the input and introduces stronger formality differences compared
to a strong baseline. Finally, we analyze the diversity of
transformations between formal and informal outputs produced by our approach.

Abstract
This work aims to produce translations that convey source
language content at a formality level that is appropriate
for a particular audience. Framing this problem as a neural
sequence-to-sequence task ideally requires training triplets
consisting of a bilingual sentence pair labeled with target
language formality. However, in practice, available training
examples are limited to English sentence pairs of different
styles, and bilingual parallel sentences of unknown formality. We introduce a novel training scheme for multi-task models that automatically generates synthetic training triplets by
inferring the missing element on the ﬂy, thus enabling endto-end training. Comprehensive automatic and human assessments show that our best model outperforms existing models
by producing translations that better match desired formality
levels while preserving the source meaning.1

1

Introduction

Producing language in the appropriate style is a requirement
for natural language generation, as the style of a text conveys
information beyond its literal meaning (Hovy 1987). This
also applies to translation: professional translators adapt
translations to their audience (Nida and Taber 2003), yet
the output style has been overlooked in machine translation.
For example, the French sentence “Bonne idée, mais elle ne
convient pas ici.” could be translated to “Good idea, but it
doesn’t ﬁt here.”, which is informal because it elides the subject, uses contractions and chained clauses. It could also be
translated more formally to “This is a helpful idea. However,
it is not suitable for this purpose.”, which is grammatically
complete and uses more formal and precise terms.
We recently addressed this gap by introducing the task
of Formality-Sensitive Machine Translation (FSMT), where
given a French sentence and a desired formality level, systems are asked to produce an English translation at the speciﬁed formality level (Niu, Martindale, and Carpuat 2017).
Building FSMT systems is challenging because of the lack
of appropriate training data: bilingual parallel corpora do

2

A Neural FSMT Model

Neural Machine Translation (NMT) models compute the
conditional probability P (Y |X) of translating a source
sentence, X = (x1 , . . . , xn ), to a target sentence, Y =
(y1 , . . . , ym ). By contrast, FSMT requires producing the
most likely translation at the given formality level :

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This work was done when the ﬁrst author was at the University
of Maryland.

Ŷ = arg max P (Y | X, ; θ).
Y

2

8568

Source code: https://github.com/xingniu/multitask-ft-fsmt.

(1)

