The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Structural Decompositions of Epistemic Logic Programs
Markus Hecher,1,2 Michael Morak,3 Stefan Woltran1
1

TU Wien, Vienna, Austria,
University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany
3
University of Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria
{hecher, woltran}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at, michael.morak@aau.at
2

approach should be equally applicable to other existing semantics that have been proposed.
Evaluating ELPs is a computationally hard task. The
central decision problem, checking whether an ELP has
a world view, is ΣP
3 -complete, and problems even higher
on the polynomial hierarchy exist (Shen and Eiter 2016;
Morak 2019). In order to deal with this high complexity
efﬁciently, we propose to use a method from the ﬁeld of
parameterized complexity, namely, investigate how the runtime behaves when looking at different structural parameters of the problem. For standard ASP, this topic has received considerable interest, (Lonc and Truszczynski 2003;
Gottlob, Pichler, and Wei 2010; Fichte and Szeider 2015;
Bliem, Ordyniak, and Woltran 2016; Fichte, Kronegger,
and Woltran 2019; Fichte and Hecher 2019). However, the
parameterized complexity of epistemic ASP has remained
largely unexplored so far. From the ASP case, we see strong
evidence that this will be the case for ELPs as well. In this
paper, we will investigate, in particular, whether ELPs can
be solved efﬁciently if their treewidth (i.e., a measure for the
tree-likeness of graphs) is bounded.
It turns out that this question can be answered in the afﬁrmative: the main decision problems become tractable. In
practice, a dynamic programming algorithm on tree decompositions can be used to exploit this directly, similarly to
what was successfully proposed for ASP and QBF solvers
(Fichte et al. 2017; Bliem et al. 2017; Fichte, Hecher, and
Zisser 2019; Charwat and Woltran 2019). However, we also
aim to investigate a more interesting angle. Many ELP
solvers today work by making (up to exponentially many)
calls to an underlying ASP solving system in order to check
world view existence. Being able to ﬁnd a bound on the
number of these ASP solver calls would be very useful. Using so-called epistemic (primal) graphs of ELPs that focus
on epistemically negated literals only, we can again employ
treewidth to establish such bounds. This novel use of structural decomposition intuitively works well in some interesting cases including instances of the scholarship eligibility (SE)1 benchmark set, as provided with the system “EPASP” (Son et al. 2017).
Using the epistemic primal graph representation, these

Abstract
Epistemic logic programs (ELPs) are a popular generalization
of standard Answer Set Programming (ASP) providing means
for reasoning over answer sets within the language. This
richer formalism comes at the price of higher computational
complexity reaching up to the fourth level of the polynomial
hierarchy. However, in contrast to standard ASP, dedicated
investigations towards tractability have not been undertaken
yet. In this paper, we give ﬁrst results in this direction and
show that central ELP problems can be solved in linear time
for ELPs exhibiting structural properties in terms of bounded
treewidth. We also provide a full dynamic programming algorithm that adheres to these bounds. Finally, we show that
applying treewidth to a novel dependency structure—given
in terms of epistemic literals—allows to bound the number of
ASP solver calls in typical ELP solving procedures.

1

Introduction

Epistemic logic programs (ELPs) (Gelfond and Przymusinska 1991), also referred to as the language of Epistemic
Speciﬁcations (Gelfond 1991), have received renewed attention in the research community as of late. ELPs are
an extension of the language of Answer Set Programming
(ASP) (Brewka, Eiter, and Truszczynski 2011; Schaub and
Woltran 2018) with epistemic operators. Gelfond (1991) introduced the operators K and M in order to represent the
concepts of known to be true and may be true, and deﬁned
an initial semantics. Several improvements to the semantics
have since been proposed in the literature (Gelfond 2011;
Truszczynski 2011; Kahl et al. 2015; Fariñas del Cerro,
Herzig, and Su 2015). Shen and Eiter (2016) realized that
these two operators can be represented via a single negationtype operator that they called epistemic negation, denoted
not , and gave a new semantics based on this operator.
Morak (2019) proposed a novel characterization of the central construct of the ELP semantics: the world view. While
a recent analysis (Cabalar, Fandinno, and Fariñas del Cerro
2019) has shown that this semantics still does not eliminate
all existing ﬂaws, we will make use of it in this paper, since
no clear “winner” semantics has as of yet emerged, and our
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2830

Problem SE was a prime motivator for ELPs (Gelfond 1991).

