The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Scaling All-Goals Updates in Reinforcement
Learning Using Convolutional Neural Networks
Fabio Pardo, Vitaly Levdik, Petar Kormushev
Robot Intelligence Lab, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
{f.pardo, v.levdik, p.kormushev}@imperial.ac.uk

sample efﬁciency by using goal relabeling. When replaying a past transition, this technique consists of substituting
the given goal with another valid goal, in order to evaluate
the action with respect to the new goal. Multiple strategies
exist for selecting these goals. For example, within the list of
future states visited in the episode from which the transition
originated, as was proposed in Hindsight Experience Replay
(HER) (Andrychowicz et al. 2017), randomly (Schaul et al.
2015; Veeriah, Oh, and Singh 2018) or from a generative
model (Nair et al. 2018). However, in the case where all the
possible goals can be enumerated, a single transition can be
maximally used by updating the policy towards all-goals.
A traditional goal-conditioned network requires one forward pass per goal which can be intractable in the case of
large goal sets. Instead, we propose to use a network producing Q-values for all combinations of actions and goals
with a single observation in input. Furthermore, we propose
to use convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) to scale to
a large number of outputs simultaneously, exploiting the correlations between neighbouring goals.
We evaluate the accuracy and generalization properties
of the proposed network on tasks consisting in ﬁnding the
shortest path towards all points in random mazes and solving random Sokoban puzzles. Our results show that the proposed approach converges faster and achieves better ﬁnal
performance while being more stable than the the goal-ininput approach. We then demonstrate that the proposed network learns well in more visually complex and difﬁcult to
control environments. On Montezuma’s Revenge we show
that the capacity to query this large number of Q-values can
allow an agent to explore well by selecting random but feasible goals. Finally, on Super Mario All-Stars, we show that
when coupled with a task-learner DQN agent (Mnih et al.
2015) the exploration method signiﬁcantly improves the performance.
The source code and videos are available on the website:
https://sites.google.com/view/q-map-rl.

Abstract
Being able to reach any desired location in the environment
can be a valuable asset for an agent. Learning a policy to navigate between all pairs of states individually is often not feasible. An all-goals updating algorithm uses each transition
to learn Q-values towards all goals simultaneously and offpolicy. However the expensive numerous updates in parallel
limited the approach to small tabular cases so far. To tackle
this problem we propose to use convolutional network architectures to generate Q-values and updates for a large number
of goals at once. We demonstrate the accuracy and generalization qualities of the proposed method on randomly generated
mazes and Sokoban puzzles. In the case of on-screen goal
coordinates the resulting mapping from frames to distancemaps directly informs the agent about which places are reachable and in how many steps. As an example of application
we show that replacing the random actions in ε-greedy exploration by several actions towards feasible goals generates
better exploratory trajectories on Montezuma’s Revenge and
Super Mario All-Stars games.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998) environments can typically be separated into goal-reaching and
reward-based types. In the former case, tasks like navigating a maze or moving an object to a target location directly
justify the use of agents that are conditioned on both the observations of the world and the goals. In the latter case of
RL environments, maximizing the discounted sum of future
rewards provides a more subtle objective that can describe
any given task. While learning can be more challenging in
this case, it can sometimes be greatly simpliﬁed by learning a task-agnostic goal-directed policy in combination with
a higher-level task-dependent one. (Bakker and Schmidhuber 2004; Kulkarni et al. 2016; Vezhnevets et al. 2017;
Peng et al. 2017).
In both cases, learning to reach each goal independently
would be very inefﬁcient. However, because the goals conditioning the policy do not modify the dynamics of the environment, off-policy algorithms can greatly improve the

2
2.1

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related work

Goal relabeling strategies

Goal relabeling strategies rely on the fact that a single transition can be used to update the policy towards any goal. A
5355

