The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Task-Aware Monocular Depth Estimation for 3D Object Detection
Xinlong Wang,1∗ Wei Yin,1 Tao Kong,2 Yuning Jiang,2 Lei Li,2 Chunhua Shen1
1

The University of Adelaide, Australia, 2 Bytedance AI Lab
{xinlong.wang, wei.yin, chunhua.shen}@adelaide.edu.au,
taokongcn@gmail.com, {jiangyuning, lileilab}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation enables 3D perception from a
single 2D image, thus attracting much research attention for
years. Almost all methods treat foreground and background
regions (“things and stuff”) in an image equally. However,
not all pixels are equal. Depth of foreground objects plays
a crucial role in 3D object recognition and localization. To
date how to boost the depth prediction accuracy of foreground objects is rarely discussed. In this paper, we ﬁrst analyze the data distributions and interaction of foreground and
background, then propose the foreground-background separated monocular depth estimation (ForeSeE) method, to estimate the foreground and background depth using separate
optimization objectives and decoders. Our method signiﬁcantly improves the depth estimation performance on foreground objects. Applying ForeSeE to 3D object detection,
we achieve 7.5 AP gains and set new state-of-the-art results
among other monocular methods. Code will be available at:
https://github.com/WXinlong/ForeSeE.

1

Figure 1: Examples of low precision prediction of foreground depth. For each row, the left picture is the projected
point cloud transformed from ground truth depth map and
RGB image; the right picture is the bird’s-eye-view closeup to compare the depth (in green) predicted by the baseline
depth estimation method with the ground truth (in white).
The inaccurate object location and shape pose challenges for
3D recognition, localization and orientation estimation.

Introduction

Depth bridges the gap between 2D and 3D perception in
computer vision. A precise depth map of an image provides
rich 3D geometry information like locations and shapes for
objects and stuff in a scene, thus attracting more and more
attention in both 2D and 3D understanding ﬁelds. Monocular depth estimation, which aims to predict the depth map
from a single image, is an ill-posed problem, as inﬁnite
number of 3D scenes can be projected to the same 2D
image. With the development of deep convolutional neural networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016), recent works
have made great progress (Xu et al. 2018; Fu et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2018). They typically consist of an encoder for feature extraction and a decoder for generating the depth of the
whole scene, either by regressing the depth values or predicting the depth range categories. Plausible results have been
shown.

When the monocular methods are applied to other tasks
focusing on foreground object analysis, e.g., 3D object detection, there are two main obstacles from the low precision
of foreground depth: (1) Poor estimate of the object center location; (2) Distorted or faint object shapes. We show
some examples in Figure 1. The inaccurate object location
and shape make the downstream localization and recognition challenging. The above issues could be handled by enhancing the depth estimation performance on foreground regions. However, all these state-of-the-art methods treat foreground depth and background depth equally, which leads to
sub-optimal performance on foreground objects.
In fact, foreground depth and background depth show different data distributions. We make qualitative and quantitative comparisons in Figure 1, Figure 2 and Table 1. Foreground pixels tend to gather into clusters, bring more and
bigger depth change and look like frustums in 3D space
rather than ﬂat surfaces like road and buildings. Second,

∗
This work is done when Xinlong Wang is an intern at
Bytedance AI Lab.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12257

