The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁcient Veriﬁcation of ReLU-Based Neural Networks via Dependency Analysis
Elena Botoeva, Panagiotis Kouvaros, Jan Kronqvist, Alessio Lomuscio, Ruth Misener
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
{e.botoeva, p.kouvaros, j.kronqvist, a.lomuscio, r.misener}@imperial.ac.uk

the neural networks presently used in industrial strength applications, including autonomous vehicles. Therefore, it remains of considerable importance to develop more scalable
approaches. This is the aim of the present contribution.
This paper introduces a novel, MILP-based approach to
verifying feed-forward ReLU-based neural networks. Rectiﬁed Linear Units (ReLUs) are the most commonly-used
activation functions in vision and are the typical object of
study in the above cited literature. This manuscript develops the concept of dependency. Two nodes in a neural network are in a dependency relation if there is a strict connection between their active or inactive state during the overall
network computation. As we show, dependency can be exploited to improve the performance of a MILP formulation.
Crucially, and differently from the related state-of-the-art,
our dependency analysis is not aimed at reducing the number
of variables in the veriﬁcation problem, but rather at reducing the search space during a branch-and-bound approach to
generate satisﬁable assignments. This paper (i) develops effective methods exploiting these dependencies and (ii) integrates the methods into a larger implementation incorporating scalability-improving methods such as domain splitting.
The resulting implementation generates speed-ups of at least
one order of magnitude against competing methods.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. After discussing related work below, Section 2 reports key concepts
on neural networks and related veriﬁcation approaches. Section 3 ﬁrst presents the theoretical contribution on dependency analysis and then gives a dependencies-based veriﬁcation algorithm. Section 4 presents a toolkit exploiting dependency analysis. Section 5 reports the experimental results
obtained on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, and ACAS datasets and
compares these against state-of-the-art implementations.
Related Work. Veriﬁcation methods for neural networks
can be partitioned into complete and incomplete ones. Complete methods can in principle return a deﬁnite answer as
to whether the property in question is satisﬁed. Differently,
incomplete methods may erroneously conclude that the network is not robust when it actually is or a certain output is
reachable when it is actually not.
Incomplete methods include approaches based on duality (Dvijotham et al. 2018), abstract interpretation (Gehr et

Abstract
We introduce an efﬁcient method for the veriﬁcation of
ReLU-based feed-forward neural networks. We derive an
automated procedure that exploits dependency relations between the ReLU nodes, thereby pruning the search tree that
needs to be considered by MILP-based formulations of the
veriﬁcation problem. We augment the resulting algorithm
with methods for input domain splitting and symbolic interval propagation. We present Venus, the resulting veriﬁcation toolkit, and evaluate it on the ACAS collision avoidance
networks and models trained on the MNIST and CIFAR-10
datasets. The experimental results obtained indicate considerable gains over the present state-of-the-art tools.

1

Introduction

Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) methods are increasingly used in
safety critical applications including, but not limited to, autonomous vehicles, avionics, and power generation. These
domains typically require a certiﬁcation aimed at establishing the safety of the application to be deployed.
Formal veriﬁcation methods commonly used in software
veriﬁcation cannot address the validation of AI applications
due to the inherently different components. In particular,
AI applications increasingly utilise neural networks in key
parts of their designs, most notably in perception and control
modules. Due to this, the area of formal veriﬁcation of neural
networks has recently received considerable attention. Simply put, methods for assessing neural systems can provide
the mathematical underpinning for safely deploying a wide
number of AI applications.
The typical decision problem tackled by veriﬁcation approaches is whether a neural network, or a closed-loop system in which neural networks are present, can output particular values, i.e., output reachability. Reachability is often
studied in conjunction with local robustness properties, i.e.,
whether for a given input, e.g., an image, small alterations
of this input can cause output variation, e.g., a different classiﬁcation. The present state of the art (Liu et al. 2019) includes several ways of formulating this problem (see related
work below); however, no method scales to the analysis of
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3291

