The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Index Tracking with Cardinality
Constraints: A Stochastic Neural Networks Approach
Yu Zheng,1,2 Bowei Chen,3 Timothy M. Hospedales,4 Yongxin Yang2,4∗
1

Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
2
ArrayStream Technologies Limited
3
University of Glasgow
4
University of Edinburgh

stantial shift in the asset management industry from active
to passive investment strategies as many actively managed
funds fail to outperform the market (Barber and Odean 2000;
Anadu et al. 2018).
Index tracking (or replication) is a popular passive investment strategy. It attempts to construct a portfolio of stocks
or ﬁnancial products to replicate the performance of an index. The constructed portfolio is called the tracking portfolio
and the chosen index is called the benchmark. How well the
constructed portfolio is tracking the index is measured by
the tracking error, which is the difference between the index
performance and the tracking portfolio performance.
Methods of constructing a tracking portfolio can be divided into two groups: full replication and partial replication. Full replication involves holding all of the stocks
that constitute the chosen index, in their respective weights.
It is the most intuitive and transparent index tracking approach. Since the tracking portfolio mirrors the index, its
returns should closely track the returns of the index in a
frictionless market (i.e., a ﬁnancial market without transaction costs). However, in practice, full replication may
not be the most efﬁcient strategy, due to the higher transaction costs involved in holding a large number of index constituents with frequent rebalancing, churn in index
members, and illiquid assets (Strub and Baumann 2018;
Benidis, Feng, and Palomar 2018). In contrast, partial replication, as the name implies, only invests in a limited number
of index constituents. It usually incurs a larger tracking error but involves smaller transaction costs because the tracking portfolio only contains a subset of stocks from the index.
Also, it involves rebalances at lower frequency as full replication usually requires daily rebalance.
Due its obvious advantages, partial replication approaches
have been well studied by academics and ﬁnancial practitioners. These approaches must address two fundamental
issues: asset selection and asset allocation. The former answers the question which stocks should be selected into the
tracking portfolio while the latter answers the question how
much capital should be allocated to each of the selected
stocks. The two issues can be solved either sequentially or
jointly through optimisation techniques and we provide a
short review of related literature later.

Abstract
Partial (replication) index tracking is a popular passive investment strategy. It aims to replicate the performance of a
given index by constructing a tracking portfolio which contains some constituents of the index. The tracking error optimisation is quadratic and NP-hard when taking the 0 constraint into account so it is usually solved by heuristic methods such as evolutionary algorithms. This paper introduces a
simple, efﬁcient and scalable connectionist model as an alternative. We propose a novel reparametrisation method and
then solve the optimisation problem with stochastic neural
networks. The proposed approach is examined with S&P 500
index data for more than 10 years and compared with widely
used index tracking approaches such as forward and backward selection and the largest market capitalisation methods. The empirical results show our model achieves excellent
performance. Compared with the benchmarked models, our
model has the lowest tracking error, across a range of portfolio sizes. Meanwhile it offers comparable performance to the
others on secondary criteria such as volatility, Sharpe ratio
and maximum drawdown.

Introduction
The efﬁcient market hypothesis (EMH) is a ﬁnancial theory primarily proposed by Samuelson (Samuelson 1965) and
Fama (Fama 1969). It states that market prices always contain all of the available information, so they reﬂect what a
company is truly worth. According to the EMH, stocks are
traded at their fair values. Therefore, it should be impossible
for investors to outperform the overall market because they
are not able to buy undervalued or sell overvalued stocks.
There has been a long debate about whether the EMH holds
true in reality. Investors who believe the EMH mainly adopt
passive investment strategies to match, as closely as possible, the performance of a speciﬁc index such as S&P 500.
Other investors believe that can select stocks expertly to
build portfolios that generate consistent excess returns and
beat the market. These approaches are called active investment strategies. Both types of approaches offer value to investors. However, in recent decades, there has been a sub∗

Corresponding author: yongxin.yang@ed.ac.uk
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1242

