The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Benign Examples: Imperceptible Changes
Can Enhance Image Translation Performance
Vignesh Srinivasan,1 Klaus-Robert Müller,2,3,4,5,∗ Wojciech Samek,1,3,∗ Shinichi Nakajima2,3,6,∗
1

Fraunhofer HHI, 2 TU Berlin, 3 Berlin Big Data Center, 4 Korea University, 5 MPI for Informatics, 6 RIKEN AIP
{vignesh.srinivasan, wojciech.samek}@hhi.fraunhofer.de
{klaus-robert.mueller, nakajima}@tu-berlin.de

Abstract
Unpaired image-to-image domain translation involves the
task of transferring an image in one domain to another domain without having pairs of data for supervision. Several
methods have been proposed to address this task using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and cycle consistency
constraint enforcing the translated image to be mapped back
to the original domain. This way, a Deep Neural Network
(DNN) learns mapping such that the input training distribution transferred to the target domain matches the target training distribution. However, not all test images are expected
to fall inside the data manifold in the input space where the
DNN has learned to perform the mapping very well. Such
images can have a poor mapping to the target domain. In
this paper, we propose to perform Langevin dynamics, which
makes a subtle change in the input space bringing them close
to the data manifold, producing benign examples. The effect
is signiﬁcant improvement of the mapped image on the target domain. We also show that the score function estimation
by denoising autoencoder (DAE), can practically be replaced
with any autoencoding structure, which most image-to-image
translation methods contain intrinsically due to the cycle consistency constraint. Thus, no additional training is required.
We show advantages of our approach for several state-of-theart image-to-image domain translation models. Quantitative
evaluation shows that our proposed method leads to a substantial increase in the accuracy to the target label on multiple
state-of-the-art image classiﬁers, while qualitative user study
proves that our method better represents the target domain,
achieving better human preference scores.

Figure 1: CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017) translates a horse image to a zebra image, which can however be unsuccessful
if a test sample lies on the fringes of training distribution
(top row). Our proposed ImproveIT makes an imperceptible
change towards high density areas in the input space, leading
to a signiﬁcantly improved translated image (bottom row).

Introduction
Image translation (IT) is the problem of translating an image
from one representation to another. Problems of this nature,
like denoising, super-resolution, coloring, inpainting, style
transfer among others are often ill-posed and require supervision for learning the mapping. Cross-domain IT is a more
challenging task as it is very hard or close to impossible to
ﬁnd paired data.
Convolutional Neural Networks have achieved signiﬁcant
strides in addressing problems in IT. Several strategies were

proposed to address the learning problem of IT, including
Denoising Autoencoders (Vincent et al. 2008a) (Vincent et
al. 2010), Variational Autoencoders (Kingma and Welling
2013), perceptual loss (Johnson, Alahi, and Fei-Fei 2016),
U-nets (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) among others. However, the task of cross-domain IT still required
paired data for the learning. Recent works propose to address this problem by unsupervised learning with the help of
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN). The task of translation is performed by an encoder. The generated images are
then given to a discriminator as well as a decoder. The dis-

∗

Asterisks indicate corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5842

