The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Visual Dialogue State Tracking for Question Generation
Wei Pang, Xiaojie Wang∗
Center for Intelligence Science and Technology, School of Computer Science,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunication
{pangweitf, xjwang}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
GuessWhat?! is a visual dialogue task between a guesser and
an oracle. The guesser aims to locate an object supposed by
the oracle oneself in an image by asking a sequence of Yes/No
questions. Asking proper questions with the progress of dialogue is vital for achieving successful ﬁnal guess. As a result,
the progress of dialogue should be properly represented and
tracked. Previous models for question generation pay less attention on the representation and tracking of dialogue states,
and therefore are prone to asking low quality questions such
as repeated questions. This paper proposes visual dialogue
state tracking (VDST) based method for question generation.
A visual dialogue state is deﬁned as the distribution on objects in the image as well as representations of objects. Representations of objects are updated with the change of the
distribution on objects. An object-difference based attention
is used to decode new question. The distribution on objects
is updated by comparing the question-answer pair and objects. Experimental results on GuessWhat?! dataset show that
our model signiﬁcantly outperforms existing methods and
achieves new state-of-the-art performance. It is also noticeable that our model reduces the rate of repeated questions
from more than 50% to 21.9% compared with previous stateof-the-art methods.

Figure 1: The left part gives an example of GuessWhat?!
game. The right part illustrates updates of visual dialogue
states, including the distribution on objects (numbers on colorful strips) as well as representations of objects (colorful
strips).

the Questioner has two sub-tasks, one is Question Generator (QGen) that generates visually grounded questions, the
other is Guesser that is to identify the target object given the
full dialog context. The Oracle answers questions with yes
or no. The left part of Fig.1 shows a game played by the
QGen, Oracle and Guesser. Among them, QGen plays the
most important role. Much work has been done on QGen (de
Vries et al. 2017; Strub et al. 2017; Zhao and Tresp 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018; Lee, Heo, and Zhang 2018; Shekhar
et al. 2018; Abbasnejad et al. 2018; Shukla et al. 2019;
Shekhar et al. 2019; Abbasnejad et al. 2019), this paper also
focuses on QGen.
De Vries et al. (de Vries et al. 2017) proposed the ﬁrst
QGen model. It is an encoder-decoder model, where images
are encoded by VGG FC8 features, and questions are decoded by an LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). It is trained in a supervised
learning (SL) way. Strub et al. (Strub et al. 2017) introduced reinforcement learning (RL) to train the QGen

Introduction
Visual dialogue is an increasing interest of multi-modal
task, which involves vision, language and reasoning between
them in a continuous conversation. Recently, researchers
have put forward many different tasks of visual dialogue, including VisDial (Das et al. 2017a), GuessWhat?! (de Vries et
al. 2017), GuessWhich (Chattopadhyay et al. 2017), ImageGrounded Conversation (IGC) (Mostafazadeh et al. 2017),
Multimodal dialogs (MMD) (Saha, Khapra, and Sankaranarayanan 2018) and so on. Among them, GuessWhat?! is
an object-guessing game played by two players - a Questioner and an Oracle. Given an image including several objects, the goal of the Questioner is to locate a target object - supposed by the oracle oneself at the beginning of
a game by asking a series of Yes/No questions. Specially,
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11831

