The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Universal Value Iteration Networks: When Spatially-Invariant Is Not Universal
Li Zhang,1 Xin Li,∗1 Sen Chen,1 Hongyu Zang,1 Jie Huang,1 Mingzhong Wang2
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
USC Business School, University of the Sunshine Coast, Australia
{3120181069, xinli, 3220190781, zanghyu, 3220190813}@bit.edu.cn, mwang@usc.edu.au
2

Abstract
In this paper, we ﬁrst formally deﬁne the problem set of
spatially invariant Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), and
show that Value Iteration Networks (VIN) and its extensions
are computationally bounded to it due to the use of the convolution kernel. To generalize VIN to spatially variant MDPs,
we propose Universal Value Iteration Networks (UVIN). In
comparison with VIN, UVIN automatically learns a ﬂexible
but compact network structure to encode the transition dynamics of the problems and support the differentiable planning module. We evaluate UVIN with both spatially invariant and spatially variant tasks, including navigation in regular
maze, chessboard maze, and Mars, and Minecraft item syntheses. Results show that UVIN can achieve similar performance as VIN and its extensions on spatially invariant tasks,
and signiﬁcantly outperforms other models on more general
problems.

ሺ‫ݔ‬ǡ‫ݕ‬൅ͳሻ
0.8

ሺ‫ݔ‬െͳǡ‫ݕ‬ሻ

0.1 ሺ‫ݔ‬ǡ‫ݕ‬ሻ 0.1

ሺ‫ݔ‬൅ͳǡ‫ݕ‬ሻ

Transition model

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Spatially invariant system with the dynamics
in each state. (b) & (c) Toy navigation problem on Mars. (b)
The magnetic ﬁelds on Mars. (c) A navigation map on Mars.
The consequence of action “go north” varies in each grid on
Mars, while remains the same on Earth.

tional neural network (CNN) to achieve learning and planning simultaneously. With the planning module, VIN generalizes well in conventional navigation domains, showing
that the planning computation module is beneﬁcial to applications requiring complex long-term reasoning.
To adapt to more complex navigation tasks, MACN (Khan
et al. 2018) and AVINs (Schleich, Klamt, and Behnke 2019)
extend VIN with a memory augmented controller and representations with multiple levels of abstraction.
The strength of VIN and its extensions (VINs) lie in the
exploitation of the resemblance between the value iteration
and the convolution operation. However, the use of the CNN
structure also limits them to solving the “conventional” navigation problems, whose state space can be seen as regular
lattices. To work with irregular spatial graphs, GVIN (Niu et
al. 2018) employs a graph convolution operator to simulate
the value iteration process.
Nevertheless, we argue that the use of convolution operator in VINs/GVIN makes them only applicable to the problem set of spatially invariant Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs).

Introduction
Literature in psychology and neuroscience reports that behaviors are generally controlled by two systems, a rigid
retrospective model-free system and a ﬂexible prospective
model-based system (Moran et al. 2019). Likewise, it is intuitive in deep reinforcement learning (DRL) research to combine the strength of both model-based (sample-efﬁciency)
and model-free (accuracy) approaches to improve performance.
Despite the great advancement in DRL research, most existing approaches focus on leveraging the deep neural network structure to approximate the value function via a trialand-error learning process (Mnih et al. 2015; Van Hasselt,
Guez, and Silver 2016; Wang et al. 2015; Hessel et al. 2018;
Lillicrap et al. 2015; Mnih et al. 2016; Schulman et al. 2015;
2017), but insufﬁciently address explicit planning computation as in the conventional model-based approaches, which
is critical for long-term reasoning and inference.
Value Iteration Networks (VIN) (Tamar et al. 2016) proposes to encode the value iteration process with a convolu-

Deﬁnition 1. An MDP is a quadruple M = {S, A, R, T }
where S is a set of states, A is a set of actions, R(s, a) is a
reward function for acting a ∈ A at s ∈ S, and T : S ×
A × S → [0, 1] is the transition function which encodes the
probability of the next state given the current state and the

∗

Xin Li is the corresponding author. This work has been partially supported by National Key R&D Program of China under
Grant No. 2017YFB0803300, NSFC under Grant No. 61772074.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6778

