The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Zero-Shot Ingredient Recognition by
Multi-Relational Graph Convolutional Network
Jingjing Chen,1 Liangming Pan,2,3 Zhipeng Wei,4
Xiang Wang,3 Chong-Wah Ngo,5 Tat-Seng Chua3
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University;
2
NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of Singapore;
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore; 4 Jilin University; 5 City University of Hong Kong
chenjingjing@fudan.edu.cn; {e0272310, xiangwang}@u.nus.edu; weizp17@mails.jlu.edu.cn;
cscwngo@cityu.edu.hk; dcscts@nus.edu.sg
Abstract
?

Recognizing ingredients for a given dish image is at the core
of automatic dietary assessment, attracting increasing attention from both industry and academia. Nevertheless, the task
is challenging due to the difﬁculty of collecting and labeling sufﬁcient training data. On one hand, there are hundred
thousands of food ingredients in the world, ranging from the
common to rare. Collecting training samples for all of the
ingredient categories is difﬁcult. On the other hand, as the
ingredient appearances exhibit huge visual variance during
the food preparation, it requires to collect the training samples under different cooking and cutting methods for robust
recognition. Since obtaining sufﬁcient fully annotated training data is not easy, a more practical way of scaling up the
recognition is to develop models that are capable of recognizing unseen ingredients. Therefore, in this paper, we target
the problem of ingredient recognition with zero training samples. More speciﬁcally, we introduce multi-relational GCN
(graph convolutional network) that integrates ingredient hierarchy, attribute as well as co-occurrence for zero-shot ingredient recognition. Extensive experiments on both Chinese
and Japanese food datasets are performed to demonstrate the
superior performance of multi-relational GCN and shed light
on zero-shot ingredients recognition.

Sliced red
chilli

Mushroom
Sliced okra

Sliced
okra

Sliced
red chilli

“is a”

(a)

Black collybia
albuminosa

“share attribute”

Black
boletus

“co-occur”

(b)

Figure 1: Given a food image (shown in (a)) that contains
unseen ingredients, this work proposes to leverage multiple relations among ingredients (b) for unseen ingredients
recognition.

often does not exist. This motivates the need to directly recognize ingredients from the food image. Moreover, training
a model that is able to recognize all the dishes is not realistic, as there are endless kinds of food categories worldwide
(Bolaños, Ferrà, and Radeva 2017). Recognizing ingredients
is more feasible in terms of scale, as the number of ingredients is much less than the number of the food category.
Existing works on ingredient recognition mainly focus on
recognizing a relatively narrow set of ingredients, ranging
from 93 to 1,276 categories (Bolaños, Ferrà, and Radeva
2017; Chen and Ngo 2016; Chen, Ngo, and Chua 2017;
Zhang, Lu, and Zhang 2016). The major obstacle for largescale ingredient recognition is the lack of sufﬁcient training samples. Collecting dish images that cover all ingredient
categories is difﬁcult, not mentioning the efforts devoted to
label the ingredient composition for each image. Besides,
for robust recognition, it requires to collect training samples
under different cooking and cutting conditions, since the appearances of ingredients depend heavily on the way they are
processed in cooking. To overcome this data sparsity issue,
a more practical way is to endow the model with the ability
to recognize ingredient which has zero training sample.
This paper studies the problem of zero-shot ingredient
recognition. The key to dealing with zero-shot recognition
problem is to transfer the knowledge obtained from familiar
categories to unfamiliar ones. The knowledge transfer is ei-

Introduction
Automatically constructing a food diary that tracks the ingredients consumed can facilitate the estimation of nutrition
facts, which is crucial to various health relevant applications.
Existing works (Kitamura, Yamasaki, and Aizawa 2008;
Meyers et al. 2015) estimate the nutrients from the food
image uploaded by the user. A classiﬁer is ﬁrst trained to
recognize the category of the food in the image. Then, the
nutrients are estimated based on the food composition table for each food category. These methods are only feasible
for restaurant food with relatively ﬁxed ingredient composition (Chen and Ngo 2016). However, for home-made food,
as they usually do not have standardized cooking methods,
food presentation, and ingredients composition, a clear mapping from the food category to its composing ingredients
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10542

