The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AI for Software Quality Assurance Blue Sky Ideas Talk
Meir Kalech, Roni Stern

Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel, {kalech, sternron}@bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Modern software systems are highly complex and often have
multiple dependencies on external parts such as other processes or services. This poses new challenges and exacerbate
existing challenges in different aspects of software Quality
Assurance (QA) including testing, debugging and repair. The
goal of this talk is to present a novel AI paradigm for software
QA (AI4QA). A quality assessment AI agent uses machinelearning techniques to predict where coding errors are likely
to occur. Then a test generation AI agent considers the error
predictions to direct automated test generation. Then a test
execution AI agent executes tests, that are passed to the rootcause analysis AI agent, which applies automatic debugging
algorithms. The candidate root causes are passed to a code
repair AI agent that tries to create a patch for correcting the
isolated error.

1

Figure 1: An illustration of the proposed AI4QA paradigm.

A quality assessment AI agent (marked 1 in Figure 1)
continuously monitors the software development process by
collecting information from existing software engineering
tools, learning over time to predict where coding errors are
likely to occur. A test generation AI agent (2) considers the
error predictions to direct automated and manual test generation. The test execution AI agent (3) executes tests and analyses their outputs, searching for failed tests and abnormal
behaviour. These potential failures are passed to the rootcause analysis AI agent (4), which applies automatic diagnosis and debugging algorithms to isolate their root cause.
In some cases, additional testing is needed to isolate the root
cause, in which case the root-cause analysis AI agent will interact with the test generation AI agent to create customized
tests to provide additional diagnostic information. After isolation, the candidate diagnoses – root causes – are passed
to a code repair AI agent (5) that tries to create a patch
for correcting the isolated error, or assign it automatically
to a human developer that is most likely to be able to solve
it. After an error is corrected, the test generation AI agent
generates suitable tests to prevent regression. This QA process is constantly monitored by the quality assessment AI
agent, which provides immediate feedback to management,
suggesting when a software is deployment-ready and which
processes need executive attention.
Algorithms for some elements of the AI agents in AI4QA
exist in the academic literature and even in industry. However, their adoption has been limited. This is because current algorithms are not powerful enough and do not provide
a full solution to the QA process. For example, there are several automated test generation tools (Fraser and Arcuri 2011;

Scientiﬁc Background

Testing, debugging, and other software Quality Assurance
(QA) activities are performed by software development
teams to increase software quality throughout the software development process and in particular prior to deployment. Estimates of the time spent for QA in software products range from 20% to 50% of overall development costs
(Tassey 2002). Recent years have demonstrated that the relevant time-to-market for software products decreases rapidly,
while the value expected by end-users is not decreasing,
thereby leaving less time for QA. This suggests software
products quality is expected to degrade, potentially leading
to a new software crisis (Cerpa and Verner 2009).
To avoid this crisis, we believe that a novel Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) paradigm for software development and QA
is required. In this paradigm a range of techniques from the
AI literature could guide human and computer QA efforts
in a cost-effective manner. Figure 1 illustrates the workﬂow
of this AI-driven QA paradigm (AI4QA). Each one of the
workﬂow components, described below, poses an interesting research challenge which can be addressed by different
well-known AI methods.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13529

