The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MultiSumm: Towards a Uniﬁed Model
for Multi-Lingual Abstractive Summarization
Yue Cao,1,2,3 Xiaojun Wan,1,2,3 Jin-ge Yao,1 Dian Yu4
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
4
Tencent AI Lab
{yuecao, wanxiaojun, yaojinge}@pku.edu.cn, yudian@tencent.com
models. Therefore, to improve scalability on multiple languages and to improve summarization performance on lowresource languages, it is natural to aim for building a uniﬁed
multi-lingual model to leverage existing large-scale monolingual summarization corpora in rich-resource languages.
Previous work on multi-lingual text summarization
mainly focus on directly mixing training data from different
languages, and training with a uniﬁed model that does not
include modules handling multilingualism (Litvak, Last, and
Friedman 2010; Vanetik and Litvak 2015; Litvak et al. 2016;
Litvak and Vanetik 2019). These multi-lingual summarization systems are mostly based on traditional machine learning techniques or integer linear programming, which can
only handle a small number of training samples. As the
number of training samples increases, the time cost of these
models becomes unbearable. To the best of our knowledge,
there are no deep learning based studies for multi-lingual
text summarization.
In this paper, we focus on multi-lingual text summarization. We propose MultiSumm, a uniﬁed multi-lingual model
to handle multi-lingual text summarization and help improve
the summarization performance on those low-resource languages. We study multi-lingual text summarization for ﬁve
rich-resource languages: English, Chinese, French, Spanish, and German, as well as two low-resource languages:
Bosnian and Croatian.
A large number of parallel corpora for English, Chinese, French, Spanish, and German already exist (Graff
et al. 2003; Hu, Chen, and Zhu 2015; Mendonça, Graff,
and DiPersio 2009a; 2009b), containing millions of textsummary pairs. However, to the best of our knowledge, there
is no published summarization dataset available for lowresource languages Bosnian and Croatian. To accomplish
the task of text summarization for Bosnian and Croatian,
we ﬁrst create a new abstractive summarization dataset for
Bosnian and Croatian, consisting of 177,406 and 204,748
samples, respectively. We give two text-summary examples
in Table 1, and the details of the dataset will be described
later. Note that the dataset we constructed is relatively
smaller than those rich-resource summarization datasets (the
ratio of sample size is about 1/20). Due to the lack of training
data, traditional deep learning models that contain billions of

Abstract
Automatic text summarization aims at producing a shorter
version of the input text that conveys the most important information. However, multi-lingual text summarization, where
the goal is to process texts in multiple languages and output summaries in the corresponding languages with a single model, has been rarely studied. In this paper, we present
MultiSumm, a novel multi-lingual model for abstractive summarization. The MultiSumm model uses the following training regime: (I) multi-lingual learning that contains language
model training, auto-encoder training, translation and backtranslation training, and (II) joint summary generation training. We conduct experiments on summarization datasets for
ﬁve rich-resource languages: English, Chinese, French, Spanish, and German, as well as two low-resource languages:
Bosnian and Croatian. Experimental results show that our
proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms a multi-lingual
baseline model. Speciﬁcally, our model achieves comparable or even better performance than models trained separately
on each language. As an additional contribution, we construct the ﬁrst summarization dataset for Bosnian and Croatian, containing 177,406 and 204,748 samples, respectively.

Introduction
Text summarization has witnessed rapid growth in recent
years. There are two primary paradigms for text summarization: extractive and abstractive. Extractive summarization builds summaries by selecting sequences of important
sentences and words from the input text. In this paper, we
focus on abstractive summarization that can generate a summary that may contain phrases or words that do not appear
in the input text.
Variants of sequence-to-sequence model for abstractive
summarization have shown to obtain promising results for
one single, resource-rich language such as English (Tan,
Wan, and Xiao 2017; Lin et al. 2018) and Chinese (Wang
et al. 2018; Wei et al. 2019). However, training a monolingual model for each language is neither scalable nor efﬁcient, while for low-resource languages, it is difﬁcult to obtain sufﬁcient training samples for training modern neural
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11

