The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Finding Most Compatible Phylogenetic Trees over Multi-State Characters
Tuukka Korhonen, Matti Järvisalo
HIIT, Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland

problem of ﬁnding the largest subset of characters admitting a perfect phylogeny. Maximum compatibility has found
various applications in analyzing real-world datasets (Ringe,
Warnow, and Taylor 2002; Brooks et al. 2007). However, developing efﬁcient algorithms for the problem is challenging;
in addition to NP-hardness, maximum compatibility cannot
be approximated well, shown via a reduction from the inapproximable maximum clique problem (Day and Sankoff
1986; Arora et al. 1992).

Abstract
The reconstruction of the evolutionary tree of a set of species
based on qualitative attributes is a central problem in phylogenetics. In the NP-hard perfect phylogeny problem the input is a set of taxa (species) and characters (attributes) on
them, and the task is to ﬁnd an evolutionary tree that describes the evolution of the taxa so that each character state
evolves only once. However, in practical situations a perfect
phylogeny rarely exists, motivating the maximum compatibility problem of ﬁnding the largest subset of characters admitting a perfect phylogeny. Various declarative approaches,
based on applying integer programming (IP), answer set programming (ASP) and pseudo-Boolean optimization (PBO)
solvers, have been proposed for maximum compatibility. In
this work we develop a new hybrid approach to solving maximum compatibility for multi-state characters, making use of
both declarative optimization techniques (speciﬁcally maximum satisﬁability, MaxSAT) and an adaptation of the Bouchitté-Todinca approach to triangulation-based graph optimization problems. Empirically our approach outperforms in scalability the earlier proposed approaches w.r.t. various parameters underlying the problem.

1

Nevertheless, the quest for practical exact algorithms for
maximum compatibility has received noticeable attention:
various declarative approaches have been proposed, including an encoding as answer set programming (ASP) (Brooks
et al. 2007); integer programming (IP) formulations based
on minimal separators (Gusﬁeld 2010; Gysel and Gusﬁeld 2011) and by reducing the general problem to a speciﬁc special case (Gusﬁeld, Frid, and Brown 2007; Stevens
and Gusﬁeld 2010) and a pseudo-Boolean optimization
(PBO) approach (Miranda, Lynce, and Manquinho 2014).
Beyond declarative approaches, the algorithmic BT framework of Bouchitté and Todinca (2001) which yields efﬁcient
exponential-time algorithms for various triangulation-based
graph optimization problems (Bodlaender and Fomin 2005;
Furuse and Yamazaki 2014; Fomin, Todinca, and Villanger
2015), can be adapted to solving maximum compatibility (Gysel 2014). However, this comes with the restriction that the number of states allowed in the characters—
describing properties of taxa—is only two. In contrast, in
applications to biology the number of states of characters is
often naturally higher—for example, four for DNA and 20
for amino acid sequences (Wiley and Lieberman 2011).

Introduction

Phylogenetics concerns the evolutionary history and relationships between individual or groups of individuals, e.g.,
species or populations in biology. Reconstruction of an evolutionary tree of a set of species based on qualitative attributes is a central problem in phylogenetics (Semple and
Steel 2003; Bordewich, Huber, and Semple 2005), and is
in many settings NP-hard (Steel 1992). In the perfect phylogeny problem the input is a set of taxa (species) and characters (attributes) on them. Each character is a partition of a
subset of the taxa into character states, describing the properties of the taxa. The task is then to ﬁnd an evolutionary tree
that describes the evolution of the taxa so that each character
state evolves only once. This problem has received a lot of
attention in theoretical algorithmics (Bodlaender, Fellows,
and Warnow 1992; Steel 1992).
However, in practical situations a perfect phylogeny
rarely exists. This gives rise to maximum compatibility, the

In this work, we propose a new exact approach to maximum compatibility. We make use of the BT framework as a
basis of a novel declarative view to the problem. Whereas
BT is based on computing the so-called potential maximal cliques (PMCs) of the input graph and then performing recursive computation in the style of dynamic programming over the PMCs, we harness the declarative optimization paradigm of maximum satisﬁability (MaxSAT) for the
second part. We model as MaxSAT in one shot the recursive
computations of BT (as hard clauses) and the task of optimally resolving a triangulation-related issue that obstructs

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1544

