The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Diversity Transfer Network for Few-Shot Learning
Mengting Chen,1∗† Yuxin Fang,1∗ Xinggang Wang,1‡ Heng Luo,2 Yifeng Geng,2
Xinyu Zhang, Chang Huang,2 Wenyu Liu,1‡ Bo Wang3,4
1

School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Horizon Robotics, Inc. 3 Vector Institute 4 PMCC, UHN
{mengtingchen, yuxin fang, xgwang, liuwy}@hust.edu.cn {heng.luo, yifeng.geng, chang.huang}@horizon.ai
xyzhang.me@foxmail.com bowang@vectorinstitute.ai

tested in an N -way K-shot scheme (Vinyals et al. 2016)
where the models need to classify the queries into one of
the N categories correctly when only K samples of each
novel category are given. This unique setting of few-shot
learning poses an unprecedented challenge in fully utilizing the prior information in the training set Dtrain , which
corresponds to the known information or historical information of the human learner. Common approaches to address this challenge either learn a good metric for novel
tasks (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Vinyals et al. 2016;
Sung et al. 2018) or train a meta-learner for fast adaptation
(Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Munkhdalai and Yu 2017;
Ravi and Larochelle 2017).
Recently, the generation based approach is becoming
an effective solution for few-shot learning (Hariharan and
Girshick 2017; Schwartz et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018), since it directly alleviates the problem of
lacking training samples. We propose a Diversity Transfer
Network (DTN) for sample generation. In DTN, the offset
between a random sample pair from the known category is
composited with a support sample in the novel category in
the latent feature space. Then, the generated features, as well
as the support features, are averaged as the proxy of the novel
category. At last, query samples are evaluated by the proxy.
Only if the generated samples follow the distribution of the
real samples to be diverse, can the meta-classiﬁer (i.e., the
proxy) be robust enough to classify queries correctly.
In addition to the new sample generation scheme, we utilize an effective meta-training curriculum called OAT (Organized Auxiliary task co-Training), inspired by the auxiliary
task co-training in TADAM (Oreshkin, Rodrı́guez López, and
Lacoste 2018) and curriculum learning (Bengio et al. 2009).
OAT organizes auxiliary tasks and meta-tasks reasonably
and effectively reduces training complexity. Experiments
show that by applying OAT, our DTN converges much faster
compared with the naı̈ve meta-training strategy (i.e., metatraining from scratch), the multi-stage training strategy used
in Δ-encoder (Schwartz et al. 2018) and the auxiliary task
co-training strategy used in TADAM.
The main components of DTN are integrated into a single
network and can be optimized in an end-to-end fashion. Thus,
DTN is very simple to implement and easy to train. Our experimental results show that this simple method outperforms
many previous works on a variety of datasets.

Abstract
Few-shot learning is a challenging task that aims at training a classiﬁer for unseen classes with only a few training
examples. The main difﬁculty of few-shot learning lies in
the lack of intra-class diversity within insufﬁcient training
samples. To alleviate this problem, we propose a novel generative framework, Diversity Transfer Network (DTN), that
learns to transfer latent diversities from known categories
and composite them with support features to generate diverse
samples for novel categories in feature space. The learning
problem of the sample generation (i.e., diversity transfer) is
solved via minimizing an effective meta-classiﬁcation loss in a
single-stage network, instead of the generative loss in previous
works. Besides, an organized auxiliary task co-training over
known categories is proposed to stabilize the meta-training
process of DTN. We perform extensive experiments and ablation studies on three datasets, i.e., miniImageNet, CIFAR100
and CUB. The results show that DTN, with single-stage training and faster convergence speed, obtains the state-of-the-art
results among the feature generation based few-shot learning
methods. Code and supplementary material are available at:
https://github.com/Yuxin-CV/DTN.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown tremendous success in solving many challenging real-world problems when
a large amount of training data is available (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
He et al. 2015). Common practice suggests that models with
more parameters have the greater capacity to ﬁt data and
more training data usually provide better generalization ability. However, DNNs struggle to generalize given only a few
training data while humans excel at learning new concepts
from just a few examples (Bloom 2000). Few-shot learning
has therefore been proposed to close the performance gap
between machine learner and human learner. In the canonical
setting of few-shot learning, there are a training set Dtrain
(seen, known) and a testing set Dtest (unseen, novel) with disjoint categories. Models are trained on the training set while
∗

Equal contribution.
Mengting Chen was an intern of Horizon Robotics when working on this paper.
‡
Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10559

