The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SubSpace Capsule Network
Marzieh Edraki,1∗ Nazanin Rahnavard,1,2 Mubarak Shah1
1

Center for Research in Computer Vision
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Central Florida
Orlando, Florida, USA, 32816
m.edraki@knights.ucf.edu, nazanin@eecs.ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu
2

idea of Capsule Networks (Hinton, Krizhevsky, and Wang
2011). Capsule networks received a ﬂurry of attention after
achieving the state-of-the-art performance on image classiﬁcation (Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017), text classiﬁcation
(Zhao et al. 2018), action detection and localization (Duarte,
Rawat, and Shah 2018), image segmentation tasks (LaLonde
and Bagci 2018), etc. Moreover, many efforts have been
made to improve the structure of capsule networks (Hinton,
Sabour, and Frosst 2018) (Bahadori 2018)(Zhang, Edraki,
and Qi 2018) as a new generation of deep neural networks.

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become a key
asset to most of ﬁelds in AI. Despite their successful performance, CNNs suffer from a major drawback. They fail to
capture the hierarchy of spatial relation among different parts
of an entity. As a remedy to this problem, the idea of capsules was proposed by Hinton. In this paper, we propose the
SubSpace Capsule Network (SCN) that exploits the idea of
capsule networks to model possible variations in the appearance or implicitly-deﬁned properties of an entity through a
group of capsule subspaces instead of simply grouping neurons to create capsules. A capsule is created by projecting an
input feature vector from a lower layer onto the capsule subspace using a learnable transformation. This transformation
ﬁnds the degree of alignment of the input with the properties
modeled by the capsule subspace.
We show that SCN is a general capsule network that can
successfully be applied to both discriminative and generative models without incurring computational overhead compared to CNN during test time. Effectiveness of SCN is evaluated through a comprehensive set of experiments on supervised image classiﬁcation, semi-supervised image classiﬁcation and high-resolution image generation tasks using the
generative adversarial network (GAN) framework. SCN signiﬁcantly improves the performance of the baseline models
in all 3 tasks.

1

A capsule is deﬁned as a group of neurons that can ultimately model different properties such as pose, texture or
deformation of an entity or a part of an entity. Each layer
of a capsule network consists of many capsules. In a welltrained capsule network, activation vector of each capsule
represents the instantiation parameters of the entity and the
length of the capsule scores the presence of that feature or
part of that entity In this paper, while we still follow the
main deﬁnition of capsules, we propose Subspace Capsule
Networks (SCNs), which build capsules based on the degree
of relevance of an input feature vector to a group of learned
subspaces . In SCNs, corresponding to each entity or part
of that entity, a speciﬁc capsule subspace is learned. Then
a capsule is created by projecting the input feature vector
onto the capsule subspace using a learned transformation,
deﬁned based on the basis of the corresponding capsule subspace. Intuitively speaking, a capsule subspace captures the
variation in visual properties; like appearance, pose, texture
and deformation; of an object or an implicitly deﬁned feature
of that object The length of the output vector of a subspace
capsule represents the degree of alignment of an input with
the properties modeled by that subspace. Hence, if a subspace capsule has a large activity vector, it means that the
input feature vector is highly related to the entity modeled
by that subspace and vice versa. This form of creating subspace capsules makes it independent of any form of routing
required in capsule network introduced in (Sabour, Frosst,
and Hinton 2017) or (Hinton, Sabour, and Frosst 2018). Due
to this property, SCN is easily scalable to large network architectures and large datasets.

Introduction

In the recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have become a key asset to most of ﬁelds in AI. Various tasks
in computer vision, reinforcement learning, natural language
and speech processing systems have achieved signiﬁcant improvement by using them. New applications like music generation (Dong et al. 2018), visual text correction (Mazaheri
and Shah 2018), online fashion recommendation (Han et al.
2017) are founded on the feature learning capability of CNN
architectures. Despite their successful performance, CNNs
suffer from a major drawback. They fail to capture the hierarchy of spatial relation among different parts of an entity.
As a remedy to this problem, Hinton et al. introduced the
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Closest to our work is the CapProNet model, proposed
by (Zhang, Edraki, and Qi 2018), in which authors apply
10745

