The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

How to Ask Better Questions? A Large-Scale
Multi-Domain Dataset for Rewriting Ill-Formed Questions
Zewei Chu,1∗ Mingda Chen,2∗† Jing Chen,3† Miaosen Wang,3†
Kevin Gimpel,2 Manaal Faruqui,3 Xiance Si3
1

2

The University of Chicago, 5730 S Ellis Ave, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, 6045 S Kenwood Ave, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
3
Google Assistant, 1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
zeweichu@uchicago.edu, {mchen, kgimpel}@ttic.edu
{chenjin, miaosen, mfaruqui, sxc}@google.com
well-formed question rewritten by the author or community
contributors. The dataset contains 427,719 question pairs
which come from 303 domains. The MQR dataset is further split into TRAIN and DEV/TEST, where question pairs
in DEV/TEST have less n-gram overlap but better semantic
preservation after rewriting. Table 1 shows some example
question pairs from the MQR DEV split.
Our dataset enables us to train models directly for the
task of question rewriting. We train neural generation models on our dataset, including Long-Short Term Memory networks (LSTM; Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) with attention (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015) and transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017). We show that these models consistently improve the well-formedness of questions although
sometimes at the expense of semantic drift. We compare to
approaches that do not use our training dataset, including
general-purpose sentence paraphrasing, grammatical error
correction (GEC) systems, and round trip neural machine
translation. Methods trained on our dataset greatly outperform those developed from other resources. Augmenting our
training set with additional question pairs such as Quora
or Paralex question pairs (Fader, Zettlemoyer, and Etzioni
2013) has mixed impact on this task. Our ﬁndings from the
benchmarked methods suggest potential research directions
to improve question quality.
To summarize our contributions:

Abstract
We present a large-scale dataset for the task of rewriting an
ill-formed natural language question to a well-formed one.
Our multi-domain question rewriting (MQR) dataset is constructed from human contributed Stack Exchange question
edit histories. The dataset contains 427,719 question pairs
which come from 303 domains. We provide human annotations for a subset of the dataset as a quality estimate. When
moving from ill-formed to well-formed questions, the question quality improves by an average of 45 points across three
aspects. We train sequence-to-sequence neural models on the
constructed dataset and obtain an improvement of 13.2%
in BLEU-4 over baseline methods built from other data resources. We release the MQR dataset to encourage research
on the problem of question rewriting.1

Introduction
Understanding text and voice questions from users is a difﬁcult task as it involves dealing with “word salad” and illformed text. Ill-formed questions may arise from imperfect
speech recognition systems, search engines, dialogue histories, inputs from low bandwidth devices such as mobile
phones, or second language learners, among other sources.
However, most downstream applications involving questions, such as question answering and semantic parsing, are
trained on well-formed natural language. In this work, we
focus on rewriting textual ill-formed questions, which could
improve the performance of such downstream applications.
Faruqui and Das (2018) introduced the task of identifying well-formed natural language questions. In this paper, we take a step further to investigate methods to rewrite
ill-formed questions into well-formed ones without changing their semantics. We create a multi-domain question
rewriting dataset (MQR) from human contributed Stack
Exchange question edit histories.2 This dataset provides
pairs of questions: the original ill-formed question and a

• We propose the task of question rewriting: converting textual ill-formed questions to well-formed ones while preserving their semantics.
• We construct a large-scale multi-domain question rewriting dataset MQR from human generated Stack Exchange
question edit histories. The development and test sets are
of high quality according to human annotation. The training set is of large-scale. We release the MQR dataset to
encourage research on the question rewriting task.
• We benchmark a variety of neural models trained on the
MQR dataset, neural models trained with other question
rewriting datasets, and other paraphrasing techniques. We
ﬁnd that models trained on the MQR and Quora datasets
combined followed by grammatical error correction perform the best in the MQR question rewriting task.

∗

Work performed during internship at Google.
Contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/ZeweiChu/MQR
2
https://archive.org/download/stackexchange
†

7586

