The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Controlling the Amount of Verbatim Copying in Abstractive Summarization

†

Kaiqiang Song,† Bingqing Wang,‡ Zhe Feng,‡ Liu Ren,‡ Fei Liu†

Computer Science Department, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA
‡
Robert Bosch LLC, Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA
kqsong@knights.ucf.edu, {bingqing.wang, zhe.feng2, liu.ren}@us.bosch.com, feiliu@cs.ucf.edu

to control over copying and generate diverse abstracts. Abstractive summarizers using encoder-decoder architectures
can either copy words from the source text or generate new
words unseen in the source (See, Liu, and Manning 2017;
Chen and Bansal 2018; Gehrmann, Deng, and Rush 2018).
Recent work further attempted to increase the use of unseen
words in summaries (Weber et al. 2018; Kryscinski et al.
2018). However, in all cases, the summarizers are trained on
single-reference abstracts to produce single outputs with a
ﬁxed (corpus-level) copy rate. It can take multiple reference
abstracts, created for the same input text with varying degrees of copying, to teach the system to generate abstracts
with similar amounts of copying. However, not only can it
be time-consuming and costly to create human abstracts, but
this is unlikely to be how humans learn to exercise control
over copying. Without an understanding of the copy mechanism of neural abstractive models, producing abstracts with
varying degrees of copying can prove daunting at best and a
“mission impossible” at worst.

Abstract
An abstract must not change the meaning of the original text.
A single most effective way to achieve that is to increase the
amount of copying while still allowing for text abstraction.
Human editors can usually exercise control over copying, resulting in summaries that are more extractive than abstractive,
or vice versa. However, it remains poorly understood whether
modern neural abstractive summarizers can provide the same
ﬂexibility, i.e., learning from single reference summaries to
generate multiple summary hypotheses with varying degrees
of copying. In this paper, we present a neural summarization
model that, by learning from single human abstracts, can produce a broad spectrum of summaries ranging from purely
extractive to highly generative ones. We frame the task of
summarization as language modeling and exploit alternative
mechanisms to generate summary hypotheses. Our method
allows for control over copying during both training and decoding stages of a neural summarization model. Through extensive experiments we illustrate the signiﬁcance of our proposed method on controlling the amount of verbatim copying and achieve competitive results over strong baselines. Our
analysis further reveals interesting and unobvious facts.

An ideal summarizer should provide the ﬂexibility to generate summaries with varying proportions of reused text. Such
summaries are required to cater to diverse usage scenarios.
E.g., system abstracts may not contain excessive copied content without proper permission—11 consecutive words or
longer are considered by EU standards as the author’s intellectual creation and it is thus protected by copyright law (de
Castilho et al. 2019). Without proper control over copying,
commercial summarizers can be held liable for copyright infringements. Moreover, system abstracts with an appropriate amount of copied content are more desirable than highly
abstractive ones, as they are less likely to suffer from content hallucination (Reiter 2018) and better at preserving the
meaning of the original text.
To date, it remains poorly understood whether modern abstractive summmarization can provide the needed ﬂexibility

In this paper, our goal is to generate abstractive summaries
with varying amounts of reused text by developing a general
framework that learns from single reference summaries. We
deﬁne copy rate as the percentage of summary n-grams appearing in the source text. A high copy rate suggests that the
summary is generated largely by copying verbatim from the
source text. Conversely, a low copy rate indicates there are
more text shortening, word reordering, paraphrasing and abstraction involved in the generation process. We argue that
abstractive summarizers are not necessarily trained on every
word of reference summaries but they ought to separate the
prediction of summary words that are seen in the source text
from those unseen. The underlying principle is simple and
intuitively appealing. If a summarizer is trained to predict
only seen words, it learns to copy them from the source text,
producing extractive summaries. As more unseen words are
used for training, the summarizer gradually transforms from
copying only to both copying and generating new words not
present in the source text. By employing a “mix-and-match”
strategy, we enable an abstractive summarizer to generate
summaries with more, or less, copying.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

We frame abstractive summarization as a language modeling task and present a decoder-only framework for it. It uses

Introduction

8902

