The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neural Simile Recognition with Cyclic
Multitask Learning and Local Attention
Jiali Zeng,1∗ Linfeng Song,2∗ Jinsong Su,1† Jun Xie,3 Wei Song,4 Jiebo Luo5
1

Xiamen University, Xiamen, China, 2 TencentAI Lab, Bellevue, USA
Mobile Internet Group, Tencent Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing, China
4
Capital Normal University, Beijing, China, 5 University of Rochester, Rochester NY, USA
lemon@stu.xmu.edu.cn, freesunshine0316@gmail.com, jssu@xmu.edu.cn,
stiffxie@tencent.com, wsong@cnu.edu.cn, jluo@cs.rochester.edu
3

Attention Weight Distribution

Abstract

0.3
0.2

Simile recognition is to detect simile sentences and to extract simile components, i.e., tenors and vehicles. It involves
two subtasks: simile sentence classiﬁcation and simile component extraction. Recent work has shown that standard multitask learning is effective for Chinese simile recognition, but
it is still uncertain whether the mutual effects between the
subtasks have been well captured by simple parameter sharing. We propose a novel cyclic multitask learning framework
for neural simile recognition, which stacks the subtasks and
makes them into a loop by connecting the last to the ﬁrst. It iteratively performs each subtask, taking the outputs of the previous subtask as additional inputs to the current one, so that
the interdependence between the subtasks can be better explored. Extensive experiments show that our framework signiﬁcantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art model and
our carefully designed baselines, and the gains are still remarkable using BERT. Source Code of this paper are available on https://github.com/DeepLearnXMU/Cyclic.

0.1

Magnolia flower like

⦿ަ㣧
tenor

‫܅‬

bottle perfume

ж⬬

comparator

俏≪

vehicle

make school

θ ᣀ

ṗണ

smell

aroma

⟅ᗍ 俏≊ᢇ啱 Ⱦ

Figure 1: Attention weights generated by the simile sentence classiﬁer of the conventional multitask learning (Liu
et al. 2018), showing that the simile sentence classiﬁer tends
to focus more on simile components.

stand the implicit meanings expressed by simile in books
and novels by highlighting simile components. However,
simile recognition is very challenging, with one reason being
that simile sentences have very similar syntactic and semantic structures to the normal sentences, hindering the feasibility of standard NLU techniques, such as syntactic and semantic parsing. Even though comparator words can provide
some hints, they are also frequently used in literal comparisons, which introduces great ambiguity to this task.
Previous approaches of simile recognition are primarily
based on handcrafted linguistic features and syntactic patterns (Li et al. 2008; Niculae and Yaneva 2013; Niculae
2013; Niculae and Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil 2014), which
are inefﬁcient on new languages and domains due to the
extra time for feature engineering. Inspired by the successful applications of neural multitask learning on many NLP
tasks (Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2016; Zhang and Weiss 2016;
Luo et al. 2015; Miwa and Bansal 2016), Liu et al. (2018) investigated a standard multitask learning framework on simile recognition, which signiﬁcantly outperforms the existing methods. Speciﬁcally, they apply a bi-directional LSTM
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) to encode the representations of each input sentence, and then the encoding results
are taken as features shared by an attention-based sentence
classiﬁer, a CRF-based component extractor (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira 2001) and a language model that serves
as an auxiliary task for additional supervision signals.
Despite their success, the multitask learning framework of
Liu et al. (2018) suffers from two major drawbacks. First,
simple parameter sharing is unable to fully exploit the se-

Introduction
Simile is a special type of metaphor that compares two objects (called tenor and vehicle) of different categories using
comparator words such as “like”, “as” or “than”. A Chinese
simile sentence is shown in Figure 1, where the tenor “Magnolia ﬂower” and the vehicle “perfume” are compared using comparator “like”. Typically, simile recognition involves
two subtasks (Liu et al. 2018): Simile Sentence Classiﬁcation, which discriminates whether a sentence containing a
comparator is a simile sentence, and Simile Component Extraction, which aims to extract the tenor and the vehicle in a
simile sentence, respectively.
It is of great importance to study simile. Simile recognition is potentially beneﬁcial for NLP applications, such
as sentiment analysis (e.g. hate speech detection), dialogue
understanding and question answering, because users sometimes use simile to express their emotions. In addition, simile recognition can help language learners to better under∗
Equal contribution, work done when the ﬁrst author was an
intern at Tencent, Beijing, China.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9515

