The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neural Graph Embedding for Neural Architecture Search
Wei Li,1 Shaogang Gong,1 Xiatian Zhu2
1

Queen Mary University of London, 2 University of Surrey
{w.li, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk, xiatian.zhu@surrey.ac.uk

 

Abstract
Existing neural architecture search (NAS) methods often operate in discrete or continuous spaces directly, which ignores
the graphical topology knowledge of neural networks. This
leads to suboptimal search performance and efﬁciency, given
the factor that neural networks are essentially directed acyclic
graphs (DAG). In this work, we address this limitation by introducing a novel idea of neural graph embedding (NGE).
Speciﬁcally, we represent the building block (i.e. the cell) of
neural networks with a neural DAG, and learn it by leveraging
a Graph Convolutional Network to propagate and model the
intrinsic topology information of network architectures. This
results in a generic neural network representation integrable
with different existing NAS frameworks. Extensive experiments show the superiority of NGE over the state-of-the-art
methods on image classiﬁcation and semantic segmentation.

 



 

 

 

Figure 1: The concept of neural graph architecture search.
We represent the cell of a network architecture with directed
acyclic graph (DAG), which enables the search space to be
represented in a continuous space, and facilitates the adoption of gradient descent based optimisation.

2000 GPU days for RL (Zoph and Le 2017) and 3150 GPU
days for EA (Real et al. 2019). Several recent attempts have
been made to improve, e.g. structural search space designing (Liu et al. 2018b; 2018a), architecture weights sharing and inheritance (Pham et al. 2018; Cai et al. 2018a;
2018b). Due to the fundamental searching challenge in a discrete space, RL and EA remain inefﬁcient for NAS.
In contrast, a GD-based NAS method operates in a continuous search space and hence enables continuity optimisation
by gradient based methods. The key of this paradigm lies in
how to construct a continuous search space. For example,
DARTS (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019) simply relaxes the
search space to be continuous by introducing a mixture of
weights for all the candidate operations. NAO (Luo et al.
2018) maps a neural architecture into a continuous representation via an encoder model. Notwithstanding signiﬁcantly
lower search cost by further using weight sharing (Pham et
al. 2018), both DARTS and NAO run the risk of being easily
stuck around inferior local minimums as observed in (Sciuto et al. 2019). We consider that their limitation is commonly due to weak capability of modelling the topological
knowledge of the network architecture when constructing
the continuous search space. As an intrinsic property of neural network in speciﬁc and directed acyclic graph (DAG) in
general, topology plays a fundamentally crucial role in the
process of NAS (Figure 1).
To solve the aforementioned limitation, in this work we
propose the notion of Neural Graph Embedding (NGE) for

Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is able to automate the tedious process of designing neural network architectures optimal for target tasks, bypassing the demand for rich domain
knowledge and experiences. Recent attempts in NAS have
achieved enormous success in various challenging tasks, e.g.
image classiﬁcation (Zoph and Le 2017), object detection
(Ghiasi, Lin, and Le 2019), and semantic segmentation (Liu
et al. 2019; Nekrasov et al. 2019).
There are three common learning paradigms among existing NAS methods: reinforcement learning (RL), evolutionary algorithm (EA), and gradient differentiable (GD) optimisation. A RL-based NAS method constructs a network architecture through deriving a sequence of discrete actions
(each selecting an operator connection token), and uses its
dev set accuracy as the reward. In a EA-based method, mutations and combinations of architectural elements are used
to generate and search the architectures, where those architectures with higher ﬁtness score (accuracy) are often
selected to continue the evolution. Despite their remarkable performance, RL-based and EA-based NAS methods
suffer from extremely low efﬁciency and high computational resource demand. For instance, to search a state-ofthe-art architecture for CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, it takes
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4707

