The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SOGNet: Scene Overlap Graph Network for Panoptic Segmentation
Yibo Yang,1,2,∗ Hongyang Li,2,∗ Xia Li,2,3 Qijie Zhao,4 Jianlong Wu,2,5 Zhouchen Lin2,†
1

Center for Data Science, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
4
Pony.ai Inc
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University
{ibo, lhy ustb, ethanlee, zhaoqijie, jlwu1992, zlin}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

The panoptic segmentation task requires a uniﬁed result from
semantic and instance segmentation outputs that may contain
overlaps. However, current studies widely ignore modeling
overlaps. In this study, we aim to model overlap relations
among instances and resolve them for panoptic segmentation.
Inspired by scene graph representation, we formulate the overlapping problem as a simpliﬁed case, named scene overlap
graph. We leverage each object’s category, geometry and appearance features to perform relational embedding, and output
a relation matrix that encodes overlap relations. In order to
overcome the lack of supervision, we introduce a differentiable
module to resolve the overlap between any pair of instances.
The mask logits after removing overlaps are fed into per-pixel
instance id classiﬁcation, which leverages the panoptic supervision to assist in the modeling of overlap relations. Besides,
we generate an approximate ground truth of overlap relations
as the weak supervision, to quantify the accuracy of overlap
relations predicted by our method. Experiments on COCO and
Cityscapes demonstrate that our method is able to accurately
predict overlap relations, and outperform the state-of-the-art
performance for panoptic segmentation. Our method also won
the Innovation Award in COCO 2019 challenge.

濜瀀濴濺濸

濜瀁瀆瀇濴瀁濶濸澳濦濸濺瀀濸瀁瀇濴瀇濼瀂瀁

濣濴瀁瀂瀃瀇濼濶澳濦濸濺瀀濸瀁瀇濴瀇濼瀂瀁

Figure 1: Instance segmentation has overlapping regions for
objects, while panoptic segmentation requires a uniﬁed result
for each pixel. Our study aims to explicitly predict overlap
relations and resolve overlaps for the panoptic output.
object region with the right thing class, as well as an instance
id, identifying which object it belongs to. As a result, panoptic segmentation cannot have overlapping segments. However,
most cutting-edge high-performance instance segmentation
methods (He et al. 2017) adopt the region-based strategy
(Girshick et al. 2014), and output overlapping segments. As
shown in Figure 1, the object pairs, such as cup-dinning table,
bottle-dinning table, and bowl-dinning table, share overlapping regions from instance segmentation output. Therefore,
resolving overlaps and producing coherent segmentation results are the main challenge for the panoptic segmentation
task (Kirillov et al. 2019b).
In (Kirillov et al. 2019b), the semantic and instance segmentation are trained separately, and their panoptic results
are merged by heuristic post-processing steps. Later studies
aim to unify the semantic and instance segmentation into an
end-to-end training framework (Kirillov et al. 2019a; Li et al.
2019b; Liu et al. 2019; Xiong et al. 2019; Porzi et al. 2019;
Yang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2018). The panoptic results are usually produced by fusion strategies (Kirillov et al. 2019a; Li et
al. 2019b), or predicted by a panoptic head (Liu et al. 2019;
Xiong et al. 2019). These studies do not explicitly model overlap relations among objects, which is especially important for
datasets with rich categories and complex scenes. However,
modeling overlap is challenging without the supervision of
object relations or depth information.
In this study, we introduce the scene overlap graph network
(SOGNet) for panoptic segmentation. The SOGNet consists
of four components: the joint segmentation, the relational
embedding module, the overlap resolving module, and the

Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved huge
success in computer vision tasks such as image recognition
(He et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2018), semantic segmentation
(Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Chen et al. 2018), object
detection (Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015), and instance segmentation (He et al. 2017). The semantic segmentation task
answers which background scene a pixel belongs to, while
the instance segmentation task predicts foreground object
masks. Recently, the panoptic segmentation task introduced
in (Kirillov et al. 2019b) aims to unify the results of semantic
and instance segmentation into a single pipeline. The system
performs semantic segmentation for pixels that belong to
amorphous background scenes, named stuff. For countable
foreground objects, named things, the goal is to assign each
∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12637

