The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Follow Directions in Street View
Karl Moritz Hermann,∗ Mateusz Malinowski,∗ Piotr Mirowski,∗
András Bánki-Horváth, Keith Anderson, Raia Hadsell
DeepMind

Abstract
Navigating and understanding the real world remains a key
challenge in machine learning and inspires a great variety
of research in areas such as language grounding, planning,
navigation and computer vision. We propose an instructionfollowing task that requires all of the above, and which combines the practicality of simulated environments with the
challenges of ambiguous, noisy real world data. StreetNav
is built on top of Google Street View and provides visually accurate environments representing real places. Agents
are given driving instructions which they must learn to interpret in order to successfully navigate in this environment.
Since humans equipped with driving instructions can readily navigate in previously unseen cities, we set a high bar
and test our trained agents for similar cognitive capabilities.
Although deep reinforcement learning (RL) methods are frequently evaluated only on data that closely follow the training
distribution, our dataset extends to multiple cities and has a
clean train/test separation. This allows for thorough testing of
generalisation ability. This paper presents the StreetNav environment and tasks, models that establish strong baselines,
and extensive analysis of the task and the trained agents.

1

Figure 1: A route from our dataset with visual observation,
instruction text and thumbnails. The agent must learn to interpret the text and thumbnails and navigate to the goal location.
son et al. 2018; Hill et al. 2017; Mirowski et al. 2018) supports the hope that such an understanding might be possible
to develop within virtual agents in the near future. That said,
the question of transfer and grounding requires more realistic circumstances in order to be fully investigated. While
proofs of concept may be demonstrated in simulated, virtual
environments, it is important to consider the transfer problem also on real-world data at scale, where training and test
environments may radically differ in many ways, such as visual appearance or topology of the map.
We propose a challenging new suite of RL environments
termed StreetNav, based on Google Street View, which consists of natural images of real-world places with realistic
connections between them. These environments are packaged together with Google Maps-based driving instructions
to allow for a number of tasks that resemble the human experience of following directions to navigate a city and reach
a destination (see Figure 1).
Successful agents need to integrate inputs coming from
various sources that lead to optimal navigational decisions
under realistic ambiguities, and then apply those behaviours
when evaluated in previously unseen areas. StreetNav provides a natural separation between different neighbourhoods
and cities so that such transfer can be evaluated under increasingly challenging circumstances. Concretely, we train
agents in New York City and then evaluate them in an unseen region of the city, in an altogether new city (Pittsburgh),
as well as on larger numbers of instructions than encoun-

Introduction

How do you get to Carnegie Hall?
— Practice, practice, practice...
The joke hits home for musicians and performers, but the
rest of us expect actual directions. For humans, asking for directions and subsequently following those directions to successfully negotiate a new and unfamiliar environment comes
naturally. Unfortunately, transferring the experience of artiﬁcial agents from known to unknown environments remains
a key obstacle in deep reinforcement learning (RL). For humans, transfer is frequently achieved through the common
medium of language. This is particularly noticeable in various navigational tasks, where access to textual directions
can greatly simplify the challenge of traversing a new city.
This is made possible by our ability to integrate visual information and language and to use this to inform our actions in
an inherently ambiguous world.
Recent progress in the development of RL agents that can
act in increasingly more sophisticated environments (Ander∗

Authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11773

