The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multimodal Summarization with Guidance of Multimodal Reference
Junnan Zhu,1,2 Yu Zhou,1,2∗ Jiajun Zhang,1,2 Haoran Li,4 Chengqing Zong,1,2,3 Changliang Li5
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
4
JD AI Research
5
Kingsoft AI Lab
{junnan.zhu, yzhou, jjzhang, cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, lihaoran24@jd.com, lichangliang@kingsoft.com
Abstract

MSMO

Multimodal summarization with multimodal output (MSMO)
is to generate a multimodal summary for a multimodal news
report, which has been proven to effectively improve users’
satisfaction. The existing MSMO methods are trained by the
target of text modality, leading to the modality-bias problem
that ignores the quality of model-selected image during training. To alleviate this problem, we propose a multimodal objective function with the guidance of multimodal reference
to use the loss from the summary generation and the image selection. Due to the lack of multimodal reference data,
we present two strategies, i.e., ROUGE-ranking and Orderranking, to construct the multimodal reference by extending
the text reference. Meanwhile, to better evaluate multimodal
outputs, we propose a novel evaluation metric based on joint
multimodal representation, projecting the model output and
multimodal reference into a joint semantic space during evaluation. Experimental results have shown that our proposed
model achieves the new state-of-the-art on both automatic
and manual evaluation metrics. Besides, our proposed evaluation method can effectively improve the correlation with
human judgments.

1

Input

Output

summarize
LeBron James after winning
the NBA Finals: ‘Cleveland,
this is for you!’

LeBron James was the first person
everybody wanted to hear from as the final
buzzer of Game 7 sounded, and the Cavs…

Ground Truth: A is better than B
LeBron James
bring a
championship
to Cavs

LeBron James
lead Cavs to
win the
championship

>

Summary A

Summary B

Training
3.02

A
Text Loss

Text Target

Baseline

B

2.95
3.02

A
Multimodal
Target

Ours

Text Loss

B

B is better

3.86

+ Image Loss

2.95

Ground
Truth

A is better

4.64

Figure 1: An example of the modality-bias problem. Summary A and B are considered similar when calculating the
loss only with the text reference. But with the multimodal
reference, we can distinguish A from B.

Introduction

Generally, most existing summarization researches focus on
either texts (Wan and Yang 2006; Celikyilmaz et al. 2018) or
images (Wang, Jia, and Hua 2011; Sharma et al. 2015) in isolation. Recently, researchers (Chen and Zhuge 2018; Zhu et
al. 2018) begin to pay attention to summarizing multimodal
news to multimodal outputs, which can be called multimodal
summarization with multimodal output (MSMO) (Zhu et al.
2018), to help improve users’ satisfaction.
Although great efforts have been made in multimodal
summarization, we ﬁnd that the existing methods have the
following problems:
Modality-bias. The current multimodal summarization
models are trained by the target of text modality, which
causes a modality-bias problem. It means the system tends
to only optimize the text summary generation process, while
the image quality is ignored during training. We give an

example in Figure 1 to illustrate this phenomenon. In the
training process, if we only consider the text reference, then
Summary B is regarded as better than A; but A will be distinguished as better than B if the multimodal reference is
available, which is in line with the ground truth.
Lack of good evaluation metric. The existing methods
evaluate multimodal summaries from three aspects: (1) the
ROUGE value between the texts in the model output and
reference, (2) the precision of the images in the model output
and reference, and (3) the image-text similarity in the model
output. However, all these metrics consider each modality
separately. We argue that the multimodal output should be
treated as a whole in the evaluation process to maintain the
information integrity (See an example in Section 3.3).
Therefore, this paper aims to guide multimodal summa-

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9749

