The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Optimize Computational
Resources: Frugal Training with Generalization Guarantees
Maria-Florina Balcan,1 Tuomas Sandholm,1,2,3,4 Ellen Vitercik1
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
2
Optimized Markets, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
3
Strategic Machine, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
4
Strategy Robot, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
{ninamf, sandholm, vitercik}@cs.cmu.edu
expected performance. Researchers have studied this conﬁguration model for decades, leading to advances in artiﬁcial
intelligence (Xu et al. 2008), computational biology (DeBlasio and Kececioglu 2018), and many other ﬁelds. This approach has also been used in industry for tens of billions of
dollars of combinatorial auctions (Sandholm 2013).
Recently, two lines of research have emerged that explore the theoretical underpinnings of algorithm conﬁguration. One provides sample complexity guarantees, bounding the number of samples sufﬁcient to ensure that an algorithm’s performance on average over the samples generalizes to its expected performance on the distribution (Gupta
and Roughgarden 2017; Balcan et al. 2017; 2018a). These
sample complexity bounds apply no matter how the learning
algorithm operates, and these papers do not include learning
algorithms that extend beyond exhaustive search.
The second line of research provides algorithms for ﬁnding nearly-optimal conﬁgurations from a ﬁnite set (Kleinberg, Leyton-Brown, and Lucier 2017; Kleinberg et al. 2019;
Weisz, György, and Szepesvári 2018; 2019). These algorithms can also be used when the parameter space is inﬁnite: for any γ ∈ (0, 1), ﬁrst sample Ω̃(1/γ) conﬁgurations, and then run the algorithm over this ﬁnite set.
The authors guarantee that the output conﬁguration will
be within the top γ-quantile. If there is only a small region of high-performing parameters, however, the uniform
sample might completely miss all good parameters. Algorithm conﬁguration problems with only tiny pockets of
high-performing parameters do indeed exist: Balcan et al.
(2018a) present distributions over integer programs where
the optimal parameters lie within an arbitrarily small region of the parameter space. For any parameter within that
region, branch-and-bound—the most widely-used integer
programming algorithm—terminates instantaneously. Using
any other parameter, branch-and-bound takes an exponential
number of steps. This region of optimal parameters can be
made so small that any random sampling technique would
require an arbitrarily large sample of parameters to hit that
region. We discuss this example in more detail in Section 5.
This paper marries these two lines of research. We present
an algorithm that identiﬁes a ﬁnite set of promising parameters within an inﬁnite set, given sample access to a distribu-

Abstract
Algorithms typically come with tunable parameters that have
a considerable impact on the computational resources they
consume. Too often, practitioners must hand-tune the parameters, a tedious and error-prone task. A recent line of research provides algorithms that return nearly-optimal parameters from within a ﬁnite set. These algorithms can be used
when the parameter space is inﬁnite by providing as input
a random sample of parameters. This data-independent discretization, however, might miss pockets of nearly-optimal
parameters: prior research has presented scenarios where the
only viable parameters lie within an arbitrarily small region.
We provide an algorithm that learns a ﬁnite set of promising parameters from within an inﬁnite set. Our algorithm can
help compile a conﬁguration portfolio, or it can be used to select the input to a conﬁguration algorithm for ﬁnite parameter
spaces. Our approach applies to any conﬁguration problem
that satisﬁes a simple yet ubiquitous structure: the algorithm’s
performance is a piecewise constant function of its parameters. Prior research has exhibited this structure in domains
from integer programming to clustering.

1

Introduction

Similar combinatorial problems often arise in seemingly unrelated disciplines. Integer programs, for example, model
problems in ﬁelds ranging from computational biology to
economics. To facilitate customization, algorithms often
come with tunable parameters that signiﬁcantly impact the
computational resources they consume, such as runtime.
Hand-tuning parameters can be time consuming and may
lead to sub-optimal results. In this work, we develop the
foundations of automated algorithm conﬁguration via machine learning. A key challenge we face is that in order to
evaluate a conﬁguration’s requisite computational resources,
the learning algorithm itself must expend those resources.
To frame algorithm conﬁguration as a machine learning
problem, we assume sample access to an unknown distribution over problem instances, such as the integer programs an
airline solves day to day. The learning algorithm uses samples to determine parameters that, ideally, will have strong
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3227

