The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Low-Variance Black-Box Gradient Estimates for the Plackett-Luce Distribution
Artyom Gadetsky,1∗† Kirill Struminsky,1∗ Christopher Robinson,2
‡
Novi Quadrianto,1,2 Dmitry Vetrov1
1

National Research University Higher School of Economics
2
Predictive Analytics Lab (PAL), University of Sussex

(Williams 1992; Mnih and Gregor 2014) remain unreliable and the state-of-the-art methods (Tucker et al. 2017;
Grathwohl et al. 2018; Yin and Zhou 2018) exclusively consider the categorical distribution. Although the reduction to
the categorical case allows beneﬁting from gradient estimators for continuous relaxations, such solutions are hard to
translate to discrete distributions with large support.
In this work, we consider a gradient estimator for the
Plackett-Luce distribution, a distribution over permutations.
Permutations naturally occur in various setting, such as
ranking problems (Guiver and Snelson 2009), optimal routing (Bello et al. 2016) and causal inference (Friedman and
Koller 2003). However, the support of the distribution is superexponential in the number of items k, which makes representing a distribution as a categorical distribution intractable
even for dozens of items. At the same time, the PlackettLuce distribution has O(k) parameters and allows sampling
in O(k log k).
We translate the recent variance reduction techniques
(Tucker et al. 2017; Grathwohl et al. 2018) to the case
of Plackett-Luce distributions. Similarly to REBAR, we
use the difference of the REINFORCE estimator and the
reparametrized estimator for the relaxed model. In particular, we derive the conditional marginalization step (Tucker
et al. 2017) for the Plackett-Luce case. In our experiments,
we recast causal inference tasks as a variational optimization
over permutations and solve it using a gradient optimization
method. We show that our method outperforms competitive
relaxation-based approaches for optimization over permutations (Grover et al. 2019; Mena et al. 2018) for differentiable
score functions and is applicable in a wider range of scenarios.
Our main contributions are the following:

Abstract
Learning models with discrete latent variables using stochastic gradient descent remains a challenge due to the high variance of gradient estimates. Modern variance reduction techniques mostly consider categorical distributions and have limited applicability when the number of possible outcomes becomes large. In this work, we consider models with latent permutations and propose control variates for the Plackett-Luce
distribution. In particular, the control variates allow us to optimize black-box functions over permutations using stochastic
gradient descent. To illustrate the approach, we consider a variety of causal structure learning tasks for continuous and discrete data. We show that our method outperforms competitive
relaxation-based optimization methods and is also applicable
to non-differentiable score functions.

Introduction
The vast majority of modern machine learning advancements share one central method - gradient-based optimization. Stochastic gradients give a scalable solution for learning, applicable when the loss function is too slow to compute due to the size of data or even intractable. The latter
is often the case when the loss function includes an expectation over random latent variables. The objectives of this
kind naturally arise in multiple settings, including probabilistic latent variable models (Neal and Hinton 1998) and
reinforcement learning (Williams 1992). Often the distribution of random variables also depends on the optimizable parameters of the loss function, which in turn makes gradient
estimation harder and less reliable due to the high variance
of stochastic gradients.
Despite the recent breakthroughs in gradient estimation
for continuous latent variables (Kingma and Welling 2013;
Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014; Mohamed et al.
2019), gradient estimation for discrete latent variables remains a challenge. Currently, general-purpose estimators

• We derive a low-variance gradient estimator for the
Plackett-Luce distribution.
• We apply the gradient estimator to solve variational optimization tasks for black-box functions and concentrate
primarily on causal inference tasks for continuous and
discrete data.

∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author. E-mail: artygadetsky@yandex.ru
‡
Samsung-HSE Laboratory
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

• For differentiable functions, we show that relaxationbased gradient optimization does not work out-of-the-box
10126

