The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Back to the Future for Dialogue Research
Philip R. Cohen

Laboratory for Dialogue Research
Faculty of Information Technology
Monash University
philip.cohen@monash.edu

Abstract
This “blue sky” paper argues that future conversational
systems that can engage in multiparty, collaborative dialogues will require a more fundamental approach than existing technology. This paper identifies significant limitations of the state of the art, and argues that our returning to
the plan-based approach to dialogue will provide a stronger
foundation. Finally, I suggest a research strategy that couples neural network-based semantic parsing with planbased reasoning in order to build a collaborative dialogue
manager.

Introduction
Imagine a not-too-distant future in which you have a
household robot or conversational assistant that is designed
to help your family. Of course, as with any family discussing their daily activities, you have the usual heated conversations, agreements, disagreements, etc. What can a household assistant do to help the family and its members
achieve their goals if it cannot even represent the differences much less track their resolution and accommodate
them? In this paper, I argue that current technologies will
not by themselves enable us to build such collaborative
multi-party dialogue systems. Instead, we should revisit a
previous approach, namely that of plan-based dialogue
systems.
A critical requirement of such a system is that it actually
collaborate with its users. People have learned to be helpful at a very young age and are strongly expected to collaborate as part of ordinary social interaction (Warneken
and Tomasello, 20061). Collaborative interaction involves
agents’ being jointly committed to their partners’ success
(Grosz and Sidner, 1990; Cohen and Levesque, 1991). In
doing so, a collaborator recognizes its partner’s plans to
achieve a joint goal, and then performs actions to facilitate
them. In general, people’s plans involve physical (and
now digital) acts, as well as speech acts, such as requests,
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1

Please see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z-eU5xZW7cU

13514

questions, confirmations, etc. When the process of collaboration is applied to communication, people infer the reasons behind their interlocutor’s utterances and attempt to
ensure their success by (at least) telling them what they
need to know to be successful, and by potentially volunteering to perform actions on their behalf. Such reasoning
is apparent when a system responds to the user’s asking
“Where is Dunkirk playing tonight?” with “It’s playing at
the Roxy theater at 7:30pm, however it is sold out.”
Here the literal and truthful answer (shown here in plain
font) would be uncooperative if the respondent knew that
the theater was sold out. On the other hand, we would
want a collaborator to go beyond inferring the user’s plan
by attempting to debug it. If the plan is expected to fail, the
collaborator may develop and suggest (or execute) an alternative plan to achieve the user’s higher-level goal. To
continue the example, a collaborative assistant system
might then say “It’s also showing at the Forum theater tomorrow at 8pm, and tickets are available. Would you like
me to purchase them?” In order to provide such responses, an assistant needs to infer a plan in which people want
to know where an entity is (the location where the movie is
showing), in order to go there (the theater), in order to perform a normal activity done on that entity at that location
(watch a movie). The assistant checks the plan’s preconditions (watching a movie requires that the person has a ticket), and also the applicability conditions (tickets must be
available). If the latter fails, the intention is impossible, so
the system must drop it and attempt to find another plan to
achieve the higher level goal (of having seen the movie).
This collaborative process underlies many conversations.
Overall, except for one-off examples, current assistant
systems are not typically engaging in collaborative behavior. In order to build collaborative systems, research is
needed on joint action, planning, plan recognition, and reasoning about people’s mental and social states (beliefs, desires, goals, intentions, permissions, obligations, etc.).
Plan-based interaction acknowledges that communication
is a special case of purposeful behavior (Allen and Perrault, 1980; Cohen and Perrault, 1979). Plan recognition
involves observing actions and inferring the (structure of)
reasons why those actions were performed, often to enable

