The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Proximal Distilled Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning
Cristian Bodnar, Ben Day, Pietro Lió
Department of Computer Science & Technology
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom
cb2015@cam.ac.uk

cess in evolving DNN-based control policies for complex
environments. Though previous work has shown GAs to
be competitive with other DRL algorithms in discrete environments (Such et al. 2017), they are still signiﬁcantly
less sample efﬁcient than a simple method like Deep QLearning (Mnih et al. 2015). Moreover, in complex robotic
environments with large continuous state and action spaces,
where environment interactions are costly, their sample inefﬁciency is even more acute (Khadka and Tumer 2018),
(Such et al. 2017).
However, in the physical world, evolution and learning
interact in subtle ways. Perhaps, the most famous product of
this interaction is the Baldwin effect (Simpson 1953), which
explains how the genotype can assimilate learnt behaviours
over the course of many generations. A more spectacular byproduct of this interplay, which has received more attention
in recent years, is the epigenetic inheritance of learnt traits
(Dias and Ressler 2013).
Despite these exciting intricacies of learning and evolution, the two have almost always received separate treatment in the ﬁeld of AI. Though they have been analysed
together in computational simulations multiple times (Hinton and Nowlan 1987), (Ackley and Littman 1992), (Suzuki
and Arita 2004), they have rarely been combined to produce
novel algorithms with direct applicability. This is surprising
given that nature has always been a great source of inspiration for AI (Floreano and Mattiussi 2008).
For the ﬁrst time, Khadka and Tumer (2018) have recently demonstrated on robot locomotion tasks the practical
beneﬁts of merging the two approaches in their Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning (ERL) framework. ERL uses
an RL-based agent alongside a genetically evolved population, with a transfer of information between the two. However, ERL has not fully addressed the scalability problem
of GAs. While the gradient information from the RL agent
can signiﬁcantly speed up the evolutionary search, the population of ERL is evolved using traditional variation operators. Paired with directly encoded DNNs, which is the most
common genetic representation in use, we show that these
operators are destructive.
This paper brings the following contributions:

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved impressive performance in many complex environments due to the integration with Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). At the same
time, Genetic Algorithms (GAs), often seen as a competing approach to RL, had limited success in scaling up to the
DNNs required to solve challenging tasks. Contrary to this
dichotomic view, in the physical world, evolution and learning are complementary processes that continuously interact.
The recently proposed Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning
(ERL) framework has demonstrated mutual beneﬁts to performance when combining the two methods. However, ERL
has not fully addressed the scalability problem of GAs. In
this paper, we show that this problem is rooted in an unfortunate combination of a simple genetic encoding for DNNs
and the use of traditional biologically-inspired variation operators. When applied to these encodings, the standard operators are destructive and cause catastrophic forgetting of
the traits the networks acquired. We propose a novel algorithm called Proximal Distilled Evolutionary Reinforcement
Learning (PDERL) that is characterised by a hierarchical integration between evolution and learning. The main innovation of PDERL is the use of learning-based variation operators that compensate for the simplicity of the genetic representation. Unlike traditional operators, our proposals meet the
functional requirements of variation operators when applied
on directly-encoded DNNs. We evaluate PDERL in ﬁve robot
locomotion settings from the OpenAI gym. Our method outperforms ERL, as well as two state-of-the-art RL algorithms,
PPO and TD3, in all tested environments.

Introduction
The ﬁeld of Reinforcement Learning (RL) has recently
achieved great success by producing artiﬁcial agents that can
master the game of Go (Silver et al. 2017), play Atari games
(Mnih et al. 2015) or control robots to perform complex
tasks such as grasping objects (Andrychowicz et al. 2017) or
running (Lillicrap et al. 2015). Most of this success is caused
by the combination of RL with Deep Learning (Goodfellow,
Bengio, and Courville 2016), generically called Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL).
At the same time, Genetic Algorithms (GAs), usually seen
as a competing approach to RL, have achieved limited suc-

• Demonstrates the negative side-effects in RL of the traditional genetic operators when applied to directly encoded
DNNs.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3283

