The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Large-Scale Dataset for Argument Quality Ranking: Construction and Analysis
Shai Gretz,∗ Roni Friedman,∗ Edo Cohen-Karlik,∗ Assaf Toledo,∗
Dan Lahav, Ranit Aharonov, Noam Slonim
IBM Research
{avishaig, roni.friedman-melamed, noams}@il.ibm.com
{edo.cohen, assaf.toledo, dan.lahav, ranit.aharonov}@ibm.com

ment quality, which is the focus of the present work. Detecting argument quality is a prominent task due to its importance in automated decision making (Bench-Capon, Atkinson, and McBurney 2009), argument search (Wachsmuth et
al. 2017b), and writing support (Stab and Gurevych 2014).
Earlier work on assessing argument quality relied on
a comparative pair-wise approach, aiming to identify the
higher-quality argument within each pair of arguments
(Habernal and Gurevych 2016; Simpson and Gurevych
2018). Recently Toledo et al. (2019) proposed a pointwise argument quality prediction scheme, which scales linearly with data size. Correspondingly, here we focus on this
paradigm which is clearly less demanding, especially in scenarios where many arguments should be considered.
A major contribution of this work is introducing a novel
dataset of arguments, carefully annotated for point-wise
quality, IBM-ArgQ-Rank-30kArgs, referred henceforth as
IBM-Rank-30k. The dataset includes around 30k arguments,
5 times larger than the largest annotated point-wise data released to date (Toledo et al. 2019). Similarly to Toledo et al.
(2019), arguments were collected actively – as opposed to
being extracted from debate portals (Habernal and Gurevych
2016) – with strict length limitations, accompanied by extensive quality control measures.
Although a continuous argument quality score seems natural, asking annotators to provide a continuous score per argument will probably introduce a subjective scale that varies
from one annotator to another, hindering downstream analysis. Instead, we take a simpliﬁed approach, asking each
annotator to answer a binary question per argument, indicating if its quality is satisfactory in a particular context.
The question remains, of how to extract a continuous quality
score out of the binary annotations provided by many annotators. Toledo et al. (2019) took a straightforward simpleaverage approach; here, we provide an extensive comparison between potential scoring functions, analyzing the differences between these models, and their impact on training
and evaluating a learning algorithm.
While an exact deﬁnition of argument quality is potentially elusive, it seems clear that it is a function of various
linguistic phenomena. As exempliﬁed in Table 1, low quality
can be manifested by dimensions such as bad grammar and

Abstract
Identifying the quality of free-text arguments has become an
important task in the rapidly expanding ﬁeld of computational
argumentation. In this work, we explore the challenging task
of argument quality ranking. To this end, we created a corpus
of 30,497 arguments carefully annotated for point-wise quality, released as part of this work. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest dataset annotated for point-wise argument quality, larger by a factor of ﬁve than previously released datasets. Moreover, we address the core issue of inducing a labeled score from crowd annotations by performing a comprehensive evaluation of different approaches to
this problem. In addition, we analyze the quality dimensions
that characterize this dataset. Finally, we present a neural
method for argument quality ranking, which outperforms several baselines on our own dataset, as well as previous methods
published for another dataset.

1

Introduction

Computational Argumentation is a rapidly emerging discipline within the Natural Language Processing community
(Reed 2016), dealing with various sub-tasks such as argument detection (Lippi and Torroni 2016; Ein-Dor et al.
2019), stance detection (Bar-Haim et al. 2017) and argument
clustering (Reimers et al. 2019).
Recently, IBM introduced Project Debater, the ﬁrst AI
system able to debate humans on complex topics. The system participated in a live debate against a world champion
debater, and was able to mine arguments, use them for composing a speech supporting its side of the debate, and also
rebut its human competitor.1 The underlying technology is
intended to enhance decision-making.
More recently, IBM also introduced Speech by Crowd,
a service which supports the collection of free-text arguments from large audiences on debatable topics to generate meaningful narratives (Toledo et al. 2019). An important sub-task of this service is automatic assessment of argu∗

These authors equally contributed to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For
more
details:
https://www.research.ibm.com/
artiﬁcial-intelligence/project-debater/live/
7805

