The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unsupervised Deep Learning via Afﬁnity Diffusion
Jiabo Huang,1 Qi Dong,1 Shaogang Gong,1 Xiatian Zhu2
1
Queen Mary University of London, 2 Vision Semantics Limited
{jiabo.huang, q.dong, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk, eddy.zhuxt@gmail.com

There are an increasing number of recent attempts on
unsupervised deep learning (Wu et al. 2018; Huang et al.
2019; Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi 2016; Caron et al. 2018;
Ji, Henriques, and Vedaldi 2019; Haeusser et al. 2018;
Yang, Parikh, and Batra 2016; Yang et al. 2017; Gidaris,
Singh, and Komodakis 2018; Zhang, Isola, and Efros 2017;
Noroozi and Favaro 2016; Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015).
One intuitive strategy is joint learning of feature representations and data clustering (Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi 2016;
Ji, Henriques, and Vedaldi 2019; Caron et al. 2018; Yang et
al. 2017). It aims to automatically discover clustering solutions during training, with each cluster hopefully capturing a
speciﬁc class concept. This objective is extremely hard due
to the numerous combinatorial conﬁgurations of unlabelled
data alongside highly complex inter-class decision boundaries. To avoid clustering errors as well as the following
propagation, instance learning is proposed (Wu et al. 2018;
Bojanowski and Joulin 2017) whereby every single sample
is treated as an independent class. However, this simpliﬁed
supervision is often rather ambiguous particularly around
class centres, therefore, leading to weak class discrimination. As an intermediate representation, tiny neighbourhoods
are leveraged for preserving the advantages of both data
clustering and instance learning (Huang et al. 2019). But this
method is restricted by the small size of local neighbourhoods. Another representative approach is designing effective pretext tasks with supervision labels produced automatically from unlabelled data (Gidaris, Singh, and Komodakis
2018; Zhang, Isola, and Efros 2017; Noroozi and Favaro
2016; Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015). Due to insufﬁcient
correlation with the target class supervision, these methods
often result in less competitive models.

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved unprecedented success in a variety of computer vision tasks.
However, they usually rely on supervised model learning with
the need for massive labelled training data, limiting dramatically their usability and deployability in real-world scenarios
without any labelling budget. In this work, we introduce a
general-purpose unsupervised deep learning approach to deriving discriminative feature representations. It is based on
self-discovering semantically consistent groups of unlabelled
training samples with the same class concepts through a progressive afﬁnity diffusion process. Extensive experiments on
object image classiﬁcation and clustering show the performance superiority of the proposed method over the stateof-the-art unsupervised learning models using six common
image recognition benchmarks including MNIST, SVHN,
STL10, CIFAR10, CIFAR100 and ImageNet.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained in a supervised fashion have signiﬁcantly boosted the state-of-the-art
performance in computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; Girshick 2015; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015). Moreover, the feature representations of a supervised CNN (e.g. trained for classiﬁcation on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015)) generalise to new tasks. Despite
such remarkable success, this approach is limited due to a
number of stringent assumptions. First, supervised model
learning requires enormous labelled datasets to be collected
manually and exhaustively (Dong, Gong, and Zhu 2018;
Dong, Zhu, and Gong 2019). This does not always hold
valid due to high annotation costs. Besides, the beneﬁts
of enlarging labelled datasets may have diminishing returns (Sun et al. 2017). Second, transfer learning becomes
less effective when the target tasks signiﬁcantly differ from
the source task (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016;
Dong, Gong, and Zhu 2017). Due to the only need for access
of unlabelled data typically available at scale, unsupervised
deep learning provides a conceptually generic and scalable
solution to these limitations (Caron et al. 2018).

In this work, we aim to solve the algorithmic limitations
of existing unsupervised deep learning methods. To that end,
we propose a general-purpose Progressive Afﬁnity Diffusion (PAD) method for training unsupervised models. Requiring no prior knowledge of class number, PAD performs
model-matureness-adaptive data group inference in training for more reliably revealing the underlying sample-toclass memberships. This is achieved by progressively selfdiscovering strongly connected subgraphs on a neighbourhood afﬁnity graph via faithful afﬁnity diffusion and formu-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11029

