The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Understanding the Disharmony between
Weight Normalization Family and Weight Decay
Xiang Li,1,2 Shuo Chen,1 Jian Yang1∗
1

DeepInsight@PCALab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Momenta

Abstract
The merits of fast convergence and potentially better performance of the weight normalization family have drawn
increasing attention in recent years. These methods use
standardization or normalization that changes the weight
W to W  , which makes W  independent to the magnitude of W . Surprisingly, W must be decayed during gradient descent, otherwise we will observe a severe underﬁtting problem, which is very counter-intuitive since weight
decay is widely known to prevent deep networks from
over-ﬁtting. Moreover, if we substitute (e.g., weight norW
malization) W  = ||W
in the original loss function
||

 2

1
λ||W
|| , it is observed that the
L(f
(x
;
W
),
y
)
+
i
i
i
2
regularization term 12 λ||W  ||2 will be canceled as a constant
1
λ in the optimization objective. Therefore, to decay W , we
2
need to explicitly append: 12 λ||W ||2 . In this paper, we theoretically prove that 12 λ||W ||2 improves optimization only
by modulating the effective learning rate and fairly has no
inﬂuence on generalization when the weight normalization
family is compositely employed. Furthermore, we also expose several serious problems when introducing weight decay
term to weight normalization family, including the missing of
global minimum, training instability and sensitivity of initialization. To address these problems, we propose an Adaptive
Weight Shrink (AWS) scheme, which gradually shrinks the
weights during optimization by a dynamic coefﬁcient proportional to the magnitude of the parameter. This simple yet
effective method appropriately controls the effective learning
rate, which signiﬁcantly improves the training stability and
makes optimization more robust to initialization.

Figure 1: Counter-intuitive performance degradation (underﬁtting) by setting weight decay parameter λ to 0 for WSequipped convolutions. Top-1 Accuracy via single 224×
crop on the ImageNet training set is plotted.

BN (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015), IN (Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and
Lempitsky 2016), LN (Ba, Kiros, and Hinton 2016), GN
(Wu and He 2018) and SN (Luo et al. 2018). These methods mainly focus on a zero mean and unit variance normalization operation on a speciﬁc dimension (or multiple dimensions) of features, which makes deep neural architectures (He et al. 2016a; 2016b; Huang et al. 2017a;
Wang et al. 2018) much easier to optimize, leading to robust
solutions with favorable generalization performance.
Beyond feature normalization, there is an increasing interest on the normalization of network weights. Weight Normalization (WN) (Salimans and Kingma 2016) ﬁrst separates the learning of the length and direction of weights, and
it performs satisfactorily on several relatively small datasets.
In some contexts of generative adversarial networks (GAN)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014), Weight Normalization with Translated ReLU (Xiang and Li 2017) is shown to achieve superior results. Later, Centered Weight Normalization (CWN)
(Huang et al. 2017b) further powers WN by additionally
centering their input weights, ulteriorly improving the conditioning and convergence speed. Recently, very similar to
CWN, Weight Standardization (WS) (Qiao et al. 2019) aims
to standardize the weights with zero mean and unit variance.
On the large-scale tasks (ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) clas-

Introduction
The normalization methodologies on features have made
great progress in recent years, with the introduction of
∗
Xiang Li, Shuo Chen and Jian Yang are with PCA
Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for
High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology. (E-mail: (xiang.li.implus, shuochen, csjyang)@njust.edu.cn). Xiang Li is also
a visiting scholar at Momenta. (Corresponding author: Jian Yang)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4715

