The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Top-Down RST Parsing Utilizing Granularity Levels in Documents
Naoki Kobayashi,1 Tsutomu Hirao,2 Hidetaka Kamigaito,1 Manabu Okumura,2 Masaaki Nagata1
1

Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
{kobayasi, kamigaito}@lr.pi.titech.ac.jp, {tsutomu.hirao.kp, masaaki.nagata.et}@hco.ntt.co.jp,
oku@pi.titech.ac.jp
2

_PPh

Abstract

Elaboration



Some downstream NLP tasks exploit discourse dependency
trees converted from RST trees. To obtain better discourse dependency trees, we need to improve the accuracy of RST trees
at the upper parts of the structures. Thus, we propose a novel
neural top-down RST parsing method. Then, we exploit three
levels of granularity in a document, paragraphs, sentences and
Elementary Discourse Units (EDUs), to parse a document accurately and efﬁciently. The parsing is done in a top-down
manner for each granularity level, by recursively splitting a
larger text span into two smaller ones while predicting nuclearity and relation labels for the divided spans. The results
on the RST-DT corpus show that our method achieved the
state-of-the-art results, 87.0 unlabeled span score, 74.6 nuclearity labeled span score, and the comparable result with
the state-of-the-art, 60.0 relation labeled span score. Furthermore, discourse dependency trees converted from our RST
trees also achieved the state-of-the-art results, 64.9 unlabeled
attachment score and 48.5 labeled attachment score.

Condition



L

a Elaboration

a

L
e1

L

L

List

Same-Unit

L

L Elaboration L
L

a

e4
e3
 Elaboration

e5

e2

a

e6

e7

Figure 1: The procedure of determining the parent of e4 . N,
S and e indicate nucleus, satellite and EDU, respectively.

Hirao et al. 2013), question-answering (Jansen, Surdeanu,
and Clark 2014), sentiment analysis (Bhatia, Ji, and Eisenstein 2015), and text categorization (Ji and Smith 2017).
Most of them rely on discourse dependency trees, that explicitly express parent-child relationships between EDUs,
converted from RST trees. When determining the parent of
an EDU, the following procedure is usually applied: (1) Find
the nearest satellite from the ancestors of the EDU. (2) From
the sibling nucleus of the nearest satellite, follow only nuclei
downward in the tree and ﬁnd the leftmost descendant EDU.
(3) Then assign the EDU as its parent. Fig. 1 shows an example. Here, consider a case where a parser built an RST tree
with swapped N/S labels for the children of the root node.
Since the number of incorrect labeling is only two, the nuclearity labeled span score is .85(=11/13). However, parentchild relationships between EDUs are drastically changed
by the swap. The unlabeled attachment score (UAS) of the
discourse dependency tree is .43(=3/7). On the other hand,
in a case of swapping N/S labels for the parents of e4 and
e5 , the nuclearity labeled span score is still .85(=11/13) but
we obtain better UAS, .71(=5/7). Thus, inaccuracies in the
upper parts of an RST tree cause a critical problem for the
dependency conversion. That is, we need to develop an RST
parser that can build RST trees with accurate upper parts to
obtain good discourse dependency trees for improving the

Introduction
A discourse structure of a document can be represented as
a tree, like a syntactic structure of a sentence being represented as a tree. Rhetorical structure theory (RST) (Mann
and Thompson 1987) is well-known and has been widely
studied for representing a document as a tree. An RST tree is
a type of constituent tree, whose terminal nodes (leaves) are
elementary discourse units (EDUs), clause-like units, and
whose non-terminal nodes represent the nuclearity status,
nucleus or satellite, for the span that consists of a sequence
of EDUs or a single EDU. The span dominated by a nucleus
is more essential than the one dominated by a satellite. That
is, the satellite has a role of supporting the nucleus. Furthermore, rhetorical relations are deﬁned between two adjacent
spans. A mono-nuclear relation, such as ”Elaboration” or
”Condition”, is assigned between a nucleus and its satellite,
and a multi-nuclear relation, such as ”Same-unit” or ”Topicchange”, is assigned between two nuclei.
RST trees have important roles in natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as summarization (Marcu 1998;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8099

