The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Optimal Decision Trees Using Caching Branch-and-Bound Search
Gaël Aglin, Siegfried Nijssen, Pierre Schaus
ﬁrstname.lastname@uclouvain.be
ICTEAM, UCLouvain
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium

• the trees found are accurate while satisfying additional
constraints such as on the fairness of the trees: in their
predictions, the trees may favor one group of individuals
over another.

Abstract
Several recent publications have studied the use of Mixed
Integer Programming (MIP) for ﬁnding an optimal decision
tree, that is, the best decision tree under formal requirements on accuracy, fairness or interpretability of the predictive model. These publications used MIP to deal with the hard
computational challenge of ﬁnding such trees. In this paper,
we introduce a new efﬁcient algorithm, DL8.5, for ﬁnding
optimal decision trees, based on the use of itemset mining
techniques. We show that this new approach outperforms earlier approaches with several orders of magnitude, for both numerical and discrete data, and is generic as well. The key idea
underlying this new approach is the use of a cache of itemsets
in combination with branch-and-bound search; this new type
of cache also stores results for parts of the search space that
have been traversed partially.

With the increasing interest in explainable and fair models
in machine learning, recent years have witnessed a renewed
interest in alternative algorithms for learning decision trees
that can provide such optimality guarantees.
Most attention has been given in recent years and in
prominent venues to approaches based on mixed integer programming (Bertsimas and Dunn 2017; Verwer and Zhang
2019; Aghaei, Azizi, and Vayanos 2019). In these approaches, a limit is imposed on the depth of the trees that
can be learned and a MIP solver is used to ﬁnd the optimal
tree under well-deﬁned constraints.
However, earlier algorithms for ﬁnding optimal decision
trees under constraints have been studied in the literature,
of which we consider the DL8 algorithm of particular interest (Nijssen and Fromont 2007; 2010). The existence of this
earlier work does not appear to have been known to the authors of the more recent MIP-based approaches, and hence,
no comparison with this earlier work was carried out.
DL8 is based on a different set of ideas than the MIPbased approaches: it treats the paths of a decision tree as
itemsets, and uses ideas from the itemset mining literature
(Agrawal et al. 1996) to search through the space of possible
paths efﬁciently, performing dynamic programming over the
itemsets to construct an optimal decision tree. Compared to
the MIP-based approaches, which most prominently rely on
a constraint on depth, DL8 stresses the use of a minimum
support constraint to limit the size of the search space. It was
shown to support a number of different optimization criteria
and constraints that do not necessarily have to be linear.
In this paper, we present a number of contributions. We
will demonstrate that DL8 can also be applied in settings in
which MIP-based approaches have been used; we will show
that, despite its age, it outperforms the more modern MIPbased approaches signiﬁcantly, and is hence an interesting
starting point for future algorithms.
Subsequently, we will present DL8.5, an improved version of DL8 that outperforms DL8 by orders of magnitude.
Compared to DL8, DL8.5 adds a number of novel ideas:

Introduction
Decision trees are among the most widely used machine
learning models. Their success is due to the fact that they
are simple to interpret and that there are efﬁcient algorithms
for learning trees of acceptable quality.
The most well-known algorithms for learning decision
trees, such as CART (Breiman et al. 1984) and C4.5 (Quinlan 1993), are greedy in nature: they grow the decision tree
top-down, iteratively splitting the data into subsets.
While in general these algorithms learn models of good
accuracy, their greedy nature, in combination with the NPhardness of the learning problem (Laurent and Rivest 1976),
implies that the trees that are found are not necessarily optimal. As a result, these algorithms do not ensure that:
• the trees found are the most accurate for a given limit on
the depth of the tree; as a result, the paths towards decisions may be longer and harder to interpret than necessary;
• the trees found are the most accurate for a given lower
bound on the number of training examples used to determine class labels in the leaves of the tree;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3146

