The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Querying to Find a Safe Policy under
Uncertain Safety Constraints in Markov Decision Processes
Shun Zhang, Edmund H. Durfee, Satinder Singh
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan
{shunzh, durfee, baveja}@umich.edu

We can see that in this example, without communicating
with the human, the robot could not ﬁnd a safe policy since
all the paths that reach the switch side effect some other objects. So we allow the robot to ask clarifying queries (for
example, “Can I move box b1 away?”). The robot ﬁnds a
policy that is known to be safe when it queries and is explicitly told that the carpet can be dirty, or b1 is movable and
d2 can be opened, etc. Our main focus is on how the robot
should ask the minimum number of queries in expectation to
either ﬁnd a safe policy or prove that no safe policy exists.
The literature has explored the problem of avoiding negative side-effects (Amodei et al. 2016; Leike et al. 2017;
Turner, Hadﬁeld-Menell, and Tadepalli 2019). Our prior
work (Zhang, Durfee, and Singh 2018) considered a similar problem, with the major difference being that we there
assumed the robot initially knows a safe policy (to reach the
switch without side effecting any objects other than ones it
knows it can) and queries to ﬁnd a maximally better safe
policy. In our problem here, since no initial safe policy is
known, our prior algorithm cannot be applied. This paper’s
contribution thus is to answer the question of how the robot
should query to ﬁnd a safe policy or prove that no safe policies actually exist when initially no safe policies are known.
Essentially, our problem is to query to satisfy safety constraints rather than to optimize a policy under safety constraints, which requires a very different approach despite the
setting being similar. Note that once the robot has found a
safe policy, if it can still ask more queries then it can use the
prior algorithms to pose queries to improve the policy.
In this paper, we make the following contributions: 1) We
formulate the problem of ﬁnding an initial safe policy in a
factored Markov decision process. 2) We design a query algorithm that makes novel use of prior work on irreducible infeasible sets and adaptive submodularity. 3) Empirically, we

Abstract
An autonomous agent acting on behalf of a human user has
the potential of causing side-effects that surprise the user
in unsafe ways. When the agent cannot formulate a policy
with only side-effects it knows are safe, it needs to selectively query the user about whether other useful side-effects
are safe. Our goal is an algorithm that queries about as few
potential side-effects as possible to ﬁnd a safe policy, or to
prove that none exists. We extend prior work on irreducible
infeasible sets to also handle our problem’s complication that
a constraint to avoid a side-effect cannot be relaxed without
user permission. By proving that our objectives are also adaptive submodular, we devise a querying algorithm that we empirically show ﬁnds nearly-optimal queries with much less
computation than a guaranteed-optimal approach, and outperforms competing approximate approaches.

Introduction
We consider a setting where an autonomous agent (called
the “robot”) takes actions in a domain on behalf of a human user (called the “human”). The human speciﬁes a goal
or a reward function for the robot to optimize. However, in
practice, she might overlook specifying some preferences, or
purposely leave out details she (possibly incorrectly) thinks
are irrelevant or already known by the robot.
For example, Figure 1 shows a robot navigation domain
modiﬁed from our prior work (Zhang, Durfee, and Singh
2018). The human asks the robot to turn off a switch in the
top-right corner. After planning, the robot could follow several possible policies. It could traverse the carpet (π1 ), but
get the carpet dirty. It could enter the room through door d1
and then move away box b1 or b2, open door d2, and go
to the switch (π2 or π3 respectively). However, the robot is
only told to change (turn off) the switch. Dirtying a carpet,
moving boxes, or opening a door may be changes that negatively surprise the human, and thus executing any of these
policies is potentially not safe. That is, because the robot
might be new to this building, it may be uncertain about the
safety constraints and human preferences here.

E

G

E
E
FDUSHW

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

ʌ

G
ʌ

G
ʌ

Figure 1: The robot navigation domain.
2552

