The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Shallow Feature Based Dense Attention Network for Crowd Counting
Yunqi Miao,1 Zijia Lin,2 Guiguang Ding,3 Jungong Han1∗
1

University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
3
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
1
{Yunqi.Miao.1, Jungong.Han}@warwick.ac.uk
2
zijlin@microsoft.com
3
dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
While the performance of crowd counting via deep learning
has been improved dramatically in the recent years, it remains an ingrained problem due to cluttered backgrounds and
varying scales of people within an image. In this paper, we
propose a Shallow feature based Dense Attention Network
(SDANet) for crowd counting from still images, which diminishes the impact of backgrounds via involving a shallow feature based attention model, and meanwhile, captures multiscale information via densely connecting hierarchical image
features. Speciﬁcally, inspired by the observation that backgrounds and human crowds generally have noticeably different responses in shallow features, we decide to build our attention model upon shallow-feature maps, which results in
accurate background-pixel detection. Moreover, considering
that the most representative features of people across different scales can appear in different layers of a feature extraction
network, to better keep them all, we propose to densely connect hierarchical image features of different layers and subsequently encode them for estimating crowd density. Experimental results on three benchmark datasets clearly demonstrate the superiority of SDANet when dealing with different scenarios. Particularly, on the challenging UCF CC 50
dataset, our method outperforms other existing methods by
a large margin, as is evident from a remarkable 11.9% Mean
Absolute Error (MAE) drop of our SDANet.

(a) Background noise

(b) Scale variation

Figure 1: Illustrations of the problems of cluttered backgrounds and varying scales of people. In (a), the right picture
depicts the estimated density map of the left image, where
backgrounds like the umbrella (in red box) could be mistakenly regarded as people in the density map and thus decrease the estimation accuracy. In (b), sizes of human heads
(in green boxes) vary greatly within the image due to their
different distances from the camera.

learning the mappings from image features to density distribution maps, i.e., 1) how to eliminate the impacts of cluttered backgrounds, and 2) how to deal with varying scales of
people within an image. Figure 1 illustrates both mentioned
problems. Speciﬁcally, in Figure 1(a), the right picture depicts the estimated density map of the left image, derived by
the MCNN model (Zhang et al. 2016). It can be noticed that
backgrounds, e.g., umbrellas, could be mistakenly regarded
as people on the density map, thus decreasing the estimation
accuracy. Meanwhile, as illustrated in Figure 1(b), sizes of
human heads can vary greatly within an image, because of
their different distances from the camera.
To eliminate noises caused by cluttered backgrounds, attention mechanism is usually introduced to re-weigh features or regions in terms of their probabilities of being the
crowds. Generally, additional training samples and parameters are employed to train standalone classiﬁers indicating
density levels (Sam, Surya, and Babu 2017) or head probability (Liu et al. 2019) as the metric to evaluate the importance of different features/regions within an image, on
the basis of which, different weights are given to the features/regions. However, standalone networks with complex
structures usually require millions of extra to-be-learned parameters, which can be a heavy burden for a real-life application.

Introduction
Crowd counting aims to count the number of people by
means of estimating the density distribution of the crowd
in a single image. It is a very useful computer vision technique to facilitate a variety of applications, including crowd
control, disaster management and public safety monitoring.
However, it is not a trivial task due to great challenges in
real-world situations caused by cluttered backgrounds and
non-uniform people scale within an image.
Tremendous algorithms (Zhang et al. 2016; Li, Zhang,
and Chen 2018; Jiang et al. 2019) have been proposed in the
literature for estimating the crowd density distribution. The
majority of them focused on addressing two problems when
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11765

