The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Deep Relations to Promote Saliency Detection
Changrui Chen,1 Xin Sun,∗,1 Yang Hua,2 Junyu Dong,1 Hongwei Xv1
1

Ocean University of China, 2 Queen’s University Belfast
{ccr, xhw}@stu.ouc.edu.cn, Y.Hua@qub.ac.uk, {sunxin, junyudong}@ouc.edu.cn

Abstract
Though saliency detectors has made stunning progress recently. The performances of the state-of-the-art saliency detectors are not acceptable in some confusing areas, e.g., object boundary. We argue that the feature spatial independence
should be one of the root cause. This paper explores the ubiquitous relations on the deep features to promote the existing saliency detectors efﬁciently. We establish the relation
by maximizing the mutual information of the deep features
of the same category via deep neural networks to break this
independence. We introduce a threshold-constrained training
pair construction strategy to ensure that we can accurately
estimate the relations between different image parts in a selfsupervised way. The relation can be utilized to further excavate the salient areas and inhibit confusing backgrounds.
The experiments demonstrate that our method can signiﬁcantly boost the performance of the state-of-the-art saliency
detectors on various benchmark datasets. Besides, our model
is label-free and extremely efﬁcient. The inference speed is
140 FPS on a single GTX1080 GPU.

1

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: Illustration of the saliency result reﬁnement. (a)
The example natural image. (b) The result of the UCF
(Zhang et al. 2017b) saliency detector. The green dash line
surrounds the missing saliency area. The blue dash line indicates the fake saliency area. We can use relations, marked by
the yellow arrow, to remedy the saliency result. (c) The wavering boundary. (d) The ground truth (GT). (e) The result
reﬁned by our method. The missing component surrounded
by the green dashed line appears. (f) The highlight of the
boundary reﬁned by our method

Introduction

In the deep learning era, deep neural networks based models signiﬁcantly boost the performance of saliency detection.
Nevertheless, these models are also unsure about some confusing saliency area. As shown in ﬁgure 1c, the saliency detector makes a wavering prediction on the boundary part.
Furthermore, component missing, shown in ﬁgure 1b, is also
a common problem in the saliency prediction.
However, human beings can easily distinguish all parts of
an object. Most of the DNNs based saliency detectors are
derived versions of the FCNs (Shelhamer, Long, and Darrell 2016). In the common training strategy of the FCNs, the
feature vector at each pixel is assigned with an independent
ground truth label. The neighbor feature vectors have little
communication during the training and inference phases. We
call this phenomenon feature spatial independence. Different from these FCNs, human beings can utilize the color
similarity, material texture, and edge coherence to assist object perception. Consequently, we believe that the feature
spatial independence should be one of the root cause of the
above-mentioned problems in saliency detection.

We consider using the relation to break the independence. Some conventional methods such as DenseCRFs
(Krähenbühl and Koltun 2013) use the conventional features
such as RGB value to build the relation. There is no doubt
that the deep features are more representative than the conventional features. In this paper, we build deep relations to
break independence between deep feature vectors. Beneﬁting from the deep relations, our method can not only eliminate the unconﬁrmed area (e.g., ﬁgure 1e is the reﬁned result) but also enhance the blurry edge (e.g., ﬁgure 1f). To
establish the relations between deep features, we appeal to
mutual information (MI) (Kullback 1962), which is widely

∗
Prof.Sun is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 

Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10510

