The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Implicit Coordination Using FOND Planning
Thorsten Engesser

Tim Miller

Department of Computer Science
University of Freiburg, Germany
engesser@cs.uni-freiburg.de

School of Computing and Information Systems
University of Melbourne, Australia
tmiller@unimelb.edu.au

One example for the application of implicit coordination
is the multi-agent path ﬁnding with destination uncertainty
(MAPF/DU) problem, which was ﬁrst described by Bolander et al. (2018) and analyzed more thoroughly by Nebel
et al. (2019). It is a generalization of the multi-agent path
ﬁnding problem, relaxing the assumption that the agents’
destinations are commonly known. Instead, it is assumed
that each agent has a set of potential destinations which is
commonly known and which is disjoint to each of the other
agents’ potential destination sets. Also, each agent knows
its own actual destination. As their ﬁnal action, agents are
allowed to reveal that they have arrived at their actual destination. Using implicit coordination, agents will clear the
way for one agent to reach any of its potential destinations,
if they know that after the agent has moved to any of these
destination candidates and announces success, the remaining problem can be solved analogously.

Abstract
Epistemic planning can be used to achieve implicit coordination in cooperative multi-agent settings where knowledge
and capabilities are distributed between the agents. In these
scenarios, agents plan and act on their own without having
to agree on a common plan or protocol beforehand. However, epistemic planning is undecidable in general. In this paper, we show how implicit coordination can be achieved in a
simpler, propositional setting by using nondeterminism as a
means to allow the agents to take the other agents’ perspectives. We identify a decidable fragment of epistemic planning that allows for arbitrary initial state uncertainty and nondeterminism, but where actions can never increase the uncertainty of the agents. We show that in this fragment, planning for implicit coordination can be reduced to a version
of fully observable nondeterministic (FOND) planning and
that it thus has the same computational complexity as FOND
planning. We provide a small case study, modeling the problem of multi-agent path ﬁnding with destination uncertainty
in FOND, to show that our approach can be successfully applied in practice.

Another interesting application for implicit coordination
is the cooperative card game Hanabi, which has gained some
attention recently (Bard et al. 2019). The objective is to score
points by putting down the cards on the table in an ascending order. However, players only see the other players’ cards.
They have to use actions with which they can hint the colors
and values of cards to the others. While the concept of implicit coordination by epistemic perspective taking has been
deﬁned only for achievement goals so far, we think that it
can be generalized to optimization problems like maximizing the expected score in Hanabi (Reifsteck et al. 2019).

Introduction
Epistemic planning has gained increasing interest in recent
years (Baral et al. 2017). One of the main features of epistemic planning is the support of knowledge goals. For example, epistemic planning is well-suited to model problems
in which information is to be conﬁdentially passed between
agents. The assumption is usually that the agents act with respect to a centralized plan. However, recent work has shown
that epistemic planning can also be used to achieve implicit
coordination in a setting where multiple agents plan and act
for themselves towards a joint goal (Engesser et al. 2017).
The idea is that the explicit modeling of the agents’ knowledge can be exploited as a means to enforce coordination
via perspective taking. In particular, by putting themselves
into the shoes of the others, agents can account for possible
contributions of other agents in their own plans. Bolander
et al. (2018) showed under which conditions such plans are
guaranteed to be successful.

The problem of planning for implicit coordination was
originally formalized as a variant of contingent planning in
the space of epistemic states (i.e., Kripke models), with actions represented by the action models from Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL) (van Ditmarsch, van der Hoek, and Kooi
2007). The formalization is similar to the one of Bolander and Andersen (2011), which produces sequential plans.
Bolander and Andersen have shown that this type of epistemic planning is undecidable in general. However, some
decidable fragments have been identiﬁed that rely on restricting the structure of action models and the form of allowed preconditions (Aucher and Bolander 2013; Bolander,
Jensen, and Schwarzentruber 2015; Charrier, Maubert, and
Schwarzentruber 2016). On the practical side, Kominis and

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7151

