The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Expectation-Aware Planning: A Unifying Framework for
Synthesizing and Executing Self-Explaining Plans for Human-Aware Planning
Sarath Sreedharan,1 Tathagata Chakraborti,2 Christian Muise,2 Subbarao Kambhampati1
1

CIDSE, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281 USA
2
IBM Research AI, Cambridge, MA, USA
{ssreedh3, rao}@asu.edu, {tchakra2, christian.muise}@ibm.com
(Chakraborti, Sreedharan, and Kambhampati 2019)), we are
unaware of any existing works that are able to capitalize on
the agent’s ability to effect and leverage human expectations
through behavior, or explicit communication, for these two
purposes.
Our formulation, on the other hand, leads to what may be
best described as self-explaining plans with the plan now
containing actions that are responsible for explaining the
rest of the plan. Such explanations may be delivered by
purely communicative actions (thereby allowing for explanations as studied in (Chakraborti et al. 2017)) that are meant
to update the human’s mental model or task level actions
that could also have epistemic side effects (thereby allowing for actions of the type studied in (Kwon, Huang, and
Dragan 2018)). Additionally, the framework allows for selecting plans that aligns with human expectations whenever
possible. Our contributions are thus two-fold:

Abstract
In this work, we present a new planning formalism called
Expectation-Aware planning for decision making with humans in the loop where the human’s expectations about an
agent may differ from the agent’s own model. We show how
this formulation allows agents to not only leverage existing
strategies for handling model differences like explanations
(Chakraborti et al. 2017) and explicability (Kulkarni et al.
2019), but can also exhibit novel behaviors that are generated through the combination of these different strategies.
Our formulation also reveals a deep connection to existing
approaches in epistemic planning. Speciﬁcally, we show how
we can leverage classical planning compilations for epistemic
planning to solve Expectation-Aware planning problems. To
the best of our knowledge, the proposed formulation is the
ﬁrst complete solution to planning with diverging user expectations that is amenable to a classical planning compilation while successfully combining previous works on explanation and explicability. We empirically show how our approach provides a computational advantage over our earlier
approaches that rely on search in the space of models.

- We present the ﬁrst uniﬁcation of various threads of planning with differing human expectation: including acting
in-accordance with the human expectation (explicability),
bridging model asymmetry through implicit (epistemic
effects of plan execution on the mental model) and explicit communication (explanations).

Introduction
One of the greatest challenges in designing agents that can
work with humans is in making sure that the agents are capable of acting in a manner that is interpretable to the humans. A major barrier towards achieving ﬂuent collaboration occurs when the human’s expectations regarding the
agent’s capabilities and preferences differ from reality. Such
knowledge asymmetry implies that even in cases where the
agent is coming up with the best decisions it can, the human
would not be able to agree to the quality of that plan. Previous works have proposed two strategies to handle this: (1)
provide information that reconciles the model differences,
either through explicit communication (Chakraborti et al.
2017) or by performing actions that convey robots capabilities (Kwon, Huang, and Dragan 2018) (2) or by acting
in a manner that aligns with human expectations (Zhang et
al. 2017). While each of these are reasonable strategies on
their own, for the agent to be truly effective we would want
it to be capable of combining the strengths of each. While
there exists some initial works in this direction (for example

- We show how our formulation is complete (as compared to our previous attempt at a balanced approach in
(Chakraborti, Sreedharan, and Kambhampati 2019)) and
also lends itself to compilation to classical planning. The
latter provides signiﬁcant computational advantage with
respect to existing algorithms that search directly in the
space of models.

Background
We will assume that the planning models used by both
the human and the robot are represented as classical planning problems described by the tuple M = F, A, I, G, C
(Geffner and Bonet 2013), where F is the set of propositional ﬂuents used to describe the planning task states, A
the set of actions, I the initial state, G the goal. Each action
a ∈ A is further deﬁned as a tuple a = preca , addsa , delsa ,
where preca is its preconditions, and addsa and delsa are its
add and delete effects. The precondition is a propositional
formula deﬁned over state ﬂuents such that an action a can
only be executed in a state S if S |= preca . The effects are

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2518

