The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FFA-Net: Feature Fusion Attention Network for Single Image Dehazing
Xu Qin,1* Zhilin Wang,2∗ Yuanchao Bai,1 Xiaodong Xie,1† Huizhu Jia1
1

School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
{qinxu, yuanchao.bai, donxie, hzjia}@pku.edu.cn, 007wangzhilin@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end feature fusion attention network (FFA-Net) to directly restore the haze-free
image. The FFA-Net architecture consists of three key components:
1) A novel Feature Attention (FA) module combines Channel Attention with Pixel Attention mechanism, considering
that different channel-wise features contain totally different
weighted information and haze distribution is uneven on the
different image pixels. FA treats different features and pixels unequally, which provides additional ﬂexibility in dealing
with different types of information, expanding the representational ability of CNNs. 2) A basic block structure consists of
Local Residual Learning and Feature Attention, Local Residual Learning allowing the less important information such as
thin haze region or low-frequency to be bypassed through
multiple local residual connections, let main network architecture focus on more effective information. 3) An Attentionbased different levels Feature Fusion (FFA) structure, the feature weights are adaptively learned from the Feature Attention (FA) module, giving more weight to important features.
This structure can also retain the information of shallow layers and pass it into deep layers.
The experimental results demonstrate that our proposed FFANet surpasses previous state-of-the-art single image dehazing
methods by a very large margin both quantitatively and qualitatively, boosting the best published PSNR metric from 30.23
dB to 36.39 dB on the SOTS indoor test dataset. Code has
been made available at GitHub.

Figure 1: An example of image dehazing. (a) Input hazy image. (b) Ground Truth. (c) Result of GCANet. (d) Our result. Our FFA-Net outperforms GCANet in image detail and
color ﬁdelity.
image input will make it difﬁcult to solve the other visual
tasks such as classiﬁcation, tracking, person re-identiﬁcation
and object detection. In view of this, image dehazing aims to
recover the clean image from the corrupted input, this will be
the preprocessing step of the high-level vision tasks. The atmosphere scattering model (Cartney 1976)(Narasimhan and
Nayar 2000)(Narasimhan and Nayar 2002) provides a simple approximation of the haze effect, it is formulated as:

Introduction

I(z) = J (z)t(z) + A(1 − t(z))

Single image dehazing as a fundamental low-level vision
task, has attracted increasing attention in the computer vision community and artiﬁcial intelligence companies over
the past few decades.
Due to the existence of smoke, dust, fumes, mist and other
ﬂoating particles in the atmosphere, images taken in such atmosphere are often subject to color distortion, blurring, low
contrast and other visible quality degradation, and the hazy

(1)

Where I(z) is the observed hazy image, A is the global
atmosphere light, and t(z) is the medium transmission map,
J (z) is the haze-free image. Moreover, we have t(z) =
e−βd(z) with β and d(z) being the atmosphere scattering parameter and the scene depth, respectively. The atmosphere
scattering model shows that image dehazing is an underdetermined problem without the knowledge of A and t(z).
Formulation (1) can also be formulated as:

∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

J (z) =
11908

(I(z) − A)
+A
t(z)

(2)

