The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Shoreline: Data-Driven Threshold Estimation of
Online Reserves of Cryptocurrency Trading Platforms
Xitong Zhang

He Zhu

Jiayu Zhou

Michigan State University
zhangxit@msu.edu

OceanEx Labs, BitOcean Global
hezhu@bitocean.org

Michigan State University
jiayuz@msu.edu

blockchain system Libra (Facebook 2019) further paves the
way to mass adoption of blockchain in individual users.
The economic foundation of blockchain projects is the
cryptocurrencies, which are digital assets being transacted
on the blockchains. The market value of the cryptocurrency
principally reﬂects the economic value of a blockchain. At
cryptocurrency exchanges, those who possess cryptocurrencies can use the currency in blockchains to exchange other
digital assets and ‘cash out’ ﬁat. As such, exchanges are in
the center of the blockchain economy and enable the liquidity of cryptocurrencies to ﬂow among different parties.
Similar to traditional exchanges, such as stock brokerage
exchanges and foreign exchange markets, a blockchain exchange manages accounts to accept deposits from, and issue withdraws to its customers, builds and maintains order
books for the customers to trade at speciﬁc prices. However, different from traditional ﬁnancial systems where ﬁats transactions are being settled between real persons, each
blockchain transaction is between two addresses and is considered ﬁnalized once the sender signs the transaction by the
corresponding private key. Such anonymity has brought signiﬁcant security risks to crypto exchanges. For example, if
a hacker managed to control a compromised server of the
crypto exchange and steals the private key, the hacker can
immediately withdraw all the assets in the exchange by signing a transaction to one of his/her addresses using the stolen
private key.
The private key that is stored in the exchange server and
programmatically signs transactions when a customer requests a withdraw is referred to as a hot wallet. The hot
wallet has been the most critical vulnerability of cryptoexchanges, and it has been reported that all-time amount
hacked from crypto-exchanges until 2018 is over $1.5 billion (Larcheveque 2018). Technically, the private key is a
random number, and the signing is a deterministic algorithm,
which means signing a transaction can be done completed in
a disconnected computer, and the signed transaction can be
broadcasted to the blockchain nodes in another computer.
This ofﬂine signing technique is called cold storage, and the
ofﬂine private keys are usually called cold wallets.
Even though the cold wallets can be almost impossible
to hack, the hot wallet cannot be entirely replaced by cold

Abstract
With the proliferation of blockchain projects and applications, cryptocurrency exchanges, which provides exchange
services among different types of cryptocurrencies, become
pivotal platforms that allow customers to trade digital assets on different blockchains. Because of the anonymity and
trustlessness nature of cryptocurrency, one major challenge of
crypto-exchanges is asset safety, and all-time amount hacked
from crypto-exchanges until 2018 is over $1.5 billion even
with carefully maintained secure trading systems. The most
critical vulnerability of crypto-exchanges is from the socalled hot wallet, which is used to store a certain portion
of the total asset of an exchange and programmatically sign
transactions when a withdraw happens. Whenever hackers
managed to gain control over the computing infrastructure of
the exchange, they usually immediately obtain all the assets
in the hot wallet. It is important to develop network security
mechanisms. However, the fact is that there is no guarantee
that the system can defend all attacks. Thus, accurately controlling the available assets in the hot wallets becomes the key
to minimize the risk of running an exchange. However, determining such optimal threshold remains a challenging task because of the complicated dynamics inside exchanges. In this
paper, we propose S HORELINE, a deep learning-based threshold estimation framework that estimates the optimal threshold
of hot wallets from historical wallet activities and dynamic
trading networks. We conduct extensive empirical studies on
the real trading data from a trading platform and demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

Introduction
Ever since the introduction of the blockchain design in
early 2013 (Nakamoto and others 2008), the technology
has attracted signiﬁcant interests from various companies
and is transforming many industries. Notably, its immutability and tamper detection provide a revolutionary infrastructure for the supply chain management that provides trustless veriﬁcation among different parties. Also, it leads to
the revolution of ﬁnance that provides real-time and lowcost transactions built upon its decentralized governance and
trustless transactions. Facebook’s recent payment oriented
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1194

