The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Optimize Variational
Quantum Circuits to Solve Combinatorial Problems
Sami Khairy,1 Ruslan Shaydulin,2 Lukasz Cincio,3 Yuri Alexeev,4 Prasanna Balaprakash4
1

Illinois Institute of Technology, 2 Clemson University, 3 Los Alamos National Laboratory, 4 Argonne National Laboratory
skhairy@hawk.iit.edu, rshaydu@g.clemson.edu, lcincio@lanl.gov, {yuri, pbalapra}@anl.gov

The Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm
(QAOA) is one of the leading candidate algorithms for
achieving quantum advantage in the near term. QAOA is a
hybrid quantum-classical algorithm for approximately solving combinatorial problems (Farhi, Goldstone, and Gutmann
2014). QAOA combines a parameterized quantum state evolution that is performed on a NISQ device, with a classical
optimizer that is used to ﬁnd optimal parameters. Conceivably, the quality of the solution produced by QAOA for a
given combinatorial instance depends on the quality of the
variational parameters found by the classical optimizer. Designing robust optimization methods for QAOA is therefore
a prerequisite for achieving a practical quantum advantage.

Abstract
Quantum computing is a computational paradigm with the
potential to outperform classical methods for a variety of
problems. Proposed recently, the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) is considered as one of the
leading candidates for demonstrating quantum advantage
in the near term. QAOA is a variational hybrid quantumclassical algorithm for approximately solving combinatorial
optimization problems. The quality of the solution obtained
by QAOA for a given problem instance depends on the performance of the classical optimizer used to optimize the variational parameters. In this paper, we formulate the problem of
ﬁnding optimal QAOA parameters as a learning task in which
the knowledge gained from solving training instances can be
leveraged to ﬁnd high-quality solutions for unseen test instances. To this end, we develop two machine-learning-based
approaches. Our ﬁrst approach adopts a reinforcement learning (RL) framework to learn a policy network to optimize
QAOA circuits. Our second approach adopts a kernel density estimation (KDE) technique to learn a generative model
of optimal QAOA parameters. In both approaches, the training procedure is performed on small-sized problem instances
that can be simulated on a classical computer; yet the learned
RL policy and the generative model can be used to efﬁciently
solve larger problems. Extensive simulations using the IBM
Qiskit Aer quantum circuit simulator demonstrate that our
proposed RL- and KDE-based approaches reduce the optimality gap by factors up to 30.15 when compared with other
commonly used off-the-shelf optimizers.

1

Optimizing QAOA parameters is known to be a hard
problem because the optimization objective is nonconvex
with low-quality nondegenerate local optima (Shaydulin,
Safro, and Larson 2019; Zhou et al. 2018). Many approaches
have been applied to QAOA parameter optimization, including gradient-based (Romero et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2018;
Crooks 2018) and derivative-free methods (Wecker, Hastings, and Troyer 2016; Yang et al. 2017; Shaydulin, Safro,
and Larson 2019). Noting that the optimization objective of
QAOA is speciﬁc to the underlying combinatorial instance,
existing works approach the task of ﬁnding optimal QAOA
parameters for a given instance as an exclusive task, and they
devise methods that require quantum circuit evaluations on
the order of thousands. To the best of our knowledge, approaching QAOA parameter optimization as a learning task
is underexplored. To that end, we propose two machinelearning-based methods for QAOA parameter optimization,
in which the knowledge gained from solving training instances can be leveraged to efﬁciently ﬁnd high-quality solutions for unseen test instances with only a couple of hundred quantum circuit evaluations. Our novel treatment of the
QAOA optimization task has the potential to make QAOA a
cost-effective algorithm to run on near-term quantum computers.

Introduction

Recently, a number of quantum computing devices have become available on the cloud. Current devices, which are
commonly referred to as Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) devices, operate on a small number of qubits
and have limited error-correction capabilities. Demonstrating quantum advantage on these devices, which is the ability
to solve a problem more efﬁciently by using quantum computational methods compared with classical state-of-the-art
methods, requires the development of algorithms that can
run using a modest quantum circuit depth.

The main contributions of our work are summarized as
follows. First, we formulate the task of learning a QAOA
parameter optimization policy as a reinforcement learning
(RL) task. This approach can learn a policy network that can
exploit geometrical regularities in the QAOA optimization

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2367

