The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Global Greedy Dependency Parsing
1

Zuchao Li,1,2,3 Hai Zhao,1,2,3,∗ Kevin Parnow1,2,3

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{charlee, parnow}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

root

Most syntactic dependency parsing models may fall into
one of two categories: transition- and graph-based models.
The former models enjoy high inference efﬁciency with
linear time complexity, but they rely on the stacking or reranking of partially-built parse trees to build a complete
parse tree and are stuck with slower training for the
necessity of dynamic oracle training. The latter, graph-based
models, may boast better performance but are unfortunately
marred by polynomial time inference. In this paper, we
propose a novel parsing order objective, resulting in a
novel dependency parsing model capable of both global (in
sentence scope) feature extraction as in graph models and
linear time inference as in transitional models. The proposed
global greedy parser only uses two arc-building actions,
left and right arcs, for projective parsing. When equipped
with two extra non-projective arc-building actions, the
proposed parser may also smoothly support non-projective
parsing. Using multiple benchmark treebanks, including the
Penn Treebank (PTB), the CoNLL-X treebanks, and the
Universal Dependency Treebanks, we evaluate our parser and
demonstrate that the proposed novel parser achieves good
performance with faster training and decoding.

1

det

nsubj
aux

punct
tmod

root/ROOT The/DT test/NN may/MD come/VB today/NN ./.

Figure 1: A fully built dependency tree for “The test may
come today.” including part-of-speech (POS) tags and root
token.
2005; Ma and Zhao 2012; Zhang, Zhao, and Qin 2016;
Li et al. 2018b; Li, Zhou, and Zhao 2019) apply globally
optimized graph-based algorithms.
A transition-based dependency parser processes the
sentence word-by-word, commonly from left to right, and
forms a dependency tree incrementally from the operations
predicted. This method is advantageous in that inference on
the projective dependency tree is linear in time complexity
with respect to sentence length; however, it has several
obvious disadvantages. Because the decision-making of
each step is based on partially-built parse trees, special
training methods are required, which results in slow training
and error propagation, as well as weak long-distance
dependence processing (McDonald and Nivre 2011).
Graph-based parsers learn scoring functions in one-shot
and then perform an exhaustive search over the entire
tree space for the highest-scoring tree. This improves the
performances of the parsers, particularly the long-distance
dependency processing, but these models usually have slow
inference speed to encourage higher accuracy.
The easy-ﬁrst parsing approach (Kiperwasser and
Goldberg 2016a; Li, Cai, and Zhao 2019) was designed
to integrate the advantages of graph-based parsers’ betterperforming trees and transition-based parsers’ linear
decoding complexity. By processing the input tokens in
a stepwise easy-to-hard order, the algorithm makes use
of structured information on partially-built parse trees.
Because of the presence of rich, structured information,
exhaustive inference is not an optimal solution - we
can leverage this information to conduct inference much
more quickly. As an alternative to exhaustive inference,

Introduction

Dependency parsing predicts the existence and type of
linguistic dependency relations between words (as shown
in Figure 1), which is a critical step in accomplishing
deep natural language processing. Dependency parsing has
been well developed (Tratz and Hovy 2011; Li et al.
2018a), and it generally relies on two types of parsing
models: transition-based models and graph-based models.
The former (Yamada and Matsumoto 2003; Nivre and
Scholz 2004; Zhang and Nivre 2011; Zhao et al. 2009;
Zhang and Nivre 2011) traditionally apply local and greedy
transition-based algorithms, while the latter (Eisner 1996;
McDonald, Crammer, and Pereira 2005; McDonald et al.
∗
Corresponding author. This paper was partially supported by
National Key Research and Development Program of China (No.
2017YFB0304100) and Key Projects of National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. U1836222 and No. 61733011).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8319

