The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reinforcing an Image Caption Generator Using Off-Line Human Feedback
Paul Hongsuck Seo,1,3∗ Piyush Sharma,2 Tomer Levinboim,2 Bohyung Han,3 Radu Soricut2
1

Computer Vision Lab., POSTECH, Korea
2
Google Research, USA
3
Computer Vision Lab., ECE, & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
hsseo@postech.ac.kr, {piyushsharma, tomerl, rsoricut}@google.com, bhhan@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Human ratings are currently the most accurate way to assess the quality of an image captioning model, yet most often
the only used outcome of an expensive human rating evaluation is a few overall statistics over the evaluation dataset. In
this paper, we show that the signal from instance-level human caption ratings can be leveraged to improve captioning
models, even when the amount of caption ratings is several
orders of magnitude less than the caption training data. We
employ a policy gradient method to maximize the human ratings as rewards in an off-policy reinforcement learning setting, where policy gradients are estimated by samples from a
distribution that focuses on the captions in a caption ratings
dataset. Our empirical evidence indicates that the proposed
method learns to generalize the human raters’ judgments to
a previously unseen set of images, as judged by a different
set of human judges, and additionally on a different, multidimensional side-by-side human evaluation procedure.

1

SKRWRRIDQDEDQGRQHGWXQQHO

(a) Image caption

DGD\DWWKHEHDFK
ZKDWDUHWKHGLIIHUHQW
W\SHVRIIUXLW"
IUXLWVDQGYHJHWDEOHV
DWDPDUNHWVWDOO





(b) Captions ratings

Figure 1: Examples from an image caption dataset (Sharma
et al. 2018) and a caption-ratings dataset (Levinboim et al.
2019). (a) Images in the caption dataset are annotated with
ground-truth captions written by humans. (b) Captions in the
caption ratings dataset are generated by trained models and
scored in [0, 1] (0: worst, 1: best) by human raters.

guide the training procedure towards models capable of producing outputs that are highly-rated by human evaluators.
As a result of the need to understand the performance of
the current models, human evaluation studies for measuring caption quality are frequently reported in the literature
(Sharma et al. 2018; Forbes et al. 2019; Dognin et al. 2019;
Zhao et al. 2019). In addition to an aggregate model performance, such human evaluation studies also produce a valuable by-product: a dataset of model-generated image captions with human annotated quality labels, as shown in Figure 1b. We argue that such a by-product, henceforth called a
caption ratings dataset, can be successfully used to improve
the quality of image captioning models, for several reasons.
First, optimizing based on instance-level human judgments
of caption quality represent a closer-to-truth objective for
image captioning: generating more captions judged as good
but fewer ones rated as poor by human raters. Second, while
having highly-rated captions as positive examples (i.e., how
good captions may look like), a caption ratings dataset also
contains captions that are highly-scored by a model but annotated as negative examples (i.e., how model-favored yet
bad captions look like), which intuitively should be a useful
signal for correcting common model biases. To the best of
our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to propose using human

Introduction

Image captioning is the task of automatically generating ﬂuent natural language descriptions for an input image. However, measuring the quality of generated captions in an automatic manner is a challenging and yet-unsolved task; therefore, human evaluations are often required to assess the
complex semantic relationships between a visual scene and
a generated caption (Sharma et al. 2018; Cui et al. 2018;
Zhao et al. 2019). As a result, there is a mismatch between
the training objective of the captioning models and their
ﬁnal evaluation criteria. The most simple and frequentlyused training objective is maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE) (Vinyals et al. 2015; Mun, Cho, and Han 2017; Lu
et al. 2017; 2018; Changpinyo et al. 2019), while other approaches make use of handcrafted evaluation metrics, such
as CIDEr (Vedantam, Zitnick, and Parikh 2015), to optimize
model parameters using reinforcement learning (RL) (Rennie et al. 2017; Ding and Soricut 2017; Anderson et al. 2018;
Qin et al. 2019). However, these surrogate objectives capture only limited aspects of caption quality, and often fail to
∗

Work done during internship at Google.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2693

