The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Beyond the Grounding Bottleneck:
Datalog Techniques for Inference in Probabilistic Logic Programs
Efthymia Tsamoura

Vı́ctor Gutiérrez-Basulto

Angelika Kimmig

Samsung AI Research

Cardiff University

Cardiff University

van Bremen, Dries, and Jung 2019), where determining the
relevant grounding explores a large search space, but only
small parts of this space contribute to the formulas.

Abstract
State-of-the-art inference approaches in probabilistic logic
programming typically start by computing the relevant
ground program with respect to the queries of interest, and
then use this program for probabilistic inference using knowledge compilation and weighted model counting. We propose
an alternative approach that uses efﬁcient Datalog techniques
to integrate knowledge compilation with forward reasoning
with a non-ground program. This effectively eliminates the
grounding bottleneck that so far has prohibited the application of probabilistic logic programming in query answering
scenarios over knowledge graphs, while also providing fast
approximations on classical benchmarks in the ﬁeld.

1

We address this bottleneck, building upon the Tc P operator (Vlasselaer et al. 2015), which integrates formula construction into forward reasoning for ground programs and
is state-of-the-art for highly cyclic PLP programs. Our key
contribution is a program transformation approach that allows us to implement forward inference using an efﬁcient
Datalog engine that directly operates on non-ground functorfree programs. We focus on programs without negation for
simplicity, though the Tc P operator has been studied for
general probabilistic logic programs (Bogaerts and Van den
Broeck 2015; Riguzzi 2016) as well; the extension to stratiﬁed negation following (Vlasselaer et al. 2016) is straightforward. We further build upon two well-known techniques
from the Datalog community, namely semi-naive evaluation (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995), which avoids recomputing the same consequences repeatedly during forward reasoning, and the magic sets transformation (Bancilhon et al. 1986; Beeri and Ramakrishnan 1991), which
makes forward reasoning query driven. We adapt and extend both techniques to incorporate the formula construction performed by the Tc P operator and implement our approach using VLog (Urbani, Jacobs, and Krötzsch 2016;
Carral et al. 2019). Our experimental evaluation demonstrates that the resulting vProbLog system enables PLP inference in the pOBDA setting, answering each of the 14
standard queries of the LUBM benchmark (Guo, Pan, and
Heﬂin 2011) over a probabilistic database of 19K facts in
a few minutes at most, while most of these are infeasible for the existing ProbLog implementation of Tc P . Furthermore, for ten of the queries, vProbLog computes exact answers over 1M facts in seconds. At the same time,
on three standard PLP benchmarks (Fierens et al. 2015;
Renkens et al. 2014; Vlasselaer et al. 2016) where the bottleneck is formula construction, vProbLog achieves comparable approximations to the existing implementation in less
time.

Introduction

The signiﬁcant interest in combining logic and probability
for reasoning in uncertain, relational domains has led to a
multitude of formalisms, including the family of probabilistic logic programming (PLP) languages based on the distribution semantics (Sato 1995) with languages and systems
such as PRISM (Sato 1995), ICL (Poole 2008), ProbLog (De
Raedt, Kimmig, and Toivonen 2007; Fierens et al. 2015)
and PITA (Riguzzi and Swift 2011). State-of-the-art inference for PLP uses a reduction to weighted model counting (WMC) (Chavira and Darwiche 2008), where the dependency structure of the logic program and the queries is
ﬁrst transformed into a propositional formula in a suitable
format that supports efﬁcient WMC. While the details of
this transformation differ across approaches, a key part of
it is determining the relevant ground program with respect
to the queries of interest, i.e., all groundings of rules that
contribute to some derivation of a query. This grounding
step has received little attention, as its cost is dominated by
the cost of constructing the propositional formula in typical
PLP benchmarks that operate on biological, social or hyperlink networks, where formulas are complex. However, it
has been observed that the grounding step is the bottleneck
that often makes it impossible to apply PLP inference in
the context of ontology-based data access over probabilistic data (pOBDA) (Schoenﬁsch and Stuckenschmidt 2017;

For details on proofs as well as additional background,
we refer to the accompanying technical report (Tsamoura,
Gutiérrez-Basulto, and Kimmig 2019).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10284

