The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Localize, Assemble, and Predicate:
Contextual Object Proposal Embedding for Visual Relation Detection
Ruihai Wu, Kehan Xu, Chenchen Liu, Nan Zhuang, Yadong Mu∗
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
{wuruihai, yurina, liuchenchen, zhuangn53, myd}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual relation detection (VRD) aims to describe all interacting objects in an image using subject-predicate-object
triplets. Critically, valid relations combinatorially grow in
O(C 2 R) for C object categories and R relationships. The
frequencies of relation triplets exhibit a long-tailed distribution, which inevitably leads to bias towards popular visual
relations in the learned VRD model. To address this problem,
we propose localize-assemble-predicate network (LAP-Net),
which decomposes VRD into three sub-tasks: localizing individual objects, assembling and predicting the subject-object
pairs. In the ﬁrst stage of LAP-Net, Region Proposal Network
(RPN) is used to generate a few class-agnostic object proposals. Next, these proposals are assembled to form subjectobject pairs via a second Pair Proposal Network (PPN), in
which we propose a novel contextual embedding scheme. The
inner product between embedded representations faithfully
reﬂects the compatibility between a pair of proposals, without estimating object and subject class. Top-ranked pairs from
stage two are fed into a third sub-network, which precisely
estimates the relationship. The whole pipeline except for the
last stage is object-category-agnostic in localizing relationships in an image, alleviating the bias in popular relations
induced by training data. Our LAP-Net can be trained in an
end-to-end fashion. We demonstrate that LAP-Net achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the VRD benchmark while
maintaining high speed in inference.

Input

Output(1):person-hold-camera

Output(2):kite-behind-person

Output(3):kite-behind-person

Figure 1: This ﬁgure shows some examples of visual relations from VRD dataset. Local information is insufﬁcient for
accurate relation detection. For example, in the this image,
only the content in object bounding boxes is not enough to
decide the relative position between kite and person. Therefore, we propose a novel contextual embedding to prompt
global-local information interaction for relation detection.

Introduction

sual relationship detection is to both localize objects in the
image and predict the relationship between object pairs.
Comparing to object detection, visual relationship detection is difﬁcult in that the distribution of relation triplets
is long-tailed. Given C object classes and R relationships,
the total number of possible relationships will be O(C 2 R),
and learning so many relationships with limited labeling
data is a challenging task. One common solution to this
problem is to learn separate models for detecting objects
and relations, reducing the complexity of training detectors to O(C + R). In such pipelines, an input image is
ﬁrst fed into an object detection module to get a set of
detected objects, then all pairs are considered as potential
<subject, object> pairs and will go through the relation detection module sequentially, as proposed in (Lu et al. 2016;

To interpret an image, it is insufﬁcient to locate and recognize objects in the scene. The interactions between objects also need to be carefully estimated. While research
on object detection is rapidly progressing, understanding visual relationships is still a hard task and the results of existing pipelines are far from being satisfactory. Visual relationships are deﬁned as <subject-predicate-object> tuples,
where subject and object are related by the predicate. There
can be many types of predicates, for example, verb (cat-sit
on-chair), spatial (book-on-shelf), preposition (person-neardog), comparative (person1-taller-person2). The goal of vi∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12297

