The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Checking Chase Termination over Ontologies of Existential Rules with Equality
David Carral

Jacopo Urbani

Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
david.carral@tu-dresden.de

Department of Computer Science
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands
jacopo@cs.vu.nl

model-faithful acyclicity (MFA) (Cuenca Grau et al. 2013),
are only deﬁned for existential rule sets without equality.
This restriction limits their usefulness, since equality is a
prevalent feature (for instance, equality is used in ∼34% of
the logical theories in the Oxford Ontology Repository1 ).
A proposed solution to enable the use of existing acyclicity notions over ontologies with equality is to treat equality
as an ordinary predicate with an explicit axiomatisation (see
Sections 2.1 and 5 of (Cuenca Grau et al. 2013)). Intuitively,
an axiomatisation of a rule set R is another rule set that does
not contain equality and can be exploited to solve CQ answering over ontologies with the rule set R. More precisely,
using axiomatisations, we can solve CQ answering over an
ontology O = R, F, where R is an existential rule set
(possibly containing equality) and F is a fact set, by implementing the following step-by-step approach:
1. Compute some equality axiomatisation R of R.
2. Verify whether R is acyclic with respect to some
acyclicity notion (e.g., MFA). If this is the case, then the
chase of R terminates; that is, for any given fact set F  ,
the chase terminates on input R , F  .
3. Apply the chase on R , F, and use the resulting output
fact set to solve CQ answering over O.
Note that, since R is an axiomatisation of R, R is equalityfree and hence, we can check if this rule set is MFA in Step 2.
The application of the above step-by-step approach to
real-world ontologies is somewhat problematic. For instance, the use of the standard axiomatisation in Step 1 often
causes the MFA check applied in Step 2 to fail (Cuenca Grau
et al. 2013). As shown in this paper, the use of other axiomatisation techniques in Step 1, such as singularisation
(Marnette 2009), ﬁxes this issue to a large extent. Unfortunately, computing the chase of an ontology that features
some singularisation of a rule set—as required in Step 3—is
not efﬁcient in practice. The fact that the use of axiomatisations leads to poor performance has previously been shown
for the standard axiomatisation (Motik et al. 2015); we show
that it is also the case when singularisation is applied.
To address these issues, we show that, if the chase of any
equality axiomatisation of R terminates, then so does the

Abstract
The chase is a sound and complete algorithm for conjunctive query answering over ontologies of existential rules with
equality. To enable its effective use, we can apply acyclicity notions; that is, sufﬁcient conditions that guarantee chase
termination. Unfortunately, most of these notions have only
been deﬁned for existential rule sets without equality. A proposed solution to circumvent this issue is to treat equality as
an ordinary predicate with an explicit axiomatisation. We empirically show that this solution is not efﬁcient in practice and
propose an alternative approach. More precisely, we show
that, if the chase terminates for any equality axiomatisation
of an ontology, then it terminates for the original ontology
(which may contain equality). Therefore, one can apply existing acyclicity notions to check chase termination over an axiomatisation of an ontology and then use the original ontology
for reasoning. We show that, in practice, doing so results in a
more efﬁcient reasoning procedure. Furthermore, we present
equality model-faithful acyclicity, a general acyclicity notion
that can be directly applied to ontologies with equality.

Introduction
Answering conjunctive queries (CQs) over ontologies of
existential rules with equality is a relevant reasoning task,
which is undecidable (Beeri and Vardi 1981). One approach
to solve it in some cases is to use the chase (Maier, Mendelzon, and Sagiv 1979)—a forward-chaining algorithm, which
is sound and complete but may not terminate. Despite the
fact that checking chase termination is undecidable (Gogacz
and Marcinkowski 2014; Grahne and Onet 2018), we can
apply acyclity notions—sufﬁcient conditions that guarantee
termination—to enable the effective use of the chase for a
large subset of real-world ontologies (Cuenca Grau et al.
2013; Carral, Dragoste, and Krötzsch 2017).
Acyclicity notions have been widely researched and many
such criteria have been developed (Fagin et al. 2005; Marnette 2009; Baget, Mugnier, and Thomazo 2011; Krötzsch
and Rudolph 2011; Carral, Feier, and Hitzler 2016; Carral, Dragoste, and Krötzsch 2017; Karimi, Zhang, and You
2018). Alas, some of the most general notions, such as
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2758

https://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/isg/ontologies/

