The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CGD: Multi-View Clustering via Cross-View Graph Diffusion
Chang Tang,1 Xinwang Liu,2 Xinzhong Zhu,3 En Zhu,2 Zhigang Luo,2 Lizhe Wang,1 Wen Gao4
1

School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
3
College of Mathematics, Physics and Information Engineering, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China
4
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
https://github.com/ChangTang/CGD
2

Multi-view clustering (Tang et al. 2019c; Liu et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2019b; 2019a; 2019d), which
partitions these multi-view data into different groups by using the complementary information of multi-view feature
sets to ensure that highly similar instances are divided into
the same group, is an important branch of multi-view learning (Wang, Nie, and Huang 2013). In general, most of previous multi-view clustering methods employ graph-based
models since the similarity graph can characterize the data
structure effectively. These methods usually learn a common
sample similarity graph W ﬁrstly by deploying features of
different views (as shown by Fig. 1a), and then the clustering result is obtained by carrying out the spectral clustering
algorithm based on W (Cao et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2017; Tang et al. 2019c; Wang and Wu 2018;
Yang et al. 2017) or obtained directly from W without performing any post-processing if W is constrained to be with
exactly k connected components, where k is the number of
clusters (Zhan et al. 2018; 2019; Wang, Yang, and Liu 2019;
Yang et al. 2019).

Abstract
Graph based multi-view clustering has been paid great attention by exploring the neighborhood relationship among
data points from multiple views. Though achieving great success in various applications, we observe that most of previous
methods learn a consensus graph by building certain data representation models, which at least bears the following drawbacks. First, their clustering performance highly depends on
the data representation capability of the model. Second, solving these resultant optimization models usually results in high
computational complexity. Third, there are often some hyperparameters in these models need to tune for obtaining the
optimal results. In this work, we propose a general, effective and parameter-free method with convergence guarantee
to learn a uniﬁed graph for multi-view data clustering via
cross-view graph diffusion (CGD), which is the ﬁrst attempt
to employ diffusion process for multi-view clustering. The
proposed CGD takes the traditional predeﬁned graph matrices
of different views as input, and learns an improved graph for
each single view via an iterative cross diffusion process by 1)
capturing the underlying manifold geometry structure of original data points, and 2) leveraging the complementary information among multiple graphs. The ﬁnal uniﬁed graph used
for clustering is obtained by averaging the improved view associated graphs. Extensive experiments on several benchmark
datasets are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method in terms of seven clustering evaluation metrics.

In recent years, numbers of graph learning based multiview clustering methods have been proposed. Due to the
page limitation, we just list a few of them here. By regarding the subspace representation matrices of different views
as a tensor, Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2015) proposed lowrank tensor constrained multi-view subspace clustering (LTMSC) to exploit the high order relation implied in multiview data. In LT-MSC, the low-rank constraint is applied
to the constructed tensor for capturing the cross-view information and reducing the redundancy among different views.
In order to exploit the complementary information among
multiple feature views, Cao et al. (Cao et al. 2015) made
use of the Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC)
to exploit the diversity of the new representations of different
views. Different from most of previous subspace clustering
methods which reconstruct data points using original features, Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2017) proposed latent multiview subspace clustering which seeks the underlying latent
representation and assumes that all of different feature views
are projected from the learned latent feature space. The uniﬁed data representation matrix of different views is simultaneously learned from the latent space. Wang et al. (Wang et

Introduction
It is not uncommon that an object is usually described by
multi-view features. For example, in image/video processing, different visual descriptors such as Local Binary Patterns (LBP) (Ojala, Pietikainen, and Maenpaa 2002), Scale
Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) (Lowe and Lowe 2004)
and Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) (Dalal and
Triggs 2005) are often used to describe each image/video
frame from different views. In biomedical research, both the
chemical structure and chemical response in different cells
can be used to represent a certain drug, while the sequence
and gene expression values can represent a certain protein in
different aspects (Li 2014; Li and Cai 2017).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5924

