The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improving Neural Relation Extraction with Positive and Unlabeled Learning

♣

Zhengqiu He,♣ Wenliang Chen,♣∗ Yuyi Wang,♥
Wei Zhang,♠ Guanchun Wang,♦ Min Zhang♣
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
♠
Alibaba Group, ♥ ETH Zurich, ♦ Laiye Network technology co.LTD
♣
zqhe@stu.suda.edu.cn, {wlchen, minzhang}@suda.edu.cn
♠
lantu.zw@alibaba-inc.com, ♥ yuwang@ethz.ch, ♦ arvid@laiye.com

Triple: < Steve Case, founders, AOL >

Abstract

Correct #1 Steve Case, a founder of AOL, is the majority owner of the company.

We present a novel approach to improve the performance of
distant supervision relation extraction with Positive and Unlabeled (PU) Learning. This approach ﬁrst applies reinforcement learning to decide whether a sentence is positive to a
given relation, and then positive and unlabeled bags are constructed. In contrast to most previous studies, which mainly
use selected positive instances only, we make full use of unlabeled instances and propose two new representations for positive and unlabeled bags. These two representations are then
combined in an appropriate way to make bag-level prediction. Experimental results on a widely used real-world dataset
demonstrate that this new approach indeed achieves significant and consistent improvements as compared to several
competitive baselines.

Correct #2 I met with Steve Case, the founder of AOL, and talked about health care.
Wrong #3 Steve Case is the former chief executive of AOL.

Wrong #4 If Eisner is to be congratulated for brushing off Steve Case of AOL as if ...
Correct

#5 Steve Case co-founded and served as CEO of America Online (AOL),
overseeing the massive merger that created AOL Time Warner Inc.

Selector
#1 #2
#3 #4 #5

#1
#2

Bag

Positive Bag

+

#3
#4 #5
Unlabeled Bag

Figure 1: A sentence bag generated through distant supervision, further split into two bags after selection
entity pair <Steve Case, AOL> and its relation “founders”1
and label ﬁve sentences by distant supervision. Though the
third sentence “Steve Case is the former chief executive of
AOL.” does not convey relation “founders” of “Steve Case”
and “AOL”, it is wrongly labeled as a positive instance for
this relation under the assumption of distant supervision.
Our preliminary experimental results show that this problem largely harms the performance of relation extraction at
sentence-level.
To address the above problem, previous studies turn to
multi-instance learning (MIL) (Zeng et al. 2015; Lin et al.
2016; Ji et al. 2017), where the training set consists of bags
for given entity pairs. Thus, the task of RE turns to predicting relations at bag-level. However, because the wrong labeling problem is still remaining, each bag in multi-instance
learning may contain many sentences mentioning the same
entity pair but belonging to different relations. These noisy
sentences may hinder the performance of the MIL-based relation extraction models.
To alleviate the impact of noisy sentences, recent studies
(Feng et al. 2018; Qin, Xu, and Wang 2018) propose to select
positive sentences from noisy bags. As a selection solution,
approaches based on reinforcement learning (RL) have been
proposed to train RL agents to decide whether a sentence is
positive. Thus the sentences are grouped into a set of positive

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE) is to classify the relationship between entity pairs from plain text where the entity pairs
are speciﬁed. Recently, supervised learning models have
achieved lots of progress in the RE task (Riedel et al. 2013;
Zeng et al. 2014). Similar to other Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, the supervised models for RE typically
require a massive amount of training data, labeled by annotators. However, hiring annotators is costly and non-scalable,
in terms of both time and money.
As an alternative solution in practice, distant supervision
can automatically generate a training corpus (Mintz et al.
2009). The key idea of distant supervision is that given an
entity pair <eh , et> and its corresponding relation rB from
one knowledge base (KB) such as Freebase, we simply label
all sentences containing the two entities by relation rB . This
solution has achieved a certain success and has been used in
the state-of-the-art techniques for RE (Riedel, Yao, and McCallum 2010; Hoffmann et al. 2011; Surdeanu et al. 2012;
Min et al. 2013). However, the training data generated by
this solution inevitably has wrong labeling problem. For example, as illustrated in Figure 1, we have a triple including
∗

The corresponding author is Wenliang Chen.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The relation “/business/company/founders” is deﬁned in Freebase, and we shorten it to “founders”.

7927

