The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Universal Adversarial Training
Ali Shafahi, ∗ Mahyar Najibi,∗ Zheng Xu,∗ John Dickerson, Larry S. Davis, Tom Goldstein
Deparment of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, Maryland 20742
{ashafahi, najibi, xuzh, john, lsd,tomg}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract

Universal
Perturbation

Standard adversarial attacks change the predicted class label
of a selected image by adding specially tailored small perturbations to its pixels. In contrast, a universal perturbation is an
update that can be added to any image in a broad class of images, while still changing the predicted class label. We study
the efﬁcient generation of universal adversarial perturbations,
and also efﬁcient methods for hardening networks to these attacks. We propose a simple optimization-based universal attack that reduces the top-1 accuracy of various network architectures on ImageNet to less than 20%, while learning the
universal perturbation 13× faster than the standard method.
To defend against these perturbations, we propose universal adversarial training, which models the problem of robust
classiﬁer generation as a two-player min-max game, and produces robust models with only 2× the cost of natural training.
We also propose a simultaneous stochastic gradient method
that is almost free of extra computation, which allows us to
do universal adversarial training on ImageNet.

Figure 1: A universal perturbation made using a subset of
ImageNet and the VGG-16 architecture. When added to the
validation images, their labels usually change. The perturbation was generated using the proposed algorithm 2. Perturbation pixel values lie in [−10, 10] (i.e.  = 10).

1

to change its class label (ﬁg. 1) with high probability.
Universal perturbations empower attackers who cannot
generate per-instance adversarial examples on the go, or
who want to change the identity of an object to be selected
later in the ﬁeld. Also, universal perturbations have good
cross-model transferability, which facilitates black-box
attacks.
Among various methods for hardening networks to perinstance attacks, adversarial training (Madry et al. 2018) is
known to dramatically increase robustness (Athalye, Carlini,
and Wagner 2018). In this process, adversarial examples are
produced for each mini-batch during training, and injected
into the training data. While effective at increasing robustness against small perturbations, it is not effective for larger
perturbations which are often the case for universal perturbations. Also, the high cost of this process precludes its use
on large and complex datasets.

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial
examples, in which small and often imperceptible perturbations change the class label of an image (Szegedy et al. 2013;
Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Nguyen, Yosinski,
and Clune 2015; Papernot et al. 2016). Many works have
shown that these vulnerabilities can be exploited by showing real world attacks on face detection (Sharif et al. 2016),
object detection (Wu et al. 2019), and copyright detection
(Saadatpanah, Shafahi, and Goldstein 2019).
Adversarial examples were originally formed by selecting a single example, and sneaking it into a different class
using a small perturbation (Carlini and Wagner 2017b). This
is done most effectively using (potentially expensive) iterative optimization procedures (Dong et al. 2017; Madry et al.
2018; Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018).
Different from per-instance perturbation attacks,
(Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2017b; 2017a) show there exists
“universal” perturbations that can be added to any image

Contributions This paper studies effective methods for
producing and deﬂecting universal adversarial attacks. First,
we pose the creation of universal perturbations as an optimization problem that can be effectively solved by stochastic gradient methods. This method dramatically reduces the
time needed to produce attacks as compared to (MoosaviDezfooli et al. 2017b). The efﬁciency of this formulation
empowers us to consider universal adversarial training. We
formulate the adversarial training problem as a min-max op-

∗

Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5636

