The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

The Effectiveness of Peer Prediction in Long-Term Forecasting
Debmalya Mandal,∗ Goran Radanović,◦ David C. Parkes•
∗

Data Science Institute, Columbia University
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
•
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
dm3557@columbia.edu, gradanovic@mpi-sws.org, and parkes@eecs.harvard.edu
◦

In human forecasting, proper scoring rules are used to
elicit effort in providing accurate probability forecasts of
future events. A challenge, though, is that users do not receive feedback about their forecasts until the outcomes are
realized. Nor is it clear whether these schemes are effective
in motivating continual attention, and updating forecasts on
difﬁcult or dynamically changing problems, for which there
is a continuous inﬂow of new information over time.
Through a large-scale experiment on Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk), we investigate whether peer prediction
methods can be used to complement methods of proper scoring rules, and improve engagement of users and ultimately
the quality of forecasts. Peer prediction provides immediate feedback, by comparing one forecaster’s prediction with
that of another, this feedback provided as rank placement or
through incentive payments. One of a very small number of
experimental studies into peer prediction, ours is the ﬁrst to
test peer prediction in this hybrid role.
We show that providing daily feedback through peer prediction has a signiﬁcant effect in increasing engagement
with the forecasting platform. Moreover, a hybrid scheme
that combines scoring rules with peer prediction feedback
(via rank feedback) is, together with the basic scoring rule
method, generally the best for accuracy. Since the hybrid
scheme also improves user engagement, this suggests that
the hybrid scheme would provide the best accuracy for
longer term forecasting events.

1

One of the key challenges in forecasting uncertain events
is the time changing nature of their underlying best estimates, requiring frequent updating of existing information
content upon which forecasts were made. The new information content is often obtained by querying multiple human
experts, and to ensure its quality, these experts can be paid
in proportion to the marginal information gain they bring to
the forecasting system.
One possible information that experts can provide to the
system are their own forecasts, which the system can aggregate to produce a ﬁnal estimate. A standard way to measure the quality of experts’ forecasts, and thus assign scores,
is through strictly proper scoring rules - a class of scoring
techniques that are maximized in expectation for the best
prediction. A well known example of a strictly scoring rule
is Brier score (Brier, 1950).
While such scoring techniques are strictly proper (accuracy rewarding), they do not provide any immediate signal to experts regarding their performance, lacking a form
of implicit incentives in interim periods, before the event
is realized. This kind of interim incentive might effectively
encourage an expert to update their (low quality) forecasts
more frequently since they indicate the quality of the expert’s current estimates, which is in turn correlates to the
expert’s score. As empirically shown by Ungar et al. (2012),
the number of forecasts that an expert makes tends to correlate with an expert’s performance, and this is in part explained by up-to-date forecasts being more accurate.
To provide interim incentives, the system can score experts based on the consistency of experts answers— such
an approach leads to peer-prediction mechanisms. Peerprediction mechanisms can provide more frequent rewards
than scoring rules, but the properness of peer-prediction
scores depends not only on a participant’s subjective belief,
but also on the strategy that all experts adopt. Fortunately, a
wide range of manipulation strategies can be avoided with
careful design.
The third possibility is a hybrid incentive approach that
seeks to combine the best of both worlds, that is, in which
a scoring rule is supported by a peer-prediction mechanism. By carefully tuning the weights put on scores derived
from the scoring rule and scores derived from the peer-

Introduction

In contrast to fully automated systems, many application domains are expected to rely on combined human-AI intelligence, a good example of which would be forecasting systems. Recently, the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects
Activity (IARPA)1 organized the Hybrid Forecasting Competition2 (HFC) program to promote the next generation of
geopolitical forecasting systems based on human-AI collaboration: human experts provide information that is supported
by AI tools, such as aggregation methods.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.iarpa.gov/
2
https://www.hybridforecasting.com/
2160

