The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improved Knowledge Distillation via Teacher Assistant
Seyed Iman Mirzadeh,∗1 Mehrdad Farajtabar,∗2 Ang Li,2
Nir Levine,2 Akihiro Matsukawa,†3 Hassan Ghasemzadeh1
1

Washington State University, WA, USA
2
DeepMind, CA, USA
3
D.E. Shaw, NY, USA
1
{seyediman.mirzadeh, hassan.ghasemzadeh}@wsu.edu
2
{farajtabar, anglili, nirlevine}@google.com
3
akihiro.matsukawa@gmail.com
Abstract
Despite the fact that deep neural networks are powerful models and achieve appealing results on many tasks, they are too
large to be deployed on edge devices like smartphones or embedded sensor nodes. There have been efforts to compress
these networks, and a popular method is knowledge distillation, where a large (teacher) pre-trained network is used
to train a smaller (student) network. However, in this paper, we show that the student network performance degrades
when the gap between student and teacher is large. Given a
ﬁxed student network, one cannot employ an arbitrarily large
teacher, or in other words, a teacher can effectively transfer its
knowledge to students up to a certain size, not smaller. To alleviate this shortcoming, we introduce multi-step knowledge
distillation, which employs an intermediate-sized network
(teacher assistant) to bridge the gap between the student and
the teacher. Moreover, we study the effect of teacher assistant
size and extend the framework to multi-step distillation. Theoretical analysis and extensive experiments on CIFAR-10,100
and ImageNet datasets and on CNN and ResNet architectures
substantiate the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

Figure 1: TA ﬁlls the gap between student & teacher
by adding a term to the usual classiﬁcation loss that encourages the student to mimic the teacher’s behavior.
However, we argue that knowledge distillation is not always effective, especially when the gap (in size) between
teacher and student is large. To illustrate, we ran experiments that show surprisingly a student model distilled from a
teacher with more parameters(and better accuracy) performs
worse than the same one distilled from a smaller teacher
with a smaller capacity. Such scenarios seem to impact the
efﬁcacy of knowledge distillation where one is given a small
student network and a pre-trained large one as a teacher, both
ﬁxed and (wrongly) presumed to form a perfect transfer pair.
Inspired by this observation, we propose a new distillation
framework called Teacher Assistant Knowledge Distillation
(TAKD), which introduces intermediate models as teacher
assistants (TAs) between the teacher and the student to ﬁll
in their gap (Figure 1). TA models are distilled from the
teacher, and the student is then only distilled from the TAs.
Our contributions are: (1) We show that the size (capacity) gap between teacher and student is important. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to study this gap and
verify that the distillation performance is not at its top with
the largest teacher; (2) We propose a teacher assistant based
knowledge distillation approach to improve the accuracy of
student network in the case of extreme compression; (3) We
extend this framework to include a chain of multiple TAs
from teacher to student to further improve the knowledge
transfer and provided some insights to ﬁnd the best one; (4)
Through extensive empirical evaluations and a theoretical
justiﬁcation, we show that introducing intermediary TA networks improves the distillation performance.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved state of the art results in
a variety of applications such as computer vision (Huang et
al. 2017; Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018), speech recognition (Han
et al. 2017) and natural language processing (Devlin et al.
2018). Although it is established that introducing more layers and more parameters often improves the accuracy of a
model, big models are computationally too expensive to be
deployed on devices with limited computation power such
as mobile phones and embedded sensors. Model compression techniques have emerged to address such issues, e.g.,
parameter pruning and sharing (Han, Mao, and Dally 2016),
low-rank factorization (Tai et al. 2015) and knowledge distillation (Bucila, Caruana, and Niculescu-Mizil 2006; Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015). Among these approaches, knowledge distillation has proven a promising way to obtain a
small model that retains the accuracy of a large one. It works
∗

Equal Contribution
Work Done at DeepMind
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

5191

