The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generating Adversarial Examples for
Holding Robustness of Source Code Processing Models
Huangzhao Zhang,1 Zhuo Li,1 Ge Li,1∗ Lei Ma,2 Yang Liu,3 Zhi Jin1∗
1

Key Lab of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies (Peking University, China), Ministry of Education
2
Kyushu University, Japan, 3 Nanyang Technology University, Singapore
{zhang hz, lizhmq, lige, zhijin}@pku.edu.cn, malei@ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp, yangliu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Automated processing, analysis, and generation of source
code are among the key activities in software and system lifecycle. To this end, while deep learning (DL) exhibits a certain
level of capability in handling these tasks, the current stateof-the-art DL models still suffer from non-robust issues and
can be easily fooled by adversarial attacks.
Different from adversarial attacks for image, audio, and
natural languages, the structured nature of programming
languages brings new challenges. In this paper, we propose a Metropolis-Hastings sampling-based identiﬁer renaming technique, named Metropolis-Hastings Modiﬁer (MHM),
which generates adversarial examples for DL models specialized for source code processing. Our in-depth evaluation
on a functionality classiﬁcation benchmark demonstrates the
effectiveness of MHM in generating adversarial examples
of source code. The higher robustness and performance enhanced through our adversarial training with MHM further
conﬁrms the usefulness of DL models-based method for future fully automated source code processing.

Figure 1: A simple example of adversarial attack on a source
code classiﬁer by performing identiﬁer renaming.

counterparts by the human perceptions, can result in severe
erroneous behavior of DL models.
Although some adversarial example generation approaches were recently proposed for natural language processing (NLP), such as GeneticAttack (Alzantot et al. 2018)
and HotFlip (Ebrahimi et al. 2018), which performs word or
character replacements to perturb the sentences, they are not
suitable for source code. Unlike most natural languages, the
source code of programming languages must strictly follow
the rigid lexical, grammatical and syntactical constraints. In
other words, the adversarial perturbations must satisfy all
these constraints, without following which, the generated
source code would encounter compilation error and would
be automatically rejected for further analysis. The gradientbased perturbations, which are widely applied in image processing (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015) are also
difﬁcult under this scenario since the source code space is
discrete. Figure 1 gives a simple example of adversarial attacks on source code processing tasks, in which the classiﬁer
is attacked by the simple renaming of variable “a” to “argc”.
The renaming operation fully preserves the program semantics yet may mislead the classiﬁcation model into erroneous
decisions. Such hazards could potentially be reduced with
adversarial training.
To address the aforementioned non-robust hazard, in
this paper, we propose the Metropolis-Hastings Modiﬁer
algorithm (MHM). MHM generates adversarial examples
of source code by performing iterative identiﬁer renaming, which is based on Metropolis-Hastings sampling. Our

Introduction
Automated processing, analysis, and generation of program
source code can greatly reduce the cost in software and
system development, testing, operation and maintenance,
with the currently urgent industrial demands. It is not until several years ago, researchers started to propose deep
learning (DL) methods for source code processing. Up to
present, a lot of successes have been achieved in many
tasks, such as functionality classiﬁcation (Mou et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2019b), code clone detection (Wei and Li 2017),
code completion (Li et al. 2017), method naming (Allamanis, Peng, and Sutton 2016), and code comment generation
(Hu et al. 2018), etc.
However, there is a major hazard lying under the stateof-the-art DL models – they lack of adversarial robustness.
Adversarial examples can be generated from original inputs
by carefully designed minor perturbations. The adversarial
examples that have little or no difference from their original
∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1169

