The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarial Transformations for Semi-Supervised Learning
Teppei Suzuki, Ikuro Sato
DENSO IT LABORATORY, INC.
2-15-1 Shibuya, Shibuya-ku Tokyo, Japan
{tsuzuki, isato}@d-itlab.co.jp

Abstract
We propose a Regularization framework based on
Adversarial Transformations (RAT) for semi-supervised
learning. RAT is designed to enhance robustness of the
output distribution of class prediction for a given data against
input perturbation. RAT is an extension of Virtual Adversarial Training (VAT) in such a way that RAT adversraialy
transforms data along the underlying data distribution by a
rich set of data transformation functions that leave class label
invariant, whereas VAT simply produces adversarial additive
noises. In addition, we veriﬁed that a technique of gradually
increasing of perturbation region further improves the
robustness. In experiments, we show that RAT signiﬁcantly
improves classiﬁcation performance on CIFAR-10 and
SVHN compared to existing regularization methods under
standard semi-supervised image classiﬁcation settings.

(a) input data

(b) VAT with  = 0.3

(c) VAT with  = 0.5

(d) RAT with rotation

Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Chapelle, Scholkopf, and
Zien 2006) is an effective learning framework on datasets
that have large amounts of the data and few labels. In a practical situations, obtained datasets are often partially labeled,
because labeling is more costly than collecting data in many
cases. Thus, a powerful SSL framework that enhances the
model performance is needed.
Among the many SSL algorithms, virtual adversarial
training (VAT) (Miyato et al. 2016; 2018) is a successful
one. It regularizes local distributional smoothness, by which
we mean the robustness of the output distribution around
each input datapoint against local perturbation, by using virtual adversarial perturbation. The perturbation is calculated
as the noise, which adversarially changes the output of the
model, and VAT imposes the consistency between the outputs of the model for the data and the perturbed data. It indicates that VAT enforces the output distribution to be robust
with respect to perturbation within the -ball centered on the
data, where  denotes the norm of the perturbation vector.
The speciﬁc advantage of VAT is to leverage the adversarial
perturbation.

Figure 1: Comparison between VAT and RAT with moons
dataset. Colored regions of (b), (c), and (d) correspond to
prediction conﬁdence. Each moon has 10 labeled data (dark
color points in (a)) and 30 unlabeled data (light color points
in (a)), and each data is randomly generated from semicircles in (a) with Gaussian noise. RAT uses noise injection and
rotation along the blue and red semicircles in (a) as transformation. The setting of (b) and (d) is the same except for
using rotation in (d).

Although VAT demonstrates remarkable accuracy in standard benchmarks, VAT allows the smoothing only within the
-ball. This means that there is no guarantee that two datapoints are classiﬁed into the same class even if they belong to
the same class, if the distance between them is greater than
2 (see Figure 1 (b)). However, if  is too large, the perturbed
data may penetrate the true class boundary; inconsistency
within -ball may occur (see Figure 1 (c)). To summarize,
the -ball, that is an isotropic hypersphere in the input space,
is too universal to take the underlying data distribution into

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5916

