The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generalized Planning with Positive and Negative Examples
Javier Segovia-Aguas,1 Sergio Jiménez,2 Anders Jonsson3
1

2

IRI - Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC
VRAIN - Valencian Research Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Universitat Politècnica de València
3
Universitat Pompeu Fabra

Abstract
Generalized planning aims at computing an algorithm-like
structure (generalized plan) that solves a set of multiple planning instances. In this paper we deﬁne negative examples for
generalized planning as planning instances that must not be
solved by a generalized plan. With this regard the paper extends the notion of validation of a generalized plan as the
problem of verifying that a given generalized plan solves the
set of input positives instances while it fails to solve a given
input set of negative examples. This notion of plan validation
allows us to deﬁne quantitative metrics to asses the generalization capacity of generalized plans. The paper also shows
how to incorporate this new notion of plan validation into a
compilation for plan synthesis that takes both positive and
negative instances as input. Experiments show that incorporating negative examples can accelerate plan synthesis in several domains and leverage quantitative metrics to evaluate the
generalization capacity of the synthesized plans.

Figure 1: a) Robot in 2 × 1, 6 × 1 and 1 × 1 corridors; b)
Three candidate generalized plans.

tion (Parekh, Honavar, and others 2000), program synthesis (Alur et al. 2018) and model learning (Camacho and
McIlraith 2019). If used appropriately, negative examples
can help reduce the solution space and accelerate the search
for a solution.
In this paper we introduce negative examples for generalized planning as input planning instances that should not
be solved by a generalized plan. An intuitive way to come
up with negative examples for solutions that generalize is
to ﬁrst synthesize a solution with exclusively positive examples, and identify cases for which the solution did not generalize as desired, somewhat akin to clause learning in satisﬁability problems (Biere et al. 2009). Imagine that we aim to
synthesize the generalized plan (paint(X), inc(X), inc(X))+
that makes a robot paint every odd cell black in a N × 1 corridor, starting from the leftmost cell (we use Kleene notation
to represent regular expressions, and Z + indicates the repetition of Z at least once). Action paint(X) paints the current
cell black while inc(X) increments the robot’s X coordinate.
The positive example of a 2 × 1 corridor (whose goal conﬁguration is illustrated at Figure 1a) is solvable by all three
automata plans in Figure 1b) (acceptor states are marked
with overlines e.g., q). These automata plans, namely Π,
Π∗ and Π+ , compactly represent the three sets of sequential

Introduction
Generalized planning studies the computation of plans that
can solve a family of planning instances that share a common structure (Hu and De Giacomo 2011; Srivastava, Immerman, and Zilberstein 2011; Jiménez, Segovia-Aguas,
and Jonsson 2019). Since generalized planning is computationally expensive, a common approach is to synthesize
a generalized plan starting from a set of small instances and
validate it on larger instances. This approach is related to the
principle of Machine Learning (ML), in which a model is
trained on a training set and validated on a test set (Mitchell
1997).
Traditionally, generalized planning has only focused on
solvable instances, both for plan synthesis and for validation (Winner and Veloso 2003; Bonet, Palacios, and
Geffner 2010; Hu and Levesque 2011; Srivastava et al. 2011;
Hu and De Giacomo 2013; Segovia-Aguas, Jiménez, and
Jonsson 2018; Segovia-Aguas, Celorrio, and Jonsson 2019).
However, many computational problems in AI beneﬁt from
negative examples, e.g. SAT approaches that exploit clause
learning (Angluin, Frazier, and Pitt 1992), grammar inducc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9949

