The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Norm-Explicit Quantization: Improving Vector
Quantization for Maximum Inner Product Search
Xinyan Dai,* Xiao Yan,* Kelvin K. W. Ng, Jie Liu, James Cheng
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{xydai, xyan, kwng6, jliu, jcheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

used for Bayesian interference (Mussmann and Ermon 2016),
memory network training (Chandar et al. 2016) and reinforcement learning (Jun et al. 2017).
Vector quantization (VQ). VQ quantizes items in the
dataset with M codebooks C 1 , C 2 , . . . , C M . Each codebook
C m contains K codewords and each codeword is a ddimensional vector, i.e., C m = {cm [1], cm [2], ..., cm [K]},
cm [k] ∈ Rd for 1 ≤ m ≤ M and 1 ≤ k ≤ K. Denote im
x as
the index of the codeword in codebook C m that item x maps
M
to, then x is approximated by x̃ = m=1 cm [im
x ]. Therefore,
the inner product between query q and item x, i.e., q  x, is apM
proximated by q  x̃ = m=1 q  cm [im
x ]. There are a number
of VQ algorithms with different quantization strategies and
codebook learning procedures, such as product quantization
(PQ) (Jégou, Douze, and Schmid 2011), optimized product
quantization (OPQ) (Ge et al. 2013), residual quantization
(RQ) (Chen, Guan, and Wang 2010) and additive quantization (AQ) (Babenko and Lempitsky 2014). We describe them
in greater details in Section 2.
VQ can be used for data compression, fast inner product computation and candidate generation in MIPS. For
data compression, the M codeword indexes {i1x , i2x , ..., iM
x }
is stored instead of the original d-dimensional vector x,
which enables storing very large datasets (e.g., with 1 billion items) in the main memory of a single machine (Johnson, Douze, and Jégou 2017). When the inner products
between query q and all codewords are precomputed and
stored in look-up tables, the approximate inner product
of an item (i.e., q  x̃) can be computed with a complexity of O(M ) instead of O(d). With two codebooks, VQ
can use the efﬁcient multi-index algorithm (Babenko and
Lempitsky 2012) to generate candidates for MIPS. Note
that VQ is orthogonal to existing MIPS algorithms, such as
tree-based methods (Koenigstein, Ram, and Shavitt 2012;
Ram and Gray 2012), locality sensitive hashing (LSH)
based methods (Neyshabur and Srebro 2015; Shrivastava
and Li 2014), proximity graph based method (Morozov and
Babenko 2018) and pruning based methods (Li et al. 2017;
Teﬂioudi, Gemulla, and Mykytiuk 2015). These algorithms
focus on generating good candidates for MIPS, while VQ
focuses on data compression and computation acceleration.
Actually, VQ can be used as a component of these algorithms

Abstract
Vector quantization (VQ) techniques are widely used in similarity search for data compression, computation acceleration
and etc. Originally designed for Euclidean distance, existing
VQ techniques (e.g., PQ, AQ) explicitly or implicitly minimize the quantization error. In this paper, we present a new
angle to analyze the quantization error, which decomposes
the quantization error into norm error and direction error. We
show that quantization errors in norm have much higher inﬂuence on inner products than quantization errors in direction,
and small quantization error does not necessarily lead to good
performance in maximum inner product search (MIPS). Based
on this observation, we propose norm-explicit quantization
(NEQ) — a general paradigm that improves existing VQ techniques for MIPS. NEQ quantizes the norms of items in a
dataset explicitly to reduce errors in norm, which is crucial
for MIPS. For the direction vectors, NEQ can simply reuse an
existing VQ technique to quantize them without modiﬁcation.
We conducted extensive experiments on a variety of datasets
and parameter conﬁgurations. The experimental results show
that NEQ improves the performance of various VQ techniques
for MIPS, including PQ, OPQ, RQ and AQ.

1

Introduction

Given a dataset X ⊂ Rd that contains n vectors (also
called items) and a query q ∈ Rd , maximum inner product
search (MIPS) ﬁnds an item x∗ that has the largest inner
product with the query,
x∗ = arg max q  x.
x∈X

(1)

The deﬁnition of MIPS can be easily extended to top-k inner
product search, which is used more commonly in practice.
MIPS has many important applications such as recommendation based on user and item embeddings (Koren, Bell, and
Volinsky 2009), multi-class classiﬁcation with linear classiﬁer (Dean et al. 2013), and object matching in computer
vision (Felzenszwalb et al. 2010). Recently, MIPS is also
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Co-ﬁrst authors are ranked alphabetically. Correspondence to
Xiao Yan.
51

