The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weighted Automata Extraction from
Recurrent Neural Networks via Regression on State Spaces
Takamasa Okudono, Masaki Waga, Taro Sekiyama, Ichiro Hasuo
National Institute of Informatics & The Graduate University for Advanced Studies
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8430
{tokudono, mwaga, sekiyama, hasuo}@nii.ac.jp

Extracting WFAs from RNNs Most of the existing automata extraction techniques target Boolean-output RNNs,
which however excludes many applications. In sentiment
analysis, it is desired to know the quantitative strength
of sentiment, besides its (Boolean) existence (Chaudhuri
2019). RNNs with real values as their output are also useful
in classiﬁcation tasks. For example, predicting class probabilities is a key in some approaches to semi-supervised
learning (Yarowsky 1995) and ensemble (Bramer 2013).
This motivates extraction of quantitative ﬁnite-state machines as abstraction of RNNs. We ﬁnd the formalism of
weighted ﬁnite automata (WFAs) suited for this purpose. A
WFA is a ﬁnite-state machine—much like a deterministic ﬁnite automaton (DFA)—but its transitions as well as acceptance values are real numbers (instead of Booleans).

Abstract
We present a method to extract a weighted ﬁnite automaton (WFA) from a recurrent neural network (RNN). Our
method is based on the WFA learning algorithm by Balle
and Mohri, which is in turn an extension of Angluin’s classic
L∗ algorithm. Our technical novelty is in the use of regression
methods for the so-called equivalence queries, thus exploiting
the internal state space of an RNN to prioritize counterexample candidates. This way we achieve a quantitative/weighted
extension of the recent work by Weiss, Goldberg and Yahav
that extracts DFAs. We experimentally evaluate the accuracy,
expressivity and efﬁciency of the extracted WFAs.

1

Introduction

Background Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been
successfully applied to domains such as text, speech, and image processing. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Chung
et al. 2014; Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) is a class of
DNNs equipped with the capability of processing sequential
data of variable length. The great success of RNNs has been
seen in, e.g., machine translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le
2014), speech recognition (Zweig et al. 2017), and anomaly
detection (Lv et al. 2018; Xiao et al. 2019).
While it has been experimentally shown that RNNs are a
powerful tool to process, predict, and model sequential data,
there are known drawbacks in RNNs such as interpretability and costly inference. A research line that attacks this
challenge is automata extraction (Omlin and Giles 1996;
Weiss, Goldberg, and Yahav 2018a). Focusing on RNNs’
use as acceptors (i.e., receiving an input sequence and producing a single Boolean output), these works extract a ﬁnitestate automaton from an RNN as a succinct and interpretable
surrogate. Automata extraction exposes internal transition
between the states of an RNN in the form of an automaton, which is then amenable to algorithmic analyses such as
reachability and model checking (Baier and Katoen 2008).
Automata extraction can also be seen as model compression:
ﬁnite-state automata are usually more compact, and cheaper
to run, than neural networks.

Contribution: Regression-Based WFA Extraction from
RNNs Our main contribution is a procedure that takes a
(real-output) RNN R, and returns a WFA AR that abstracts
R. The procedure is based on the WFA learning algorithm
in (Balle and Mohri 2015), that is in turn based on the
famous L∗ algorithm for learning DFAs (Angluin 1987).
These algorithms learn automata by a series of so-called
membership queries and equivalence queries. In our procedure, a membership query is implemented by an inference
of the given RNN R. We iterate membership queries and
use their results to construct a WFA A and to grow it.
The role of equivalence queries is to say when to stop
this iteration: it asks if A and R are “equivalent,” that is,
if the WFA A obtained so far is comprehensive enough to
cover all the possible behaviors of R. This is not possible in
general—RNNs are more expressive than WFAs—therefore
we inevitably resort to an approximate method. Our technical novelty lies in the method for answering equivalence
queries; notably it uses a regression method—e.g., the Gaussian process regression (GPR) and the kernel ridge regression (KRR)—for abstraction of the state space of R.
We conducted experiments to evaluate the effectiveness
of our approach. In particular, we are concerned with the
following questions: 1) how similar the behavior of the extracted WFA AR , and that of the original RNN R, are;
2) how applicable our method is to an RNN that is a more
expressive model than WFAs; and 3) how efﬁcient the in-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5306

