The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hierarchical Contextualized Representation for Named Entity Recognition
Ying Luo,1,2,3 Fengshun Xiao,1,2,3 Hai Zhao1,2,3,∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{kingln, felixxiao}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Named entity recognition (NER) models are typically based
on the architecture of Bi-directional LSTM (BiLSTM). The
constraints of sequential nature and the modeling of single
input prevent the full utilization of global information from
larger scope, not only in the entire sentence, but also in the
entire document (dataset). In this paper, we address these
two deﬁciencies and propose a model augmented with hierarchical contextualized representation: sentence-level representation and document-level representation. In sentencelevel, we take different contributions of words in a single sentence into consideration to enhance the sentence representation learned from an independent BiLSTM via label embedding attention mechanism. In document-level, the key-value
memory network is adopted to record the document-aware
information for each unique word which is sensitive to similarity of context information. Our two-level hierarchical contextualized representations are fused with each input token
embedding and corresponding hidden state of BiLSTM, respectively. The experimental results on three benchmark NER
datasets (CoNLL-2003 and Ontonotes 5.0 English datasets,
CoNLL-2002 Spanish dataset) show that we establish new
state-of-the-art results.

,WDO\

UHFDOOHG

0DUFHOOR

&XWWLWW

s-rep

s-rep

s-rep

s-rep

dRFXPHQW-level representation
sentence-level representation

Figure 1: Incorporating hierarchical contextualized representation for NER. The sentence-level representation is assigned to each token and fed to the sequence labeling BiLSTM encoder. The document-level representation is fused
with the hidden state of the BiLSTM and fed to the decoder.

inputs, making it difﬁcult to capture sentence-level information. (Zhang, Liu, and Song 2018) simultaneously model the
sub-states for individual words and an overall sentence-level
state. (Liu et al. 2019b) use a global contextual encoder and
mean pooling strategy to capture sentence-level features,
though they ignore the different importance of words in the
same sentence. Second, though BiLSTM updates the parameters with the iteration of all training instances, it only consumes one instance during both training and predicting. This
nature prevents the model from effectively capturing document (dataset)-level information, e.g. for a unique token, its
representations in training instances are indicative for recognizing the concerned token. (Akbik, Bergmann, and Vollgraf 2019) use a pooling operation on different contextualized embeddings to generate global word representations.
While they only consider the changes of embeddings for
each unique word.
In this paper, we propose a hierarchical contextualized representation architecture to enhance NER modeling.
For sentence-level representation, inspired by (Wang et al.
2018), we embed labels in the same space with word embeddings, and label embeddings are learned from attention
mechanism computed with word embeddings to ensure that,
each word embedding is much closer to their corresponding label embedding, and farther to other label embeddings.

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is one of the fundamental tasks in natural language processing (NLP) that intends to identify words or phrases as the proper names of
PER (Person), ORG (Organization), LOC (Location), etc.
Currently, most state-of-the-art NER systems (Huang, Xu,
and Yu 2015; Lample et al. 2016; Ma and Hovy 2016;
Chiu and Nichols 2016) employ BiRNNs, specially BiLSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) as the encoder to
extract the sequential information.
BiLSTM architectures exist limitations in making full use
of global information. First, at each time step, BiLSTM
takes current word embedding and past summary states as
∗
Corresponding author. This paper was partially supported
by National Key Research and Development Program of China
(No. 2017YFB0304100), Key Projects of National Natural Science
Foundation of China (U1836222 and 61733011).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8441

