The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Exploit and Replace: An Asymmetrical Two-Stream
Architecture for Versatile Light Field Saliency Detection
∗

Yongri Piao,1 Zhengkun Rong,1 Miao Zhang,2,3 Huchuan Lu1,4
1

School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
International School of Information and Software Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
3
Key Lab for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, Dalian University of Technology, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{yrpiao, miaozhang, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, rzk911113@mail.dlut.edu.cn
2

2015; Smeulders et al. 2013), object recognition (Ren et al.
2015; Dai et al. 2016) and robot navigation (Craye, Filliat,
and Goudou 2016).
The existing saliency detection methods can be roughly
divided into three categories based on the 2D (RGB), 3D
(RGB-D) and 4D (light ﬁeld) input images. Different from
2D and 3D saliency detection methods, 4D methods exploit the light ﬁeld data. The light ﬁeld provides multiview images of the scene through an array of lenslets and
produces a stack of focal slices, containing abundant spatial parallax information as well as accurate depth information. Moreover, the stack of focal slices cater to human visual perception and are observed in sequence with a combination of eye movements and shifts in visual attention.
Such abundant 4D data provides abundant saliency cues
for saliency detection in challenging scenes such as similar foreground and background, small salient objects and
complex background (Li et al. 2014a; Li, Sun, and Yu 2015;
Piao et al. 2019).
However, light ﬁeld saliency detection has signiﬁcant
drawbacks. 1) Light ﬁeld methods are both computationintensive and memory-intensive as high dimensional data
are employed, e.g., the model size of the ﬁrst deep-learning
based light ﬁeld saliency detection network is more than 119
MB and FPS is only 2 on a single 1080Ti GPU card (Piao
et al. 2019). 2) Taking light ﬁeld data as input is seemingly
inconvenient because data taken by light ﬁeld cameras is far
less ubiquitous as RGB data taken by traditional digital cameras. In consequence, it is reasonably essential to design a
versatile, efﬁcient and user-friendly mechanism to address
those issues while ensuring the performance.
In this paper, we propose a novel learning strategy
leveraging the concept of knowledge distillation (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015) and learning under an asymmetrical two-stream network architecture, to confront those challenges (see Figure 1). First, we consider the Focal stream,
operating on focal slices, as a teacher network. Our goal is
to design a deep network not only to achieve superior performance for higher requirements on desktop computers but
also to transfer comprehensive knowledge for the student
network. Given two phrases—recruiting and screening that
the eyes process all information in our visual ﬁeld (Recruit-

Abstract
Light ﬁeld saliency detection is becoming of increasing interest in recent years due to the signiﬁcant improvements in
challenging scenes by using abundant light ﬁeld cues. However, high dimension of light ﬁeld data poses computationintensive and memory-intensive challenges, and light ﬁeld
data access is far less ubiquitous as RGB data. These may
severely impede practical applications of light ﬁeld saliency
detection. In this paper, we introduce an asymmetrical twostream architecture inspired by knowledge distillation to
confront these challenges. First, we design a teacher network to learn to exploit focal slices for higher requirements on desktop computers and meanwhile transfer comprehensive focusness knowledge to the student network. Our
teacher network is achieved relying on two tailor-made modules, namely multi-focusness recruiting module (MFRM)
and multi-focusness screening module (MFSM), respectively.
Second, we propose two distillation schemes to train a student network towards memory and computation efﬁciency
while ensuring the performance. The proposed distillation
schemes ensure better absorption of focusness knowledge
and enable the student to replace the focal slices with a single RGB image in an user-friendly way. We conduct the experiments on three benchmark datasets and demonstrate that
our teacher network achieves state-of-the-arts performance
and student network (ResNet18) achieves Top-1 accuracies
on HFUT-LFSD dataset and Top-4 on DUT-LFSD, which
tremendously minimizes the model size by 56% and boosts
the Frame Per Second (FPS) by 159%, compared with the
best performing method.

Introduction
Human attentional mechanism (HAM) allows us to focus on
interesting regions and ﬁlter out irrelevant ones. This cognitive ability helps us quickly understand visual scenes out
of an overwhelming amount of information. Over the past
decades, many works devote to imitating HAM. This task,
namely saliency detection, is essential for progress in image understanding and has shown great potential in various
computer vision and image processing tasks, such as image
segmentation (Li et al. 2014b), visual tracking (Hong et al.
∗

Contact Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11865

