The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AATEAM: Achieving the Ad Hoc
Teamwork by Employing the Attention Mechanism
Shuo Chen,1,2 Ewa Andrejczuk,2 Zhiguang Cao,3 Jie Zhang1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
ST Engineering - NTU Corporate Laboratory, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Industrial Systems Engineering and Management, National University of Singapore, Singapore
chen1087@e.ntu.edu.sg, {ewaa, zhangj}@ntu.edu.sg, isecaoz@nus.edu.sg
2

a policy for each past teammate type. When working with
new teammates, it chooses one of the policies based on the
similarity between the new and past experiences and uses
that policy to select the sequence of actions for the ad hoc
agent. However, the selected policy only works well when
new teammates behave similarly to the chosen teammate
type. When new teammates’ behaviour becomes far from the
teammate type, the ad hoc agent needs to switch to another
policy. Switching between policies to adapt to new teammates’ behaviour takes time, which threatens the successful
performance of a task. Given that, it is desirable to develop
a new method that adapts to new teammates’ behaviours in
real-time for complex domains.
In this paper, we propose to Achieve the Ad hoc Teamwork
by Employing Attention Mechanism (AATEAM). AATEAM
uses attention-based recurrent neural networks to cope with
new teammates’ behaviour in real-time. Our workﬂow is as
follows. First, we use reinforcement learning to learn policies to work with past teammates. Second, we make the ad
hoc agent play with each type of teammate using the corresponding learned policy. We collect the states (input) and
the ad hoc agent’s actions (label) as training data. Third, we
use this data to teach one attention network for each type of
past teammates. The attention network works as follows. In
every step, the attention network takes a state as input. The
attention mechanism inside extracts the temporal correlation
between the state and the states encountered previously, i.e.
context. It further maps the context to an action probability
distribution. In every step, the attention networks also output a metric that measures the similarity between past and
new teammate types. The more similar the types, the more
important the corresponding probability distribution over actions. We aggregate networks’ probability distributions over
actions by calculating the weighted sum of those probabilities and its importance. Finally, we output an action with
the highest aggregated probability. Since AATEAM evaluates the similarity in every step, we can adjust to the new
teammates’ behaviour in real-time.
In summary, we make the following contributions: 1) we
propose AATEAM, an attention-based method to cope with
teammates’ different behaviours in complex domains. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time attention mechanism is applied to this problem. 2) Besides learning the
mapping from contexts to probability distribution over ac-

Abstract
In the ad hoc teamwork setting, a team of agents needs to perform a task without prior coordination. The most advanced
approach learns policies based on previous experiences and
reuses one of the policies to interact with new teammates.
However, the selected policy in many cases is sub-optimal.
Switching between policies to adapt to new teammates’ behaviour takes time, which threatens the successful performance of a task. In this paper, we propose AATEAM –
a method that uses the attention-based neural networks to
cope with new teammates’ behaviour in real-time. We train
one attention network per teammate type. The attention networks learn both to extract the temporal correlations from the
sequence of states (i.e. contexts) and the mapping from contexts to actions. Each attention network also learns to predict
a future state given the current context and its output action.
The prediction accuracies help to determine which actions the
ad hoc agent should take. We perform extensive experiments
to show the effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
In the majority of the multiagent systems (MAS) literature
tackling teamwork, a team of at least two agents shares cooperation protocols to work together and perform collaborative tasks (Grosz and Kraus 1996; Tambe 1997). However,
with the increasing number of agents in various domains
(e.g. construction, search and rescue) developed by different companies, we can no longer coordinate agents’ activities beforehand. In this case, we expect a team of agents to
perform a task without any pre-deﬁned coordination strategy. This problem is known in the literature as the ad hoc
teamwork problem (Stone et al. 2010). This paper tackles
the ad hoc teamwork problem where an ad hoc agent plans
its actions only by observing other teammates.
Most of the existing approaches for the ad hoc teamwork
focus on simple domains, i.e. they ignore the environmental
uncertainty or they assume teammates’ actions are fully observable (Agmon, Barrett, and Stone 2014; Ravula, Alkoby,
and Stone 2019). To the best of our knowledge, PLASTICPolicy (Barrett et al. 2017) is the only scheme proposed for
more complex domains, i.e. with a dynamic environment
and a continuous state/action space. PLASTIC-Policy learns
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7095

