The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Revisiting Image Aesthetic Assessment via Self-Supervised Feature Learning
Kekai Sheng,1,2 Weiming Dong,1∗ Menglei Chai,3 Guohui Wang,3 Peng Zhou,4
Feiyue Huang,2 Bao-Gang Hu,1 Rongrong Ji,5 Chongyang Ma6
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent, 3 Snap Inc.
North China Electric Power University, 5 Xiamen University, China, 6 Kuaishou Technology
{saulsheng, garyhuang}@tencent.com, {weiming.dong, baogang.hu}@ia.ac.cn, {cmlatsim, robertwgh}@gmail.com
pzhou@ncepu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, chongyangma@kwai.com
4

Abstract
Visual aesthetic assessment has been an active research ﬁeld
for decades. Although latest methods have achieved promising
performance on benchmark datasets, they typically rely on a
large number of manual annotations including both aesthetic
labels and related image attributes. In this paper, we revisit
the problem of image aesthetic assessment from the selfsupervised feature learning perspective. Our motivation is
that a suitable feature representation for image aesthetic
assessment should be able to distinguish different expertdesigned image manipulations, which have close relationships
with negative aesthetic effects. To this end, we design two
novel pretext tasks to identify the types and parameters of
editing operations applied to synthetic instances. The features
from our pretext tasks are then adapted for a one-layer linear
classiﬁer to evaluate the performance in terms of binary
aesthetic classiﬁcation. We conduct extensive quantitative
experiments on three benchmark datasets and demonstrate
that our approach can faithfully extract aesthetics-aware
features and outperform alternative pretext schemes. Moreover,
we achieve comparable results to state-of-the-art supervised
methods that use 10 million labels from ImageNet.



 

   
 
 
  
 

Figure 1: Illustration of our key idea. Some image editing
operations typically have negative aesthetic impact and the
degree of the impact is related to manipulation parameters.

and Chen 2017; Mai, Jin, and Liu 2016; Sheng et al. 2018b;
Talebi and Milanfar 2018), beneﬁting from several image
aesthetic benchmarks (Murray, Marchesotti, and Perronnin
2012; Kong et al. 2016). However, the inherent shortcomings
of these datasets are still deterring us from continuously
scaling up the volume of training data and improving the
performance: (1) the sizes of existing image aesthetic datasets
are far from enough to feed up latest neural networks with
very deep architectures, since the labor work involved in
manual labeling is prohibitively expensive and developing
aesthetics-invariant data augmentation solution remains an
open problem; (2) meanwhile, subjective human annotations
are often strongly biased towards personal aesthetic preference, and thus require excessive amount of data to neutralize
such inconsistency for reliable training.
Due to the poor scalability and consistency of available aesthetics datasets, it is becoming more and more
attractive to break these bottlenecks of purely supervised
training with unsupervised (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006;
Vincent et al. 2008), or more speciﬁcally, self-supervised
features (de Sa 1994; Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015;
Pathak et al. 2016; Zhang, Isola, and Efros 2016). The
main idea of self-supervision is to design pretext tasks that
are naturally available, contextually relevant, and capable
of providing proxy loss as the training signal to guide the

Introduction
With the explosive growth of online visual data, the demand
for image aesthetic assessment (Datta et al. 2006) in many
multimedia applications has been dramatically increased.
Typically, this assessment process seeks to evaluate the
aesthetic level of each image according to certain rules
commonly agreed by human visual perception, ranging
from ﬁne-grained local textures and lighting details to
high-level semantic layout and composition. These highly
subjective and ambiguous perceptual metrics pose formidable
challenges on designing intelligent agents to automatically
and quantitatively measure image aesthetics, especially with
conventional hand-crafted features.
Following the recent advances in deep convolutional neural
networks, researchers have explored various data-driven
learning based approaches for aesthetic assessment and have
reported impressive results in the past few years (Ma, Liu,
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5709

