The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

EEMEFN: Low-Light Image Enhancement via
Edge-Enhanced Multi-Exposure Fusion Network
Minfeng Zhu,1,2∗ Pingbo Pan,2,3† Wei Chen,1‡ Yi Yang2
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
The ReLER Lab, University of Technology Sydney, 3 Baidu Research
minfeng zhu@zju.edu.cn, chenwei@cad.zju.edu.cn, pingbo.pan@student.uts.edu.au, yi.yang@uts.edu.au
2

heavily on the quality of input images. Therefore, low-light
image enhancement has attracted growing attention in the
computer vision ﬁeld. This work focuses on solving the lowlight image enhancement problem, which aims to reduce
color bias and reveal hidden information from dark regions.

Abstract
This work focuses on the extremely low-light image enhancement, which aims to improve image brightness and reveal
hidden information in darken areas. Recently, image enhancement approaches have yielded impressive progress. However,
existing methods still suffer from three main problems: (1)
low-light images usually are high-contrast. Existing methods
may fail to recover images details in extremely dark or bright
areas; (2) current methods cannot precisely correct the color
of low-light images; (3) when the object edges are unclear,
the pixel-wise loss may treat pixels of different objects
equally and produce blurry images. In this paper, we propose
a two-stage method called Edge-Enhanced Multi-Exposure
Fusion Network (EEMEFN) to enhance extremely low-light
images. In the ﬁrst stage, we employ a multi-exposure fusion
module to address the high contrast and color bias issues. We
synthesize a set of images with different exposure time from
a single image and construct an accurate normal-light image
by combining well-exposed areas under different illumination
conditions. Thus, it can produce realistic initial images with
correct color from extremely noisy and low-light images.
Secondly, we introduce an edge enhancement module to
reﬁne the initial images with the help of the edge information.
Therefore, our method can reconstruct high-quality images
with sharp edges when minimizing the pixel-wise loss. Experiments on the See-in-the-Dark dataset indicate that our
EEMEFN approach achieves state-of-the-art performance.

There have been numerous attempts in the literature to address the low-light image enhancement problem. Traditional
techniques (Lee, Lee, and Kim 2013; Land 1977) enhance
pixels with low values to obey a natural distribution. Deep
learning-based methods design deep models to recover highquality images (Chen et al. 2018; Lore, Akintayo, and Sarkar
2017). Though these methods achieve signiﬁcant progress,
enhancing extremely low-light images is still challenging
due to three main problems. Firstly, when a low-light image is high-contrast with under-exposed or over-exposed
regions, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a one-to-one mapping from
raw sensor data to images. Existing methods fail to recover
well-exposed image details from extremely dark or bright
areas. The generated images are always blurry and noisy.
Secondly, without well-exposed image information, existing
models may suffer from color distortion due to the color bias
between low-light images and ground truth images. Thirdly,
pixel-wise loss tends to blur edges, destroy image details
when object edges are unclear in low-light images. Pixelwise loss weights all pixels equally regardless of their spatial
distribution. For instance, l1 or l2 loss will be minimized by
averaging nearby pixels or choosing the median of possible
colors (Isola et al. 2017).

Introduction
High-quality images are critical to computer vision tasks,
e.g., video surveillance, and object detection. However,
images captured in extremely low-light conditions may lose
information in the dark region and receive unexpected noise
and color bias. The low-quality images may signiﬁcantly
reduce the performance of computer vision methods (Zhu
et al. 2017; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), which rely

In this paper, we propose the Edge-Enhanced MultiExposure Fusion Network (EEMEFN) to enhance extremely
low-light images and recover realistic image details. Our
EEMEFN decomposes the image enhancement process into
two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, we propose a multi-exposure
fusion (MEF) module to solve the high contrast and color
bias issues. To recover a well-exposed image from a highcontrast low-light image, we need to assign different exposure time to different regions. For instance, bright areas
require a shorter exposure time than dark areas. We generate
a set of multi-exposure images with different exposure times
from one single low-light image. Speciﬁcally, fusion blocks
are proposed to combine well-exposed regions of the multiexposure image set in a complementary way. Thus, the MEF

∗
This work was done when Minfeng Zhu was visiting the
University of Technology Sydney.
†
Part of this work was done when Pingbo Pan was a research
intern with baidu research.
‡
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13106

