The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Task Driven Feature Models for Thermal Infrared Tracking
Qiao Liu,1 Xin Li,1∗ Zhenyu He,1,3† Nana Fan,1 Di Yuan,1 Wei Liu,2,3 Yongsheng Liang1
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Information Technology
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
liuqiao@stu.hit.edu.cn, {xinlihitsz, nanafanhit, dyuanhit}@gmail.com
{zhenyuhe, liangyongsheng}@hit.edu.cn, liuwei@sziit.edu.cn
2

TIR trackers. Deep feature based TIR trackers, e.g., DSSTtir (Gundogdu et al. 2016), MCFTS (Liu et al. 2017), and
LMSCO (Gao et al. 2018), use a pre-trained classiﬁcation
network for extracting deep features and then integrate them
into conventional trackers. Despite the demonstrated success, their performance is limited by the pre-trained deep
features which are learned from RGB images and are less
effective in representing TIR objects. Matching-based deep
TIR tracking methods, e.g., HSSNet (Li et al. 2019a) and
MLSSNet (Liu et al. 2019b), cast tracking as a matching
problem and train a matching network off-line for online
tracking. These methods receive much attention recently because of their high efﬁciency and simplicity. However, they
are also limited by the weak discriminative capacity of the
learned features due to the following reasons. First, they
do not learn how to separate samples belonging to different classes, namely, the learned features are sensitive to all
semantic objects. Second, their features are insensitive to
similar objects as they are usually learned on a global semantic feature space without ﬁne-grained information. Noting that ﬁne-grained information is crucial for distinguishing TIR objects as similar semantic patterns are generated
from intra-class TIR objects. Third, their features are often
learned from RGB or small TIR datasets, which do not learn
the speciﬁc patterns of TIR objects.

Abstract
Existing deep Thermal InfraRed (TIR) trackers usually use
the feature models of RGB trackers for representation. However, these feature models learned on RGB images are neither
effective in representing TIR objects nor taking ﬁne-grained
TIR information into consideration. To this end, we develop a
multi-task framework to learn the TIR-speciﬁc discriminative
features and ﬁne-grained correlation features for TIR tracking. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst use an auxiliary classiﬁcation network to guide the generation of TIR-speciﬁc discriminative
features for distinguishing the TIR objects belonging to different classes. Second, we design a ﬁne-grained aware module to capture more subtle information for distinguishing the
TIR objects belonging to the same class. These two kinds of
features complement each other and recognize TIR objects
in the levels of inter-class and intra-class respectively. These
two feature models are learned using a multi-task matching
framework and are jointly optimized on the TIR tracking task.
In addition, we develop a large-scale TIR training dataset to
train the network for adapting the model to the TIR domain.
Extensive experimental results on three benchmarks show
that the proposed algorithm achieves a relative gain of 10%
over the baseline and performs favorably against the stateof-the-art methods. Codes and the proposed TIR dataset are
available at https://github.com/QiaoLiuHit/MMNet.

Introduction

To address the above-mentioned issues, we propose to
learn TIR-speciﬁc discriminative features and ﬁne-grained
correlation features. Speciﬁcally, we use a classiﬁcation network, targeting at distinguishing TIR objects from different
classes, to guide the generation of the TIR-speciﬁc discriminative feature. In addition, we design a ﬁne-grained aware
network, which consists of a holistic correlation and pixellevel correlation modules, for obtaining the ﬁne-grained correlation features. When the TIR-speciﬁc discriminative features are not able to distinguish similar distractors, the ﬁnegrained correlation feature provides more detailed information for distinguishing them.

TIR object tracking is an important task in artiﬁcial intelligence. It has been widely used in maritime rescue, video
surveillance, and driver assistance at night (Gade and Moeslund 2014) as it can track the object in total darkness. Despite much progress, TIR tracking still faces several challenging problems, such as distractor, occlusion, size change,
and thermal cross (Liu et al. 2019a).
Inspired by the success of Convolution Neural Networks
(CNNs) in visual tracking, there are several attempts to
use CNNs to improve the performance of TIR trackers.
These methods can be roughly divided into two categories,
deep feature based TIR trackers and matching-based deep

To integrate these two complemental features effectively,
we design a multi-task matching framework for learning
them simultaneously. To adapt the feature model to the
TIR domain better, we construct a large-scale TIR image sequence dataset to train the proposed network. The

∗

Qiao Liu and Xin Li contribute equally.
†
Zhenyu He is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11604

