The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Context Modulated Dynamic Networks for Actor
and Action Video Segmentation with Language Queries
∗

Hao Wang,1,2 Cheng Deng,1† Fan Ma,2 Yi Yang2
1

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
{haowang.xidian, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com, fan.ma@student.uts.edu.au, Yi.Yang@uts.edu.au

DJX\LVRQWKHULJKWKROGLQJDQGHDWLQJDVDQGZLFK

Abstract
Actor and action video segmentation with language queries
aims to segment out the expression referred objects in the
video. This process requires comprehensive language reasoning and ﬁne-grained video understanding. Previous methods
mainly leverage dynamic convolutional networks to match
visual and semantic representations. However, the dynamic
convolution neglects spatial context when processing each region in the frame and is thus challenging to segment similar
objects in the complex scenarios. To address such limitation,
we construct a context modulated dynamic convolutional network. Speciﬁcally, we propose a context modulated dynamic
convolutional operation in the proposed framework. The kernels for the speciﬁc region are generated from both language
sentences and surrounding context features. Moreover, we devise a temporal encoder to incorporate motions into the visual
features to further match the query descriptions. Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets, Actor-Action Dataset
Sentences (A2D Sentences) and J-HMDB Sentences, demonstrate that our proposed approach notably outperforms stateof-the-art methods.

DJLUOLQZKLWHMDFNHWDQGSLQNEDJLVZDONLQJRQWKHOHIW

D ,QSXW)UDPH

E '\&RQY

F &0'\&RQY

Figure 1: The ﬁrst column shows the input frames. The second and the last columns demonstrate the results of stateof-the-art method and our approach, which reﬂects the importance of context modeling. Here, the input sentence and
colored mask share the same color if they are corresponding.

Actor and action video segmentation via language is to
segment out the related objects in the query sentences. Recently, many approaches (Hu, Rohrbach, and Darrell 2016;
Li et al. 2017b; Gavrilyuk et al. 2018; Shi et al. 2018;
Margffoy-Tuay et al. 2018; Opazo et al. 2019) have been
exploited to learn the complex interactions between heterogeneous modalities. These approaches can be roughly
categorized into two paradigms: heterogeneous feature fusion and dynamic convolution methods. The former framework managed to explore the relationship between different inputs by merging their features (Shi et al. 2018). Dynamic convolution explicitly models the correlation between
visual and semantic information via convolution computation, which has been investigated in an increasing number
of works (Margffoy-Tuay et al. 2018; Opazo et al. 2019).
The kernels in dynamic convolution methods are generated
from the embedding of the query sentence to segment objects in the video. However, the generated spatial-irrelevant
kernel makes it hard to model the contextual visual information. It will cause ambiguities if there are similar objects
in the video for the given query. As shown in Figure 1(b),
the model with dynamic convolution fails to segment target
objects in query sentences. To address this, we propose a

Introduction
Video understanding has attracted ever-increasing attention
in computer vision community, and it serves as a basic foundation for human action recognition (Yang et al. 2016b; Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Yang et al. 2016a; Xie et al. 2019;
Yang et al. 2016c), action detection and localization (Huang
et al. 2018), and video object segmentation (Xu et al. 2015;
Kalogeiton et al. 2017). However, these works emphasize
on the coarse grained video understanding, failing to adequately interact with the high-level semantics. Attempting
to study the combination of video content and human language, which is a more practical and natural way of humancomputer interaction, Gavrilyuk et al. (2018) introduced a
challenging task of actor and action video segmentation with
language queries, as illustrated in Figure 1.
∗
This work was done when Hao Wang was visiting the ReLER
Lab, UTS
†
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12152

