The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Off-Policy Evaluation in Partially Observable Environments
Guy Tennenholtz

Shie Mannor

Uri Shalit

Technion Institute of Technology

Technion Institute of Technology

Technion Institute of Technology

healthcare, where we are trying to learn from observed policies enacted by medical experts, without having full access
to the information the experts have in hand.
A basic observation we make is that traditional methods in OPE are not applicable to partially observable environments. For this reason, we start by deﬁning the OPE
problem for POMDPs, proposing various OPE approaches.
We deﬁne OPE for POMDPs in Section 2. Then, in Section 3, Theorem 1 shows how past and future observations
of an unobserved state can be leveraged in order to evaluate
a policy, under a non-singularity condition of certain joint
probability distribution matrices. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst OPE result for POMDPs.
In Section 4 we build upon the results of Section 3
and propose a more involved POMDP model: the Decoupled POMDP model. This is a class of POMDPs for
which observed and unobserved variables are distinctly partitioned. Decoupled POMDPs hold intrinsic advantages over
POMDPs for OPE. The assumptions required for OPE are
more ﬂexible than those required in POMDPs, allowing for
easier estimation (Theorem 2).
In Section 5 we attempt to answer the question as to why
traditional OPE methods fail when parts of the state are unobserved. We emphasize the hardness of OPE in POMDPs
through a conventional procedure known as Importance
Sampling. We further construct an Importance Sampling
variant that can be applied to POMDPs under an assumption
about the reward structure. We then compare this variant to
the OPE result of Section 4 in a synthetic medical environment (Section 6), showing it is prone to arbitrarily large bias.
Before diving into the subtleties associated with offpolicy evaluation in partially observable environments, we
provide two examples in which ignoring unobserved variables can lead to erroneous conclusions about the relation
between actions and their rewards.
Medical Treatment: Consider a physician monitoring a patient, frequently prescribing drugs and applying treatments
according to her medical state. Some of the patient’s information observed by the physician may be unavailable to us
(e.g., the patient’s socioeconomic status). A physician might
tend to prescribe Drug A for her wealthier patients who can
afford it. At the same time, wealthier patients tend to have

Abstract
This work studies the problem of batch off-policy evaluation
for Reinforcement Learning in partially observable environments. Off-policy evaluation under partial observability is inherently prone to bias, with risk of arbitrarily large errors.
We deﬁne the problem of off-policy evaluation for Partially
Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) and establish what we believe is the ﬁrst off-policy evaluation result
for POMDPs. In addition, we formulate a model in which observed and unobserved variables are decoupled into two dynamic processes, called a Decoupled POMDP. We show how
off-policy evaluation can be performed under this new model,
mitigating estimation errors inherent to general POMDPs. We
demonstrate the pitfalls of off-policy evaluation in POMDPs
using a well-known off-policy method, Importance Sampling,
and compare it with our result on synthetic medical data.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms learn to maximize
rewards by analyzing past experience in an unknown environment (Sutton and Barto 1998). In the context of RL,
off-policy evaluation (OPE) refers to the task of estimating
the value of an evaluation policy without applying it, using
data collected under a different behavior policy (Dann, Neumann, and Peters 2014), also unknown as a logging policy.
The problem of OPE has been thoroughly studied under fully-observable models. In this paper we extend and
deﬁne OPE for Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs). Informally, the goal of OPE in POMDPs
is to evaluate the cumulative reward of an evaluation policy
πe which is a function of observed histories, using a measure over the observed variables under a behavior policy πb
which is a function of an unobserved state. We assume that
we do not have access to the unobserved states, nor do we
have any prior information of their model. In fact, in many
cases we do not even know whether these states exist. These
states are commonly referred to as confounding variables in
the causal inference literature, whenever they affect both the
reward as well as the behavior policy. OPE for POMDPs is
highly relevant to real-world applications in ﬁelds such as
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10276

