The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Gradient-Based Optimization for Bayesian Preference Elicitation
Ivan Vendrov, Tyler Lu, Qingqing Huang, Craig Boutilier
Google Research, Mountain View, California
{ivendrov, tylerlu, qqhuang, cboutilier}@google.com

formation (EVOI) offers a principled criterion for selecting
preference queries and determining when to make recommendations. EVOI is relatively practical in domains with
small decision spaces and, as such, can be applied to certain types of content-based RSs, e.g., those with small “catalogs” of attribute-based items. However, maximizing EVOI
is generally computationally intractable and often unable to
scale to realistic settings with millions of items.

Abstract
Effective techniques for eliciting user preferences have taken
on added importance as recommender systems (RSs) become increasingly interactive and conversational. A common
and conceptually appealing Bayesian criterion for selecting
queries is expected value of information (EVOI). Unfortunately, it is computationally prohibitive to construct queries
with maximum EVOI in RSs with large item spaces. We
tackle this issue by introducing a continuous formulation of
EVOI as a differentiable network that can be optimized using gradient methods available in modern machine learning
computational frameworks (e.g., TensorFlow, PyTorch). We
exploit this to develop a novel Monte Carlo method for EVOI
optimization, which is much more scalable for large item
spaces than methods requiring explicit enumeration of items.
While we emphasize the use of this approach for pairwise (or
k-wise) comparisons of items, we also demonstrate how our
method can be adapted to queries involving subsets of item
attributes or “partial items,” which are often more cognitively
manageable for users. Experiments show that our gradientbased EVOI technique achieves state-of-the-art performance
across several domains while scaling to large item spaces.

1

Our work aims to make Bayesian elicitation more practical. Our ﬁrst contribution is a novel formulation of the problem of selecting a slate query with maximum EVOI as a continuous optimization in a differentiable network. This allows
the problem to be solved using gradient-based techniques
available in modern ML computational frameworks such as
TensorFlow or PyTorch. The key to our approach is relaxing
the set of items from which recommendations and queries
are generated by allowing attributes to vary continuously
without requiring they correspond to available items (these
could be interpreted as “hypothetical” items in attribute- or
embedding-space). Once optimized in this relaxed fashion,
any hypotheticals are projected back into the nearest actual
items to generate suitable recommendations or queries. We
also propose regularizers that can be used during optimization to keep hypothetical items close to some actual item.
We show empirically that this approach achieves comparable performance to state-of-the-art discrete methods, and
also offers several key advantages: (a) it leverages highly
optimized ML software and hardware for ease of implementation, performance and parallelization; (b) it generalizes to
a variety of query types, including those involving items not
present in the dataset, or partially speciﬁed items; (c) it accommodates continuous item attributes; and (d) it can use
arbitrary differentiable metrics and non-linear utilities, allowing end-to-end optimization using gradient ascent.

Introduction

Rapid advances in AI, machine learning (ML), speech and
language technologies have enabled recommender systems
(RSs) to become more conversational and interactive. Increasingly, users engage RSs using language-based (speech
or text) and multi-modal interfaces that have the potential to
increase communication bandwidth with users compared to
passive systems that make recommendations based only on
user-initiated engagement. In such contexts, actively eliciting a user’s preferences with a limited amount of interaction
can be critical to the user experience.
Preference elicitation has been widely studied in decision analysis and AI (Keeney and Raiffa 1976; Salo
and Hämäläinen 2001; Chajewska, Koller, and Parr 2000;
Boutilier 2002), but has received somewhat less attention
in the recommender community (we discuss exceptions below). Bayesian methods have proven to be conceptually appealing for elicitation; in particular, expected value of in-

Our second contribution leverages this ﬂexibility—we
propose a novel elicitation strategy based on partial comparison queries. In multi-attribute domains where items have
large numbers of attributes, asking a user to compare complete items can be impractical (e.g., with voice interfaces)
or cognitively burdensome. Instead we ask the user to compare partially instantiated items, with only a small number
of attributes speciﬁed, as is common in decision analysis

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10292

