The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Lifelong Learning with a Changing Action Set
Yash Chandak,1 Georgios Theocharous,2 Chris Nota,1 Philip S. Thomas1
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2 Adobe Research
{ychandak, cnota, pthomas}@cs.umass.edu, theochar@adobe.com

algorithms that can continually adapt to such changes in the
action set over the agent’s lifetime?

Abstract
In many real-world sequential decision making problems, the
number of available actions (decisions) can vary over time.
While problems like catastrophic forgetting, changing transition dynamics, changing rewards functions, etc. have been
well-studied in the lifelong learning literature, the setting
where the size of the action set changes remains unaddressed.
In this paper, we present ﬁrst steps towards developing an
algorithm that autonomously adapts to an action set whose
size changes over time. To tackle this open problem, we break
it into two problems that can be solved iteratively: inferring
the underlying, unknown, structure in the space of actions and
optimizing a policy that leverages this structure. We demonstrate the efﬁciency of this approach on large-scale real-world
lifelong learning problems.

Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a successful class of methods for solving sequential decision making
problems. However, excluding notable exceptions that we
discuss later (Boutilier et al. 2018; Mandel et al. 2017), its
applications have been limited to settings where the set of
actions is ﬁxed. This is likely because RL algorithms are
designed to solve a mathematical formalization of decision
problems called Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman 2014), wherein the set of available actions is ﬁxed. To
begin addressing our lifelong learning problem, we ﬁrst extend the standard MDP formulation to incorporate this aspect
of changing action set size. Motivated by the regularities in
real-world problems, we consider an underlying, unknown,
structure in the space of actions from which new actions are
generated. We then theoretically analyze the difference between what an algorithm can achieve with only the actions
that are available at one point in time, and the best that the
algorithm could achieve if it had access to the entire underlying space of actions (and knew the structure of this space).
Leveraging insights from this theoretical analysis, we then
study how the structure of the underlying action space can be
recovered from interactions with the environment, and how
algorithms can be developed to use this structure to facilitate
lifelong learning.

Introduction
Real-world problems are often non-stationary. That is, parts
of the problem speciﬁcation change over time. We desire
autonomous systems that continually adapt by capturing the
regularities in such changes, without the need to learn from
scratch after every change. In this work, we address one form
of lifelong learning for sequential decision making problems,
wherein the set of possible actions (decisions) varies over
time. Such a situation is omnipresent in real-world problems.
For example, in robotics it is natural to add control components over the lifetime of a robot to enhance its ability to
interact with the environment. In hierarchical reinforcement
learning, an agent can create new options (Sutton, Precup,
and Singh 1999) over its lifetime, which are in essence new
actions. In medical decision support systems for drug prescription, new procedures and medications are continually
discovered. In product recommender systems, new products
are constantly added to the stock, and in tutorial recommendation systems, new tutorials are regularly developed, thereby
continuously increasing the number of available actions for a
recommender engine. These examples capture the broad idea
that, for an agent that is deployed in real world settings, the
possible decisions it can make changes over time, and motivates the question that we aim to answer: how do we develop

As in the standard RL setting, when facing a changing
action set, the parameterization of the policy plays an important role. The key consideration here is how to parameterize
the policy and adapt its parameters when the set of available
actions changes. To address this problem, we leverage the
structure in the underlying action space to parameterize the
policy such that it is invariant to the cardinality of the action
set—changing the number of available actions does not require changes to the number of parameters or the structure of
the policy. Leveraging the structure of the underlying action
space also improves generalization by allowing the agent to
infer the outcomes of actions similar to actions already taken.
These advantages make our approach ideal for lifelong learning problems where the action set changes over time, and
where quick adaptation to these changes, via generalization
of prior knowledge about the impact of actions, is beneﬁcial.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3373

