The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Making High-Performance Robots Safe
and Easy to Use For an Introduction to Computing
Joseph Spitzer,1 Joydeep Biswas,2 Arjun Guha1
University of Massachusetts Amherst1 , University of Texas at Austin2

Abstract

Student Laptops

Robots are a popular platform for introducing computing and
artiﬁcial intelligence to novice programmers. However, programming state-of-the-art robots is very challenging, and requires knowledge of concurrency, operation safety, and software engineering skills, which can take years to teach. In
this paper, we present an approach to introducing computing that allows students to safely and easily program highperformance robots. We develop a platform for students to
program RoboCup Small Size League robots using JavaScript.
The platform 1) ensures physical safety at several levels
of abstraction, 2) allows students to program robots using
JavaScript in the browser, without the need to install software, and 3) presents a simpliﬁed JavaScript semantics that
shields students from confusing language features. We discuss our experience running a week-long workshop using this
platform, and analyze over 3,000 student-written program revisions to provide empirical evidence that our approach does
help students.

1

Browser IDE

• Files 1
• Compiler 2
• Viewer
• RoboJS 3

Google Cloud
1

Robots
3

Simulators
2

2

3
2

3 2

2
2

Middleware
3

3

• Vision
• Safety
• Radio

3

Controller
KEY: 1 = Source Code; 2 = World State; 3 = Robot Commands

Figure 1: A schematic representation of the major components and data ﬂow in our system.

1) SSL robots are compelling because they exhibit highperformance behaviors and demonstrate what state-of-theart robots can do. For example, they are omnidirectional,
move at high speeds, and can manipulate a ball rapidly.
2) We can explain and demonstrate how the robots were built
and the equipment needed to do so, namely CNC mills and
CAD tools. 3) SSL robots are designed to compete in teams,
thus students can use them to write cooperative and competitive agents for soccer and other activities (e.g. robot tag or
navigation in a maze). 4) Soccer is a well-known domain.
However, high-performance robots such as ours, are not
well-suited for novice programmers. 1) If programmed incorrectly, the robots can cause injury because they are able
to move very rapidly. 2) We program the robots using a sophisticated low-level C++ API that lends itself to writing
high-performance code, but requires signiﬁcant expertise to
use. 3) For competitive play, the robots employ a multi-tier
abstraction for high-level team-wide planning and low-level
control that continuously updates the robots’ roles (Browning et al. 2005), which makes it difﬁcult to issue simple
movement commands to an individual robot.

Introduction

Robots are frequently used to introduce computing to novice
programmers (Osborne, Thomas, and Forbes 2010; Featherston et al. 2014; Magnenat et al. 2014; Dee et al. 2017;
Gucwa and Cheng 2017; Musicant, Laddha, and Choi 2017;
Paramasivam et al. 2017; Doran and Clark 2018; Paspallis
et al. 2018). Since they are a hands-on medium, it is relatively easy to make an engaging robotics-based curriculum.
Moreover, robots are a natural platform to introduce a variety of core STEM subjects, including geometry, mechanics,
and programming. However, many robotics-based curricula
use robots that are designed for education, and do not represent the state-of-the-art in robotics (Osborne, Thomas, and
Forbes 2010; Featherston et al. 2014; Magnenat et al. 2014;
Dee et al. 2017; Gucwa and Cheng 2017; Musicant, Laddha, and Choi 2017; Estrada 2017; Doran and Clark 2018;
Paspallis et al. 2018).
Our research group maintains a team of soccer-playing
robots that compete in the RoboCup Small Size League
(SSL) tournament (Weitzenfeld et al. 2015). We designed,
built, and programmed these robots ourselves, and wanted
to use them in an outreach workshop for several reasons.

Contributions The diagram in Figure 1 depicts the design
of our system, which addresses these challenges.
1. We develop a robot control platform that checks for
safety at several layers of abstraction, which allows
novices to safely work with high-performance RoboCup
SSL robots.

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13469

