The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Partial Multi-Label Learning with Noisy Label Identiﬁcation
Ming-Kun Xie, Sheng-Jun Huang∗
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 211106
{mkxie, huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

:NK)GTJOJGZK9KZ
'II[XGZKUTKYOTHRGIQ

Partial multi-label learning (PML) deals with problems where
each instance is assigned with a candidate label set, which
contains multiple relevant labels and some noisy labels. Recent studies usually solve PML problems with the disambiguation strategy, which recovers ground-truth labels from
the candidate label set by simply assuming that the noisy labels are generated randomly. In real applications, however,
noisy labels are usually caused by some ambiguous contents of the example. Based on this observation, we propose
a partial multi-label learning approach to simultaneously recover the ground-truth information and identify the noisy labels. The two objectives are formalized in a uniﬁed framework with trace norm and 1 norm regularizers. Under the
supervision of the observed noise-corrupted label matrix, the
multi-label classiﬁer and noisy label identiﬁer are jointly optimized by incorporating the label correlation exploitation and
feature-induced noise model. Extensive experiments on synthetic as well as real-world data sets validate the effectiveness
of the proposed approach.

NU[YK

ZXKK

IGX

ROMNZ

IRU[J
LRU]KX IGZ
VKUVRK

Figure 1: An example of partial multi-label learning. The
image is partially labeled by noisy annotators in crowdsourcing. Among the candidate labels, house, tree, car, light and
cloud are ground-truth labels while ﬂower, cat and people
are noisy labels.

shown in Figure 1), among the candidate labels annotated
by annotators, only some of them are accurate ones owing to
potential unreliable annotators. The scenario has been formalized as a learning framework called partial multi-label
learning (PML) by (Xie and Huang 2018).
To solve PML problems, one straightforward method is to
simply treat all the candidate labels as relevant ones. Then
the PML problem can be solved by standard multi-label
learning algorithms, e.g., Binary Relevance (BR) (Boutell et
al. 2004), ML-kNN (Zhang and Zhou 2007), CPLST(Chen
and Lin 2012) and so on. However, such methods will be
misled by the noisy labels in the candidate set, and fail to
generalize well on future data.
In order to deal with the challenge, several PML techniques are proposed recently. Among them, the most commonly used strategy to learn from PML examples is disambiguation. It tires to recover ground-truth labeling information from candidate labels, by either introducing labeling
conﬁdences (Xie and Huang 2018; Fang and Zhang 2019) or
employing low-rank and sparse decomposition scheme (Lijuan Sun and Jin 2019). Despite the advances these methods have achieved, a potential limitation is that they neglect
the cause of noisy labels in the candidate set, which may
be an important information for recovering the ground-truth
labels. These methods typically assume that noisy labels are
generated randomly, which may be not consistent with many

Introduction
Multi-label learning (MLL) solves problems where each object is assigned with multiple class labels simultaneously
(Zhang and Zhou 2014). For instance, an image may be annotated with labels sea, sunset and beach. A large number of
recent works have witnessed the great successes that MLL
has achieved in many research areas, e.g., music emotion
recognition (Trohidis et al. 2008), text categorization (Lin et
al. 2018) and image annotation (Chen et al. 2019).
In traditional multi-label studies, a basic assumption is
that each training instance has been precisely annotated with
all of its relevant labels. However, in many real-world scenarios, it is difﬁcult and costly to obtain precise annotations.
Instead, it is more common that a set of candidate labels are
roughly assigned by noisy annotators. In addition to the relevant labels, the candidate set may also contain some noisy
labels, where the number of relevant or noisy labels is unknown. For example, in crowdsourcing image tagging (as
∗
This research was supported by NSFC(61876081, 61572252),
the Aerospace Power Funds No. 6141B09050342 and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, NO.
NE2019104.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6454

