The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Electing Successive Committees: Complexity and Algorithms
Robert Bredereck, Andrzej Kaczmarczyk, Rolf Niedermeier
Technische Universität Berlin, Chair of Algorithmics and Computational Complexity
{robert.bredereck, a.kaczmarczyk, rolf.niedermeier}@tu-berlin.de

language skills
Mandarin
Spanish
French
Arabic
Hindi

Abstract
We introduce successive committees elections. The point is
that our new model additionally takes into account that “committee members” shall have a short term of ofﬁce possibly
over a consecutive time period (e.g., to limit the inﬂuence
of elitist power cartels or to keep the social costs of overloading committees as small as possible) but at the same time
overly frequent elections are to be avoided (e.g., for the sake
of long-term planning). Thus, given voter preferences over a
set of candidates, a desired committee size, a number of committees to be elected, and an upper bound on the number of
committees that each candidate can participate in, the goal is
to ﬁnd a “best possible” series of committees representing the
electorate.
We show a sharp complexity dichotomy between computing
series of committees of size at most two (mostly in polynomial time) and of committees of size at least three (mostly
NP-hard). Depending on the voting rule, however, even for
larger committee sizes we can spot some tractable cases.

A




B




C



D



E



F



Table 1: The company’s available data on individual employees qualiﬁcations. Symbol  denotes approval.

per member. Notably, our setting is still an ofﬂine, not an
online scenario.
Our model can be applied when a selection of a “best”
series of same-sized groups (committees) of candidates is
needed. For illustration, consider the following simple example. Imagine we are operating a big company providing a
complex service system to customers. More speciﬁcally, at
the beginning of every month the task is to build and schedule weekly size-two service teams throughout the month.
The company follows a travel policy aimed at keeping a
necessary trade-off between their employees’ travel friction
and its business outcomes (see a ﬁeld study on road warriors (Airlines Reporting Corporation 2018) describing the
importance of such policies). Thus, each employee can be
“on external service” (including traveling and hotel stays)
for at most two weeks per month. For the same reason,
the company favors consecutive service periods for every
employee. Moreover, for each employee there is data (provided both by the customers and by the internal ﬁles of
the company) that, in the simplest form, approves or disapproves each employee for certain qualiﬁcations (e.g., language skills).
At ﬁrst glance, it seems beneﬁcial to select the “highest
scoring” employees according to the data to form the service
teams. However, if these employees hold very similar qualiﬁcations (i.e., are supported by a relatively coherent set of
the “voters”), then this simple “greedy strategy” fails to provide a good selection of (matched-up) service teams. In particular, it may suffer from lack of diversity. Such a situation
is exhibited in Example 1. For clarity, the example features a
very small election where an optimal outcome can be found
by checking all possible solutions. However, this approach
starts to be computationally infeasible for only little bigger

Introduction
The study of committee elections, that is, to elect a group
of representatives for a group of voters, gained strong interest over the recent years (Faliszewski et al. 2017). In this
work, we consider the election of committees whose members have short term of ofﬁce (possibly in consecutive time
slots). This is motivated by, for example, avoiding the overloading of committee members or excluding the danger of
elitist power cartels. Modeling this, we arrive at the following, to the best of our knowledge new model for multiwinner
voting: The input is a set of preferences over candidates (the
votes) and a natural number specifying how many committees, each of same ﬁxed size, should be built. The goal is to
output a corresponding series of same-size committees such
that, altogether, we get a “best possible” selection. To this
end, we introduce committee evaluation functions (based on
multiwinner voting rules) together with egalitarian and utilitarian aggregation functions, thus yielding an overall evaluation of the quality of a series of committees. Moreover,
we allow to model constraints such as a committee member
having to serve in a subseries of consecutive committees and
allowing only a limited number of committee participations
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1846

