The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Teaching Constraint Programming Using Fable-Based Learning
Mavis Chan,1 Cecilia Chun,1 Holly Fung,1 Jimmy H.M. Lee,2 Peter J. Stuckey3∗
1
2

Centre for Learning Enhancement And Research, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
3
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
{miym, kawaichun, hollyfung}@cuhk.edu.hk, jlee@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, peter.stuckey@monash.edu

timetables, and delivering power to our homes. Despite their
fundamental importance, all of these problems are a nightmare to solve using traditional undergraduate computer science methods.
Constraint Programming (CP) is an approach to tackling
Discrete Optimization problems. The method consists of
ﬁrst coming up with a mathematically precise model of the
problem and then submitting the model to generic constraint
solving and optimization algorithms. Since CP is not widely
taught, we set ourselves the task of promoting CP using the
MiniZinc modeling language and CP solving technology. In
order to reach out and educate the wider community, we utilized Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) (Blackmon
and Major 2017), which provide a platform for disseminating high quality training rapidly and widely to the masses.
MOOCs beneﬁt learners of different sectors such as those
without ready access to higher learning, those seeking to
upgrade their employment skills, and those engaging in lifelong learning.
A typical MOOC consists of lecturing videos optionally
with interactive quizzes. Teachers can provide further online resources for learners’ to pursue additional self-learning
activities. There will usually be an online forum to facilitate communications amongst the teachers and the learners. Many MOOCs provide assessment tasks and evaluate
students’ submissions, with peer grading or auto-grading
software. A problem with traditional MOOCs, however, is
student engagement and retention. We propose to enhance
student engagement by using Fable-based Learning so that
learning is fun, immersive and contextualized.
In Fable-based Learning, all lectures are designed around
the progression of a coherent story plot. Learners are immersed in movie-like settings as they progress along the lecture videos. Pedagogically, each lecture starts with a short
animation both to tell stories and present a challenging problem as the learning context for the materials to be covered in
the lecture. As such, we expect learners to identify themselves as the main characters in the story, have a better understanding of the challenges to be solved, and feel the urge
to learn new techniques to solve the challenges.
We present the experience of utilizing Chinese classic
novels to design three MOOCs on modeling techniques and

Abstract
The paper presents the pedagogical innovations and experience of the co-development of three MOOCs on the subject of
“Modeling and Solving Discrete Optimization Problems” by
two universities. In a nutshell, the MOOCs feature the FableBased Learning approach, which is a form of problem-based
learning encapsulated in a coherent story plot. Each lecture
video begins with an animation that tells a story following
a novel. The protagonists of the story encounter a problem
requiring technical assistance from the two professors from
modern time via a magical tablet granted to them by a fairy
god. The new pedagogy aims at increasing learners’ motivation and interests as well as situating the learners in a coherent
learning context. In addition to scriptwriting, animation production and situating the teaching materials in the story plot,
another challenge of the project is the remote distance between the two institutions as well as the need to produce all
teaching materials in both (Mandarin) Chinese and English
to cater for different geographic learning needs. The MOOCs
have been running recurrently on Coursera since 2017. We
present learner statistics and feedback, and discuss our experience with and preliminary observations of adopting the
online materials in a Flipped Classroom setting.

Introduction
Discrete Optimization problems require us to make a ﬁnite
number of decisions, each from a ﬁnite number of possibilities, such that some constraints are satisﬁed and the solution found is “good” under some objective measure. It is a
common form of decision making, and ubiquitous in our society. Its applications range from solving Sudoku puzzles to
arranging seating in a wedding banquet. The same technology can schedule planes and their crews, coordinate the production of steel, and organize the transportation of iron ore
from the mines to the ports. Good decisions in manpower
and material resources management also allow corporations
to improve proﬁt by millions of dollars. Similar problems
also underpin much of our daily lives and are part of determining daily delivery routes for packages, making school
∗
The author is indebted to the University of Melbourne for supporting the MOOC development.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13423

