The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

EHSOD: CAM-Guided End-to-End
Hybrid-Supervised Object Detection with Cascade Reﬁnement
∗

∗

Linpu Fang,1 Hang Xu,2 † Zhili Liu,2
Sarah Parisot,2 Zhenguo Li2
1

South China University of Technology
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract

horse person

Object detectors trained on fully-annotated data currently
yield state of the art performance but require expensive manual annotations. On the other hand, weakly-supervised detectors have much lower performance and cannot be used
reliably in a realistic setting. In this paper, we study the
hybrid-supervised object detection problem, aiming to train
a high quality detector with only a limited amount of fullyannotated data and fully exploiting cheap data with imagelevel labels. State of the art methods typically propose an iterative approach, alternating between generating pseudo-labels
and updating a detector. This paradigm requires careful manual hyper-parameter tuning for mining good pseudo labels at
each round and is quite time-consuming. To address these issues, we present EHSOD, an end-to-end hybrid-supervised
object detection system which can be trained in one shot
on both fully and weakly-annotated data. Speciﬁcally, based
on a two-stage detector, we proposed two modules to fully
utilize the information from both kinds of labels: 1) CAMRPN module aims at ﬁnding foreground proposals guided
by a class activation heat-map; 2) hybrid-supervised cascade
module further reﬁnes the bounding-box position and classiﬁcation with the help of an auxiliary head compatible with
image-level data. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method and it achieves comparable results on multiple object detection benchmarks with
only 30% fully-annotated data, e.g. 37.5% mAP on COCO.
We will release the code and the trained models.

Heavily Annotated

motorbike
motorbike

plane
…

Images with instance-level labels
sheep

Internet

motorbike
person

plane
…

Easily Accessed
Images with image-level labels
End-to-end training with hybrid-supervised data

horse
person

EHSOD Model

Figure 1: An illustration of our hybrid-supervised object
detection task. Hybrid-supervised object detection problem
focuses on training a good detector with a) limited fullyannotated data with bounding-box labels; b) fully utilizing cheap data with image-level labels. The conventional
weakly-supervised methods usually require alternating iterative strategy while we aim to design an end-to-end hybridsupervised object detection which can fully utilize both
kinds of data.
severe when the number of categories is large. Thus, training a customized good object detector with a limited budget becomes a crucial problem in community. On the other
hand, image-level labels that indicate the presence of an object can be acquired cheaply even in large amounts as such
labels can be collected easily using an Internet crawler in
an image search engine. Unfortunately, training solely with
weakly-supervised methods yields models of subpar performance that cannot be reliably used in real life scenarios. As
a result, we study the Hybrid Supervised Object Detection
(HSOD) problem focusing on training a good detector with
some fully-annotated data with bounding-box labels while
fully utilizing weakly-annotated data with image-level labels. Note that this task is different from semi-supervised
detection settings which usually focus on training with some
existing categories with annotated labels and infering on
some new categories.
The current state-of-the-art weakly-supervised/few-shot

Introduction
Recent advances of object detectors trained on large-scale
datasets with instance-level annotations have shown promising results which predict both the class labels and the locations of objects in an image ( Lin et al.; Redmon and
Farhadi; Li et al.; Wang et al. 2017a; 2017; 2018; 2019).
Those detectors are typically trained under full supervision
which requires huge manual annotations of the objects’ locations and categories for a large number of training images. However, it is expensive and time-consuming to recruit annotators for labeling the images. This becomes more
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding Author: xbjxh@live.com
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10778

