The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MTSS: Learn from Multiple Domain
Teachers and Become a Multi-Domain Dialogue Expert
Shuke Peng,1,2 Feng Ji,2 Zehao Lin,1,2 Shaobo Cui,2 Haiqing Chen,2 Yin Zhang1∗
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{pengsk, georgelin, zhangyin98}@zju.edu.cn, {zhongxiu.jf, yuanchun.csb, haiqing.chenhq}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Math Teacher

How to build a high-quality multi-domain dialogue system is
a challenging work due to its complicated and entangled dialogue state space among each domain, which seriously limits
the quality of dialogue policy, and further affects the generated response. In this paper, we propose a novel method to acquire a satisfying policy and subtly circumvent the knotty dialogue state representation problem in the multi-domain setting. Inspired by real school teaching scenarios, our method
is composed of multiple domain-speciﬁc teachers and a universal student. Each individual teacher only focuses on one
speciﬁc domain and learns its corresponding domain knowledge and dialogue policy based on a precisely extracted single
domain dialogue state representation. Then, these domainspeciﬁc teachers impart their domain knowledge and policies
to a universal student model and collectively make this student model a multi-domain dialogue expert. Experiment results show that our method reaches competitive results with
SOTAs in both multi-domain and single domain setting.

1

Other Teachers

Student

Science Teacher

History Teacher

Figure 1: Learning scenarios in school

2016; Yao, Zweig, and Peng 2015). The aforementioned approaches are almost satisfactory in a single domain setting
dialogue task such as tickets booking since the number of the
slots, and the entities are relatively small in a single domain
setting. Nevertheless, the performance of existing dialogue
state representation approaches deteriorates rapidly when it
comes to multi-domain setting. For the state tracking approach, the ontology space grows enormous in multi-domain
dialogue systems. This growing ontology space leads to the
accuracy degeneracy of dialogue state tracking, which limits the performance of dialogue systems. As for the hidden state representation approach, the human-labelled semantic information cannot be fully used. Besides, a hidden state representation is almost a black box which makes
the dialogue system incomprehensible and hard to debug.
The poor-quality and inaccurate multi-domain dialogue state
representation severely limits the quality of multi-domain
dialogue policy and further affects the overall performance
of dialogue systems.
To build a satisfactory multi-domain dialogue system,
we propose a model named Multiple Teachers Single Student (MTSS) to subtly circumvent the complex multidomain dialogue state representation problem and learn a
quality dialogue policy in a multi-domain setting. We use
multiple teacher models (one for one domain to learn a satisfying domain-speciﬁc dialogue policy) to teach a student
model to become a multi-domain dialogue expert. Our intuition comes from a real-life scenario in which a student
has to learn many subjects such as Math, History and Science (see Figure 1). Usually, there is a full-time teacher

Introduction

Spoken Dialogue Systems (SDS) are widely used as assistants to help users in processing daily affairs such as booking tickets or reserving hotels. A typical dialogue system
consists of three key components: spoken language understanding (SLU), dialogue manager (DM), and natural language generation (NLG)(Maes 2005; Maes and Gopalakrishnan 2006). Within the procedure above, dialogue state
representation is crucial since DM needs a precise representation of the present dialogue state to select an appropriate action. There are mainly two types of approaches for
dialogue state representation: the state tracking approach
and the hidden vector approach. The state tracking approach is to use a belief state tracker to extract the ontology
from users’ utterances (Sun et al. 2014; Mrksic et al. 2017;
Zhong, Xiong, and Socher 2018). Those extracted ontology,
known as slots, are used as the state representation. The hidden vector approach, more popular utilized in end-to-end
dialogue systems, is to use the hidden vector compressed
from users’ utterance as the state presentation (Serban et al.
∗

Corresponding Author: Yin Zhang, zhangyin98@zju.edu.cn
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8608

