The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Task Self-Supervised Learning for Disﬂuency Detection
Shaolei Wang,1 Wanxiang Che,1∗ Qi Liu,2 Pengda Qin,3 Ting Liu,1 William Yang Wang4
1

Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
University of Oxford
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
4
University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
{slwang, car, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn, qi.liu@st-hughs.ox.ac.uk, qinpengda@bupt.edu.cn, william@cs.ucsb.edu

I want a flight [ to Boston + {um} to Denver ]

Abstract

RM

Most existing approaches to disﬂuency detection heavily rely
on human-annotated data, which is expensive to obtain in
practice. To tackle the training data bottleneck, we investigate methods for combining multiple self-supervised tasksi.e., supervised tasks where data can be collected without
manual labeling. First, we construct large-scale pseudo training data by randomly adding or deleting words from unlabeled news data, and propose two self-supervised pre-training
tasks: (i) tagging task to detect the added noisy words. (ii)
sentence classiﬁcation to distinguish original sentences from
grammatically-incorrect sentences. We then combine these
two tasks to jointly train a network. The pre-trained network is then ﬁne-tuned using human-annotated disﬂuency detection training data. Experimental results on the commonly
used English Switchboard test set show that our approach can
achieve competitive performance compared to the previous
systems (trained using the full dataset) by using less than 1%
(1000 sentences) of the training data. Our method trained on
the full dataset signiﬁcantly outperforms previous methods,
reducing the error by 21% on English Switchboard.

IM

RP

Figure 1: A sentence from the English Switchboard
corpus with disﬂuencies annotated. RM=Reparandum,
IM=Interregnum, RP=Repair. The preceding RM is corrected by the following RP.
Type
repair
repair
repetition
restart

Annotation
[ I just + I ] enjoy working
[ we want + {well} in our area we want ] to
[it’s + {uh} it’s ] almost like
[ we would like + ] let’s go to the

Table 1: Different types of disﬂuencies.

in that they are in free form. As a result, most previous disﬂuency detection work focuses on detecting reparandums.
Most work (Zayats and Ostendorf 2018; Lou and Johnson 2017; Wang et al. 2017; Jamshid Lou, Anderson, and
Johnson 2018; Zayats and Ostendorf 2019) on disﬂuency
detection heavily relies on human-annotated data, which is
scarce and expensive to obtain in practice. In this paper,
we investigate self-supervised learning method (Agrawal,
Carreira, and Malik 2015; Fernando et al. 2017) to tackle
this training data bottleneck. Self-supervised learning aims
to train a network on auxiliary tasks where ground-truth
is obtained automatically. The merits of this line work are
that they do not require manually annotations but still utilize supervised learning by inferring supervisory signals
from the data structure. Neural networks pre-trained with
these tasks can be ﬁne-tuned to perform well on standard
supervised task with less manually-labeled data than networks which are initialized randomly. In natural language
processing domain, self-supervised research mainly focus
on word embedding (Mikolov et al. 2013a; 2013b) or language model learning (Bengio et al. 2003; Peters et al. 2018;
Radford et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019). Motivated by the
success of self-supervised learning, we propose two selfsupervised tasks for disﬂuency detection task, as shown in

Introduction
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) outputs often contain various disﬂuencies, which create barriers to subsequent text processing tasks like parsing, machine translation, and summarization. Disﬂuency detection (Zayats, Ostendorf, and Hajishirzi 2016; Wang, Che, and Liu 2016;
Wu et al. 2015) focuses on recognizing the disﬂuencies from
ASR outputs. As shown in Figure 1, a standard annotation
of the disﬂuency structure indicates the reparandum (words
that the speaker intends to discard), the interruption point
(denoted as ‘+’, marking the end of the reparandum), an optional interregnum (ﬁlled pauses, discourse cue words, etc.)
and the associated repair (Shriberg 1994).
Ignoring the interregnum, disﬂuencies are categorized
into three types: restarts, repetitions and corrections. Table
1 gives a few examples. Interregnums are relatively easier to
detect as they are often ﬁxed phrases, e.g. “uh”, “you know”.
On the other hand, reparandums are more difﬁcult to detect
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9193

