The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Mining on Heterogeneous Manifolds for Zero-Shot Cross-Modal Image Retrieval
Fan Yang,1,2 Zheng Wang,2,∗ Jing Xiao,2 Shin’chi Satoh1,2
1
The University of Tokyo, Japan
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
{yang, wangz, jing xiao, satoh}@nii.ac.jp
2

cross-modal model usually has two streams where each of
them handles images input from each modality. Those two
streams join together at the tail of the model, mapping
image features from two modalities into a shared feature
space, with a classiﬁer attached afterward (Ye et al. 2018a;
2018b). Although such a model memorized how to map
training images of the same class into a concentrated cluster whichever modalities they are from, we argue that aligning classes in the training set across different modalities inevitably distorts the remaining manifolds consists of samples
of unseen classes.
Fig. 1 visualizes this phenomenon. Fig. 1a shows the feature distribution of digits 7 to 9 in the MNIST dataset where
features are extracted by a single-modal model which is
trained by using other digits in the MNIST dataset only.
While Fig. 1b shows the feature distribution for the SVHN
dataset. Although imperfect, it can be observed that most
image features are concentrated around their class centers.
The cross-modal model, instead, is trained with images from
both modalities (i.e. modalities of MNIST and SVHN) and
results in a cluttered distribution in its uniform feature space
(Figs. 1c and 1d). Particularly, it can be observed that the
manifold of digit 9 in Fig. 1d is isolated into several blobs.
Needless to say, this issue directly results in poor crossmodal retrieval performance.
Some may ascribe such a phenomenon to the over-ﬁtting,
but we have another plausible interpretation. Suppose that
we have images of lemon, lime, and mango. In the color domain, lemon is more similar to mango than lime in terms of
color. While in the monochrome domain, lemon is closer to
lime than mango in terms of shape. These domain-speciﬁc
relationships are helpful in forming the feature distribution
in every single domain. However, when we train a crossmodal model by using all images of lemon and lime, the conﬂicts among those relationships (lemon and lime are close in
shape but far in color) ask both domains to adapt its feature
space for each other. As a result, the feature space of each
domain is distorted and the feature manifold of the unseen
class mango is very likely to be torn into parts.
In this work, we propose to leverage the domain-speciﬁc
information by mining on manifolds in different singlemodal feature spaces. Our idea is straightforward. Now that

Abstract
Most recent approaches for the zero-shot cross-modal image
retrieval map images from different modalities into a uniform
feature space to exploit their relevance by using a pre-trained
model. Based on the observation that manifolds of zero-shot
images are usually deformed and incomplete, we argue that
the manifolds of unseen classes are inevitably distorted during the training of a two-stream model that simply maps images from different modalities into a uniform space. This issue directly leads to poor cross-modal retrieval performance.
We propose a bi-directional random walk scheme to mining
more reliable relationships between images by traversing heterogeneous manifolds in the feature space of each modality. Our proposed method beneﬁts from intra-modal distributions to alleviate the interference caused by noisy similarities in the cross-modal feature space. As a result, we
achieved great improvement in the performance of the thermal v.s. visible image retrieval task. The code of this paper:
https://github.com/fyang93/cross-modal-retrieval

1

Introduction

The ongoing prosperity of deep learning lowers the barrier
to produce reliable image representations. Given robust image representations, previous studies have made tremendous
progress on the task of image retrieval. Although most image retrieval tasks are enclosed in a single modality, e.g. all
images are from the RGB domain, a rising trend is to break
through this limitation so that images can be queried across
different modalities. However, a huge performance gap can
still be observed between intra-modal and cross-modal image retrieval tasks (Ye et al. 2018b; Wang et al. 2019;
2018). We speciﬁcally focus on the zero-shot cross-modal
image retrieval where the testing images are sampled from
classes that never appeared in the training set.
For a single-modal task, it is general to ﬁne-tune a model
pre-trained on ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) and extract
image features from its intermediate layers. While for a
cross-modal task, the images come from two subsets corresponding to two different modalities. In this regard, the
∗

corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12589

