The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Learning Based Branch and Bound
for Maximum Common Subgraph Related Problems
Yanli Liu,1,4,5 Chu-Min Li,2∗ Hua Jiang,3† Kun He1‡
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
MIS, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, France
3
Yunnan University, China
4
WuHan University of Science and Technology, China
5
State Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
yanlil2008@163.com, chu-min.li@u-picardie.fr, huajiang@ynu.edu.cn, brooklet60@hust.edu.cn
2010; Bahiense et al. 2012; Levi 1973; Hoffmann, McCreesh, and Reilly 2017; Lodi and Zarpellon 2017). Some
techniques of constraint programming for ﬁltering domain
are used in SI algorithms (Solnon 2010; Cordella et al. 2004;
Zampelli, Deville, and Solnon 2010; Bonnici and Giugno
2017). In this paper, we focus on the branch-and-bound
(BnB) scheme for the MCS and extend it to the MCCS
and SI. Examples of existing BnB algorithms for the MCS
can be found in (Mcgregor 2010; Ndiaye and Solnon 2011;
McCreesh, Prosser, and Trimble 2017).
It is well-known that the performance of a BnB algorithm
crucially depends on its branching heuristic. The branching
heuristic in McSplit (McCreesh, Prosser, and Trimble 2017),
the current best BnB algorithm for the MCS, aims at minimizing the number of branches for the current branching
point and uses vertex degree to rank the vertices. Unfortunately, due to the NP-hardness of the MCS, the BnB search
tree size may not be predictable in general using vertex degree or any other static feature of a graph.
In this paper, we propose to use reinforcement learning
(RL) to discover which branching choice yields the greatest
reduction of the search tree by trying them during the search.
Speciﬁcally, we consider the BnB algorithm as an agent and
each branching choice as an action. When the agent takes an
action, it receives a reward determined by the consequence
of this action, which in our context is the reduction of the
search space. The score of the action depends on the accumulated rewards it received in the past. Then, at every
branching point, the agent selects an action with the greatest
score to branch on.
We implement our branching heuristic on top of McSplit, and design a new algorithm called McSplit+RL. The
new algorithm is extensively evaluated on 24,761 MCS instances from diverse applications (biochemical reaction, images analysis, 3D, 4D objects, complex networks), including
the large instances used in (McCreesh, Prosser, and Trimble 2017) for evaluating McSplit. Since McSplit is already
highly efﬁcient, most instances are very easy for both McSplit and McSplit+RL, and can be solved by all tested algorithms within 10s. We exclude these easy instances that do
not need learning to be solved, and the too hard instances
that none of the tested algorithms can solve within the time

Abstract
The performance of a branch-and-bound (BnB) algorithm
for maximum common subgraph (MCS) problem and its related problems, like maximum common connected subgraph
(MCCS) and induced Subgraph Isomorphism (SI), crucially
depends on the branching heuristic. We propose a branching
heuristic inspired from reinforcement learning with a goal of
reaching a tree leaf as early as possible to greatly reduce the
search tree size. Experimental results show that the proposed
heuristic consistently and signiﬁcantly improves the current
best BnB algorithm for the MCS, MCCS and SI problems.
An analysis is carried out to give insight on why and how reinforcement learning is useful in the new branching heuristic.

Introduction
A graph is a logic model to describe a set of objects and
the relationship of the objects abstracted from real-world
applications. Given two graphs G and H, it is often crucial to determine the similarity of G and H. The Maximum Common induced Subgraph (MCS) problem was introduced for this purpose, consisting in ﬁnding a graph
with as many vertices as possible that is isomorphic to
an induced subgraph in both G and H. If we require the
induced subgraph to be connected, then it is called the
Maximum Common Connected induced Subgraph (MCCS).
They are NP-hard and widely occurs in applications such
as image or video analysis (Bunke and Messmer 1995;
Liu and Lee 2001), information retrieval (Cao, Yang, and
Wang 2011), biochemistry (Giugno et al. 2013; Cootes,
Muggleton, and Sternberg 2007; Faccioli et al. 2005), pattern recognition (Solnon et al. 2015; Conte et al. 2008;
Cordella et al. 2004) and cheminformatics (Raymond, Gardiner, and Willett 2002). A related problem called induced
Subgraph Isomorphism (SI) is to decide whether a small
graph G occurs inside a graph H.
Many approaches have been designed to address MCS
and MCCS, see, e.g, (McCreesh et al. 2016; Mcgregor
∗

The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally to this paper.
Corresponding author.
‡
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2392

