The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reﬁning HTN Methods via Task Insertion with Preferences
Zhanhao Xiao,1 Hai Wan,1 * Hankui Hankz Zhuo,1† Andreas Herzig,2,3
Laurent Perrussel,3 Peilin Chen1
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
IRIT, CNRS, Toulouse, France
3
University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France

main knowledge, a planner may fail to obtain a solution
via decomposition according to the given methods. The
main reason lies in that the given method set is incomplete,
which includes at least an incomplete method lacking subtasks. On the other hand, the hierarchical domain knowledge
comes from the experience and investigation of domain experts, which normally are supposed to be necessary. However, the traditional approaches to learning HTN methods,
such as (Hogg, Muñoz-Avila, and Kuter 2008), only concentrate on declarative goals of compound tasks and omit
hierarchically procedural knowledge obtained from domain
experts.Indeed, these procedural knowledge cannot be expressed by only operator structures (action models), which
can be concluded from (Goldman 2009; Höller et al. 2014).
Therefore, in this paper, we focus on reﬁning HTN methods and keeping the original hierarchical domain knowledge
from domain experts.
To tackle the method incompleteness, Geier and Bercher
(2011) proposed a hybrid planning formalization, HTN planning with task insertion (TIHTN planning), to allow generating plans via decomposing tasks according to the methods but also inserting tasks from outside the given methods.
Example 1 shows a plan with task insertion (called TIHTN
plan) for an HTN problem with incomplete methods. Actually, the TIHTN plan offers a reference to reﬁne the methods by adding the inserted tasks. For example, the method of
airShip can be reﬁned by adding ﬂy as its subtask. It allows
us to absolutely preserve the original domain knowledge to
reﬁne the incomplete methods, further to assist domain experts to improve the HTN domain.

Abstract
Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning is showing its
power in real-world planning. Although domain experts have
partial hierarchical domain knowledge, it is time-consuming
to specify all HTN methods, leaving them incomplete. On the
other hand, traditional HTN learning approaches focus only
on declarative goals, omitting the hierarchical domain knowledge. In this paper, we propose a novel learning framework
to reﬁne HTN methods via task insertion with completely
preserving the original methods. As it is difﬁcult to identify
incomplete methods without designating declarative goals
for compound tasks, we introduce the notion of prioritized
preference to capture the incompleteness possibility of
methods. Speciﬁcally, the framework ﬁrst computes the
preferred completion proﬁle w.r.t. the prioritized preference
to reﬁne the incomplete methods. Then it ﬁnds the minimal
set of reﬁned methods via a method substitution operation.
Experimental analysis demonstrates that our approach is
effective, especially in solving new HTN planning instances.

Introduction
Hierarchical task network (HTN) planning techniques (Erol,
Hendler, and Nau 1994) are increasingly used in a number of real-world applications (Lin, Kuter, and Sirin 2008;
Behnke et al. 2019). In the real-world logistics domain,
such as Amazon and DHL Global Logistics, the shipment
of packages is arranged via decomposition into a more detailed shipment arrangement in a top-down way according to
the predeﬁned HTN methods. In practice, there exist a vast
number of cases occurring, such as the delay caused by the
weather, leading that it is difﬁcult and time-consuming for
humans to ﬁnd all complete methods for all actions. This
suggests that it is important to learn complete methods.
Normally, domain experts have partially hierarchical domain knowledge, which possibly is not sufﬁcient to cover
all desirable solutions (Kambhampati, Mali, and Srivastava 1998). On one hand, with partially hierarchical do-

Example 1. Consider an example in the logistics domain, suppose every task has only one method and a decomposition tree is shown in Figure 1. The initial task
ship(pkg1, whA, shopB) is to ship a package from city A
to city B and it has a method: to ship the package from
the warehouse to the airport by truck, from city A to city
B by plane and from the airport to the shop by truck. But
in case that the plane is not in the airport of city A, the
air transportation task airShip(pkg1, airpA, airpB) cannot
be accomplished, neither can the initial task. When arranging the plane to airport A, ﬂy(plane1, airpA), is done before
loading to the plane, an executable plan is found.

* Corresponding author
†

Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China; Guangdong Province Key
Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, China.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10009

