The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Clustering-Aware Multiple Graph Matching
via Decayed Pairwise Matching Composition
Tianzhe Wang,† Zetian Jiang,† Junchi Yan∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{usedtobe, maple jzt, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

First, we consider the classic two-graph matching setting
involving graph Gi and Gj , in its quadratic assignment programming (QAP) problem formulation (Loiola et al. 2007),
which is also termed by Lawler’s QAP (Lawler 1963):

Abstract
Jointly matching of multiple graphs is challenging and recently has been an active topic in machine learning and
computer vision. State-of-the-art methods have been devised,
however, to our best knowledge there is no effective mechanism that can explicitly deal with the matching of a mixture
of graphs belonging to multiple clusters, e.g., a collection of
bikes and bottles. Seeing its practical importance, we propose
a novel approach for multiple graph matching and clustering. Firstly, for the traditional multi-graph matching setting,
we devise a composition scheme based on a tree structure,
which can be seen as in the between of two strong multigraph matching solvers, i.e., MatchOpt (Yan et al. 2015a) and
CAO (Yan et al. 2016a). In particular, it can be more robust
than MatchOpt against a set of diverse graphs and more efﬁcient than CAO. Then we further extend the algorithm to
the multiple graph matching and clustering setting, by adopting a decaying technique along the composition path, to discount the meaningless matching between graphs in different clusters. Experimental results show the proposed methods achieve excellent trade-off on the traditional multi-graph
matching case, and outperform in both matching and clustering accuracy, as well as time efﬁciency.

J(X) = vec(X) Kvec(X),
X1nj = 1ni ,

X ∈ {0, 1}ni ×nj ,

(1)



X 1ni ≤ 1nj

where the (partial) permutation matrix X indicates node correspondence, and K ∈ Rni nj ×ni nj is often called afﬁnity matrix (Leordeanu and Hebert 2005). The node-to-node
and edge-to-edge afﬁnity information are stored on the diagonal elements and off-diagonal ones, respectively. Apart
from these second-order afﬁnity model, there are methods for hypergraph matching (Chertok and Keller 2010;
Duchenne et al. 2011; Yan et al. 2015b; Zass and Shashua
2008), which often involve an afﬁnity tensor and are shown
more robust against noise, at the cost of higher complexity.
Recently, there are also considerable efforts on multiple
graph matching for its practical utility. For real-world applications, one often has to face with many graphs for matching, which also brings opportunities of fusing the information across graphs to achieve more accurate matchings.
Given N graphs and afﬁnity matrix Kij for each pair Gi
and Gj , (Yan et al. 2015a) shows the following objective:

X∗ = arg max
vec(Xij ) Kij vec(Xij )
(2)

Introduction
Graph matching (GM) refers to ﬁnding node correspondence over two or multiple graphs, based on the afﬁnity information between nodes, edges (Cho, Lee, and Lee 2010;
Gold and Rangarajan 1996), and even hyperedges (Lee, Cho,
and Lee 2011; Ngoc, Gautier, and Hein 2015; Yan et al.
2015b) over graphs. As a robust tool for structural matching against noise and outliers, graph matching has been applied in various computer vision tasks, and it has also been
an intellectual pursuit for devising effective techniques for
solving the problem in an approximate manner, as GM, in
general, is known NP-hard (Garey and Johnson 1990).

X

s.t.

i,j=1,i=j

Xij 1n = 1n


1
n Xij = 1n

Xij , Xji ∈ {0, 1}n×n

Xij = X
ji ,

∀i, j = 1, ..., N

where X = {Xij }N
i,j=1 denotes the matchings for each pair
of graphs. Here the assumption is that all graphs contain the
same number of nodes and some may be outliers.
Most multi-graph matching solvers (Chen, Guibas, and
Huang 2014; Huang and Guibas 2013; Pachauri, Kondor,
and Vikas 2013; Wang, Zhou, and Daniilidis 2018) focus
on improving the initial matchings obtained by two-graph
matchings via the so-called cycle-consistency. In contrast,
another line of works tries to combine both afﬁnity and consistency for optimization (Yan et al. 2016a; 2015a).
Nevertheless, all these works assume that all the graphs
belong to the same cluster and contain common inliers (with

∗
The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally, whose order of authorship is decided through dice rolling. Junchi Yan is the correspondence author and he is also afﬁliated with MoE Key Lab
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. This work is partly supported by NSFC 61972250, the Open
Projects Program of National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1660

