The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Feature Variance Regularization:
A Simple Way to Improve the Generalizability of Neural Networks
Ranran Huang,1,2∗ Hanbo Sun,1 Ji Liu,2 Lu Tian,2
Li Wang,2 Yi Shan,2 Yu Wang1†
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Xilinx
{hrr17, sun-hb17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {jiliu1, lutian, liwa, yishan}@xilinx.com
yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn

phenomenon is especially severe when lacking rich information from sufﬁcient data. Therefore training only with
ERM may provide poor generalization on test data that only
slightly deviate the training data.
Intuitively, we propose to bring confusion to the feature
extraction by pulling features of training samples closer to
each other to penalize the strongly discriminative feature
extraction under ERM training, and this will prevent the
feature extractors from over-representing training samples.
Speciﬁcally, we formalize this intuition and propose Feature
Variance Regularization (FVR) that regularizes the empirical risk using a penalty on the empirical variance of the features.
We also provide a theoretical explanation of FVR based
on previous statistical learning theories (Maurer and Pontil 2009; Namkoong and Duchi 2017; Tolstikhin and Seldin
2013). We prove that through FVR, the discrepancy between
the features of training samples and unobservable true data
will be reduced, and the expected risk will be minimized,
which means better generalizability of the model.
Despite its simplicity, our experiments demonstrate FVR
outperforms many other regularizers, and the performance
is consistent across multiple tasks, including classiﬁcation (CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2009), ImageNet
(Deng et al. 2009), ﬁne-grained datasets (Wah et al. 2011;
Yang et al. 2015; Maji et al. 2013)), and semantic segmentation (Cityscapes (Cordts et al. 2016)). And our ablation
study experiments also show our approach could improve
the transfer ability, make the feature map less responsive
to environmental noises and is robust to label noise and the
choices of hyperparameters.

Abstract
To improve the generalization ability of neural networks, we
propose a novel regularization method that regularizes the
empirical risk using a penalty on the empirical variance of
the features. Intuitively, our approach introduces confusion
into feature extraction and prevents the models from learning features that may relate to speciﬁc training samples. According to our theoretical analysis, our method encourages
models to generate closer feature distributions for the training set and unobservable true data and minimize the expected
risk as well, which allows the model to adapt to new samples better. We provide a thorough empirical justiﬁcation of
our approach, and achieves a greater improvement than other
regularization methods. The experimental results show the effectiveness of our method on multiple visual tasks, including
classiﬁcation (CIFAR100, ImageNet, ﬁne-grained datasets)
and semantic segmentation (Cityscapes).

Introduction
By virtue of a large number of parameters and multiple
nonlinear layers, deep neural networks have powerful abilities to learn the complex relationship between inputs and
outputs, and have demonstrated much impressive success
on a variety of visual tasks in recent years (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016; Sandler et al. 2018;
Ioffe and Szegedy 2015; Paszke et al. 2016). To train neural networks, Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) (Vapnik
1995) is widely adopted as a learning scheme to minimize
prediction errors over training samples. However, through
ERM, large models may memorize some unique feature patterns relating to training samples, especially when available
data is limited. For instance, in order to distinguish visually similar samples with different labels, ERM encourages
models to be as conﬁdent as possible of the predictions, thus
force models to capture the most obviously discriminative
feature representations to separate samples well, which may
be the less generalized feature patterns that only relate to
speciﬁc training samples (i.e. background noises), and this

Related works
Regularization
Numerous methods have been proposed to improve the generalization abilities of neural networks. L1 and L2 regularization (Ng 2004) are widely used to regularize ERM
by constraining model weights. Dropout (Srivastava et al.
2014) ensembles exponentially many thinned networks efﬁciently to avoid over-ﬁtting. Adversarial training (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014) is a regularization method

∗

Work done during an internship at Xilinx.
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4190

