The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

End-to-End Bootstrapping Neural Network for Entity Set Expansion
∗

∗

Lingyong Yan,1,3 Xianpei Han,1,2, Ben He,3,1, Le Sun1,2
1

Chinese Information Processing Laboratory, 2 State Key Laboratory of Computer Science
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{lingyong2014, xianpei, sunle}@iscas.ac.cn, benhe@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract

Iteration 1
seeds

Bootstrapping for entity set expansion (ESE) has long been
modeled as a multi-step pipelined process. Such a paradigm,
unfortunately, often suffers from two main challenges: 1) the
entities are expanded in multiple separate steps, which tends
to introduce noisy entities and results in the semantic drift
problem; 2) it is hard to exploit the high-order entity-pattern
relations for entity set expansion. In this paper, we propose an
end-to-end bootstrapping neural network for entity set expansion, named BootstrapNet, which models the bootstrapping
in an encoder-decoder architecture. In the encoding stage, a
graph attention network is used to capture both the ﬁrst- and
the high-order relations between entities and patterns, and encode useful information into their representations. In the decoding stage, the entities are sequentially expanded through
a recurrent neural network, which outputs entities at each
stage, and its hidden state vectors, representing the target category, are updated at each expansion step. Experimental results demonstrate substantial improvement of our model over
previous ESE approaches.

matched patterns

Iteration 2

expanded entities

went to *
Britain
S1
S2&S3
China
* agreed to
U.S.
minister of *

matched patterns

expanded entities

* said
Moscow
Ford
S4&S1
S2&S3
NASA
Allen
visit *
Thailand
Washington
* hopes that

S1: Matching patterns via expanded entities

S3: Matching entities via selected patterns

S2: Evaluating and selecting patterns

S4: Evaluating and expanding entities

…

Figure 1: An example of the bootstrapping process by unfolding the bootstrapping iterations to a sequence. Patterns
and entities in blue are top scored ones to be selected. Entities with strikethroughs are noisy entities.

used to boost the successive expansions; and in the pipeline
paradigm, the expanded entities from previous steps are directly used as the golden entities to guide the next expansion
(Riloff and Jones 1999; Curran, Murphy, and Scholz 2007;
Gupta and Manning 2014; Yan et al. 2019), which may
cause the expansion process drifting to other categories as
not all expanded entities are correct. For example, in Figure
1, when expanding the geopolitical entities (GPE), the noisy
entity “NASA” selects a general pattern “* said”, resulting in
selection of other noisy entities (“Ford” and “Allen”) in the
subsequent steps. To resolve the semantic drift problem, we
argue that the expansion steps should be tightly coupled so
that: 1) more information from previous expansion steps can
be better exploited, e.g., the conﬁdence scores of entities; 2)
future expansion results can be used as feedback for ﬁltering
out noisy entities.
Second, it is hard to exploit the high-order entity-pattern
relations for entity set expansion. Due to the lack of extra
supervision, previous studies mainly used the entity-pattern
matching statistics for entity/pattern evaluation (Riloff and
Jones 1999; Curran, Murphy, and Scholz 2007; Shi et al.
2014; Zupon et al. 2019). However, these methods only exploit the ﬁrst-order entity-pattern relations, while ignoring
the useful information from the high-order relations, which
have been proven useful in many information extraction
tasks (Riedel et al. 2013; Chen et al. 2006).
To address the above two problems, this paper proposes a

Introduction
Bootstrapping is a classical technique for entity set expansion (ESE) (Riloff and Jones 1999), as well as many
other information extraction tasks such as relation extraction (Batista, Martins, and Silva 2015; Gupta, Roth, and
Schütze 2018) and event extraction (Liao and Grishman
2010). Bootstrapping has long been modeled as a multi-step
pipelined process. Starting from several seed instances, a
bootstrapping ESE system expands new instances by iteratively matching patterns using expanded entities, evaluating
and selecting new patterns, matching entities using selected
patterns, and eventually, expanding new entities based on the
quality evaluation (see example in Figure 1).
However, such a multi-step pipeline paradigm often suffers from two challenges.
First, the entities are expanded in multiple separate steps,
which tends to introduce noisy entities and results in the semantic drift problem (Curran, Murphy, and Scholz 2007).
In bootstrapping, the expansion results in previous steps are
∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9402

