The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Collaborative Sampling in Generative Adversarial Networks
Yuejiang Liu,∗ Parth Kothari,∗ Alexandre Alahi
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
Abstract
The standard practice in Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) discards the discriminator during sampling. However, this sampling method loses valuable information learned
by the discriminator regarding the data distribution. In this
work, we propose a collaborative sampling scheme between
the generator and the discriminator for improved data generation. Guided by the discriminator, our approach reﬁnes the
generated samples through gradient-based updates at a particular layer of the generator, shifting the generator distribution
closer to the real data distribution. Additionally, we present
a practical discriminator shaping method that can smoothen
the loss landscape provided by the discriminator for effective
sample reﬁnement. Through extensive experiments on synthetic and image datasets, we demonstrate that our proposed
method can improve generated samples both quantitatively
and qualitatively, offering a new degree of freedom in GAN
sampling.

Figure 1: Once training completes, we use both the generator and the discriminator for collaborative sampling. Our
scheme consists of one sample proposal step and multiple sample reﬁnement steps. (I) The ﬁxed generator proposes samples. (II) Subsequently, the discriminator provides
gradients, with respect to the activation maps of the proposed samples, back to a particular layer of the generator.
Gradient-based updates are performed iteratively.

Introduction

distribution pr under certain assumptions. However, these
methods have several limitations:

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et
al. 2014) are a powerful class of deep generative models
known for producing realistic samples. Despite successful
applications in a wide variety of tasks (Zhu et al. 2017;
Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019; Karras, Laine, and
Aila 2019), training GANs is notoriously unstable, often impacting the model distribution. Numerous works have attempted to improve GAN training through loss functions
(Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017), regularization methods (Miyato et al. 2018), training procedures (Karras et al.
2017) as well as model architectures (Radford, Metz, and
Chintala 2015; Zhang et al. 2019). Yet, stabilizing GANs at
scale remains an open problem. In this work, we go beyond
GAN training and explore methods for effective sampling.
Our goal is to improve the model distribution by fully exploiting the value contained in the trained networks during
sampling.
A standard practice in GAN sampling is to completely
discard the discriminator while using only the generator for
sample generation. Recent works propose to post-process
the model distribution pg , implicitly deﬁned by the trained
generator, using Monte Carlo techniques such as rejection
sampling (Azadi et al. 2019) and Metropolis-Hastings independence sampler (Turner et al. 2019). By rejecting undesired samples based on the output of an optimal discriminator, the accept-reject paradigm is able to recover the real data

• exactness: the assumption that the support of pg includes
the support of pr is often too strong to hold in practice,
• efﬁciency: the accept-reject procedure suffers from low
sample efﬁciency when pg is statistically distant from pr ,
• applicability: rejection cannot be applied to many scenarios where only one sample is produced, e.g., CycleGAN
(Zhu et al. 2017).
Drawing inspiration from Langevin (Roberts and Tweedie
1996) and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo methods (Neal 1996),
we address these issues by reﬁning, rather than simply rejecting, the generated samples.
Figure 1 illustrates our proposed collaborative sampling
scheme between the generator and the discriminator. Once
training completes, we freeze the parameters of the generator and reﬁne the proposed samples using the gradients provided by the discriminator. This gradient-based sample reﬁnement can be performed repeatedly at any layer of the
generator, ranging from low-level feature maps to the ﬁnal
output space, until the samples look “realistic” to the discriminator.
The performance of our collaborative sampling scheme is
dependent on the loss landscape provided by the discriminator. To further improve the sample reﬁnement process, we
propose a practical discriminator shaping method that ﬁnetunes the discriminator using the reﬁned samples. This shaping method not only enhances the robustness of the discriminator for classiﬁcation but also smoothens the learned loss

∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4948

