The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weakly Supervised Disentanglement by Pairwise Similarities
Junxiang Chen, Kayhan Batmanghelich
Department of Biomedical Informatics
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15232, US
{juc91, kayhan}@pitt.edu

Kulkarni et al. 2015). However, such supervision can be
expensive to acquire.
Our method is motivated by a real-world problem. In this
problem, we want to understand how the Computer Tomography (CT) images are related to the severity of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), which is a devastating
disease related to cigarettes smoking. Since COPD manifests itself as airﬂow limitation, its severity can be measured
via spirometry (meaning the measuring of breath). However,
the disease severity is usually measured by combining two
(Vestbo et al. 2013) or three (Quanjer et al. 2012) spirometric
measures. It is not obvious how we can represent disease
severity with one real value. Therefore, we represent disease
severity using real-valued pairwise similarities between subjects, which are computed based on spirometric measures.
The available CT images and the pairwise similarities motivate us to develop a disentanglement method that utilizes
pairwise similarities when analyzing images.
In this paper, we assume that we are provided a measure
of similarity between instances based on a speciﬁc factor of
interest, in addition to the observations. The pairwise similarity can be binary (yes/no) or real-valued and may only
be provided for a few pairs of instances. The goal is to learn
disentangled representations such that a subset of the latent
variables explain the factor of interest, but do not convey
information about other factors of variations. We propose to
achieve this goal by constructing a VAE model that generates
both the samples and the pairwise similarities based on latent
representations. We achieve disentanglement by letting the
pairwise similarities depend on a subset of the latent variables
but independent of the other latent variables, and penalizing
the information capacity of the dependent latent variables.
Our empirical evaluations on several benchmark datasets and
the COPD dataset show that providing pairwise similarities
improves the performance of the disentanglement method
substantially.
Contributions We make the following contributions in this
paper: (1) We design a latent variable model that enables a
user to provide similarities between instances in the desired
latent space. (2) The similarity can be a binary or real-valued
value provided for all or a subset of the pairs of instances.
We formulate the model with a VAE framework and propose

Abstract
Recently, researches related to unsupervised disentanglement
learning with deep generative models have gained substantial
popularity. However, without introducing supervision, there
is no guarantee that the factors of interest can be successfully
recovered (Locatello et al. 2018). Motivated by a real-world
problem, we propose a setting where the user introduces weak
supervision by providing similarities between instances based
on a factor to be disentangled. The similarity is provided
as either a binary (yes/no) or real-valued label describing
whether a pair of instances are similar or not. We propose a
new method for weakly supervised disentanglement of latent
variables within the framework of Variational Autoencoder.
Experimental results demonstrate that utilizing weak supervision improves the performance of the disentanglement method
substantially.

Introduction
Disentanglement learning is a task of ﬁnding latent representations that separate the explanatory factors of variations in the data (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013).
In recent years, several methods (Higgins et al. 2017;
Kim and Mnih 2018; Chen et al. 2018; Lopez et al. 2018)
have been proposed to solve disentanglement learning under the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) framework. However,
most of these existing methods are unsupervised. In this paper, we focus on improving the disentangling performance by
utilizing weak supervisions in terms of pairwise similarities.
Locatello et al. (2018) showed that unsupervised disentanglement learning is fundamentally impossible if no inductive biases on models and datasets are provided. Existing unsupervised methods control the implicit inductive biases by choosing the hyperparameters. However, the
factor of interest is not guaranteed to be successfully recovered by only tuning the hyper-parameters. Providing
strong supervisions with discrete or real-valued labels have
been previously suggested (Narayanaswamy et al. 2017;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
The code is available at https://github.com/batmanlab/VAE
pairwise.
3495

