The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Semi-Supervised Hierarchical Recurrent Graph
Neural Network for City-Wide Parking Availability Prediction
Weijia Zhang,1∗ Hao Liu,2∗† Yanchi Liu,3 Jingbo Zhou,2 Hui Xiong2†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, 2 Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Research,
National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application, Beijing, China, 3 Rutgers University, USA
wjzhang3@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {liuhao30, zhoujingbo}@baidu.com, yanchi.liu@rutgers.edu, xionghui@gmail.com

to help drivers efﬁciently ﬁnd parking, help governments for
urban planning, and alleviate the city’s trafﬁc congestion.
Due to its importance, city-wide parking availability prediction has attracted much attention from both academia and
industry. On one hand, Google Maps predicts parking difﬁculty on a city-wide scale based on users’ survey and trajectory data (Arora et al. 2019), and Baidu Maps estimates
real-time city-wide parking availability based on environmental contextual features (e.g., Point of Interest (POI), map
queries, etc.) (Rong et al. 2018). The above mentions make
city-wide parking availability prediction based on biased
and indirect input signals (e.g., user’s feedback are noisy and
lagged), which may induce inaccurate prediction results. On
the other hand, in recent years, we have witnessed real-time
sensor devices such as camera, ultrasonic sensor, and GPS
become ubiquitous, which can signiﬁcantly improve the prediction accuracy of parking availability (Mathur et al. 2010;
Fusek et al. 2013; Zhou and Tung 2015). However, for economic and privacy concerns, it is difﬁcult to be scaled up to
cover all parking lots of a city.
In this paper, we propose to simultaneously predict the
availability of each parking lot of a city, based on both environmental contextual data (e.g., POI distribution, population) and partially observed real-time parking availability data. By integrating both datasets, we can make a better parking availability prediction at a city-scale. However,
it is a non-trivial task faced with the following three major challenges. (1) Spatial autocorrelation. The availability
of a parking lot is not only effected by the occupancy of
nearby parking lots but may also synchronize with distant
parking lots (Wang et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017). The ﬁrst
challenge is how to model the irregular and non-Euclidean
autocorrelation between parking lots. (2) Temporal autocorrelation. Future availability of a parking lot is correlated
with its availability of previous time periods (Rajabioun and
Ioannou 2015). Besides, the spatial autocorrelation between
parking lots may also vary over time (Liang et al. 2018;
Yao et al. 2019). How to model dynamic temporal autocorrelation of each parking lot is another challenge. (3) Parking
availability scarcity. Only a small portion of parking lots

Abstract
The ability to predict city-wide parking availability is crucial for the successful development of Parking Guidance and
Information (PGI) systems. Indeed, the effective prediction
of city-wide parking availability can improve parking efﬁciency, help urban planning, and ultimately alleviate city congestion. However, it is a non-trivial task for predicting citywide parking availability because of three major challenges:
1) the non-Euclidean spatial autocorrelation among parking
lots, 2) the dynamic temporal autocorrelation inside of and
between parking lots, and 3) the scarcity of information about
real-time parking availability obtained from real-time sensors (e.g., camera, ultrasonic sensor, and GPS). To this end,
we propose Semi-supervised Hierarchical Recurrent Graph
Neural Network (SHARE) for predicting city-wide parking
availability. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst propose a hierarchical graph
convolution structure to model non-Euclidean spatial autocorrelation among parking lots. Along this line, a contextual
graph convolution block and a soft clustering graph convolution block are respectively proposed to capture local and
global spatial dependencies between parking lots. Additionally, we adopt a recurrent neural network to incorporate dynamic temporal dependencies of parking lots. Moreover, we
propose a parking availability approximation module to estimate missing real-time parking availabilities from both spatial and temporal domain. Finally, experiments on two realworld datasets demonstrate the prediction performance of
SHARE outperforms seven state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed signiﬁcant development
of Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) (Zhang et al.
2011). Parking guidance and information (PGI) systems, especially parking availability prediction, is an indispensable
component of ITS. According to a survey by the International Parking Institute (IPI)1 , over 30% cars on the road are
searching for parking, and these cruising cars contribute up
to 40% trafﬁc jams in urban areas (Shoup 2006). Thus, citywide parking availability prediction is of great importance
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1
https://www.parking.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/Emergi
ng-Trends-2012.pdf

1186

