The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ScaleNet - Improve CNNs through Recursively Rescaling Objects
Xingyi Li,1 Zhongang Qi,1,2 Xiaoli Z. Fern,1 Li Fuxin1
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University
2
Applied Research Center, PCG, Tencent
{lixin, xfern, lif}@eecs.oregonstate.edu, zhongangqi@tencent.com

CNN (Dai et al. 2017) and CapsNet (Sabour, Frosst, and
Hinton 2017) claim that they can deal with variant reception
ﬁelds, but the practical improvements under larger distortions (such as halving the size) are very limited. Some existing techniques attempt to address this problem through integrating side networks with pretrained deep learning models (Lin et al. 2017a; Zhang et al. 2017; Dai et al. 2017;
Zhou et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018). However, none of them
formally deﬁnes the scale of an object and includes the prediction of scales as an explicit loss function.
In this paper, we propose ScaleNet, which explicitly predicts object scale in a deep learning model. Different from
the aforementioned approaches, ScaleNet has an explicit objective to predict the scale of objects in images. Also, our approach does not need to retrain the original object detector
or change its network structure. Instead, we aim at rescaling
images/objects to ﬁt the pretrained reception ﬁelds of the object detector before feeding them to the networks. Thus, the
proposed ScaleNet can be applied with any pretrained object
classiﬁer/detector to enhance its robustness to scale changes.
When a new scale is introduced that has never been observed in the training set, ScaleNet may not be able to accurately predict its scale. However, empirically we show that
ScaleNet often has sufﬁcient information to predict whether
the object should be enlarged or shrinked. Intuitively, this is
because the prediction of scales is more likely based on local features such as line thickness and the magnitude of textures, hence more robust than object recognition and affords
some extrapolation power. We introduce recursive rescaling
to leverage this beneﬁt. Speciﬁcally, our approach repeatedly applies ScaleNet and rescales the image/object until the
resulting scale falls into the recognizable range for the pretrained classiﬁer/detector.
Our contributions in this paper are as follows:
• We proposed ScaleNet that trains to predict object scales
• By recursively applying ScaleNet and rescaling, pretrained object recognizers can generalize to scales significantly different from those seen in the training set

Abstract
Deep networks are often not scale-invariant hence their performance can vary wildly if recognizable objects are at an
unseen scale occurring only at testing time. In this paper,
we propose ScaleNet, which recursively predicts object scale
in a deep learning framework. With an explicit objective to
predict the scale of objects in images, ScaleNet enables pretrained deep learning models to identify objects in the scales
that are not present in their training sets. By recursively calling ScaleNet, one can generalize to very large scale changes
unseen in the training set. To demonstrate the robustness
of our proposed framework, we conduct experiments with
pretrained as well as ﬁne-tuned classiﬁcation and detection
frameworks on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and MS COCO datasets
and results reveal that our proposed framework signiﬁcantly
boosts the performances of deep networks.

Introduction
Deep learning has made signiﬁcant strides in recent years,
achieving extraordinary performance on many tasks in computer vision, such as image recognition (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; He et al. 2016) and object detection (He et al.
2014; Ren et al. 2015; Dai et al. 2016; He et al. 2017). However, most of the existing approaches are not scale-invariant
— their performance can vary wildly in recognizing objects in scales that are not or rarely contained in the training
set (Gong et al. 2014). If an image from the training set is
down-sampled by half, it is very likely that the pretrained
deep model will fail to recognize it. Hence, robustness to
scale changes is still an unsolved challenge. To demonstrate
this issue more starkly, we conducted a simple experiment
on the MNIST dataset by down-sampling the MNIST testing images by half and feeding them to a convolutional neural network (CNN) pretrained on MNIST training set. The
classiﬁcation accuracy drops by an astounding 40%.
One of the most widely applied techniques for tackling
this problem is data augmentation, which adds more objects
with diverse scales to the training set. However, it is not
practical to simulate all possible scales for all the objects
in the training set. Besides data augmentation, deformable

Related Work

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Conventional deep learning based object detection techniques utilize object proposals to arbitrarily specify several
11426

