The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Overcoming Language Priors in VQA
via Decomposed Linguistic Representations
Chenchen Jing,1 Yuwei Wu,1∗ Xiaoxun Zhang,2 Yunde Jia,1 Qi Wu3
1

Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Alibaba Group
3
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, University of Adelaide, Australia
{chenchen.jing, wuyuwei, jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn, xiaoxun.zhang@alibaba-inc.com, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au
embeddings. However, these models do not explicitly distinguish and utilize different information in questions, and
thus inevitably use the co-occurrences of the answers and
interrogative words to infer answers. Although some VQA
models (Lu et al. 2016; Ma et al. 2018) adopt the question
attention to focus on relevant words with image representations as guidance, they do not eliminate the effect of interrogative words during answer inference and thus are also
susceptible to language priors.

Abstract
Most existing Visual Question Answering (VQA) models
overly rely on language priors between questions and answers. In this paper, we present a novel method of language
attention-based VQA that learns decomposed linguistic representations of questions and utilizes the representations to
infer answers for overcoming language priors. We introduce
a modular language attention mechanism to parse a question
into three phrase representations: type representation, object
representation, and concept representation. We use the type
representation to identify the question type and the possible
answer set (yes/no or speciﬁc concepts such as colors or numbers), and the object representation to focus on the relevant
region of an image. The concept representation is veriﬁed
with the attended region to infer the ﬁnal answer. The proposed method decouples the language-based concept discovery and vision-based concept veriﬁcation in the process of
answer inference to prevent language priors from dominating
the answering process. Experiments on the VQA-CP dataset
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

To overcome language priors, Agrawal et al. (2018) proposed a grounded visual question answering model that exploits different information in questions by using multiple
hand-designed modules. They devised a question classiﬁer
to classify questions into yes/no questions or non-yes/no
questions, a Part-of-Speech-based concept extractor to extract concepts in yes/no questions, and an answer cluster predictor to identify the answer type of non-yes/no questions. In
this paper, we propose to learn and exploit decomposed linguistic representations of different kinds of information in
questions for overcoming language priors.

Introduction

A question-answer pair usually contains three kinds of information: question type, referring object, and expected concept. Note that the expected concept is included in the question for yes/no questions, and in the answer for non-yes/no
questions. Humans can effortlessly identify and utilize different information in questions to infer answers and are undoubtedly insusceptible to language priors. For instance,
if one is asked to answer a question, “Is the man’s shirt
white?”, at a glance of “is”, he/she knows that it’s a veriﬁcation question whose possible answers are “yes” and “no”.
Then he/she localizes the man’s shirt in the image via the
phrase “man’s shirt” and veriﬁes the visual presence/absence
of “white”, the excepted concept in the question, based on
the shirt. This process is also applicable to non-yes/no questions such as “What color is the man’s shirt?”. The only
difference is that apart from knowing that the question is
about color via “What color”, several concepts (e.g.,“white”,
“black” and “blue”) that are possible to be the answer may
arise in his/her mind for further veriﬁcation. It is thus desirable that a VQA model capable of ﬂexibly learning and
utilizing the decomposed representations of different information in questions should be established for alleviating the

Recent studies (Kaﬂe and Kanan 2017; Agrawal et al. 2018;
Selvaraju et al. 2019) demonstrate that most existing Visual Question Answering (VQA) models overly rely on superﬁcial correlations between questions and answers, i.e.,
language priors, and ignore image information. For example, they may frequently answer “white” for questions about
color, “tennis” for questions about sports, and “yes” for
questions beginning with “is there a”, no matter what images are given with the questions.
The main reason why these models are vulnerable to
language priors is that different kinds of information of
questions are entangled in the answer inference process.
Most VQA models (Fukui et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2016;
Anderson et al. 2018) consist of three parts: extracting informative representations for both images and questions, fusing
these representations to obtain joint embeddings of images
and questions, and predicting ﬁnal answers with the joint
∗

corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11181

