The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Leveraging Multi-Token Entities in
Document-Level Named Entity Recognition
Anwen Hu,2,3 Zhicheng Dou,1,2 Jian-Yun Nie,5 Ji-Rong Wen3,4
1

Gaoling School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
School of Information, Renmin University of China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
4
Key Laboratory of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, MOE
5
Department of Computer Science and Operations Research, University of Montreal
{anwenhu, dou, jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn, nie@iro.umontreal.ca
Abstract
Most state-of-the-art named entity recognition systems are
designed to process each sentence within a document independently. These systems are easy to confuse entity types
when the context information in a sentence is not sufﬁcient
enough. To utilize the context information within the whole
document, most document-level work let neural networks on
their own to learn the relation across sentences, which is not
intuitive enough for us humans. In this paper, we divide entities to multi-token entities that contain multiple tokens and
single-token entities that are composed of a single token. We
propose that the context information of multi-token entities
should be more reliable in document-level NER for news articles. We design a fusion attention mechanism which not
only learns the semantic relevance between occurrences of
the same token, but also focuses more on occurrences belonging to multi-tokens entities. To identify multi-token entities, we design an auxiliary task namely ‘Multi-token Entity Classiﬁcation’ and perform this task simultaneously with
document-level NER. This auxiliary task is simpliﬁed from
NER and doesn’t require extra annotation. Experimental results on the CoNLL-2003 dataset and OntoNotesnbm dataset
show that our model outperforms state-of-the-art sentencelevel and document-level NER methods.

1)

...

漕

2)

...

BOJ

3)

...

”

Yasuo

Matsushita E-PER

governor

was

quoted

Matsushita S-ORG

Matsushita S-ORG

said

in

's
an

in

...

remark

...

interview

...

Figure 1: An example of the label inconsistency problem
within a document in the CoNLL-2003 English dataset.
Green and red tags indicate respectively correct and incorrect tags predicted by a sentence-level model. Green and
black arrows refer to useful and less useful contextual information for the second ‘Matsushita’ token.

‘ORG’. After investigation, we ﬁnd ‘Matsushita’ usually
refers to the organization ‘Matsushita Electric Industrial’. In
the glove embedding space, it is most close to the names of
Japanese companies such as ‘sanyo’ and ‘panasonic’. Thus,
without further contextual information, the latter two ‘Matsushita’ are easily recognized as ‘ORG’.
A possible solution to solve the above problem is to extend sentence-level NER to document-level NER, which
leverages information from the entire document. For the example shown in Figure 1, the ﬁrst occurrence of the token ‘Matsushita’ can provide useful information for disambiguating the second occurrence. Various document-level
information has been incorporated, ranging from manually designed information (Chieu and Ng 2003; Finkel,
Grenager, and Manning 2005; Krishnan and Manning 2006;
Kazama and Torisawa 2007) to automatically learned information (Strubell et al. 2017; Luo et al. 2017; Zhang et al.
2018; Xu, Wang, and He 2018). For example, some global
attention mechanisms (Zhang et al. 2018; Luo et al. 2017;
Xu, Wang, and He 2018) were designed to utilized context information across sentences. In these methods, attention weights are all calculated based on contextual hidden
states produced by LSTM. It’s not clear enough which context information should be more reliable and it’s hard for us
humans to understand what the high attention weights are
based on in the learned attention mechanisms. In this paper,
we call this kind of attention mechanism as semantic attention mechanism.

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) is one of the ﬁrst stages
for natural language processing. Most neural network based
models are designed for sentence-level NER: they treat sentences in a document independently during training or predicting (Huang, Xu, and Yu 2015; Chiu and Nichols 2016;
Lample et al. 2016; Ma and Hovy 2016; Gregoric, Bachrach,
and Coope 2018; Peters et al. 2018). This may easily lead
to tagging inconsistency problems: the same entity in two
different sentences might be recognized as different entity
types. For the example given in Figure 1, there are three
occurrences of the token ‘Matsushita’ in three sentences
within a document. A sentence-level NER model, namely
BiLSTM-CNNs-CRF (Ma and Hovy 2016), can successfully recognize ‘Yasuo Matsushita’ as a ‘PERSON’. However, it incorrectly classiﬁes the latter two ‘Matsushita’ as
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7961

