The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improving Entity Linking by
Modeling Latent Entity Type Information
Shuang Chen,1∗ Jinpeng Wang,2 Feng Jiang,1,3 Chin-Yew Lin2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
Microsoft Research Asia, 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
hitercs@gmail.com, {jinpwa, cyl}@microsoft.com, fjiang@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Existing state of the art neural entity linking models employ
attention-based bag-of-words context model and pre-trained
entity embeddings bootstrapped from word embeddings to assess topic level context compatibility. However, the latent entity type information in the immediate context of the mention
is neglected, which causes the models often link mentions to
incorrect entities with incorrect type. To tackle this problem,
we propose to inject latent entity type information into the
entity embeddings based on pre-trained BERT. In addition,
we integrate a BERT-based entity similarity score into the local context model of a state-of-the-art model to better capture
latent entity type information. Our model signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art entity linking models on standard benchmark (AIDA-CoNLL). Detailed experiment analysis demonstrates that our model corrects most of the type
errors produced by the direct baseline.

:LNLSHGLD7LWOH

/RFDOFRQWH[WVFRUH

*ROGHQ

0LOZDXNHHB%UHZHUV



灤

0LOZDXNHH



¥

,Q 0LOZDXNHH  0DUF 1HZILHOG KRPHUHG RII -RVH 3DUUD 
D OHDGLQJ RII WKH ERWWRP RI WKH WK DV WKH %UHZHUV UDOOLHG IRU D
 YLFWRU\ RYHU WKH 0LQQHVRWD 7ZLQV 
QLQWK QLQWK VHYHQWK VHYHQWK 0LOZDXNHH 0LOZDXNHH LQQLQJ
E JDPHV JDPHV YLFWRU\ 5R\DOV 5R\DOV ZLQ UDOOLHG VHFRQG VHFRQG
LQQLQJV UXQ UXQ UXQ UXQ UXQ %UHZHUV %UHZHUV 0LQQHVRWD

Figure 1: One error case on AIDA-CoNLL development set
of the full model of Ganea and Hofmann (2017). (a) Immediate context; (b) Attended contextual words sorted by attention weights. The preposition “In” is a strong cue predictive
of the type of mention “Milwaukee” which is not captured
by the local context model.

Introduction

the traditional methods on standard benchmark (e.g., AIDACoNLL). A line of follow-up work (Le and Titov 2018;
2019a; 2019b) investigate potential improvement solution or
other task settings based on that.
Such state-of-the-art entity linking models (Ganea and
Hofmann 2017; Le and Titov 2018) employ attention-based
bag-of-words context model and pre-trained entity embeddings bootstrapped from word embeddings to assess topic
level context compatibility. However, the latent entity type
information in the immediate context of the mention is neglected. We suspect this may sometimes cause the models
link mentions to incorrect entities with incorrect type. To
verify this, we conduct error analysis of the well known
DeepED1 model (Ganea and Hofmann 2017) on the development set of AIDA-CoNLL (Hoffart et al. 2011), and
found that more than half of their error cases fall into the
category of type errors where the predicted entity’s type is
different from the golden entity’s type, although some predictive contextual cue for them can be found in their local
context. As shown in Fig. 1, the full model of Ganea and
Hofmann (2017) incorrectly links the mention “Milwaukee”
to the entity M ILWAUKEE B REWERS. However, the prepo-

Entity Linking (EL) is the task of disambiguating textual mentions to their corresponding entities in a reference
knowledge base (e.g., Wikipedia). An accurate entity linking system is crucial for many knowledge related tasks such
as question answering (Yih et al. 2015) and information extraction (Hoffmann et al. 2011).
Traditional entity linkers mainly depend on manually designed features to evaluate the local context compatibility and document-level global coherence of referent entities (Cheng and Roth 2013; Durrett and Klein 2014).
The design of such features requires entity-speciﬁc domain
knowledge. These features can not fully capture relevant
statistical dependencies and interactions. One recent notable work (Ganea and Hofmann 2017) instead pioneers
to rely on pre-trained entity embeddings, learnable context representation and differentiable joint inference stage
to learn basic features and their combinations from scratch.
Such model design allows to learn useful regularities in
an end-to-end fashion and eliminates the need for extensive feature engineering. It also substantially outperforms
∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

7529

https://github.com/dalab/deep-ed

