The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Distributed Representations for Arithmetic Word Problems
Sowmya S Sundaram,1 Deepak P,2 Savitha Sam Abraham1
1

Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India
2
Queen’s University Belfast, UK
{sowmya, savithas}@cse.iitm.ac.in, deepaksp@acm.org

inappropriate for sentiment-speciﬁc tasks, necessitating a
sentiment-speciﬁc word embedding that SSWE provides.
A similar motivation was leveraged in developing a
methodology for emotion-enriched word representations
(Agrawal, An, and Papagelis 2018). These indicate that
bespoke techniques to learn specialized text embeddings
are needed in order to make sure that the resultant
representations are useful for speciﬁc tasks.
Coming to word problems, schemas (Marshall 1996)
are classes of word problems meant to be indicative of
the kind of solution methodology that is to be adopted
to solve the problem. Table 1 lists three example word
problems along with their schemas. A schema may be
thought of as a categorization of word problems that
is aligned with the learning task. For example, combine
and change word problems can be solved effectively
by students who have understood the intricacies of the
mathematical operations involved in the respective domains.
Given this mapping between schemas and learning tasks,
schema-aligned retrieval of word problems is fundamental
to automation in student-centric learning frameworks such
as supportive scaffolding (Saxena 2010).

Abstract
We consider the task of learning distributed representations
for arithmetic word problems. We outline the characteristics
of the domain of arithmetic word problems that make
generic text embedding methods inadequate, necessitating
a specialized representation learning method to facilitate
the task of retrieval across a wide range of use cases
within online learning platforms. Our contribution is
two-fold; ﬁrst, we propose several ’operators’ that distil
knowledge of the domain of arithmetic word problems
and schemas into word problem transformations. Second,
we propose a novel neural architecture that combines
LSTMs with graph convolutional networks to leverage word
problems and their operator-transformed versions to learn
distributed representations for word problems. While our
target is to ensure that the distributed representations are
schema-aligned, we do not make use of schema labels
in the learning process, thus yielding an unsupervised
representation learning method. Through an evaluation on
retrieval over a publicly available corpus of word problems,
we illustrate that our framework is able to consistently
improve upon contemporary generic text embeddings in
terms of schema-alignment.

Introduction

Lucy went to the grocery store. She bought 12 packs
of cookies and 5 packs of noodles. How many packs of
groceries did she buy in all? [ combine ]
Lucy was counting the two gifts she received on her
ﬁfth birthday. The ﬁrst gift was a set of two toy cars.
The second gift was a set of two rattle toys. How many
toys did she receive altogether? [ combine ]
Bobby went to the grocery store. He bought 12 packs
of noodles. He gave 6 packs to his friend, Lucy. How
many packs does Bobby have? [ change ]

A word problem is a narrative involving a few sentences
describing a real-life scenario expressing a task that needs
to be solved by way of a mathematical calculation1 . Central
to any system that processes word problems electronically is
a method to represent them in a meaningful way.
Notwithstanding the effectiveness of current embedding
methodologies such as (Mikolov et al. 2013) in general
NLP scenarios, there have been a number of efforts
in improving text embeddings for speciﬁc tasks. As an
example, SSWE (Tang et al. 2014) is a sentiment-speciﬁc
word embedding that builds on the observation that
generic word embedding models such as word2vec, being
sentiment-agnostic, tend to put words of opposite sentiment
polarity, such as good and bad, to neighboring locations
in the vector space. Such characteristics render them

Table 1: Example Word Problems and Schemas
In Table 1, the ﬁrst and second problems involve the
combine schema, whereas the third problem involves a
change (i.e., transfer). It may be observed that the ﬁrst and
the third problems relate to a grocery store context and have
a reasonable amount of word overlap, and that is liable

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.theschoolrun.com/what-is-a-word-problem
9000

