The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Algorithmic Improvements for Deep
Reinforcement Learning Applied to Interactive Fiction
Vishal Jain,1,3 William Fedus,1,2 Hugo Larochelle,1,2,5 Doina Precup,1,3,4,5 Marc G. Bellemare1,2,3,5
1

Mila, 2 Google Brain, 3 McGill University, 4 DeepMind, 5 CIFAR Fellow
vishal.jain@mail.mcgill.ca, {liamfedus, hugolarochelle, bellemare}@google.com, dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Text-based games are a natural challenge domain for deep
reinforcement learning algorithms. Their state and action
spaces are combinatorially large, their reward function is
sparse, and they are partially observable: the agent is informed of the consequences of its actions through textual
feedback. In this paper we emphasize this latter point and
consider the design of a deep reinforcement learning agent
that can play from feedback alone. Our design recognizes
and takes advantage of the structural characteristics of textbased games. We ﬁrst propose a contextualisation mechanism, based on accumulated reward, which simpliﬁes the
learning problem and mitigates partial observability. We then
study different methods that rely on the notion that most
actions are ineffectual in any given situation, following Zahavy et al.’s idea of an admissible action. We evaluate these
techniques in a series of text-based games of increasing difﬁculty based on the TextWorld framework, as well as the
iconic game Z ORK. Empirically, we ﬁnd that these techniques
improve the performance of a baseline deep reinforcement
learning agent applied to text-based games.

1

Figure 1: The introductory gameplay from Z ORK.

such as retrieving an important object or unlocking a new
part of the domain.
We are particularly interested in bringing deep reinforcement learning techniques to bear on this problem. In this
paper, we consider how to design an agent architecture that
can learn to play text adventure games from feedback alone.
Despite the inherent challenges of the domain, we identify
three structural aspects that make progress possible:

Introduction

In a text-based game, also called interactive ﬁction (IF), an
agent interacts with its environment through a natural language interface. Actions consist of short textual commands,
while observations are paragraphs describing the outcome
of these actions (Figure 1). Recently, interactive ﬁction has
emerged as an important challenge for AI techniques (Atkinson et al. 2018), in great part because the genre combines
natural language with sequential decision-making.
From a reinforcement learning perspective, IF domains
pose a number of challenges. First, the state space is typically combinatorial in nature, due to the presence of objects
and characters with which the player can interact. Since any
natural language sentence may be given as a valid command,
the action space is similarly combinatorial. The player observes its environment through feedback in natural language,
making this a partially observable problem. The reward
structure is usually sparse, with non-zero rewards only received when the agent accomplishes something meaningful,

• Rewards from subtasks. The optimal behaviour completes a series of subtasks towards the eventual game end;
• Transition structure. Most actions have no effect in a
given state;
• Memory as state. Remembering key past events is often
sufﬁcient to deal with partial observability.
While these properties have been remarked on in previous
work (Narasimhan, Kulkarni, and Barzilay 2015; Zahavy et
al. 2018), here we relax some of the assumptions previously
made and provide fresh tools to more tractably solve IF domains. More generally, we believe these tools to be useful in
partially observable domains with similar structure.
Our ﬁrst contribution takes advantage of the special reward structure of IF domains. In IF, the accumulated reward
within an episode correlates with the number of completed

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4328

