The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Pose-Guided Multi-Granularity
Attention Network for Text-Based Person Search
Ya Jing,1,3 Chenyang Si,1,3 Junbo Wang,1,3 Wei Wang,1,3∗ Liang Wang,1,2,3 Tieniu Tan1,2,3
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
{ya.jing, chenyang.si, junbo.wang}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {wangwei, wangliang, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Text-based person search aims to retrieve the corresponding
person images in an image database by virtue of a describing sentence about the person, which poses great potential
for various applications such as video surveillance. Extracting visual contents corresponding to the human description
is the key to this cross-modal matching problem. Moreover,
correlated images and descriptions involve different granularities of semantic relevance, which is usually ignored in previous methods. To exploit the multilevel corresponding visual
contents, we propose a pose-guided multi-granularity attention network (PMA). Firstly, we propose a coarse alignment
network (CA) to select the related image regions to the global
description by a similarity-based attention. To further capture
the phrase-related visual body part, a ﬁne-grained alignment
network (FA) is proposed, which employs pose information
to learn latent semantic alignment between visual body part
and textual noun phrase. To verify the effectiveness of our
model, we perform extensive experiments on the CUHK Person Description Dataset (CUHK-PEDES) which is currently
the only available dataset for text-based person search. Experimental results show that our approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods by 15 % in terms of the top-1 metric.

Figure 1: The illustration of text-based person search. Given
a textual description of a person, the model aims to retrieve the corresponding person images from the given image database. There are two granularity alignments in our
retrieval procedure: coarse alignment by textual description
and ﬁne-grained alignment by noun phrases.
describing persons’ appearance. Since textual descriptions
are more accessible and can describe persons of interest with
more details in a more natural way, we study the task of textbased person search in this paper.
Text-based person search aims to retrieve the corresponding person images to a textual description from a large-scale
image database, which is illustrated in Fig. 1. The main
challenge of this task is to effectively extract corresponding visual contents to the human description under multigranularity semantic relevances between image and text.
Previous methods (Zheng et al. 2017b; Zhang and Lu 2018)
generally utilize Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) to obtain a global
representation of the input image, which often cannot effectively extract visual contents corresponding to the person
in image. Considering that human pose is closely related to
human body parts, we exploit pose information for effective
visual feature extraction. To our knowledge, we are probably the ﬁrst to employ human pose to handle the task of
text-based person search.

Introduction
Person search has gained great attention in recent years due
to its wide applications in video surveillance, e.g., missing
persons searching and suspects tracking. With the explosive
increase in the number of videos, manual person search in
large-scale videos is unrealistic, so we need to design automatic methods to perform this task more efﬁciently. Existing
methods of person search are mainly classiﬁed into three
categories according to the query type, e.g., image-based
query (Zhou et al. 2018; Zheng, Gong, and Xiang 2011;
Sarfraz et al. 2018), attribute-based query (Su et al. 2016;
Vaquero et al. 2009) and text-based query (Li et al. 2017b;
2017a; Zheng et al. 2017b; Chen, Xu, and Luo 2018).
Image-based person search needs at least one image of the
queried person which in many cases is very difﬁcult to obtain. Attribute-based person search has limited capability of
∗

Corresponding Author: Wei Wang
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11189

