The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Discovering New Intents via Constrained
Deep Adaptive Clustering with Cluster Reﬁnement
Ting-En Lin,1, 2 Hua Xu,1,2∗ Hanlei Zhang1,2,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology(BNRist), Beijing 100084, China
3
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
lte17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuhua@tsinghua.edu.cn, 16281181@bjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Training =

Identifying new user intents is an essential task in the dialogue system. However, it is hard to get satisfying clustering
results since the deﬁnition of intents is strongly guided by
prior knowledge. Existing methods incorporate prior knowledge by intensive feature engineering, which not only leads
to overﬁtting but also makes it sensitive to the number of
clusters. In this paper, we propose constrained deep adaptive clustering with cluster reﬁnement (CDAC+), an end-toend clustering method that can naturally incorporate pairwise
constraints as prior knowledge to guide the clustering process. Moreover, we reﬁne the clusters by forcing the model to
learn from the high conﬁdence assignments. After eliminating low conﬁdence assignments, our approach is surprisingly
insensitive to the number of clusters. Experimental results on
the three benchmark datasets show that our method can yield
signiﬁcant improvements over strong baselines. 1

Unlabeled

+

Labeled

Test

Known Intent 1

Intent 1

Known Intent 2

Intent 2

…

Intent 3

Known Intent N

Intent 4

New Intents

…
Intent M

Figure 1: An example of new intent discovery. Our goal is
to ﬁnd out the underlying new intents by utilizing the limited
labeled data to guide the clustering process.

and prune it into subgraphs based on frequency and entropy. Padmasundari and Bangalore (2018) combine the results of different clustering methods and sentence representations through an ensemble approach. AutoDial (Shi et al.
2018) extracts all kinds of features, such as POS tags and
keywords, and then uses the hierarchical clustering method
to group the sentences. Haponchyk et al. (2018) use predeﬁned structured outputs to guide the clustering process.
However, all of the above methods require intensive feature
engineering. Besides, those methods perform representation
learn and cluster assignments in a pipeline manner, which
may result in poor performance.
In reality, as shown in Figure 1, we may have limited labeled data and a vast amount of unlabeled data, and we do
not know all the intent categories in advance. Besides, the
training data is noisy because unlabeled data contain both
known and unknown intents. The key is to take advantage of
labeled data to improve clustering performance effectively.
To address these issues, we propose an end-to-end clustering method that optimizes the intent representation within
the clustering process. Also, we leverage the pre-trained language model, BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), and the labeled
data to aid the clustering process. As shown in Figure 2,
we divide our method into three steps. First, we obtain intent representations from BERT. Second, we construct a

Introduction
Discovering new user intents that have not been met is an
important task in the dialogue system. By grouping similar utterances into clusters, we may identify new business
opportunities and decide the future direction of system development. Since most conversational data is unlabelled, an
effective clustering method can help us automatically ﬁnd a
reasonable taxonomy and identify potential user needs.
However, it is not as easy as we think. On the one hand,
it is difﬁcult to estimate the exact number of new intents.
On the other hand, it is hard to get desired clustering results
since the taxonomy of intents is usually determined by the
heuristic (Lin and Xu 2019). For example, suppose we want
to partition the data according to the technical problems encountered by users, we may end up with clustering results
partitioned by question types (e.g., what, how, why).
Recently, this problem has attracted the attention of researchers. For example, Hakkani-Tür et al. (2015) use semantic parsing to decompose user utterances into graphs
∗
Hua Xu is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code is available at https://github.com/thuiar/CDAC-plus

8360

