The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

IPO: Interior-Point Policy Optimization under Constraints
Yongshuai Liu, Jiaxin Ding, Xin Liu
University of California, Davis
{yshliu, jxding, xinliu}@ucdavis.edu

instantaneous constraints (e.g. robot arm twist) and cumulative constraints (e.g. average latency). An instantaneous constraint is a constraint that the chosen action needs to satisfy
in each step. A cumulative constraint requires that the sum
of one constraint variable from the beginning to the current
time step is within a certain limit. In this work, we focus on
cumulative constraints, including both discounted cumulative constraints and mean valued constraints.
A common approach to solve CMDPs is the Lagrangian
relaxation method (Chow et al. 2017; Tessler, Mankowitz,
and Mannor 2018). The constrained optimization problem is
reduced to an unconstrained one by augmenting the objective function with a sum of the constraint functions weighted
by their corresponding Lagrange multipliers. Then, the Lagrange multipliers are updated in the dual problem to satisfy the constraints. Although constraints are satisﬁed when
the policy converges, this approach is sensitive to the initialization of the Lagrange multipliers and the learning rate,
and the policy obtained during training does not consistently
satisfy the constraints, as discussed in (Achiam et al. 2017;
Chow et al. 2019). Another related approach is reward shapping (Tessler, Mankowitz, and Mannor 2018) with ﬁxed
Lagrange multipliers. It, however,inherits the difﬁculties of
adapting the shaping rewards throughout training stages and
across different tasks with respect to the various requirements for reward shaping.
Constrained policy optimization (CPO) (Achiam et al.
2017) is proposed to solve CMDPs. It extends the trustregion policy optimization (TRPO) algorithm (Schulman et
al. 2015) to handle the constraints. CPO monotonically improves the policy during training, demonstrating promising
empirical performance, and it guarantees constraint satisfaction during the training process once the constraints are satisﬁed (Chow et al. 2019). However, CPO needs to calculate
the second-order derivatives and thus is complicated to compute and implement. In addition, CPO does not handle mean
valued constraints (Tessler, Mankowitz, and Mannor 2018),
and it is difﬁcult to employ CPO when there are multiple
constraints.
In this paper, we propose a ﬁrst-order optimization
method, Interior-point Policy Optimization (IPO), to solve
CMDPs with different types of cumulative constraints.

Abstract
In this paper, we study reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to solve real-world decision problems with the objective of maximizing the long-term reward as well as satisfying
cumulative constraints. We propose a novel ﬁrst-order policy optimization method, Interior-point Policy Optimization
(IPO), which augments the objective with logarithmic barrier functions, inspired by the interior-point method. Our proposed method is easy to implement with performance guarantees and can handle general types of cumulative multiconstraint settings. We conduct extensive evaluations to compare our approach with state-of-the-art baselines. Our algorithm outperforms the baseline algorithms, in terms of reward
maximization and constraint satisfaction.

Introduction
Recent advances have demonstrated signiﬁcant potentials
of deep reinforcement learning (RL) in solving complex
sequential decision and control problems, e.g., the Atari
game (Mnih et al. 2015), robotics (Andrychowicz et al.
2018), Go (Silver et al. 2016), etc. In such RL problems,
the objective is to maximize the discounted cumulative reward. In many other problems, in addition to maximizing the
reward, a policy needs to satisfy certain constraints. For example, in a cellular network, a common objective for the network operator is to maximize the throughput or cumulative
data transmitted to users. At the same time, users may have
different requirements for the quality of service, such as
the requirements on average latency, cumulative throughput,
or the average package loss rate, which are constraints on
the optimization problem (Julian et al. 2002). Consider another example of robot manipulation and control. In the task
of placing an object (Pham, De Magistris, and Tachibana
2018), the reward is the measurement of how well the object
is placed, while there are constraints on the motion of the
robot arm, such as how much the arm can twist.
RL with constraints is usually modeled as a Constrained
Markov Decision Process (CMDP)(Altman 1999), where
the agent must act with respect to constraints, in addition
to reward maximization. There are two types of constraints:
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4940

