The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Detecting and Tracking Communal Bird Roosts in Weather Radar Data
Zezhou Cheng

Saadia Gabriel

Pankaj Bhambhani

UMass Amherst
zezhoucheng@cs.umass.edu

University of Washington
skgabrie@cs.washington.edu

UMass Amherst
pankaj@cs.umass.edu

Daniel Sheldon

Subhransu Maji

Andrew Laughlin

David Winkler

UMass Amherst
sheldon@cs.umass.edu

UMass Amherst
smaji@cs.umass.edu

UNC Asheville
alaughli@unca.edu

Cornell University
dww4@cornell.edu

of birds or bats from roosting locations (Winkler 2006;
Horn and Kunz 2008; Buler et al. 2012).
This paper is about the development of an AI system to
track the roosting and migration behavior of communally
roosting songbirds. Such birds congregate in large roosts at
night during portions of the year. Roosts may contain thousands to millions of birds and are packed so densely that
when birds depart in the morning they are visible on radar.
Roosts occur all over the US, but few are documented, and
many or most are never witnessed by humans, since birds
enter and leave the roosts during twilight. Those who do witness the swarming behavior of huge ﬂocks at roosts report
an awe-inspiring spectacle1 .
We are particularly interested in swallow species, which,
due to their unique behavior, create a distinctive expanding ring pattern in radar (see Fig. 1). During fall and winter, the Tree Swallow (Tachycineta bicolor) is the only
swallow species present in North America, so roost signatures provide nearly unambiguous information about this
single species, which is highly signiﬁcant from an ecological perspective. Swallows are aerial insectivores, which
are rapidly declining in North America (Fraser et al. 2012;
Nebel et al. 2010). Information about the full life cycles
of these birds is urgently needed to understand and reverse
the causes of their declines (NABCI 2012). Radar data represents an unparalleled opportunity to gather this information, but it is too difﬁcult to access manually, which has
greatly limited the scope (in terms of spatial/temporal extent or detail) of past research studies (Laughlin et al. 2016;
Bridge et al. 2016).
We seek an AI system to ﬁll this gap. An AI system
has the potential to collect ﬁne-grained measurements of
swallows—across the continent, at a daily time scale—from
the entire 20-year radar archive. This would allow scientists
to study trends in population size and migration behavior in
relation to changes in climate and habitat availability, and
may provide some of the ﬁrst insights into where and when
birds die during their annual life cycle, which is critical information to guide conservation efforts.
The dramatic successes of deep learning for recognition
tasks make it an excellent candidate for detecting and track-

Abstract
The US weather radar archive holds detailed information
about biological phenomena in the atmosphere over the last
20 years. Communally roosting birds congregate in large
numbers at nighttime roosting locations, and their morning
exodus from the roost is often visible as a distinctive pattern
in radar images. This paper describes a machine learning system to detect and track roost signatures in weather radar data.
A signiﬁcant challenge is that labels were collected opportunistically from previous research studies and there are systematic differences in labeling style. We contribute a latentvariable model and EM algorithm to learn a detection model
together with models of labeling styles for individual annotators. By properly accounting for these variations we learn
a signiﬁcantly more accurate detector. The resulting system
detects previously unknown roosting locations and provides
comprehensive spatio-temporal data about roosts across the
US. This data will provide biologists important information
about the poorly understood phenomena of broad-scale habitat use and movements of communally roosting birds during
the non-breeding season.

1

Introduction

The US weather radar network offers an unprecedented opportunity to study dynamic, continent-scale movements of
animals over a long time period. The National Weather Service operates a network of 143 radars in the contiguous US.
These radars were designed to study weather phenomena
such as precipitation and severe storms. However, they are
very sensitive and also detect ﬂying animals, including birds,
bats, and insects (Kunz et al. 2008). The data are archived
and available from the early 1990s to present, and provide
comprehensive views of a number of signiﬁcant biological phenomena. These include broad-scale patterns of bird
migration, such as the density and velocity of all nocturnally migrating birds ﬂying over the US in the spring and
fall (Farnsworth et al. 2016; Shamoun-Baranes et al. 2016),
and the number of migrants leaving different stopover habitats (Buler and Diehl 2009; Buler and Dawson 2014). Radars
can also detect phenomena that can be matched to individual
species, such as insect hatches and departures of large ﬂocks
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

378

See: https://people.cs.umass.edu/∼zezhoucheng/roosts

