The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GENO – Optimization for Classical
Machine Learning Made Fast and Easy
Sören Laue,1,2 Matthias Mitterreiter,1 Joachim Giesen1
1

Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
Ernst-Abbe-Platz 2
07743 Jena, Germany
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena
2
Data Assessment Solutions GmbH, Hannover
Related work. Classical machine learning is typically
served by toolboxes like scikit-learn (Pedregosa and others 2011), Weka (Frank, Hall, and Witten 2016), and
MLlib (Meng and others 2016). These toolboxes mainly
serve as wrappers for a collection of well-engineered implementations of standard solvers like LIBSVM or glmnet.
A disadvantage of the toolbox approach is a lacking of ﬂexibility. A slightly changed model, for instance by adding a
non-negativity constraint, might already be missing in the
framework.
Modeling languages provide more ﬂexibility since they
allow to specify problems from large problem classes. Popular modeling languages for optimization are CVX (Grant
and Boyd 2008) for MATLAB and its Python extension
CVXPY (Diamond and Boyd 2016), and JuMP (Dunning,
Huchette, and Lubin 2017) which is bound to Julia. All these
languages take an instance of an optimization problem and
transform it into some standard form of a linear program
(LP), quadratic program (QP), second-order cone program
(SOCP), or semi-deﬁnite program (SDP). The transformed
problem is then addressed by solvers for the corresponding
standard form. However, the transformation into standard
form can be inefﬁcient, because the formal representation
in standard form can grow substantially with the problem
size. This representational inefﬁciency directly translates into
computational inefﬁciency.
GENO differs from the standard modeling language plus
solver approach by a much tighter coupling of the language
and the solver. GENO does not transform problem instances
but whole problem classes, including constrained problems,
into a very general standard form. Since the standard form
is independent of any speciﬁc problem instance it does not
grow for larger instances. GENO does not require the user to
tune parameters and the generated code is highly efﬁcient.

Abstract
Most problems from classical machine learning can be cast
as an optimization problem. We introduce GENO (GENeric
Optimization), a framework that lets the user specify a constrained or unconstrained optimization problem in an easyto-read modeling language. GENO then generates a solver,
i.e., Python code, that can solve this class of optimization
problems. The generated solver is usually as fast as handwritten, problem-speciﬁc, and well-engineered solvers. Often
the solvers generated by GENO are faster by a large margin
compared to recently developed solvers that are tailored to a
speciﬁc problem class.
An online interface to our framework can be found at
http://www.geno-project.org.

1

Introduction

Most problems from classical machine learning like support
vector machines, robust regression, elastic net regression,
sparse PCA, matrix or tensor factorization, etc. can be cast as
optimization problems. Each new machine learning problem
gives rise to a new optimization problem for which a new
problem-speciﬁc solver is being implemented manually. However, designing and implementing optimization algorithms is
still a time-consuming and error-prone task.
Here, we demonstrate GENO (GENeric Optimization),
an optimization framework that allows to state constrained
and unconstrained optimization problems in an easy-to-read
modeling language. From the problem formulation that the
user can specify an optimizer is automatically generated.
Contrary to common belief, we could show (Laue, Mitterreiter, and Giesen 2019) that the solvers generated by GENO
are (1) as efﬁcient as well-engineered, specialized solvers
like LIBSVM, LIBLINEAR, or glmnet, (2) more efﬁcient by
a decent margin than recent state-of-the-art, problem-speciﬁc
solvers that have been published at ICML and NeurIPS within
the last few years, and (3) orders of magnitude more efﬁcient
than classical modeling language plus solver approaches like
CVXPY paired with solvers like Gurobi or Mosek.

2

The GENO Pipeline

GENO features a modeling language and a solver that are
tightly coupled. The modeling language allows to specify
a whole class of optimization problems in terms of an objective function and constraints that are given as vectorized
linear algebra expressions. Neither the objective function nor
the constraints need to be differentiable. Non-differentiable

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13620

