The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Motion-Attentive Transition for Zero-Shot Video Object Segmentation
Tianfei Zhou,1,2 Shunzhou Wang,2 Yi Zhou,1 Yazhou Yao,3 Jianwu Li,2∗ Ling Shao1
1

Inception Institute of Artiﬁcal Intelligence, UAE
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2

zero-shot solution (Ventura et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019a).
These methods generally learn a powerful object representation from large-scale training data and then adapt the models
to test videos without any annotations.
Even before the era of deep learning, object motion has
always been considered as an informative cue for automatic video object segmentation. This is largely inspired
by the remarkable capability of motion perception in the
human visual system (HVS) (Treisman and Gelade 1980;
Mital et al. 2013), which can quickly orient attentions towards moving objects in dynamic scenarios. In fact, human
beings are more sensitive to moving objects than static ones,
even if the static objects are strongly contrasted against their
surroundings. Nevertheless, motion does not work alone.
Recent studies (Cloutman 2013) have revealed that, in HVS,
the dorsal pathway (for motion perception) has a faster
activation response than the ventral pathway (for objectness/semantic perception), and tends to send signals to the
ventral pathway along multi-level connections to prompt it
to focus on processing the most salient objects. This multimodal system enables human beings to focus on the moving
parts of objects ﬁrst and then transfer the attention to appearance for the whole picture. Thus, it is desirable to take
this biological mechanism into account and incorporate object motion into appearance learning, in a hierarchical way,
for more effective spatio-temporal object representation.
By considering information ﬂow from motion to appearance, we can alleviate ambiguity in object appearance (e.g.
visually similar to the surroundings), thus easing the pressure in representation learning of objects. However, in the
context of deep learning, most segmentation models do not
leverage this potential. Many approaches (Tokmakov, Alahari, and Schmid 2017a; Perazzi et al. 2017; Jain, Xiong,
and Grauman 2017; Cheng et al. 2017) simply treat motion
cues as equal to appearance cues and learn to directly map
optical ﬂow to the corresponding segmentation mask. A few
methods (Xiao et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018b) have attempted
to enhance object representation with motion; however, they
rely on complex heuristics and only operate at a single scale,
ignoring the critical hierarchical structure.
Motivated by these observations, we propose a MotionAttentive Transition Network (MATNet) for zero-shot video

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel Motion-Attentive Transition Network (MATNet) for zero-shot video object segmentation, which provides a new way of leveraging motion information to reinforce spatio-temporal object representation. An
asymmetric attention block, called Motion-Attentive Transition (MAT), is designed within a two-stream encoder, which
transforms appearance features into motion-attentive representations at each convolutional stage. In this way, the encoder becomes deeply interleaved, allowing for closely hierarchical interactions between object motion and appearance.
This is superior to the typical two-stream architecture, which
treats motion and appearance separately in each stream and
often suffers from overﬁtting to appearance information. Additionally, a bridge network is proposed to obtain a compact,
discriminative and scale-sensitive representation for multilevel encoder features, which is further fed into a decoder to
achieve segmentation results. Extensive experiments on three
challenging public benchmarks (i.e. DAVIS-16, FBMS and
Youtube-Objects) show that our model achieves compelling
performance against the state-of-the-arts. Code is available
at: https://github.com/tfzhou/MATNet.

Introduction
The task of automatically segmenting primary object(s)
from videos has gained signiﬁcant attention in recent years,
and has a powerful impact in many areas of computer vision,
including surveillance, robotics and autonomous driving.
However, due to the lack of human intervention, in addition
to the common challenges posed by video data (e.g. appearance variations, scale changes, background clutter), the task
faces great difﬁculties in accurately discovering the most
distinct objects throughout a video sequence. Early nonlearning methods typically address this using handcrafted
features, e.g. motion boundary (Papazoglou and Ferrari
2013), saliency (Wang, Shen, and Porikli 2015) and point
trajectories (Ochs, Malik, and Brox 2013). More recently,
research has turned towards the deep learning paradigm,
with several studies attempting to ﬁt this problem into a
∗

Corresponding author: Jianwu Li(ljw@bit.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13066

