The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph Attention Based Proposal 3D ConvNets for Action Detection
Jun Li,1 Xianglong Liu,1,2∗ Zhuofan Zong,1 Wanru Zhao,1 Mingyuan Zhang,1 Jingkuan Song3
1

2

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Innovation Center, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
junmuzi@gmail.com, xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn

et al. 2009), ASM (Gaidon, Harchaoui, and Schmid 2011)
and SDPM (Tian, Sukthankar, and Shah 2013). In the past
decade, because of the stronger modeling capabilities of
convolutional neural networks, more studies have focused
on deep features based action detection (Singh et al. 2016;
Gao et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019).
Among the deep features based solutions, 3D ConvNet
methods have shown promising performance in modeling
the motion and appearance information, which can alleviate expensive optical ﬂow computation, and have been
widely studied recently. Shou, Wang, and Chang exploited
the sliding windows and 3D ConvNets to classify and localize the video activities. Inspired by Faster R-CNN (Ren et
al. 2015), Xu, Das, and Saenko proposed R-C3D for action
detection, which integrated temporal action proposals generation and proposals classiﬁcation in one end-to-end network.
Wang and Gupta chose a graph-based reasoning framework
to model human-object and object-object relationships. In
(Long et al. 2019) a set of Gaussian kernels were learnt to
dynamically model temporal scale of each action proposal
in 3D ConvNets.
Despite the successful progress using 3D ConvNets, most
of these methods heavily rely on the temporal action proposal generation as the input of the action detector and localization regressor, which plays a very important role on
promising the action detection accuracy. In practice, the
proposals usually contain strong inherent relations, mainly
stemming from the temporal and spatial variations in the
video actions. The intra relations inside each proposal are
useful for correcting the wrong action proposal towards the
ground truth label, while the inter relations across different proposals can help adjusting the imprecise boundary of
the temporal proposal. Unfortunately, the existing solutions
often ignore such inherent relations and thus largely suffer
from deviated action boundaries and inaccurate detection.
To address this issue, we propose graph attention based
proposal 3D convolutional networks (AGCN-P-3DCNNs)
to simultaneously model the intra and inter dependencies
of temporal action proposals for accurate action detection.
Speciﬁcally, an intra and inter attention mechanism are respectively introduced and fused in the graph convolutional
network (GCN) to dynamically represent the proposals and

Abstract
The recent advances in 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (3D CNNs) have shown promising performance for
untrimmed video action detection, employing the popular detection framework that heavily relies on the temporal action
proposal generations as the input of the action detector and localization regressor. In practice the proposals usually contain
strong intra and inter relations among them, mainly stemming
from the temporal and spatial variations in the video actions.
However, most of existing 3D CNNs ignore the relations and
thus suffer from the redundant proposals degenerating the
detection performance and efﬁciency. To address this problem, we propose graph attention based proposal 3D ConvNets
(AGCN-P-3DCNNs) for video action detection. Speciﬁcally,
our proposed graph attention is composed of intra attention
based GCN and inter attention based GCN. We use intra attention to learn the intra long-range dependencies inside each
action proposal and update node matrix of Intra Attention
based GCN, and use inter attention to learn the inter dependencies between different action proposals as adjacency matrix of Inter Attention based GCN. Afterwards, we fuse intra
and inter attention to model intra long-range dependencies
and inter dependencies simultaneously. Another contribution
is that we propose a simple and effective framewise classiﬁer, which enhances the feature presentation capabilities
of backbone model. Experiments on two proposal 3D ConvNets based models (P-C3D and P-ResNet) and two popular
action detection benchmarks (THUMOS 2014, ActivityNet
v1.3) demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance achieved
by our method. Particularly, P-C3D embedded with our module achieves average mAP 3.7% improvement on THUMOS
2014 dataset compared to original model.

Introduction
In recent years, with the tremendous increase of video data,
effective and efﬁcient video analysis is becoming a problem demanding prompt solutions. Speciﬁcally, video action
detection, not only locating the action temporal boundary
but also classifying the action category, is one of the challenging tasks. Many early studies developed hand-craft features to achieve action detection, such as DLSBP (Duchenne
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4626

