The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Feature Discrete Collaborative
Filtering for Fast Cold-Start Recommendation
Yang Xu,1 Lei Zhu,1∗ Zhiyong Cheng,2 Jingjing Li,3 Jiande Sun1
1

2

Shandong Normal University
Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan)
2
Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences)
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
leizhu0608@gmail.com
tween their latent features. However, the time complexity
for generating top-k items recommendation for all users is
O(nmr + nm log k) (Zhang, Lian, and Yang 2017). Therefore, MF-based methods are often computational expensive
and inefﬁcient when handling the large-scale recommendation applications (Cheng et al. 2018; 2019).

Abstract
Hashing is an effective technique to address the largescale recommendation problem, due to its high computation
and storage efﬁciency on calculating the user preferences
on items. However, existing hashing-based recommendation
methods still suffer from two important problems: 1) Their
recommendation process mainly relies on the user-item interactions and single speciﬁc content feature. When the interaction history or the content feature is unavailable (the
cold-start problem), their performance will be seriously deteriorated. 2) Existing methods learn the hash codes with relaxed optimization or adopt discrete coordinate descent to
directly solve binary hash codes, which results in signiﬁcant quantization loss or consumes considerable computation
time. In this paper, we propose a fast cold-start recommendation method, called Multi-Feature Discrete Collaborative Filtering (MFDCF), to solve these problems. Speciﬁcally, a lowrank self-weighted multi-feature fusion module is designed
to adaptively project the multiple content features into binary
yet informative hash codes by fully exploiting their complementarity. Additionally, we develop a fast discrete optimization algorithm to directly compute the binary hash codes with
simple operations. Experiments on two public recommendation datasets demonstrate that MFDCF outperforms the stateof-the-arts on various aspects.

Recent studies show that the hashing-based recommendation algorithms, which encode both users and items into
binary codes in Hamming space, are promising to tackle
the efﬁciency challenge (Zhang et al. 2016; 2014). In these
methods, the preference score could be efﬁciently computed
by Hamming distance. However, learning binary codes is
generally NP-hard (Håstad 2001) due to the discrete constraints. To tackle this problem, the researchers resort to a
two-stage hash learning procedure (Liu et al. 2014; Zhang
et al. 2014): relaxed optimization and binary quantization.
Continuous representations are ﬁrst computed by the relaxed
optimization, and subsequently the hash codes are generated
by binary quantization. This learning strategy indeed simpliﬁes the optimization challenge. However, it inevitably suffers from signiﬁcant quantization loss according to (Zhang
et al. 2016). Hence, several solutions are developed to directly optimizing the binary hash codes from the matrix factorization with discrete constraints. Despite much progress
has been achieved, they still suffer from two problems: 1)
Their recommendation process mainly relies on the useritem interactions and single speciﬁc content feature. Under
such circumstances, they cannot provide meaningful recommendations for new users (e.g. for the new users who have
no interaction history with the items). 2) They learn the hash
codes with Discrete Coordinate Descent (DCD) that learns
the hash codes bit-by-bit, which results in signiﬁcant quantization loss or consumes considerable computation time.

Introduction
With the development of online applications, recommender
systems have been widely adopted by many online services
for helping their users ﬁnd desirable items. However, it is
still challenging to accurately and efﬁciently match items
to their potential users, particularly with the ever-growing
scales of items and users (Batmaz et al. 2019).
In the past, Collaborative Filtering (CF), as exempliﬁed
by Matrix Factorization (MF) algorithms (Koren, Bell, and
Volinsky 2009) have demonstrated great successes in both
academia and industry. MF factorizes an n × m user-item
rating matrix to project both users and items into a rdimensional latent feature space, where the user’s preference scores for items are predicted by the inner product be-

In this paper, we propose a fast cold-start recommendation
method, called Multi-Feature Discrete Collaborative Filtering (MFDCF) to alleviate these problems. Speciﬁcally, we
propose a low-rank self-weighted multi-feature fusion module to adaptively preserve the multiple content features of
users into the compact yet informative hash codes by sufﬁciently exploiting their complementarity. Our method is inspired by the success of the multiple feature fusion in other
relevant areas (Wang et al. 2018; 2012; Lu et al. 2019a;

∗

The corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
270

