The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning from Interventions Using Hierarchical Policies for Safe Learning
Jing Bi,1 Vikas Dhiman,2 Tianyou Xiao,1 Chenliang Xu1
1

University of Rochester
University of California San Diego
jbi5@ur.rochester.edu, vdhiman@ucsd.edu
txiao3@u.rochester.edu, chenliang.xu@rochester.edu
2

Abstract
Learning from Demonstrations (LfD) via Behavior Cloning
(BC) works well on multiple complex tasks. However, a limitation of the typical LfD approach is that it requires expert
demonstrations for all scenarios, including those in which
the algorithm is already well-trained. The recently proposed
Learning from Interventions (LfI) overcomes this limitation
by using an expert overseer. The expert overseer only intervenes when it suspects that an unsafe action is about to
be taken. Although LfI signiﬁcantly improves over LfD, the
state-of-the-art LfI fails to account for delay caused by the expert’s reaction time and only learns short-term behavior. We
address these limitations by 1) interpolating the expert’s interventions back in time, and 2) by splitting the policy into two
hierarchical levels, one that generates sub-goals for the future
and another that generates actions to reach those desired subgoals. This sub-goal prediction forces the algorithm to learn
long-term behavior while also being robust to the expert’s reaction time. Our experiments show that LfI using sub-goals
in a hierarchical policy framework trains faster and achieves
better asymptotic performance than typical LfD.

Eect of Intervention on
trajectories

Path/Goal without intervention

Optimal path/goal

Eect of Intervention on
sub-goals

Path/Goal with intervention

Safe region

Figure 1: An autonomous driving example to show the advantage of intervening on sub-goals rather than trajectories.
An expert-overseer intervenes whenever the car is about to
go outside the safe region, with some delay. The ﬁgure on
the left shows three trajectories: without intervention, with
intervention, and the optimal trajectory. There is a difference
between the intervened trajectory and the desired trajectory
due to the expert’s reaction time. However, by formulating
the intervention in terms of sub-goals, we can minimize this
discrepancy, as shown in the right ﬁgure.

Introduction
ever learning the reward function. In safety-critical scenarios, BC is preferred over IRL because it requires no trialand-error during training. However, BC requires a large
number of data samples, as it depends on the demonstration
data in all scenarios, even if the algorithm has learned the
scenarios satisfactorily.
(Saunders et al. 2018) and (Waytowich, Goecks, and
Lawhern 2018) have recently introduced the framework of
Learning from Interventions (LfI) that allows for safe RL in
the presence of a human overseer. This approach guarantees
the safety and is shown to need fewer samples from an expert
than LfD. State-of-the-art approaches in both LfD and LfI
learn reactive behaviors (Tai et al. 2016) and very little longterm behavior. Moreover, no LfI framework so far considers
the reaction delay in modeling expert supervision. We ﬁnd
that the expert only signals after a non-negligible amount of
delay and that compensating for these delays leads to improvements in both sample efﬁciency and performance.
To address both of these challenges in LfI, we employ
ideas from Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (Kulkarni
et al. 2016; Savinov, Dosovitskiy, and Koltun 2018) by mod-

Methodologies for learning control policies can be categorized into Reinforcement Learning (RL) and Imitation
Learning (IL). RL depends on the availability of a welldesigned reward function, while IL depends on demonstrations from an expert. Recently, RL has had success
in simulated environments and games (Mnih et al. 2015;
Silver et al. 2016). However, in many real-world robotic applications like autonomous driving, it is challenging to design explicit reward functions. Moreover, training by trialand-error in the real world is highly unsafe. For these reasons, IL is often preferable to RL.
There are two main categories of Imitation Learning: Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) and Behavior Cloning
(BC), which is also known as Learning from Demonstration (LfD). In IRL, the algorithm learns a reward function
from expert demonstrations, then learns the optimal policy through trial and error. On the other hand, BC directly
learns the policy to match expert demonstration, without
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10352

