The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Effective Modeling of Encoder-Decoder
Architecture for Joint Entity and Relation Extraction
Tapas Nayak, Hwee Tou Ng
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
nayakt@u.nus.edu, nght@comp.nus.edu.sg

capture the interaction among multiple tuples. Zheng et al.
(2017) proposed a joint extraction model based on neural
sequence tagging scheme. But their model could not extract
tuples with overlapping entities in a sentence as it could not
assign more than one tag to a word. Zeng et al. (2018) proposed a neural encoder-decoder model for extracting relation tuples with overlapping entities. However, they used
a copy mechanism to copy only the last token of the entities, thus this model could not extract the full entity names.
Also, their best performing model used a separate decoder
to extract each tuple which limited the power of their model.
This model was trained with a ﬁxed number of decoders
and could not extract tuples beyond that number during inference. Encoder-decoder models are powerful models and
they are successful in many NLP tasks such as machine
translation, sentence generation from structured data, and
open information extraction.
In this paper, we explore how encoder-decoder models
can be used effectively for extracting relation tuples from
sentences. There are three major challenges in this task: (i)
The model should be able to extract entities and relations together. (ii) It should be able to extract multiple tuples with
overlapping entities. (iii) It should be able to extract exactly
two entities of a tuple with their full names. To address these
challenges, we propose two novel approaches using encoderdecoder architecture1 . We ﬁrst propose a new representation
scheme for relation tuples (Table 1) such that it can represent multiple tuples with overlapping entities and different
lengths of entities in a simple way. We employ an encoderdecoder model where the decoder extracts one word at a time
like machine translation models. At the end of sequence generation, due to the unique representation of the tuples, we
can extract the tuples from the sequence of words. Although
this model performs quite well, generating one word at a
time is somewhat unnatural for this task. Each tuple has exactly two entities and one relation, and each entity appears as
a continuous text span in a sentence. The most effective way
to identify them is to ﬁnd their start and end location in the
sentence. Each relation tuple can then be represented using
ﬁve items: start and end location of the two entities and the

Abstract
A relation tuple consists of two entities and the relation between them, and often such tuples are found in unstructured
text. There may be multiple relation tuples present in a text
and they may share one or both entities among them. Extracting such relation tuples from a sentence is a difﬁcult task
and sharing of entities or overlapping entities among the tuples makes it more challenging. Most prior work adopted a
pipeline approach where entities were identiﬁed ﬁrst followed
by ﬁnding the relations among them, thus missing the interaction among the relation tuples in a sentence. In this paper,
we propose two approaches to use encoder-decoder architecture for jointly extracting entities and relations. In the ﬁrst
approach, we propose a representation scheme for relation
tuples which enables the decoder to generate one word at a
time like machine translation models and still ﬁnds all the
tuples present in a sentence with full entity names of different length and with overlapping entities. Next, we propose a
pointer network-based decoding approach where an entire tuple is generated at every time step. Experiments on the publicly available New York Times corpus show that our proposed approaches outperform previous work and achieve signiﬁcantly higher F1 scores.

Introduction
Distantly-supervised information extraction systems extract
relation tuples with a set of pre-deﬁned relations from text.
Traditionally, researchers (Mintz et al. 2009; Riedel, Yao,
and McCallum 2010; Hoffmann et al. 2011) use pipeline approaches where a named entity recognition (NER) system is
used to identify the entities in a sentence and then a classiﬁer is used to ﬁnd the relation (or no relation) between them.
However, due to the complete separation of entity detection
and relation classiﬁcation, these models miss the interaction
between multiple relation tuples present in a sentence.
Recently, several neural network-based models (Katiyar
and Cardie 2016; Miwa and Bansal 2016) were proposed to
jointly extract entities and relations from a sentence. These
models used a parameter-sharing mechanism to extract the
entities and relations in the same network. But they still ﬁnd
the relations after identifying all the entities and do not fully
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The code and data of this paper can be found at
https://github.com/nusnlp/PtrNetDecoding4JERE

8528

