The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MetaMT, a Meta Learning Method Leveraging
Multiple Domain Data for Low Resource Machine Translation
Rumeng Li,1∗ Xun Wang,1,2,3∗ Hong Yu1,2,3,4
1

School of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA, United States
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, United States
3
Bedford Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bedford, MA, United States
4
Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States
alicerumeng@foxmail.com, wangxun@outlook.com, Hong Yu@uml.edu
2

When migrating NMT models from one domain to another, one of the biggest challenges faced by researchers
is the domain divergence. Domain divergence causes difﬁculties for NMT in at least two aspects. Firstly, different domains tend to have their own distinct set of vocabulary. For example, when referring to the same pathology,
a medical corpus would be inclined to use “cardiovascular disease”, while “heart disease” would be more common
among corpora of general domains. The resulting large vocabulary aggravates the problem of data sparsity. Secondly,
even identical words may carry different meanings in the
context of their respective domains. For example, “Obama”
is widely known as the former president of US, but the same
word usually refers to a beautiful seaside city in Japan in
a corpus about Japan. As such, embeddings for the same
word cannot be shared across domains. This is referred
to as the polysemy problem which has been addressed by
many works (Yarowsky 1996; Chen, Bian, and Lin 1999;
Koehn 2009) and this problem is more severe for domainspeciﬁc machine translation.

Abstract
Neural machine translation (NMT) models have achieved
state-of-the-art translation quality with a large quantity of
parallel corpora available. However, their performance suffers signiﬁcantly when it comes to domain-speciﬁc translations, in which training data are usually scarce. In this paper,
we present a novel NMT model with a new word embedding
transition technique for fast domain adaption. We propose to
split parameters in the model into two groups: model parameters and meta parameters. The former are used to model the
translation while the latter are used to adjust the representational space to generalize the model to different domains.
We mimic the domain adaptation of the machine translation
model to low-resource domains using multiple translation
tasks on different domains. A new training strategy based on
meta-learning is developed along with the proposed model
to update the model parameters and meta parameters alternately. Experiments on datasets of different domains showed
substantial improvements of NMT performances on a limited
amount of data.

Introduction

Existing approaches for domain adaptation NMT generally fall into two categories: data-centric and model-centric
(Chu and Wang 2018). Data-centric methods focus on creating more data from either in-domain monolingual corpora,
synthetic corpora or parallel corpora (Zhang and Zong 2016;
Domhan and Hieber 2017; Chu, Dabre, and Kurohashi
2017). The creation of more in-domain training data could
balance the ratio between the in- and out-of-domain data
and therefore enable the learnt model to pay more attention to the target domain. The model-centric category focuses on NMT models that are specialized for domain adaptation such as Fine Tuning (Dakwale and Monz 2017) and
Instance/Cost Weighting (Wang et al. 2017a; 2017b). Such
methods could also leverage out-of-domain parallel corpora
or in-domain monolingual corpora. Fine tuning places data
of the target domain at the end of the training data stream,
forcing the model to pay more attention to the target domain.
Instance/Cost Weighting methods force the model to focus
on the target domain by explicitly assigning higher weights
to data in the target domain (or similar to the data in the
target domain) during training. Both instance/cost weighting and ﬁne tuning optimize the model towards a local min-

Neural machine translation (NMT) is a deep learning-based
approach for machine translation. A typical NMT model
comprises three parts: the encoder, the decoder and the attention model. It relies on large quantities of parallel corpora for effective training of the unprecedented amount
of parameters in each of its parts and to avoid overﬁtting
(Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Gehring et al. 2017;
Vaswani et al. 2017; Meng et al. 2019). However, ﬁnding such data remains challenging for speciﬁc domains as
the construction of parallel corpus is often too expensive.
The scarcity of domain-speciﬁc parallel data limits the potentials of NMT models in low-resource scenarios as previous works stated (Zoph et al. 2016; Gu et al. 2018;
Koehn and Knowles 2017).
One research direction for resource lean approaches is to
leverage data of multiple domains to develop robust translation systems that can be migrated to speciﬁc domains easily.
∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8245

