The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Target-Aspect-Sentiment Joint Detection for Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis
Hai Wan,1 Yufei Yang,1 Jianfeng Du,2∗ Yanan Liu,1 Kunxun Qi,2 Jeff Z. Pan3
1

2

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Multilingual Intelligent Processing, Guangdong University of Foreign Studies,
Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
3
Department of Computing Science, The University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 3UE, UK
wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn, jfdu@gdufs.edu.cn, {yangyf35, liuyn56}@mail3.sysu.edu.cn,
kunxunqi@foxmail.com, jeff.z.pan@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract

id = 1189674:3
Admittedly some nights inside the restaurant were rather warm, but
the open kitchen is part of the charm.

Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) aims to detect the
targets (which are composed by continuous words), aspects
and sentiment polarities in text. Published datasets from
SemEval-2015 and SemEval-2016 reveal that a sentiment polarity depends on both the target and the aspect. However,
most of the existing methods consider predicting sentiment
polarities from either targets or aspects but not from both,
thus they easily make wrong predictions on sentiment polarities. In particular, where the target is implicit, i.e., it does not
appear in the given text, the methods predicting sentiment polarities from targets do not work. To tackle these limitations in
ABSA, this paper proposes a novel method for target-aspectsentiment joint detection. It relies on a pre-trained language
model and can capture the dependence on both targets and
aspects for sentiment prediction. Experimental results on the
SemEval-2015 and SemEval-2016 restaurant datasets show
that the proposed method achieves a high performance in detecting target-aspect-sentiment triples even for the implicit
target cases; moreover, it even outperforms the state-of-theart methods for those subtasks of target-aspect-sentiment detection that they are competent to.

target: open kitchen aspect: AMBIENCE#GENERAL sentiment: positive
target: restaurant
aspect: AMBIENCE#GENERAL sentiment: negative
id = 1632445:5
Even though its good seafood, the prices are too high.
target: seafood
target: seafood

aspect: FOOD#QUALITY
aspect: FOOD#PRICES

sentiment: positive
sentiment: negative

id = 1726473:4
The food arrived 20 minutes after I called, cold and soggy.
target: NULL
target: food

aspect: SERVICE#GENERAL
aspect: FOOD#QUALITY

sentiment: negative
sentiment: negative

Figure 1: Three examples in the restaurant dataset from
SemEval-2016 Task 5.
Task 5. The ﬁrst example shows that the sentiment cannot
be determined by the sentence and the aspect. The second
example shows that the sentiment cannot be determined by
the sentence and the target. That is, the sentiment depends
on both the target and the aspect. Moreover, the target of
the last example can be given implicitly; i.e., it is assigned
NULL and does not contain any word in the sentence.
Two restaurant datasets are published by the above two
competitions, respectively. They give new challenges to
ABSA. The primary challenge is that the sentiment actually
depends on both the target and the aspect. Most existing
studies in ABSA do not handle this dual dependence. For
example, some studies such as (Wang et al. 2016) and (Xue
and Li 2018) predict sentiments from aspects alone, while
other studies such as (Schmitt et al. 2018) and (Sun, Huang,
and Qiu 2019) predict sentiments from targets alone. Moreover, most existing studies such as (Ma, Li, and Wang 2018;
Wang, Lan, and Wang 2018; Luo et al. 2019b) ignore implicate target cases. However, from the restaurant datasets,
there are about one fourth of opinions that have implicit
targets (see Table 1). Thus handling implicit target cases is
also a non-neglectable challenge in ABSA.
The above challenges call for a solution to the task of
target-aspect-sentiment detection (TASD), namely detecting
target-aspect-sentiment triples from a sentence. By considering that the target and the aspect are highly related and that

Introduction
Sentiment analysis, aiming to detect the sentiment expressed
in text, is a fundamental task in natural language processing.
Since the sentiments in a sentence can be complex and
varied by different aspects, aspect-based sentiment analysis
(ABSA) is proposed to reﬁne sentiment analysis. It often
aims to detect ﬁne-grained opinions towards different aspects. Recently ABSA has gained more and more attention
especially with the rise of social media and public opinion.
SemEval-2015 Task 12 (Pontiki et al. 2015) and
SemEval-2016 Task 5 (Pontiki et al. 2016) formalize ABSA
as a task for target-aspect-sentiment detection from a
sentence, where the target is composed of continuous words
in the sentence, the aspect is drawn from a predeﬁned vocabulary, and the sentiment is a polarity (positive, negative,
or neutral) towards the target and the aspect. Figure 1 gives
three examples in the restaurant dataset from SemEval-2016
∗
Corresponding author and having equal contribution with the
ﬁrst author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9122

