The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Stereoscopic Image Super-Resolution with Stereo Consistent Feature
Wonil Song, Sungil Choi, Somi Jeong, Kwanghoon Sohn∗
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
{swonil92, csi6570, somijeong, khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a ﬁrst attempt for stereoscopic image superresolution (SR) for recovering high-resolution details while
preserving stereo-consistency between stereoscopic image
pair. The most challenging issue in the stereoscopic SR is
that the texture details should be consistent for corresponding pixels in stereoscopic SR image pair. However, existing
stereo SR methods cannot maintain the stereo-consistency,
thus causing 3D fatigue to the viewers. To address this issue,
in this paper, we propose a self and parallax attention mechanism (SPAM) to aggregate the information from its own image and the counterpart stereo image simultaneously, thus reconstructing high-quality stereoscopic SR image pairs. Moreover, we design an efﬁcient network architecture and effective loss functions to enforce stereo-consistency constraint.
Finally, experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
our method over state-of-the-art SR methods in terms of both
quantitative metrics and qualitative visual quality while maintaining stereo-consistency between stereoscopic image pair.

9'65

3$665QHW

2XUV

Figure 1: The result of 4× super-resolved stereo left (top)
and right (bottom) image using VDSR (Kim, Lee, and Lee
2016), PASSRnet (Wang et al. 2019a), and our proposed
method. These results are achieved on “Validation 57” of
Flickr 1024 dataset (Wang et al. 2019b). Our result shows
consistent texture details different with others.

work of Dong et al. (2015), numerous single image SR
methods have leveraged convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). They adopt advanced CNN techniques such as
residual architecture (Kim, Lee, and Lee 2016; Zhang et
al. 2018c) and perceptual loss (Johnson, Alahi, and Fei-Fei
2016; Ledig et al. 2017) to achieve the enhanced performance, but due to signiﬁcant information loss in LR image,
it is still extremely challenging.
To alleviate this limitation, some SR methods have been
proposed using multiple LR images such as stereo image pairs (Jeon et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019a) and video
frames (Liao et al. 2015; Caballero et al. 2017; Tao et
al. 2017). By taking advantage of additional information
from multiple LR images, they show the superior SR performance. However, the disparity (motion) exists between
stereo images (video frames), so conducting disparity (motion) compensation is a essential process to integrate them.
However, since they focus on generating the target HR image by incorporating additional LR images, they do not consider the consistent property. As shown in Figure 1, the SR
images reconstructed by conventional single and stereo SR
methods (Kim, Lee, and Lee 2016; Wang et al. 2019a) show
inconsistent texture details across stereo images, thus providing a visual discomfort from blurry details.
In this paper, we present a novel stereoscopic superresolution method for overcoming the aforementioned lim-

Introduction
With the increasing attention and popularity of stereoscopic 3D industry, stereoscopic image/video processing
techniques have been spotlighted in a wide range of ﬁelds
such as image inpainting (Wang et al. 2008), video stabilization (Guo et al. 2016), and style transfer (Chen et al. 2018).
These 3D contents are presented via 3D displays such as
AR/VR devices and 3D televisions by creating the illusion
of depth from the stereo images. As the 3D devices have advanced, they demand high-resolution stereoscopic images,
thus requiring stereoscopic super-resolution (SR) technique.
The most important point for the stereoscopic SR is preserving the consistency between super-resolved stereo image pair to provide the illusion of depth. Otherwise, the inconsistent stereo images would cause 3D fatigue to the viewers.
Super-resolution (SR) is a fundamental problem in lowlevel vision tasks aiming to enhance the spatial resolution of low-resolution (LR) image by reconstructing highresolution (HR) image. Recently, following the seminal
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12031

