The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Open-Domain Dialog
Abdelrhman Saleh,1,∗ Natasha Jaques,2,∗ Asma Ghandeharioun,2
Judy Hanwen Shen,2 Rosalind Picard2
1

Harvard University, 2 MIT Media Lab
abdelrhman saleh@college.harvard.edu, {jaquesn, asma gh, judyshen}@mit.edu, picard@media.mit.edu

systems from being deployed for safety-critical applications
such as mental health. Further, maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) training of such models often leads to the generation of dull and repetitive text (Li et al. 2016). Finally,
models may have difﬁculty tracking long-term aspects of the
conversation, and evidence has shown that they do not adequately condition on the conversation history in generating
responses (Sankar et al. 2019).
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a powerful paradigm that
allows dialog models to optimize for non-differentiable metrics of conversation quality, and thereby helps overcome the
above problems. In this paper, we use RL to learn from selfplay; the model talks to a ﬁxed copy of itself, and computes
reward functions on the generated conversation. We propose
novel, human-centered rewards, such as minimizing toxicity
of a conversation, in order to limit inappropriate responses.
We also design rewards based on the psychology of good
conversation (e.g. Bodie et al.; Weger Jr, Castle, and Emmett
(2012; 2010)), and reward recently proposed conversation
metrics that are associated with improved human judgments
of conversation quality (See et al. 2019). Table 1 shows how
RL can be used to optimize our proposed metrics, shifting
the conversation towards more positive and engaging conversation, with less repetition and toxicity.
Applying RL to open-domain dialog generation is a challenging problem. Most prior approaches (e.g. Li et al.; Li
et al.; Jaques et al.; Ranzato et al.; Yu et al. (2016; 2017;
2019; 2015; 2017)) learn to model rewards at the word level,
meaning that the reward is applied to affect the probability of
generating each word in the response. Such low-level control
makes credit assignment especially challenging, since highlevel rewards based on multiple conversation turns must be
applied to speciﬁc words. Further, this approach makes the
number of actions available to the RL agent equivalent to the
number of words in the dialog model’s vocabulary (20,000
in our case). Thus there are several orders of magnitude
more actions than in typical applications of deep RL, such
as learning to play an Atari game with only tens of actions
(e.g. Kulkarni et al. (2016)).
To overcome these challenges, we leverage hierarchical
reinforcement learning (HRL) to model rewards at the utterance level, improving the ﬂexibility of dialog models

Abstract
Open-domain dialog generation is a challenging problem;
maximum likelihood training can lead to repetitive outputs, models have difﬁculty tracking long-term conversational goals, and training on standard movie or online datasets
may lead to the generation of inappropriate, biased, or offensive text. Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a powerful framework that could potentially address these issues, for example
by allowing a dialog model to optimize for reducing toxicity
and repetitiveness. However, previous approaches which apply RL to open-domain dialog generation do so at the word
level, making it difﬁcult for the model to learn proper credit
assignment for long-term conversational rewards. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL), VHRL, which uses policy gradients to
tune the utterance-level embedding of a variational sequence
model. This hierarchical approach provides greater ﬂexibility
for learning long-term, conversational rewards. We use selfplay and RL to optimize for a set of human-centered conversation metrics, and show that our approach provides signiﬁcant improvements – in terms of both human evaluation
and automatic metrics – over state-of-the-art dialog models,
including Transformers.

1

Introduction

Since the inception of the Turing test, generating convincing
open-ended (open-domain) dialog has been a fundamental
challenge in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). A successful opendomain dialog system could provide enormous value enabling more natural human-computer interaction. Successful
dialog models could also unlock new, beneﬁcial applications
of AI, such as companion chatbots for therapy applications.
However, current generative models for dialog suffer from
several shortcomings that limit their usefulness in the real
world. Training on standard dialog datasets collected online or from movie scripts often leads to malicious, aggressive, biased, or offensive responses (Curry and Rieser 2018;
He and Glass 2018; Henderson et al. 2018; Wallace et al.
2019). There are no guarantees on the quality and sensitivity
of the generated text, often preventing open-domain dialog
∗

Equal Contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8741

