The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning from Easy to Complex: Adaptive
Multi-Curricula Learning for Neural Dialogue Generation
Hengyi Cai,†,§∗ Hongshen Chen,‡ Cheng Zhang,† Yonghao Song,†
Xiaofang Zhao,† Yangxi Li, Dongsheng Duan, Dawei Yin‡
†

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
§
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
‡
Data Science Lab, JD.com

National Computer network Emergency Response technical Team/Coordination Center of China
{caihengyi, zhangcheng, songyonghao, zhaoxf}@ict.ac.cn, ac@chenhongshen.com,
liyangxi@outlook.com, dds@cert.org.cn, yindawei@acm.org
from publicly available sources such as OpenSubtitles (Lison
and Tiedemann 2016).

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art neural dialogue systems are mainly
data-driven and are trained on human-generated responses.
However, due to the subjectivity and open-ended nature of human conversations, the complexity of training dialogues varies
greatly. The noise and uneven complexity of query-response
pairs impede the learning efﬁciency and effects of the neural dialogue generation models. What is more, so far, there
are no uniﬁed dialogue complexity measurements, and the
dialogue complexity embodies multiple aspects of attributes—
speciﬁcity, repetitiveness, relevance, etc. Inspired by human
behaviors of learning to converse, where children learn from
easy dialogues to complex ones and dynamically adjust their
learning progress, in this paper, we ﬁrst analyze ﬁve dialogue
attributes to measure the dialogue complexity in multiple
perspectives on three publicly available corpora. Then, we
propose an adaptive multi-curricula learning framework to
schedule a committee of the organized curricula. The framework is established upon the reinforcement learning paradigm,
which automatically chooses different curricula at the evolving learning process according to the learning status of the
neural dialogue generation model. Extensive experiments conducted on ﬁve state-of-the-art models demonstrate its learning
efﬁciency and effectiveness with respect to 13 automatic evaluation metrics and human judgments.

Context:
Response:
Context:
Response:
Context:
Response:

This is for you. what is it? A keychain!
It’s so pretty! Can I touch it?
I have many pains because of the humidity.
I also have a cough.
I understand now! My rakugo wasn’t for anyone
else. I’ve been doing it for myself.
Yurakutei kikuhiko.

Table 1: Examples of dialogues with different complexities
in OpenSubtitles.
However, due to the subjectivity and open-ended nature of
human conversations, the complexity of training dialogues
varies greatly (Lison and Bibauw 2017). Table 1 shows samples drawn from OpenSubtitles (Lison and Tiedemann 2016),
which contains millions of human-human conversations converted from movie transcripts. The response of the third sample “Yurakutei kikuhiko.” looks quite strange in terms of the
given query, while the ﬁrst sample is clearly easier to learn.
The noise and uneven complexity of query-response pairs impede the learning efﬁciency and effects of the neural dialogue
generation models.
Babies learn to speak by ﬁrst imitating easy and exact
utterances repeatedly taught by their patient parents. As children grow up, they learn grade by grade, from simple conversations to more complex ones. Inspired by such human
behaviors of learning to converse, in this paper, we introduce curriculum learning to bring the neural dialogue model
with easy-to-complex learning curriculum, where the model
ﬁrst learns from easy conversations and then gradually manages more complicated dialogues. Nevertheless, organizing a
curriculum with increasing difﬁculty faces insurmountable
obstacles: 1) automatic evaluation of dialogue complexity is
a non-trivial task. Platanios et al. (2019) deﬁned the difﬁculty
for the training examples with respect to the sentence length
and word rarity in neural machine translation. Sachan and
Xing (2016) expressed the difﬁculty regarding the value of
the objective function. So far, there is no uniﬁed approach in
measuring dialogue complexity. 2) Unlike the single metric

Introduction
Teaching machines to converse with humans naturally and
engagingly is a fundamentally interesting and challenging
problem in AI research. Many contemporary state-of-the-art
approaches (Serban et al. 2017; Li et al. 2016; Zhao, Zhao,
and Eskénazi 2017; Zhou et al. 2018; Young et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2019; Gu et al. 2019) for dialogue generation
follow the data-driven paradigm: trained on a plethora of
query-response pairs, the model attempts to mimic human
conversations. As a data-driven approach, the quality of generated responses in neural dialogue generation heavily depends
on the training data. As such, in order to train a robust and
well-behaved model, most works obtain large-scale queryresponse pairs by crawling human-generated conversations
∗

Work done at Data Science Lab, JD.com.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7472

