The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Conquering the CNN Over-Parameterization
Dilemma: A Volterra Filtering Approach for Action Recognition
Siddharth Roheda, Hamid Krim
North Carolina State University at Raleigh, NC, USA
{sroheda, ahk}@ncsu.edu

availability of large training datasets and computational resources have come a long way to obtaining the various steps
by a single neural network. This approach has led to remarkable progress in action recognition in video sequences,
as well as in other vision applications like object detection (Sermanet et al. 2013), scene labeling (Farabet et al.
2012), image generation (Goodfellow et al. 2014), image
translation (Isola et al. 2017), information distillation (Roheda et al. 2018b; Hoffman, Gupta, and Darrell 2016), etc. In
the Action Recognition domain, datasets like the UCF-101
(Soomro, Zamir, and Shah 2012), Kinetics (Kay et al. 2017),
HMDB-51 (Kuehne et al. 2011), and Sports-1M (Karpathy et al. 2014) have served as benchmarks for evaluating
various solution performances. In action recognition applications the proposed CNN solutions generally align along
two themes: 1. One Stream CNN (only use either spatial
or temporal information), 2. Two Stream CNN (integrate
both spatial and temporal information). Many implementations (Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Diba, Sharma, and
Van Gool 2017; Feichtenhofer, Pinz, and Zisserman 2016;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) have shown that integrating both streams leads to a signiﬁcant boost in recognition performance. In Deep Temporal Linear Encoding (Diba,
Sharma, and Van Gool 2017), the authors propose to use 2D
CNNs (pre-trained on ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009)) to extract features from RGB frames (spatial information) and the
associated optical ﬂow (temporal information). The video
is ﬁrst divided into smaller segments for feature extraction
via 2D CNNs. The extracted features are subsequently combined into a single feature map via a bilinear model. This
approach, when using both streams, is shown to achieve a
95.6 % accuracy on the UCF-101 dataset, while only achieving 86.3 % when only relying on the RGB stream. Carreira
et al. (Carreira and Zisserman 2017) adopt the GoogLeNet
architecture which was developed for image classiﬁcation in
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009), and use 3D convolutions (instead of 2D ones) to classify videos. This implementation is
referred to as the Inﬂated 3D CNN (I3D), and is shown to
achieve a performance of 88.8 % on UCF-101 when trained
from scratch, while achieving a 98.0 % accuracy when a
larger dataset (Kinetics) was used for pre-training the entire network (except for the classiﬁcation layer). While these

Abstract
The importance of inference in Machine Learning (ML) has
led to an explosive number of different proposals in ML, and
particularly in Deep Learning. In an attempt to reduce the
complexity of Convolutional Neural Networks, we propose
a Volterra ﬁlter-inspired Network architecture. This architecture introduces controlled non-linearities in the form of interactions between the delayed input samples of data. We propose a cascaded implementation of Volterra Filtering so as
to signiﬁcantly reduce the number of parameters required to
carry out the same classiﬁcation task as that of a conventional
Neural Network. We demonstrate an efﬁcient parallel implementation of this Volterra Neural Network (VNN), along with
its remarkable performance while retaining a relatively simpler and potentially more tractable structure. Furthermore, we
show a rather sophisticated adaptation of this network to nonlinearly fuse the RGB (spatial) information and the Optical
Flow (temporal) information of a video sequence for action
recognition. The proposed approach is evaluated on UCF-101
and HMDB-51 datasets for action recognition, and is shown
to outperform state of the art CNN approaches.

1

Introduction

Human action recognition is an important research topic
in Computer Vision, and can be used towards surveillance,
video retrieval, and man-machine interaction to name a few.
The survey on Action Recognition approaches (Kong and
Fu 2018) provides a good progress overview. Video classiﬁcation usually involves three stages (Wang et al. 2009;
Liu, Luo, and Shah 2009; Niebles, Chen, and Fei-Fei 2010;
Sivic and Zisserman 2003; Karpathy et al. 2014), namely,
visual feature extraction (local features like Histograms
of Oriented Gradients (HoG) (Dalal and Triggs 2005),
or global features like Hue, Saturation, etc.), feature fusion/concatenation, and lastly classiﬁcation. In (Yi, Krim,
and Norris 2011), an intrinsic stochastic modeling of human activity on a shape manifold is proposed and an accurate analysis of the non-linear feature space of activity
models is provided. The emergence of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al. 1998), along with the
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11948

