The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Neural Network Approximated
Dynamic Programming for Combinatorial Optimization
Shenghe Xu,1 Shivendra S. Panwar,1 Murali Kodialam,2 T.V. Lakshman2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NYU Tandon School of Engineering, Brooklyn, NY
2
Nokia Bell Labs, Crawford Hill, NJ
{shenghexu, panwar}@nyu.edu, {murali.kodialam, tv.lakshman}@nokia-bell-labs.com

problem (TSP), simple exhaustive search has time complexity of O(n!). The Bellman-Held-Karp algorithm (Bellman
1962; Held and Karp 1962) based on DP can achieve time
complexity of O(2n n2 ) and space complexity of O(2n n).
The exponential growing complexity can still be relatively
high for large problem sizes, making it unsuitable for time
or memory critical applications.
Methods based on neural networks (NNs) have been proposed as solutions to combinatorial problems since decades
ago (Looi 1992; Smith 1999). Recent advancements in deep
neural networks (DNNs) have lead to more efﬁcient schemes
using novel network architectures and new training procedures of NNs (Bello et al. 2016; Khalil et al. 2017;
Yang et al. 2018). However, many of the previously proposed methods focus on speciﬁc classes of problems such
as graph based problems (Khalil et al. 2017) and routing
problems (Kool, van Hoof, and Welling 2018). Alternatively,
they rely on speciﬁc network architectures and speciﬁc reinforcement learning training procedures (Bello et al. 2016).
Though in (Yang et al. 2018) a NN based dynamic programming method was proposed, it requires training on each testing instance of the problem, which is impractical for time
critical tasks.
In this paper, we propose a deep neural network approximated dynamic programming approach to solve general
combinatorial optimization problems. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a general framework for combining
deep neural networks (DNNs) with dynamic programming
to solve combinatorial optimization problems. For problems
that can be broken into smaller subproblems and solved by
dynamic programming, we train a set of neural networks to
replace value or policy functions at each decision step. Two
variants of the neural network approximated dynamic programming (NDP) methods are proposed; in the value-based
NDP method, the networks learn to estimate the value of
each choice at the corresponding step, while in the policybased NDP method the DNNs only estimate the best decision at each step. The training procedure of the NDP starts
from the smallest problem size and a new DNN for the next
size is trained to cooperate with previous DNNs. After all the
DNNs are trained, the networks are ﬁne-tuned together to further improve overall performance. We test NDP on the linear
sum assignment problem, the traveling salesman problem and
the talent scheduling problem. Experimental results show that
NDP can achieve considerable computation time reduction on
hard problems with reasonable performance loss. In general,
NDP can be applied to reducible combinatorial optimization
problems for the purpose of computation time reduction.

Introduction
Dynamic programming (DP) is a widely used method for
solving various optimization problems (Bellman 1966). For
a problem that can be reduced to sub-problems with similar structures, each corresponding to a stage of decision
making, DP ﬁnds the optimal solution for each sub-problem
and achieves global optimal solution. Since the problem is
broken into sub-problems, DP can efﬁciently reduce search
space as compared with naive exhaustive search over all the
possible combinations.
However, for many of the combinatorial optimization
problems, the size of the search space grows exponentially
or by factorial order of the problem size. Even if problems
are broken into sub-problems to reduce search space, the
complexity of algorithms using DP can still be high for
NP-hard problems. For example, for the traveling salesman

• We propose a general framework of replacing policy or
value function calculation process with NNs called neural network approximated dynamic programming (NDP).
The framework is simple and robust and can be combined
with different NN architectures.
• An unsupervised training procedure is proposed for NDP.
It consists of a pre-training step and a ﬁne-tuning step. Robust performance improvement is achieved in the training
procedure.
• Experimental results on the linear sum assignment problem (LSAP) and the TSP show that compared with previous methods, NDP can be an alternative to achieve a
balance between computation time and solution quality.
When applied to the talent scheduling problem, NDP is

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1684

