The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Strategy-Proof and Non-Wasteful
Multi-Unit Auction via Social Network1
Takehiro Kawasaki,1 Nathanaël Barrot,2 Seiji Takanashi,3 Taiki Todo,1,2 Makoto Yokoo1,2
1

Kyushu University, Japan, kawasaki@agent.inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp, {todo, yokoo}@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp
2
RIKEN AIP, Japan, nathanaelbarrot@gmail.com
3
Kyoto University, Japan, s.takanashi1990@gmail.com

buyers to forward the information to as many followers as
possible, as well as truthfully reporting their valuation functions. For selling a single unit of an item, Li et al. (2017)
developed an auction mechanism in which each buyer is incentivized to forward the information to her followers.
Zhao et al. (2018) studied a multi-unit unit-demand auction via social network, where each unit is identical and each
buyer requires a unit. They proposed the generalized information diffusion mechanism (GIDM) and argued that it is
strategy-proof. However, Takanashi et al. (2019) pointed out
an error in their proof and argued that GIDM is not strategyproof. They also proposed a strategy-proof mechanism for
the same model, which however violates a revenue condition called non-deﬁcit, i.e., the seller might suffer a deﬁcit.
To the best of our knowledge, for the multi-unit unit-demand
auction via social network, no mechanism satisfying both
strategy-proofness and non-deﬁcit has been developed, except for some naı̈ve ones.
The main objective of this paper is to propose a mechanism that satisﬁes both strategy-proofness and non-deﬁcit,
as well as some other properties. As Takanashi et al. (2019)
pointed out, no mechanism satisﬁes those properties and
Pareto efﬁciency, i.e., maximizing the social surplus, under certain natural assumptions. They thus considered weakening the non-deﬁcit condition. In this paper, on the other
hand, we consider a weaker efﬁciency property called nonwastefulness, which only requires the allocation of as many
units as possible. Non-wastefulness has its own importance
in practice. For example, in a spectrum auction, it is important to allocate as much frequency range as possible to carriers in order to guarantee a sufﬁcient number of services.
We propose a new mechanism, called dinstance-based
network auction mechanism for multi-unit, unit-demand
buyers (DNA-MU), for a multi-unit unit-demand auction
via social network, which satisﬁes strategy-proofness, nondeﬁcit, non-wastefulness, and individual rationality, i.e., no
buyer receives negative utility under truth-telling, and whose
description is much simpler than GIDM. It is inspired by the
concept of the diffusion critical tree, originally proposed in
Li et al. (2017), which speciﬁes, for each buyer i, the set of
critical buyers for i’s participation. If a buyer j is critical for

Abstract
Auctions via social network, pioneered by Li et al. (2017),
have been attracting considerable attention in the literature of mechanism design for auctions. However, no known
mechanism has satisﬁed strategy-proofness, non-deﬁcit, nonwastefulness, and individual rationality for the multi-unit
unit-demand auction, except for some naı̈ve ones. In this paper, we ﬁrst propose a mechanism that satisﬁes all the above
properties. We then make a comprehensive comparison with
two naı̈ve mechanisms, showing that the proposed mechanism dominates them in social surplus, seller’s revenue, and
incentive of buyers for truth-telling. We also analyze the characteristics of the social surplus and the revenue achieved by
the proposed mechanism, including the constant approximability of the worst-case efﬁciency loss and the complexity of
optimizing revenue from the seller’s perspective.

1

Introduction

Auction theory has attracted much attention in artiﬁcial intelligence as a foundation of multi-agent resource allocation. One of the mainstreams in the literature is analyzing
auctions from the perspective of mechanism design. In particular, several works studied how to design strategy-proof
auctions, which incentivize each buyer to truthfully report
her valuation function, regardless of the reports of the other
buyers. One critical contribution in the literature is the development of the Vickrey-Clarke-Groves mechanism (VCG),
which satisﬁes strategy-proofness and various other properties (Vickrey 1961; Clarke 1971; Groves 1973).
Li et al. (2017) proposed a new model of auctions, in
which buyers are distributed in a social network and the information on the auction propagates over it. Utilizing a social network, the seller can advertise the auction to more potential buyers beyond her followers, as many works studied
in network science (Emek et al. 2011; Borgatti et al. 2009;
Jackson 2008; Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003). From
the buyers’ perspective, however, forwarding the information increases the number of buyers, which reduces the possibility that they will get the item. Therefore, the main challenge in the auction via social network is how to incentivize
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2062

A full version is available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.08809

