The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Modular Robot Design Synthesis with Deep Reinforcement Learning
Julian Whitman,1 Raunaq Bhirangi,2 Matthew Travers,2 Howie Choset2
1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
2
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213
jwhitman@cmu.edu

Abstract
Modular robots hold the promise of versatility in that their
components can be re-arranged to adapt the robot design to
a task at deployment time. Even for the simplest designs, determining the optimal design is exponentially complex due
to the number of permutations of ways the modules can be
connected. Further, when selecting the design for a given
task, there is an additional computational burden in evaluating the capability of each robot, e.g., whether it can reach
certain points in the workspace. This work uses deep reinforcement learning to create a search heuristic that allows us
to efﬁciently search the space of modular serial manipulator
designs. We show that our algorithm is more computationally efﬁcient in determining robot designs for given tasks in
comparison to the current state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Modular robots offer the potential to create customized
robots that can be readily deployed to perform a variety
of tasks. Synthesizing the design of a modular robot for
a given task involves a number of challenges, one being
that the space of possible module arrangements (ordered sequences of discrete robotic modules) grows exponentially in
the number of types of modules and ways they can be connected. When searching this exponentially large space, we
have to evaluate whether each candidate robot can complete
the task. This evaluation requires planning for and comparing the relative costs of motions for each candidate, which
is computationally intractable at scale. We address this intractability by learning a search heuristic which implicitly
encodes robot performance under the evaluation metric. The
main contribution of this work is an algorithm which uses
deep reinforcement learning to create this heuristic, enabling
us to efﬁciently search the space of arrangements in the context of each robot’s inherent capabilities for a given task. We
limit the scope of the problem to synthesizing the arrangements of modular serial manipulators, for tasks in which the
manipulator must reach a set of quasi-static workspace positions and orientations.
We build on prior modular design synthesis methods (Desai, Yuan, and Coros 2017; Ha et al. 2018) which incrementally construct and search a tree of different modular

Figure 1: Our approach searches for modular manipulator
designs by viewing the space of arrangements as a tree,
where modules are sequentially added to the end of the
robot. The arrangement at the root of the tree is a base
mounting location. Solid arrows represent module additions,
and dashed arrows indicate that the tree continues but is not
shown. We use deep reinforcement learning to create a datadriven search heuristic which guides search on this tree. We
apply our algorithm to modular components produced by
Hebi Robotics (Hebi Robotics 2019).

arrangements. Speciﬁcally, each node added as a child to
a current leaf node represents adding a module to the distal
end of the manipulator, as shown in Figure 1. We view the
construction of this tree as a series of states (arrangements)
and actions (adding modules), and treat assembly of an arrangement as a Markov Decision Process (Sutton 1988). Under this formulation, we learn a state-action value function
which approximates the beneﬁt of adding each module type
to an arrangement given the task. We train a deep Q-network

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10418

