The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Map Frequent Phrases to Sub-Structures
of Meaning Representation for Neural Semantic Parsing
∗

∗

Bo Chen,1,2 Xianpei Han,1,2, Ben He,3,1, Le Sun1,2
1

Chinese Information Processing Laboratory 2 State Key Laboratory of Computer Science
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{chenbo, xianpei, sunle}@iscas.ac.cn, benhe@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract

answer ( A , ( state ( A ) , next_to ( A , B ) , const ( B , stateid ( Texas ) ) ) )
Logical Form

Neural semantic parsers usually generate meaning representation tokens from natural language tokens via an encoderdecoder model. However, there is often a vocabularymismatch problem between natural language utterances and
logical forms. That is, one word maps to several atomic logical tokens, which need to be handled as a whole, rather
than individual logical tokens at multiple steps. In this paper, we propose that the vocabulary-mismatch problem can
be effectively resolved by leveraging appropriate logical tokens. Speciﬁcally, we exploit macro actions, which are of the
same granularity of words/phrases, and allow the model to
learn mappings from frequent phrases to corresponding substructures of meaning representation. Furthermore, macro actions are compact, and therefore utilizing them can signiﬁcantly reduce the search space, which brings a great beneﬁt to
weakly supervised semantic parsing. Experiments show that
our method leads to substantial performance improvement on
three benchmarks, in both supervised and weakly supervised
settings.

Seq2Seq
Utterance

Which states border Texas?

Seq2Action
Action Sequence
add_node:A, add_type: state, arg_node: A, add_node:B,
add_edge: next_to, arg_node: A, arg_node:B,
add_entity:texas:st, arg_node: B, return:A

Figure 1: A demonstration of Seq2Seq model and
Seq2Action model for semantic parsing.

To adapt to the Seq2Seq framework, most neural semantic parsers decouple meaningful semantic units (e.g., CCG
category, lambda term, etc.) into atomic logical tokens, so
that the decoder can generate them just like words in neural machine translation. This assumption, unfortunately, often leads to a vocabulary-mismatch problem. For example,
in Figure 1 the predicate triggered by word “border” will
be decoupled to 4 atomic logical tokens [next to, (, ,,
)] in lambda calculus or 3 actions [add edge:next to,
arg node:A, arg node:B] in semantic graph representation. It is obvious that words and atomic logical tokens are
of different granularities, and atomic logical tokens cannot
act as separate meaningful semantic units.
The vocabulary-mismatch problem raises both effectiveness and efﬁciency issues for neural semantic parsing.
Firstly, the logical tokens triggered by a word are generated
in multiple individual steps, rather than being triggered at
once. Therefore, neural parsers need to additionally model
the dependency between different logical tokens, in order
to prevent syntactically ill-formed logic forms (e.g., missing arguments for predicates, missing “)” after “(”, missing
nodes for an edge). Secondly, the granularity of logical tokens is usually too small, which is likely to result in long
logical token sequence, and consequently, high time complexity in both training and decoding phases. For instance,
in G EO dataset the average CCG category size of its sentences is 7.6, but the average length of linearized logical to-

Introduction
Semantic parsing aims to transform natural language utterances to meaning representations (Zelle and Mooney 1996;
Zettlemoyer and Collins 2005; Wong and Mooney 2007;
Lu et al. 2008; Kwiatkowski et al. 2013; Yin et al. 2018).
In recent years, encoder-decoder based neural models have
achieved signiﬁcant progress in semantic parsing (Xiao,
Dymetman, and Gardent 2016; Dong and Lapata 2016;
Jia and Liang 2016; Rabinovich, Stern, and Klein 2017;
Chen, Sun, and Han 2018). Neural parsers model semantic
parsing as a word sequence to logical token sequence translation task, where an encoder encodes the word sequence of
an utterance, and an attention-guided decoder generates its
logical form token-by-token. These tokens can be logical tokens of a linearized logical form, or atomic construction actions of a semantic graph. Figure 1 shows an example, where
“Which states border Texas?” is translated to a logical token
sequence [answer, (, A ...] or an atomic action sequence
[add node:A, add type:state ...].
∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7546

