The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Online Evaluation of Audiences for Targeted Advertising via Bandit Experiments
Tong Geng,1 Xiliang Lin,1 Harikesh S. Nair2
1

JD.com
JD.com and Stanford University
{tong.geng, xiliang.lin}@jd.com, harikesh.nair@stanford.com
2

combination for the advertiser while minimizing her costs of
experimentation.
When only creatives have to be compared to each other,
the typical practice is to leverage an “A/B/n” experimental
design in which creatives represent arms, so that the best
creative is found by ranking the expected payoffs for users
randomized into the arms. When target audiences have to
be evaluated in addition, extending this design − treating
creative-target audience combinations as arms − is problematic. The main difﬁculty is possible overlap in the target audiences that are compared (e.g., “San Francisco users” and
“Male users”). This complicates user assignment because it
is not obvious to which constituent arm, a user belonging
to an overlapping region should be assigned (e.g., should
a Male user from San Francisco be assigned to the “San
Francisco-creative” arm or the “Male-creative” arm?). Assigning the overlapping user to one of the constituent arms
violates the representativeness of the arms (e.g., if we use
a rule that Male users from San Francisco will always be
assigned to the “San Francisco-creative” arm, the “Malecreative” arm will have no San Franciscans, and will not
represent the distribution of Male users in the platform population).1 Such assignment also under-utilizes data: though
the feedback from the user is informative of all constituent
arms, it is being used to learn the best creative for only one
picked arm (e.g., if we assign a Male user from San Francisco to the “San Francisco-creative” arm, we do not learn
from him the value of the “Male-creative” arm, though his
behavior is informative of that arm).
Another difﬁculty is that typical “A/B/n” test designs
keep the sample/trafﬁc splits constant as the test progresses.
Therefore, both good and bad creatives will be allocated the
same amount of trafﬁc during the test. Instead, as we learn
during the test that an arm is not performing well, reducing
its trafﬁc allocation can reduce the cost of experimentation.
The goal of this paper is to develop an algorithm that
addresses these issues. It has two broad steps. In step one,
we split the compared target audiences (henceforth “TA”s)
into disjoint audience sub-populations (henceforth “DA”s),
so the set of DAs fully span the set of TAs. In step two, we
train a bandit with the creatives as arms, the payoffs to the

Abstract
Firms implementing digital advertising campaigns face a
complex problem in determining the right match between
their advertising creatives and target audiences. Typical solutions to the problem have leveraged non-experimental methods, or used “split-testing” strategies that have not explicitly addressed the complexities induced by targeted audiences that can potentially overlap with one another. This paper presents an adaptive algorithm that addresses the problem via online experimentation. The algorithm is set up as
a contextual bandit and addresses the overlap issue by partitioning the target audiences into disjoint, non-overlapping
sub-populations. It learns an optimal creative display policy
in the disjoint space, while assessing in parallel which creative has the best match in the space of possibly overlapping target audiences. Experiments show that the proposed
method is more efﬁcient compared to naive “split-testing”
or non-adaptive “A/B/n” testing based methods. We also describe a testing product we built that uses the algorithm. The
product is currently deployed on the advertising platform of
JD.com, an eCommerce company and a publisher of digital
ads in China.

1

Introduction

A critical determinant of the success of advertising campaigns is picking the right audience to target. As digital
ad-markets have matured and the ability to target advertising has improved, the range of targeting options has expanded, and the proﬁle of possible audiences have become
complex. Both advertisers and publishers now rely on datadriven methods to evaluate audiences and to ﬁnd effective
options with which to advertise to them. This paper presents
a new bandit algorithm along with a product built to facilitate such evaluations via online experimentation.
The problem addressed is as follows. An advertiser designing a campaign wants to pick, from a set of possible target audiences and creatives, a creative-target audience combination that provides her the highest expected payoff in the
campaign. The target audiences can be complex, potentially
overlapping with each other, and the creatives can be any
type of media (picture, video, text etc). We would like to design an experiment to ﬁnd the best creative-target audience
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Random assignment of users in overlapping regions to parent
arms does not solve the issue; discussed later in the paper.

13273

