The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

The Efﬁciency of Human Cognition
Reﬂects Planned Information Processing
Mark K. Ho,1 David Abel,2 Jonathan D. Cohen,1
Michael L. Littman,2 Thomas L. Grifﬁths1
1

2

Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ
Department of Computer Science, Brown University, Providence, RI
{mho, jdc, tomg}@princeton.edu
{dmabel, mlittman}@cs.brown.edu
plans. But why plan one’s plans? Why not just plan one’s actions? We propose that planning one’s plans emerges from
two aspects of human decision making. First, plans can include different details at different times and change as time
moves on. Second, representing detailed plans is itself costly
(in terms of time and memory). Thus, people should consider what details they include in a plan and when to include
those details. That is, they should plan their plans.
Here, we develop and empirically evaluate this idea in humans. We ﬁrst discuss how planning one’s plans relates to
existing ideas in psychology and machine learning. Then,
we formalize the relation between planning one’s plans and
the cost of planning by deﬁning a general Bellman objective
that includes both task rewards and information-theoretic
planning costs. We then discuss several qualitative features
of solutions to this objective. Finally, we report the results
of two new human experiments that compare participant reaction times during problem solving to the predictions of
our model and alternatives. These empirical ﬁndings support our normative account of planning one’s plans and raise
new questions about the nature of boundedly rational decision making in both people and machines.

Abstract
Planning is useful. It lets people take actions that have desirable long-term consequences. But, planning is hard. It requires thinking about consequences, which consumes limited
computational and cognitive resources. Thus, people should
plan their actions, but they should also be smart about how
they deploy resources used for planning their actions. Put another way, people should also “plan their plans”. Here, we
formulate this aspect of planning as a meta-reasoning problem and formalize it in terms of a recursive Bellman objective
that incorporates both task rewards and information-theoretic
planning costs. Our account makes quantitative predictions
about how people should plan and meta-plan as a function
of the overall structure of a task, which we test in two experiments with human participants. We ﬁnd that people’s reaction
times reﬂect a planned use of information processing, consistent with our account. This formulation of planning to plan
provides new insight into the function of hierarchical planning, state abstraction, and cognitive control in both humans
and machines.

Introduction
Suppose you have to catch a ﬂight in three hours, and you
are in your bedroom packing. How would you plan your next
move? You might reason, “I will ﬁnish packing my bag.
Then, I will get a car to take me to the airport.” This plan
seems intuitive and straightforward. However, many details
have been left out: Which taxi or ride-sharing company will
you use? How are you going to get from security to your
gate? If you reach the gate and get hungry, can you pick up
a snack in time to still make your ﬂight? Clearly, you did
not imagine every possible contingency from now until your
ﬂight departs. Instead, you sketched out a partial plan that
considers the information most relevant to your current circumstance, and delayed thinking about other details to when
they become more relevant. For instance, rather than thinking of a detailed path from your bedroom to the ﬂight gate
right now, you might plan to later think about the route to
the gate once you get through airport security.
As this example suggests, human decision making not
only involves planning one’s actions, but also planning one’s

Background
Put simply, planning involves ﬁnding a good sequence of
actions given a particular problem representation (Newell,
Shaw, and Simon 1958). In computer science, many approaches have been developed to facilitate planning. These
include classical planning methods such as depth-limited
search (Korf 1990), heuristic search (Pearl 1984), and
Monte-Carlo tree search (Abramson 1987) as well as the use
of data structures like hierarchies (Sacerdoti 1974; Kaelbling
and Lozano-Perez 2010), temporal abstractions (McDermott
et al. 1998), and state abstractions (Givan, Dean, and Greig
2003). At the same time, psychologists have long recognized
that people also rely on heuristics (Tversky and Kahneman
1974; Gigerenzer and Goldstein 1996) and use abstractions
to organize their thoughts and behaviors (Lashley 1951;
Rosenbaum, Inhoff, and Gordon 1984; Solway et al. 2014).
But why do people use heuristics and abstractions, and
why do we build these structures into our algorithms to
use? A simple reason is that naı̈ve planning is prohibitively

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1300

