The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Distributed Stochastic Gradient Descent with Event-Triggered Communication
Jemin George,1 Prudhvi Gurram2,1
1

CCDC Army Research Laboratory
Adelphi, MD 20783
jemin.george.civ@mail.mil
2
Booz Allen Hamilton
McLean, VA 22102
gurram prudhvi@bah.com

client nodes that host the data. The client nodes compute
the local gradients or parameter updates and communicate
them to the server nodes. Server nodes aggregate these
values and update the current model (Zhang et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2014b). On the other extreme, we have federated
learning, where each client node obtains a local solution to
the learning problem and the server node computes a global
model by averaging the local models (Konec̆nú et al. 2016;
McMahan et al. 2017). Besides the server-client architecture, a shared-memory (multicore/multiGPU) architecture,
where different processors independently compute the gradients and update the global model parameter using a
shared memory, has also been proposed as a solution to the
distributed machine learning problem (Recht et al. 2011;
De Sa et al. 2015; Chaturapruek, Duchi, and Ré 2015;
Feyzmahdavian, Aytekin, and Johansson 2016). However,
none of the above-mentioned learning techniques are truly
distributed since they follow a master-slave architecture and
do not involve any peer-to-peer communication. Furthermore,
these techniques are not always robust and they are rendered
useless if the master/server node or the shared-memory fails.
Therefore, we aim to develop a fully distributed machine
learning architecture enabled by client-to-client interaction.
For large-scale machine learning, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) methods are often preferred over batch gradient
methods (Bottou, Curtis, and Nocedal 2018) because (i) in
many large-scale problems, there is a good deal of redundancy in data and therefore it is inefﬁcient to use all the data
in every optimization iteration, (ii) the computational cost
involved in computing the batch gradient is much higher than
that of the stochastic gradient, and (iii) stochastic methods
are more suitable for online learning where data are arriving sequentially. Since most machine learning problems are
non-convex, there is a need for distributed stochastic gradient methods for non-convex problems. Therefore, here we
present a communication efﬁcient, distributed stochastic gradient algorithm for non-convex problems and demonstrate its
utility for distributed machine learning.

Abstract
We develop a Distributed Event-Triggered Stochastic GRAdient Descent (DETSGRAD) algorithm for solving non-convex
optimization problems typically encountered in distributed
deep learning. We propose a novel communication triggering mechanism that would allow the networked agents to
update their model parameters aperiodically and provide sufﬁcient conditions on the algorithm step-sizes that guarantee
the asymptotic mean-square convergence. The algorithm is
applied to a distributed supervised-learning problem, in which
a set of networked agents collaboratively train their individual neural networks to perform image classiﬁcation, while
aperiodically sharing the model parameters with their onehop neighbors. Results indicate that all agents report similar
performance that is also comparable to the performance of
a centrally trained neural network, while the event-triggered
communication provides signiﬁcant reduction in inter-agent
communication. Results also show that the proposed algorithm
allows the individual agents to classify the images even though
the training data corresponding to all the classes are not locally
available to each agent.

Introduction
With the advent of smart devices, there has been an exponential growth in the amount of data collected and stored
locally on individual devices. Applying machine learning to
extract value from such massive data to provide data-driven
insights, decisions, and predictions has been a popular research topic as well as the focus of numerous businesses.
However, porting these vast amounts of data to a data center
to conduct traditional machine learning has raised two main
issues: (i) the communication challenge associated with transferring vast amounts of data from a large number of devices
to a central location and (ii) the privacy issues associated
with sharing raw data. Distributed machine learning techniques based on the server-client architecture (Li et al. 2014a;
2014b; Zhang, Alqahtani, and Demirbas 2017) have been
proposed as solutions to this problem. On one extreme
end of this architecture, we have the parameter server approach, where a server or group of servers initiate distributed learning by pushing the current model to a set of

Related work

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Distributed Non-Convex Optimization: A few early examples of (non-stochastic or deterministic) distributed non7169

