The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Integrating Linguistic Knowledge to Sentence Paraphrase Generation
Zibo Lin,1,2∗ Ziran Li,1,2∗ Ning Ding,1,2 Hai-Tao Zheng1,2†
Ying Shen,3 Wei Wang,1,2 Cong-Zhi Zhao4
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
School of Electronics and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
4
Giiso Information Technology Co., Ltd
{lzb18, lizr18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Paraphrase generation aims to rewrite a text with different
words while keeping the same meaning. Previous work performs the task based solely on the given dataset while ignoring the availability of external linguistic knowledge. However, it is intuitive that a model can generate more expressive and diverse paraphrase with the help of such knowledge.
To ﬁll this gap, we propose Knowledge-Enhanced Paraphrase
Network (KEPN), a transformer-based framework that can
leverage external linguistic knowledge to facilitate paraphrase
generation. (1) The model integrates synonym information
from the external linguistic knowledge into the paraphrase
generator, which is used to guide the decision on whether to
generate a new word or replace it with a synonym. (2) To
locate the synonym pairs more accurately, we adopt an incremental encoding scheme to incorporate position information of each synonym. Besides, a multi-task architecture is
designed to help the framework jointly learn the selection of
synonym pairs and the generation of expressive paraphrase.
Experimental results on both English and Chinese datasets
show that our method signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-ofthe-art approaches in terms of both automatic and human
evaluation.

Figure 1: An example of paraphrase generation guided by
linguistic knowledge.

Recently, various neural models have been put forward for
automatic paraphrase generation, which modeled the task as
a Seq2Seq learning problem from the original sentence to
the target paraphrase (Prakash et al. 2016; Gupta et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2019a). Although these methods generate ﬂuent and
grammatically correct restatements, the performances are far
from perfect. Because this kind of data-driven methods can
only make limited modiﬁcations to the original text such as
changing word order or part of speech, which are lack of
lexical and phrasal diversity.
If a model can be guided by external linguistic knowledge
like thesauri, it can replace a word (especially a rare word)
in the sentence with a corresponding synonym and thus generate a more complete and expressive paraphrase. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, to rewrite the input sentence
“What causes impoverishment in this region?” to the target
sentence “What are the causes of poverty in this area?”, we
need synonym pairs provided by thesauri such as (impoverishment, poverty) and (region, area). And it is worth noting
that the word “impoverishment” in the original sentence is
a low-frequent word. Without the guidance of external linguistic knowledge, this word is likely to be masked as an
unknown tag in restatement.
Some prior works have been conducted to introduce external linguistic knowledge in paraphrase generation. Specifically, Cao et al. (2017) propose a Seq2Seq model with a
copying decoder and equips the decoder with a paraphrase

Introduction
Paraphrase generation is a fundamental task in natural language processing, which aims to restate a text with different words while keeping the meaning approximately the
same as the original. Automatic paraphrase generation can
be applied to many scenarios to promote the study of natural language processing. For example, questions answering systems are often sensitive to the way questions are
asked, rephrasing questions can help people get better answers in many real-world question answering applications
(Fader, Zettlemoyer, and Etzioni 2014). Additionally, paraphrases can also help diversify responses of dialogue assistants (Shah et al. 2018), augment training data (Yang et al.
2019b) and extend coverage of semantic parsers (Berant and
Liang 2014).
∗

indicates equal contribution.
Corresponding author: zheng.haitao@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8368

