The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

One-Shot Image Classiﬁcation by Learning to Restore Prototypes
Wanqi Xue

Wei Wang

Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
wanqixue0@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
wangwei@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
One-shot image classiﬁcation aims to train image classiﬁers
over the dataset with only one image per category. It is challenging for modern deep neural networks that typically require hundreds or thousands of images per class. In this paper, we adopt metric learning for this problem, which has
been applied for few- and many-shot image classiﬁcation by
comparing the distance between the test image and the center of each class in the feature space. However, for one-shot
learning, the existing metric learning approaches would suffer
poor performance because the single training image may not
be representative of the class. For example, if the image is far
away from the class center in the feature space, the metriclearning based algorithms are unlikely to make correct predictions for the test images because the decision boundary is
shifted by this noisy image. To address this issue, we propose a simple yet effective regression model, denoted by RestoreNet, which learns a class agnostic transformation on the
image feature to move the image closer to the class center in
the feature space. Experiments demonstrate that RestoreNet
obtains superior performance over the state-of-the-art methods on a broad range of datasets. Moreover, RestoreNet can
be easily combined with other methods to achieve further improvement.

1

Figure 1: The challenge for metric learning in one-shot image classiﬁcation and our solution to it. Each green point
represents a training image. Dark points denote the prototypes and the red star marks the center of the class.
Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017;
Vinyals et al. 2016; Ravi and Larochelle 2016; Munkhdalai
and Yu 2017).
A popular category of solutions is based on meta-learning,
where a meta-learner is trained to generate classiﬁers. The
training is conducted in episodic manner, where the each
episode is constituted by two sets of data, namely the support set and the query set. The generated classiﬁer is trained
over the support set and evaluated on the query set. The meta
learner is then updated based on the evaluation performance.
The idea is to transfer some class agnostic knowledge from
the training data to the test data via the meta learner. Different meta-learning approaches have been proposed. Metriclearning-based methods, e.g. Prototypical network (Snell,
Swersky, and Zemel 2017), train the meta-leaner to transform the images into a metric space where nearest neighbour
classiﬁers can be applied. MAML trains the meta-leaner to
learn a good initialization state (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine
2017; Li et al. 2017) for the convolutional neural network

Introduction

Over the past decade, we have witnessed the great success
of deep learning in computer vision. With large amounts of
annotated data, deep learning models achieved impressive
breakthroughs again and again (He et al. 2016; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Huang et al. 2017). However,
in practical applications, large quantities of labeled data is
expensive or sometimes impossible to acquire. In such a
situation where only a few samples per category are available, both training from scratch and ﬁne-tuning on the small
dataset are likely to cause severe overﬁtting, leading to
poor recognition performance. Humans, in contrast, have
the ability to quickly learn a new concept from one or a
few examples. The signiﬁcant gap between human and machine intelligence encourages the interest of researchers.
Many endeavours have been done to narrow the gap (Finn,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6558

