The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Attribute Propagation Network for Graph Zero-Shot Learning
Lu Liu,1 Tianyi Zhou,2 Guodong Long,1∗ Jing Jiang,1 Chengqi Zhang1
1

Center for AI, School of Computer Science, University of Technology Sydney
Paul G. Allen Center for Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
lu.liu-10@student.uts.edu.au, tianyizh@uw.edu, {guodong.long, jing.jiang, chengqi.zhang}@uts.edu.au
2

Abstract
The goal of zero-shot learning (ZSL) is to train a model to
classify samples of classes that were not seen during training. To address this challenging task, most ZSL methods relate unseen test classes to seen(training) classes via a predeﬁned set of attributes that can describe all classes in the
same semantic space, so the knowledge learned on the training classes can be adapted to unseen classes. In this paper, we
aim to optimize the attribute space for ZSL by training a propagation mechanism to reﬁne the semantic attributes of each
class based on its neighbors and related classes on a graph of
classes. We show that the propagated attributes can produce
classiﬁers for zero-shot classes with signiﬁcantly improved
performance in different ZSL settings. The graph of classes
is usually free or very cheap to acquire such as WordNet or
ImageNet classes. When the graph is not provided, given predeﬁned semantic embeddings of the classes, we can learn a
mechanism to generate the graph in an end-to-end manner
along with the propagation mechanism. However, this graphaided technique has not been well-explored in the literature.
In this paper, we introduce the “attribute propagation network (APNet)”, which is composed of 1) a graph propagation model generating attribute vector for each class and 2)
a parameterized nearest neighbor (NN) classiﬁer categorizing an image to the class with the nearest attribute vector to
the image’s embedding. For better generalization over unseen
classes, different from previous methods, we adopt a metalearning strategy to train the propagation mechanism and the
similarity metric for the NN classiﬁer on multiple sub-graphs,
each associated with a classiﬁcation task over a subset of
training classes. In experiments with two zero-shot learning
settings and ﬁve benchmark datasets, APNet achieves either
compelling performance or new state-of-the-art results.

1

Figure 1: A simple scenario for zero-shot learning. It is easy
for humans to transform the attribute information into mental pictures and choose the correct image. Can machines
achieve this same level of intelligence?

seen samples from that class before. For example, as shown
in Figure 1, it is not difﬁcult for someone to match each image with a given set of attributes. However, underneath this
seemingly simple task, we are imagining—imagining how
colors, shapes, and concepts in images relate to words describing them, e.g., the class names. This raises the question:
Can machines also “imagine”? Can a machine be trained to
match text-based attribute representations to visual feature
representations?
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is a challenging task aiming to
learn a model classifying images of any unseen classes given
only the semantic attributes of the classes. It can test exactly the capability of generalizing knowledge learned on
training classes to unseen classes, by establishing a scenario and asking a model to “imagine” the visual features
of unseen classes (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2014)
based on their semantic attributes. Generalized zero-shot
learning (GZSL) assumes a more practical scenario. It is
still based solely on semantic attributes of test classes with
zero training sample, but the test set is composed of data
from both seen and unseen classes, and the predictions are
not restricted to the scope of unseen classes. The new challenge comes from the imbalance between seen and unseen
classes and the possibility that the model mistakenly categorizes unseen class images as seen classes or vice versa. It
requires the model to be easily adapted to unseen classes and

Introduction

Imagination, the ability of synthesizing novel objects and
reasoning new patterns from existing ones, plays an important role in human’s exploration and learning within the unknown world when supervised information is insufﬁcient.
Given a list of attributes describing different classes, humans
can accurately classify an image, even if they have never
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4868

