The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Narrative Planning Model Acquisition from Text Summaries and Descriptions
Thomas Hayton,1 Julie Porteous,2 João F. Ferreira,3 Alan Lindsay4
1

Teesside University, Middlesbrough, United Kingdom, t.hayton@tees.ac.uk
School of Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia, julie.porteous@rmit.edu.au
3
INESC-ID & Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal, joao@joaoff.com
4
University of Huddersﬁeld, United Kingdom, a.lindsay@hud.ac.uk
2

interactive models via systematic consideration of alternatives around the baseline (Porteous, Cavazza, and Charles
2010). Indeed many prototype systems have sought inspiration from existing narrative works (e.g. Who’s Afraid of
Virginia Woolf? (Mateas and Stern 2005), Madame Bovary
(Cavazza et al. 2009), Aladdin (Riedl and Young 2010)) and
games (e.g. Hitman (Pizzi et al. 2010)). Our motivation in
this work is to assist authors and reduce this authoring burden, by developing an automated route to baseline narrative
planning model development.
The solution presented in the paper is an automated approach that takes as input natural language (NL) sentences
summarising the main elements of a story (i.e. from plot synopses) and from this generates planning action representations, a narrative planning domain model, corresponding to
the baseline plot. This is a non-trivial task, as NL sentences
often have multiple clauses and conjunctions that use many
pronouns and multiple references to the same object or characters. This approach is fully implemented in a prototype
system, the main tasks of which are: (i) identify objects in
the domain; (ii) remove all pronoun references from the text
using a novel sieve-based approach to pronoun coreferencing which exploits contextual object information; and (iii)
use NLP techniques to identify actions in the input sentences
and construct structured representations which are used to
build the ﬁnal output narrative domain model.
The contribution of this work is an approach that can generate baseline narrative planning domain models from input
NL plot synopses in a fully automated way. Thus this helps
reduce the overall authoring burden.
In the paper we start with background on the work. This
is followed with detail of the key aspects of the approach:
(1) Object Identiﬁcation; (2) Input Sentence Pre-Processing;
and (3) Narrative Domain Model Acquisition. In the evaluation we consider the performance of our approach on each of
these aspects. The results are encouraging and demonstrate
comprehensive detection of narrative objects and events (actions) in the system-generated models, in combination with
marked improvement in the accuracy of pronoun resolution.
We further show that the models are able to re-generate the
original baseline story and discuss results of a user study and
the ability of the approach to reduce authoring burden.

Abstract
AI Planning has been shown to be a useful approach for the
generation of narrative in interactive entertainment systems
and games. However, the creation of the underlying narrative
domain models is challenging: the well documented AI planning modelling bottleneck is further compounded by the need
for authors, who tend to be non-technical, to create content.
We seek to support authors in this task by allowing natural
language (NL) plot synopses to be used as a starting point
from which planning domain models can be automatically
acquired. We present a solution which analyses input NL text
summaries, and builds structured representations from which
a PDDL model is output (fully automated or author in-theloop). We introduce a novel sieve-based approach to pronoun
resolution that demonstrates consistently high performance
across domains. In the paper we focus on authoring of narrative planning models for use in interactive entertainment systems and games. We show that our approach exhibits comprehensive detection of both actions and objects in the systemextracted domain models, in combination with signiﬁcant improvement in the accuracy of pronoun resolution due to the
use of contextual object information. Our results and an expert user assessment show that our approach enables a reduction in authoring effort required to generate baseline narrative
domain models from which variants can be built.

Introduction
Domain modelling for automated planning is challenging in
general but is further compounded when non-technical authors are needed to create the content to populate the model.
This is particularly true for domain models for use in Interactive Entertainment systems and games. Whilst these applications are our focus in this work we note that this is also
true of other application domains such as requirements engineering (Deeptimahanti and Babar 2009).
AI planning has been widely used for generating narrative in Interactive Entertainment systems e.g. (Aylett, Dias,
and Paiva 2006; Riedl and Young 2010; Porteous, Charles,
and Cavazza 2013). To date, the modelling of these domain
models has been handled manually: a common strategy being to start by building a baseline plot and then building up
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1709

