The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Fair Naive Bayes Classiﬁers by
Discovering and Eliminating Discrimination Patterns
YooJung Choi,1∗ Golnoosh Farnadi,2,3∗ Behrouz Babaki,4∗ Guy Van den Broeck1
1

University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Mila, 3 Université de Montréal, 4 Polytechnique Montréal
{yjchoi, guyvdb}@cs.ucla.edu, farnadig@mila.quebec, behrouz.babaki@polymtl.ca

is usually to assure the fair treatment of individuals or groups
that are identiﬁed by sensitive attributes.
In this paper, we study fairness properties of probabilistic classiﬁers that represent joint distributions over the features and decision variable. In particular, Bayesian network
classiﬁers treat the classiﬁcation or decision-making task as
a probabilistic inference problem: given observed features,
compute the probability of the decision variable. Such models
have a unique ability that they can naturally handle missing
features, by simply marginalizing them out of the distribution when they are not observed at prediction time. Hence, a
Bayesian network classiﬁer effectively embeds exponentially
many classiﬁers, one for each subset of observable features.
We ask whether such classiﬁers exhibit patterns of discrimination where similar individuals receive markedly different
outcomes purely because they disclosed a sensitive attribute.
The ﬁrst key contribution of this paper is an algorithm to
verify whether a Bayesian classiﬁer is fair, or else to mine the
classiﬁer for discrimination patterns. We propose two alternative criteria for identifying the most important discrimination
patterns that are present in the classiﬁer. We specialize our
pattern miner to efﬁciently discover discrimination patterns
in naive Bayes models using branch-and-bound search. These
classiﬁers are often used in practice because of their simplicity and tractability, and they allow for the development of
effective bounds. Our empirical evaluation shows that naive
Bayes models indeed exhibit vast numbers of discrimination
patterns, and that our pattern mining algorithm is able to ﬁnd
them by traversing only a small fraction of the search space.
The second key contribution of this paper is a parameter
learning algorithm for naive Bayes classiﬁers that ensures that
no discrimination patterns exist in the the learned distribution. We propose a signomial programming approach to eliminate individual patterns of discrimination during maximumlikelihood learning. Moreover, to efﬁciently eliminate the exponential number of patterns that could exist in a naive Bayes
classiﬁer, we propose a cutting-plane approach that uses our
discrimination pattern miner to ﬁnd and iteratively eliminate
discrimination patterns until the entire learned model is fair.
Our empirical evaluation shows that this process converges
in a small number of iteration, effectively removing millions
of discrimination patterns. Moreover, the learned fair mod-

Abstract
As machine learning is increasingly used to make real-world
decisions, recent research efforts aim to deﬁne and ensure fairness in algorithmic decision making. Existing methods often
assume a ﬁxed set of observable features to deﬁne individuals,
but lack a discussion of certain features not being observed
at test time. In this paper, we study fairness of naive Bayes
classiﬁers, which allow partial observations. In particular, we
introduce the notion of a discrimination pattern, which refers
to an individual receiving different classiﬁcations depending
on whether some sensitive attributes were observed. Then a
model is considered fair if it has no such pattern. We propose
an algorithm to discover and mine for discrimination patterns
in a naive Bayes classiﬁer, and show how to learn maximumlikelihood parameters subject to these fairness constraints. Our
approach iteratively discovers and eliminates discrimination
patterns until a fair model is learned. An empirical evaluation
on three real-world datasets demonstrates that we can remove
exponentially many discrimination patterns by only adding a
small fraction of them as constraints.

1

Introduction

With the increasing societal impact of machine learning
come increasing concerns about the fairness properties of
machine learning models and how they affect decision making. For example, concerns about fairness come up in policing (Mohler et al. 2018), recidivism prediction (Chouldechova 2017), insurance pricing (Kusner et al. 2017), hiring (Datta, Tschantz, and Datta 2015), and credit rating (Henderson et al. 2015). The algorithmic fairness literature has
proposed various solutions, from limiting the disparate treatment of similar individuals to giving statistical guarantees
on how classiﬁers behave towards different populations. Key
approaches include individual fairness (Dwork et al. 2012;
Zemel et al. 2013), statistical parity, disparate impact and
group fairness (Kamishima et al. 2012; Feldman et al. 2015;
Chouldechova 2017), counterfactual fairness (Kusner et al.
2017), preference-based fairness (Zafar et al. 2017a), relational fairness (Farnadi, Babaki, and Getoor 2018), and equality of opportunity (Hardt et al. 2016). The goal in these works
∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10077

