The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation via
Structured Prediction Based Selective Pseudo-Labeling
Qian Wang,1 Toby P. Breckon1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Durham University, United Kingdom
2
Department of Engineering, Durham University, United Kingdom
qian.wang173@hotmail.com, toby.breckon@durham.ac.uk

features extracted by deep models pre-trained on the largescale ImageNet dataset (Deng et al. 2009) further facilitates
these feature transformation based approaches. On the other
hand, deep learning models are used to learn domain invariant features in an end-to-end manner. The gradient reversal
layer (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015) and adversarial learning
(Tzeng et al. 2017) have been employed for this purpose.
In the UDA problem, both labeled samples from the
source domain and unlabeled samples from the target domain are assumed to be available during model training and
hence it is a transductive learning problem. The opportunity
of transductive learning is when the algorithm can explore
the test data (samples from the target domain in the case
of UDA). One effective method is to assign pseudo-labels
to the target samples so that samples from both domains
can be combined and ready for supervised learning. The
accuracy of pseudo-labeling plays an important role in the
whole learning process. In most existing methods, the target
samples are pseudo-labeled independently once the classiﬁer is trained overlooking the structural information underlying the target domain.
In this paper, we explore such structural information
via unsupervised learning (i.e. K-means) and propose a
novel UDA approach based on selective pseudo-labeling
and structured prediction. Speciﬁcally, our approach tries to
learn a domain invariant subspace by Supervised Locality
Preserving Projection (SLPP) using both labeled source data
and pseudo-labeled target data. The accuracy of pseudolabeling is promoted by structured prediction and progressively selections. The contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation aims to address the problem of classifying unlabeled samples from the target domain
whilst labeled samples are only available from the source domain and the data distributions are different in these two domains. As a result, classiﬁers trained from labeled samples in
the source domain suffer from signiﬁcant performance drop
when directly applied to the samples from the target domain.
To address this issue, different approaches have been proposed to learn domain-invariant features or domain-speciﬁc
classiﬁers. In either case, the lack of labeled samples in the
target domain can be an issue which is usually overcome by
pseudo-labeling. Inaccurate pseudo-labeling, however, could
result in catastrophic error accumulation during learning. In
this paper, we propose a novel selective pseudo-labeling strategy based on structured prediction. The idea of structured
prediction is inspired by the fact that samples in the target
domain are well clustered within the deep feature space so
that unsupervised clustering analysis can be used to facilitate accurate pseudo-labeling. Experimental results on four
datasets (i.e. Ofﬁce-Caltech, Ofﬁce31, ImageCLEF-DA and
Ofﬁce-Home) validate our approach outperforms contemporary state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Domain adaptation problems exist in many real-world applications. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims to
address problems where the unlabeled test samples and the
labeled training samples are from different domains (dubbed
target and source domains, respectively). Models learned
with labeled samples from the source domain suffer from
signiﬁcant performance reduction when they are directly applied to the target samples without domain adaptation. Such
reduced performance is mainly due to the domain shift characterized by the difference of data distributions between the
two domains. To address this issue, approaches to UDA have
been proposed trying to align the source and target domains
by learning a joint subspace so that samples from either
domain can be projected into this common subspace. Different algorithms were employed to promote the separability of target samples in such subspaces. The use of visual

– a novel iterative learning algorithm is proposed for UDA
using SLPP based subspace learning and the selective
pseudo-labeling strategy.
– structured prediction is employed to explore the structural
information within the target domain to promote the accuracy of pseudo-labeling and domain alignment.
– thorough comparative experiments and ablation studies
are conducted to demonstrate the proposed approach can
achieve new state-of-the-art performance on four benchmark datasets.

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6243

