The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dynamic Knowledge Routing Network
for Target-Guided Open-Domain Conversation
Jinghui Qin,1∗ Zheng Ye,1∗ Jianheng Tang,1 Xiaodan Liang1,2†
1

Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Dark Matter AI Inc.
{qinjingh, yezh7}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {sqrt3tjh, xdliang328}@gmail.com

Target: turtle
Baseline Kernel Conversation
A: Hi there. How are things?
H: Dressing up, acting, skin care, and eating out... you?
A: Not too bad. I distracted myself with my favorite things,
the color orang, roses, etc.
H: Sounds good. Do you have a job?
A: I’ve an animal, a turtle. Do you have any ?
DKRN Conversation
A: Hi there. How are things?
H: Good thanks. So, do you read?
A: Not really. I like to spend time on the farm. Do you like
sports?
H: Nah, I am not into sports. I want to produce music.
A: Cool. I also have a pet lizard, do you have any pets?
H: Nope, no pets. I wish i did, but one of my sisters is allergic.
A: That is so sad. I have a turtle because mommy is allergic.

Abstract
Target-guided open-domain conversation aims to proactively
and naturally guide a dialogue agent or human to achieve
speciﬁc goals, topics or keywords during open-ended conversations. Existing methods mainly rely on single-turn datadriven learning and simple target-guided strategy without
considering semantic or factual knowledge relations among
candidate topics/keywords. This results in poor transition
smoothness and low success rate. In this work, we adopt a
structured approach that controls the intended content of system responses by introducing coarse-grained keywords, attains smooth conversation transition through turn-level supervised learning and knowledge relations between candidate keywords, and drives an conversation towards an
speciﬁed target with discourse-level guiding strategy. Specially, we propose a novel dynamic knowledge routing network (DRKN) which considers semantic knowledge relations
among candidate keywords for accurate next topic prediction of next discourse. With the help of more accurate keyword prediction, our keyword-augmented response retrieval
module can achieve better retrieval performance and more
meaningful conversations. Besides, we also propose a novel
dual discourse-level target-guided strategy to guide conversations to reach their goals smoothly with higher success rate.
Furthermore, to push the research boundary of target-guided
open-domain conversation to match real-world scenarios better, we introduce a new large-scale Chinese target-guided
open-domain conversation dataset (more than 900K conversations) crawled from Sina Weibo. Quantitative and human
evaluations show our method can produce meaningful and
effective target-guided conversations, signiﬁcantly improving
over other state-of-the-art methods by more than 20% in success rate and more than 0.6 in average smoothness score.

Table 1: A conversation example between human (H) and
agents (A). Keywords predicted by the agents or mentioned
by human are highlighted in bold. The target achieved at the
end of a conversation is underlined. Our method can produce
more meaningful responses than Kernel (Tang et al. 2019)
due to the semantic knowledge relation injection and dual
discourse-level target-guided strategy shown in Figure 1.

and generation. Many researchers have devoted themselves
to overcome this challenge and achieved impressive progress
from early rule-based systems (Weizenbaum 1983) to recent end-to-end neural conversation systems that are built
on massive data (Vinyals and Le 2015; Lewis et al. 2017)
and common-sense knowledge (Ghazvininejad et al. 2018;
Liu et al. 2018). However, there are some limitations in current open-domain dialogue systems. First, they (Yi et al.
2019) suffer from a generic response problem that a system response can be an answer to a large number of user
utterances, such as “I don’t know.”. Second, they (Ram et
al. 2018) are struggling to interact with human engagingly.
Finally, they (Li et al. 2016) often generate inconsistent or
uncontrolled responses. Moreover, in many real-world openended open-domain conversation application, there are some
speciﬁc goals need to be achieved, such as accomplishing
nursing in therapeutic conversation, making recommendation and persuasion in shopping guide, inspiring ideas in education, etc. Therefore, there is a strong demand to integrate

Introduction
Open-domain Conversation systems have attracted more and
more attention, but creating an intelligent conversation agent
that can chat with human naturally is still challenging due
to the difﬁculty of accurate natural language understanding
∗

Equal Contribution and work was done at Dark Matter AI Inc.
Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8657

