The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fairness-Aware Demand Prediction for New Mobility
An Yan, Bill Howe
Information School, University of Washington
Seattle, WA, 98105
{yanan15, billhowe}@uw.edu

nomic conditions and demographics. For example, low ridership in poor, black neighborhoods is not necessarily (or
even typically) an indication of low demand (Brown 2018;
Ge et al. 2016). City governments have a mandate to deliver a transportation system that beneﬁts all citizens, particularly for historically underrepresented groups, such that
an individual’s access to resources as allocated by an algorithm should not be dependent on sensitive attributes such as
race and age. Any demand prediction model should therefore temper accuracy (with respect to prior data) with fairness (given known biases in that data). Any fairness-agnostic
demand prediction model is at risk of reinforcing inequitable
access to transportation services.
In this paper, we propose a model for fairness-aware demand prediction for new mobility systems, which extends
our previous work introducing the concept (Yan and Howe
2019). We consider a multi-stream network design that integrates data from multiple sources and maximizes accuracy. We then introduce novel fairness metrics for spatialtemporal settings, and design a corresponding regularizer for
each.
Modeling mobility resource demand is challenging because of the complex spatial and temporal patterns it exhibits, as well as the many external factors that inﬂuence
it (Li, Zheng, and Yang 2018). We address this challenge
by using a three-stream architecture: a submodel that built
upon 3D convolutional neural network (CNN) to capture
spatial-temporal correlations within the mobility demand; a
2D CNN submodel to learn information from spatial features such as road network; and a 1D CNN submodel to include information from time series such as city-wide rainfall. The three submodels are then fused together to produce
the ﬁnal prediction.
To incorporate fairness into the prediction model, we need
to deﬁne ”fairness” in the context of mobility demand prediction. Although there has been intensive research in developing fairness metrics for credit scoring, online advertising, employment, etc. (Zliobaite 2015; Hardt, Price, and
Srebro 2016), most of the existing metrics are inapplicable in spatial-temporal settings (Yan and Howe 2019). We
consider fairness as the requirement that individuals of different demographic groups receives equal amount of mo-

Abstract
Emerging transportation modes, including car-sharing, bikesharing, and ride-hailing, are transforming urban mobility yet
have been shown to reinforce socioeconomic inequity. These
services rely on accurate demand prediction, but the demand
data on which these models are trained reﬂect biases around
demographics, socioeconomic conditions, and entrenched geographic patterns. To address these biases and improve fairness, we present FairST, a fairness-aware demand prediction model for spatiotemporal urban applications, with emphasis on new mobility. We use 1D (time-varying, spaceconstant), 2D (space-varying, time-constant) and 3D (both
time- and space-varying) convolutional branches to integrate
heterogeneous features, while including fairness metrics as
a form of regularization to improve equity across demographic groups. We propose two spatiotemporal fairness metrics, region-based fairness gap (RFG), applicable when demographic information is provided as a constant for a region, and individual-based fairness gap (IFG), applicable
when a continuous distribution of demographic information
is available. Experimental results on bike share and ride share
datasets show that FairST can reduce inequity in demand prediction for multiple sensitive attributes (i.e. race, age, and
education level), while achieving better accuracy than even
state-of-the-art fairness-oblivious methods.

Introduction
New mobility refers to emerging transportation modes including car-sharing, bike-sharing, and ride-hailing (Goldman and Gorham 2006). These new mobility services provide technology-based, on-demand, and affordable alternatives to traditional transportation services. Supply and demand in new mobility systems are difﬁcult to model due to
complex dependencies on trafﬁc patterns, weather, human
behavior, socioeconomic conditions, and more. These services therefore rely crucially on accurate and high-resolution
demand models, trained on a variety of relevant datasets,
to guide resource optimization and maximize system utility
(Bell and Smyl 2018; Mooney et al. 2019).
But accuracy can be misleading; these models may overﬁt to strong biases in the source data related to socioecoc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1079

