The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

History-Adaption Knowledge
Incorporation Mechanism for Multi-Turn Dialogue System
Yajing Sun,1,2 Yue Hu,∗,1,2 Luxi Xing,1,2 Jing Yu,1,2 Yuqiang Xie1,2
2

1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{sunyajing, huyue, xingluxi, yujing02, xieyuqiang}@iie.ac.cn

methods have the advantage of providing ﬂuent and informative responses.

Abstract
Keeping the conversation consistent and avoiding its repetition are two key factors to construct an intelligent multiturn knowledge-grounded dialogue system. Although some
works tend to combine history with external knowledge such
as personal background information to boost dialogue quality, they are prone to ignore the fact that incorporating the
same knowledge multiple times into the conversation leads
to repetition. The main reason is the lack of effective control over the use of knowledge on the conversation level. So
we design a history-adaption knowledge incorporation mechanism to build an effective multi-turn dialogue model. Our
proposed model addresses repetition by recurrently updating the knowledge from the conversation level and progressively incorporating it into the history step-by-step. And the
knowledge-grounded history representation also enhances the
conversation consistency. Experimental results show that our
proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms several retrievalbased models on some benchmark datasets. The human evaluation demonstrates that our model can maintain conversation consistent and reduce conversation repetition.

It’s a crucial step to measure the relevance degree between the context of conversation and candidate responses.
Although great progress has been made, common issues
still exist in open-domain multi-turn dialogue. First, the
models fail to capture the sequential and contextualized
information of a long history, which leads to the loss of
important information (Vinyals and Le 2015; Sordoni et
al. 2015) and hinders the conversation understanding. Second, the models have poor ability to stay or change topics to keep dialogue consistent by itself (Li et al. 2016b;
Zhang et al. 2018). Third, the repetitiveness of response,
which incorporates and utilizes the same external knowledge
multiple times to generate the same but meaningless content, remains without a de facto solution (Serban et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2016a; Xu et al. 2017).
To address these problems, in recent years, several approaches have been developed to generate or select consistent and informative responses. Some works apply hierarchical recurrent network (Xing et al. 2018), convolution network (Wu et al. 2016) or transformer architecture (Mazaré et
al. 2018) to encode the semantics of contexts and responses
on words, n-grams, and sub-sequences of utterances. These
methods capture both short-term and long-term dependencies among words. However, these works can’t guarantee
the consistency and interactivity of the dialogue only depending on the context of the conversation, since data-driven
models are learned using the conversation data produced
by the different speakers. There are two types of methods
to model personalized neural conversation models. Li et
al.; Kottur, Wang, and Carvalho; Zhang et al.(2016b; 2017;
2019) encode each speaker to a user vector, and the vector is
fed to the sequence-to-sequence model to capture the speaking style of the speaker implicitly. Due to poor interpretability and data sparsity, the other methods generated or selected
responses are conditioned either on a given personal proﬁle
(Zhang et al. 2018) or on a text-described external knowledge (Qian et al. 2017). It’s a matter of fact that structuredform or unstructured-form information can greatly improve
the consistency and interactivity of the dialogue. But most
of the existing methods tend to pay attention to using per-

Introduction
Building a human-machine conversational agent is one of
the most important and challenging tasks in artiﬁcial intelligent(AI). Recently, building a chatbot for open-domain conversation (Serban et al. 2015; Ghazvininejad et al. 2017)
has gained increasing interests due to both availabilities of a
large amount of human conversation data and powerful models learned based on the neural networks. Existing methods
are either retrieval-based or generation-based. The retrievalbased methods match the dialogue semantic representation
with several response candidates, and then select an appropriate one as a reply to a human input (Shang, Lu, and Li
2015; Walker, Lin, and Sawyer 2012). On the other hand,
the generated-based methods directly generate a response
via natural language generation techniques (Mairesse and
Walker 2007; 2008). We focus on the problem of response
selection for retrieval-based chatbots since retrieval-based
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8944

