The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Harnessing GANs for Zero-Shot Learning
of New Classes in Visual Speech Recognition
Yaman Kumar∗

Dhruva Sahrawat∗

Shubham Maheshwari∗

Debanjan Mahata

Adobe
ykumar@adobe.com

NUS, Singapore
dhruva@comp.nus.edu.sg

MIDAS Lab, IIIT-Delhi
shubham14101@iiitd.ac.in

Bloomberg, USA
dmahata@bloomberg.net

Amanda Stent

Yifang Yin

Rajiv Ratn Shah

Roger Zimmermann

Bloomberg, USA
astent@bloomberg.net

NUS, Singapore
idsyin@nus.edu.sg

MIDAS Lab, IIIT-Delhi
rajivratn@iiitd.ac.in

NUS, Singapore
rogerz@comp.nus.edu.sg

labels. The ﬁnal prediction is the utterance label with the
highest probability score. The performance of humans in
lip reading is poor, with the best lip readers achieving an
accuracy of just around 21% (Easton and Basala 1982), so
VSR is a challenging task.
Modeling VSR as a classiﬁcation problem limits the predictions to a ﬁxed number of utterances. This signiﬁcantly
hinders model generalization on predicting out-of-vocabulary
(OOV) classes, i.e. new utterances, new poses or new speakers. Additionally, preparing datasets for training VSR models
is a challenging task by itself as it requires collecting hours
of video recordings of utterances from multiple speakers and
multiple poses. Recently, signiﬁcant effort has gone into collecting high-quality VSR datasets, yet VSR is still both more
complex than and has far less available training data than its
close relative, “classic” audio speech recognition. Therefore
in functionality VSR is basically where audio speech recognition was in the late 1980s - isolated words/phrases, limited
speakers.
Due to the unique aspects of VSR as a task, the challenges
associated with it and its potential applications, it forms an
appropriate down-stream task for low-shot OOV problem
settings. The challenge of automatically learning new classes
and to generalize from very few labeled examples is often
called low-shot (or few-shot) learning (Wang et al. 2018); or
zero-shot learning (Socher et al. 2013), in situations where
there are no examples of certain classes at all. Two main
techniques applied to solve such machine learning problems
are: (i) data driven approaches (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012), which rely on adding more data either by collecting data from external sources or by augmenting existing
datasets by synthesizing similar data points, and (ii) parameter driven approaches (Elhoseiny et al. 2017), which rely on
regularization techniques in order to constrain the number of
parameters to be learnt by the model.
In 2014, Goodfellow et al. presented the idea of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (2014). Since then, there
has been signiﬁcant research on GANs and their applications (Creswell et al. 2018). In their seminal work, Goodfellow et al. mention data augmentation as one of the applications of GANs, and indeed there is a growing literature focusing on it (Antoniou, Storkey, and Edwards 2017;

Abstract
Visual Speech Recognition (VSR) is the process of recognizing or interpreting speech by watching the lip movements of
the speaker. Recent machine learning based approaches model
VSR as a classiﬁcation problem; however, the scarcity of training data leads to error-prone systems with very low accuracies
in predicting unseen classes. To solve this problem, we present
a novel approach to zero-shot learning by generating new
classes using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), and
show how the addition of unseen class samples increases the
accuracy of a VSR system by a signiﬁcant margin of 27%
and allows it to handle speaker-independent out-of-vocabulary
phrases. We also show that our models are language agnostic
and therefore capable of seamlessly generating, using English
training data, videos for a new language (Hindi). To the best
of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to show empirical
evidence of the use of GANs for generating training samples
of unseen classes in the domain of VSR, hence facilitating
zero-shot learning. We make the added videos for new classes
publicly available along with our code1 .

1

Introduction

In Visual Speech Recognition (VSR), also known as automated lip reading, a system has to recognize words spoken by a human in a silent video, by primarily focusing on
the region of the speaker’s lips. VSR has a wide variety of
potential applications such as in cybersecurity, and as assistive/augmentative technology (Schmidt et al. 2013). For
example, if a person has a laryngectomy or voice-box cancer,
dysarthria, or works in very loud environments such as a
factory ﬂoor, VSR can be enabling.
VSR is treated as a classiﬁcation problem. The training
data can have single or multiple views of different speakers,
paired with utterance labels (e.g. digits, phrases or sentences).
Given a video displaying lip movements of a speaker, the
model outputs a probability distribution over the utterance
∗

These authors contributed equally. Author order was determined by a coin ﬂip.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code as well as the supplementary ﬁle can be found at
https://github.com/midas-research/DECA/. The videos can be accessed through this YouTube playlist link: https://bit.ly/336geft.
2645

