The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Two-Level Transformer and Auxiliary
Coherence Modeling for Improved Text Segmentation
Goran Glavaš,1 Swapna Somasundaran2
1

Data and Web Science Research Group
University of Mannheim
goran@informatik.uni-mannheim.de
2
Educational Testing Service (ETS)
ssomasundaran@ets.org

Abstract

Amsterdam is younger than Dutch cities such
as Nijmegen, Rotterdam, and Utrecht.

Breaking down the structure of long texts into semantically
coherent segments makes the texts more readable and supports
downstream applications like summarization and retrieval.
Starting from an apparent link between text coherence and
segmentation, we introduce a novel supervised model for text
segmentation with simple but explicit coherence modeling.
Our model – a neural architecture consisting of two hierarchically connected Transformer networks – is a multi-task
learning model that couples the sentence-level segmentation
objective with the coherence objective that differentiates correct sequences of sentences from corrupt ones. The proposed
model, dubbed Coherence-Aware Text Segmentation (CATS),
yields state-of-the-art segmentation performance on a collection of benchmark datasets. Furthermore, by coupling CATS
with cross-lingual word embeddings, we demonstrate its effectiveness in zero-shot language transfer: it can successfully
segment texts in languages unseen in training.

Amsterdam was granted city rights in either
1300 or 1306.
T3

T4

T1

In the 14th century Amsterdam flourished
because of trade with the Hanseatic League.

Amsterdam is located in the Western
Netherlands.
The river Amstel ends in the city centre and
connects to numerous canals.

T2

Amsterdam is about 2 metres (6.6 feet)
below sea level.

Figure 1: Snippet illustrating the relation (i.e., dependency)
between text coherence and segmentation.

T1 and T2 are more coherent than T3 and T4 : all T1 sentences
relate to Amsterdam’s history, and all T2 sentences to Amsterdam’s geography; in contrast, T3 and T4 contain sentences
from both topics. T1 and T2 being more coherent than T3 and
T4 signals that the fourth sentence starts a new segment.
Given this duality between text segmentation and coherence, it is surprising that the methods for text segmentation
capture coherence only implicitly. Unsupervised segmentation models rely either on probabilistic topic modeling
(Brants, Chen, and Tsochantaridis 2002; Riedl and Biemann
2012; Du, Buntine, and Johnson 2013) or semantic similarity
between sentences (Glavaš, Nanni, and Ponzetto 2016), both
of which only indirectly relate to text coherence. Similarly,
a recently proposed state-of-the-art supervised neural segmentation model (Koshorek et al. 2018) directly learns to
predict binary sentence-level segmentation decisions and has
no explicit mechanism for modeling coherence.
In this work, in contrast, we propose a supervised neural
model for text segmentation that explicitly takes coherence
into account: we augment the segmentation prediction objective with an auxiliary coherence modeling objective. Our proposed model, dubbed Coherence-Aware Text Segmentation
(CATS), encodes a sentence sequence using two hierarchically connected Transformer networks (Vaswani et al. 2017;
Devlin et al. 2018). Similar to (Koshorek et al. 2018), CATS’

Introduction
Natural language texts are, more often than not, a result
of a deliberate cognitive effort of an author and as such
consist of semantically coherent segments. Text segmentation deals with automatically breaking down the structure of
text into such topically contiguous segments, i.e., it aims to
identify the points of topic shift (Hearst 1994; Choi 2000;
Brants, Chen, and Tsochantaridis 2002; Riedl and Biemann
2012; Du, Buntine, and Johnson 2013; Glavaš, Nanni, and
Ponzetto 2016; Koshorek et al. 2018). Reliable segmentation results with texts that are more readable for humans,
but also facilitates downstream tasks like automated text
summarization (Angheluta, De Busser, and Moens 2002;
Bokaei, Sameti, and Liu 2016), passage retrieval (Huang et
al. 2003; Shtekh et al. 2018), topical classiﬁcation (Zirn et
al. 2016), or dialog modeling (Manuvinakurike et al. 2016;
Zhao and Kawahara 2017).
Text coherence is inherently tied to text segmentation –
intuitively, the text within a segment is expected to be more
coherent than the text spanning different segments. Consider,
e.g., the text in Figure 1, with two topical segments. Snippets
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7797

