The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TreeGen: A Tree-Based Transformer Architecture for Code Generation
Zeyu Sun,† Qihao Zhu,† Yingfei Xiong,∗† Yican Sun,† Lili Mou,‡ Lu Zhang†
†

Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies (Peking University), MoE;
Software Institute, Peking University, 100871, P. R. China
{szy , zhuqh, xiongyf, sycpku, zhanglucs}@pku.edu.cn
‡
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
doublepower.mou@gmail.com

Sun et al. 2019). Especially, state-of-the-art approaches generate code by predicting a sequence of grammar rules (Yin
and Neubig 2017; Rabinovich, Stern, and Klein 2017; Sun
et al. 2019). That is to say, the system keeps a partial abstract syntax tree (AST) of the already-generated code, and
predicts the grammar rule to be used to expand a particular
node.
The classiﬁcation of grammar rules faces two main challenges. The ﬁrst challenge is the long-dependency problem (Bengio, Simard, and Frasconi 1994). A code element
may depend on another far-away element. For example, a
variable reference statement “if len(a) < Max Length:”
at line 100 may depend on a variable deﬁnition statement
“Max Length = 100” at line 10. The second challenge
is the representation of code structures. It is pointed out
that the tree-structural information is crucial for modeling
code (Mou et al. 2016; Yin and Neubig 2017; Rabinovich,
Stern, and Klein 2017; Sun et al. 2019). However, a “ﬂat”
neural architecture, such as an RNN, cannot capture structure information well.
In this paper, we propose a novel neural architecture,
TreeGen, for the code generation. To address the ﬁrst challenge, TreeGen adopts the recently proposed Transformer
architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017), which is capable of
capturing long dependencies. However, the original Transformer architecture is not designed for programs, and cannot utilize tree structures, i.e., the second above mentioned
challenge. A standard way of utilizing structural information, as in graph- and tree-based convolutional neural networks, is to combine the vector representations of a node
and its structural neighbors as the output of a structural convolution sub-layer. However, a standard Transformer architecture does not have such structural convolution sub-layers,
and it is not clear where to add them.
It is tempting to add structural convolution sub-layers in
all the Transformer blocks. Our core conjecture is that when
convolving a node and its structural neighbors, the vector
representation should mainly contain the information from
the original node. As the vector representation of the nodes
is processed by more blocks in the decoder of the Transformer, they gradually mix in more information from other
nodes and lose their original information. Therefore, we add

Abstract
A code generation system generates programming language
code based on an input natural language description. State-ofthe-art approaches rely on neural networks for code generation. However, these code generators suffer from two problems. One is the long dependency problem, where a code
element often depends on another far-away code element.
A variable reference, for example, depends on its deﬁnition,
which may appear quite a few lines before. The other problem
is structure modeling, as programs contain rich structural information. In this paper, we propose a novel tree-based neural
architecture, TreeGen, for code generation. TreeGen uses the
attention mechanism of Transformers to alleviate the longdependency problem, and introduces a novel AST reader (encoder) to incorporate grammar rules and AST structures into
the network. We evaluated TreeGen on a Python benchmark,
HearthStone, and two semantic parsing benchmarks, ATIS
and GEO. TreeGen outperformed the previous state-of-theart approach by 4.5 percentage points on HearthStone, and
achieved the best accuracy among neural network-based approaches on ATIS (89.1%) and GEO (89.6%). We also conducted an ablation test to better understand each component
of our model.

Introduction
Code generation is an important artiﬁcial intelligence problem that has the potential to signiﬁcantly boost the productivity of programmers. Given a speciﬁcation written in
natural language, a code generation system translates the
speciﬁcation into an executable program. For example, if a
python programmer gives an instruction “initialize a dictionary, Dict”, the code generator is expected to automatically
generates “Dict={ }”.
With the development deep learning techniques, researchers have applied various neural architectures to this
problem, such as sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) models
or sequence-to-tree (Seq2Tree) models (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014; Ling et al. 2016; Yin and Neubig 2017;
Rabinovich, Stern, and Klein 2017; Hayati et al. 2018;
∗
Yingfei Xiong is the corresponding author. The code is available at https://github.com/zysszy/TreeGen
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8984

