The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hypernym Detection Using Strict Partial Order Networks
Sarthak Dash, Md Faisal Mahbub Chowdhury, Alﬁo Gliozzo,
Nandana Mihindukulasooriya, Nicolas Rodolfo Fauceglia
IBM Research AI, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
{sdash, mchowdh, gliozzo}@us.ibm.com
{nandana.m, nicolas.fauceglia}@ibm.com

designed to enforce strict partial order as a soft constraint.
We present an implementation of SPON designed to learn
is-a relations. The input of SPON is a list of is-a pairs, provided either by applying Hearst-like patterns over a text corpus or via a list of manually validated pairs.
In order to identify hypernyms for out-of-vocabulary
(OOV) terms, i.e. terms that are not seen by SPON during the training phase, we present an augmented variant of
SPON that can generalize type information learned for the
in-vocabulary terms to previously unseen ones. The augmented model does so by using normalized distributional
similarity values as weights within a probabilistic model, the
details of which are described in Section 5.
The main contributions of this paper are the following:
• We introduce the idea of Strict Partial Order Network
(SPON), highlighting differences and similarities with
previous approaches aimed at the same task.
• A theoretical analysis shows SPON enforces asymmetry
and transitivity requirement as soft constraints .
• An augmented variant of SPON to predict hypernyms for
OOV is proposed.
• Compared to previous approaches, we demonstrate that
our system achieves and/or improves the state of the art
(SOTA) consistently across a large variety of hypernymy
tasks and datasets (multi-lingual and domain-speciﬁc), including supervised and unsupervised settings.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2
describes related work. SPON is introduced in Section 3,
and theoretical analysis is provided in Section 4. In Section
5 we show how SPON can be augmented for OOV terms
in the test dataset. Section 6 and 7 describe the evaluation
setup and results. Section 8 concludes the paper and highlights perspectives for future work.

Abstract
This paper introduces Strict Partial Order Networks (SPON),
a novel neural network architecture designed to enforce
asymmetry and transitive properties as soft constraints. We
apply it to induce hypernymy relations by training with is-a
pairs. We also present an augmented variant of SPON that
can generalize type information learned for in-vocabulary
terms to previously unseen ones. An extensive evaluation
over eleven benchmarks across different tasks shows that
SPON consistently either outperforms or attains the state of
the art on all but one of these benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The ability to generalize the meaning of domain-speciﬁc
terms is essential for many NLP applications. However,
building taxonomies by hand for a new domain is timeconsuming. This drives the requirement to develop automatic systems that are able to identify hypernymy relationships (i.e. is-a relations) from text.
Hypernymy relation is reﬂexive and transitive but not
symmetric (George et al. 1990; Hearst 1992). For example,
if Wittgenstein ≺ philosopher and philosopher ≺ person,
where ≺ means is-a, it follows that Wittgenstein ≺ person
(transitivity). In addition, it also follows that both philosopher ⊀ Wittgenstein and person ⊀ philosopher (asymmetry). Absence of self-loops within taxonomies (e.g. WordNet
(George et al. 1990)) emphasizes that reﬂexivity (e.g. person
≺ person) does not add any new information.
In order theory, a partial order is a binary relation
that is transitive, reﬂexive and anti-symmetric. A strict
partial order is a binary relation that is transitive, irreﬂexive and asymmetric. Strict partial orders correspond
more directly to directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). In fact, hypernymy relation hierarchy in WordNet is a DAG (Suchanek,
Kasneci, and Weikum 2008). Therefore, we hypothesize that
the Hypernymy relations within a taxonomy can be better
represented via strict partial order relations.
In this paper we introduce Strict Partial Order
Networks (SPON), a neural network architecture comprising of non-negative activations and residual connections

2

Related Work

Since the pioneering work of Hearst (1992), lexico-syntactic
pattern-based approaches (e.g., “NPy is a NPx ”) remains
inﬂuential in subsequent academic and commercial applications. Some work tried to learn such patterns automatically (Snow, Jurafsky, and Ng 2005; Shwartz, Goldberg, and
Dagan 2016) instead of using a predeﬁned list of patterns.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7626

