The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Rethinking Temporal Fusion for Video-Based
Person Re-Identiﬁcation on Semantic and Time Aspect
Xinyang Jiang,1 Yifei Gong,1 Xiaowei Guo,1 Qize Yang,2 Feiyue Huang,1
Weishi Zheng,2 Feng Zheng,3 Xing Sun1∗
1
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2

Abstract
Recently, the research interest of person re-identiﬁcation
(ReID) has gradually turned to video-based methods, which
acquire a person representation by aggregating frame features
of an entire video. However, existing video-based ReID methods do not consider the semantic difference brought by the
outputs of different network stages, which potentially compromises the information richness of the person features. Furthermore, traditional methods ignore important relationship
among frames, which causes information redundancy in fusion along the time axis. To address these issues, we propose a
novel general temporal fusion framework to aggregate frame
features on both semantic aspect and time aspect. As for the
semantic aspect, a multi-stage fusion network is explored to
fuse richer frame features at multiple semantic levels, which
can effectively reduce the information loss caused by the traditional single-stage fusion. While, for the time axis, the existing intra-frame attention method is improved by adding
a novel inter-frame attention module, which effectively reduces the information redundancy in temporal fusion by taking the relationship among frames into consideration. The
experimental results show that our approach can effectively
improve the video-based re-identiﬁcation accuracy, achieving
the state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1: Illustration of temporal fusion. The cuboids represent features of different temporal and semantic levels.
The time axis (vertical) represents the image frames in
chronological order. The semantic axis (horizontal) represents the frame feature maps extracted from different stages
of a CNN, from low-level local feature to high-level semantics. We conduct temporal and semantic fusion to select and
weight features from different time and different semantic
levels and aggregate the selected features.

Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (ReID) is an important technology
to match images of pedestrians in different, non-overlapping
cameras. During the past few years, person re-identiﬁcation
has drawn increasing attention due to its wide applications
in surveillance, tracking, smart retail, etc. Unlike standard
image-based re-identiﬁcation approaches, video-based reidentiﬁcation directly takes video/tracklet (i.e. a sequence of
images) as input and learns a feature to represent the entire
tracklet in an end-to-end fashion, which captures more information from multiple frames in the tracklet, such as temporal cues, variant views, and poses, etc.
One of the key problems in video-based re-identiﬁcation
is temporal fusion, which is to aggregate feature from each

time frame into a comprehensive representation of the tracklet. This paper tries to rethink the temporal fusion problem
on the dimension of time and semantics, as well as proposing a uniﬁed temporal fusion framework based on temporal and semantic attention. As shown in Figure 1, we model
the temporal fusion process in a rectangular coordinates system. Frame features are ﬁrst extracted from different stages
of a CNN-based network (the output from different layers
in the CNN). The temporal fusion of frame features is performed on the time axis, selectively aggregating these features of different frames, while the semantic fusion aggregates the temporally-fused features that are outputs from different stages of the CNN-based network into a comprehen-

∗

Corresponding Author (winfredsun@tencent.com)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11133

