The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Complementary-View Multiple Human Tracking
Ruize Han,1,2 Wei Feng,1,2∗ Jiewen Zhao,1,2 Zicheng Niu,1 Yujun Zhang,1,2
Liang Wan,1,2 Song Wang1,2,3∗
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China
Key Research Center for Surface Monitoring and Analysis of Cultural Relics, SACH, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA
{han ruize, wfeng, zhaojw, niuzchina, yujunzhang, lwan}@tju.edu.cn, songwang@cec.sc.edu
2

Subject #2

Subject #1

The global trajectories of targets on ground can be well captured from a top view in a high altitude, e.g., by a dronemounted camera, while their local detailed appearances can
be better recorded from horizontal views, e.g., by a helmet
camera worn by a person. This paper studies a new problem
of multiple human tracking from a pair of top- and horizontalview videos taken at the same time. Our goal is to track the
humans in both views and identify the same person across
the two complementary views frame by frame, which is very
challenging due to very large ﬁeld of view difference. In this
paper, we model the data similarity in each view using appearance and motion reasoning and across views using appearance and spatial reasoning. Combing them, we formulate
the proposed multiple human tracking as a joint optimization
problem, which can be solved by constrained integer programming. We collect a new dataset consisting of top- and
horizontal-view video pairs for performance evaluation and
the experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Horizontal view

Top view

Abstract

Subject #2
Subject #1

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: An illustration of the top-view (a) and horizontalview (b) videos. The former is taken by a camera mounted
to a drone in the air and the latter is taken by a GoPro
worn by a wearer who walked on the ground. The proposed
method jointly tracking multiple subjects, indicated by identical color boxes, across the two videos. Note that the global
motion trajectory and local appearance are well presented in
these two complementary views.

person identiﬁcation, action recognition, etc. In this paper,
we present a new camera setting to address this problem.
To track a group of people, which we refer to as subjects in
this paper, on the ground, we use two cameras with different views and synchronized clock: A top-view camera at a
high altitude, e.g, mounted to ﬂying drone, provides a global
birds-eye view of the subjects and the whole scene as shown
in Fig. 1(a). A horizontal-view camera on the ground, e.g.,
mounted to a helmet worn by one person, which is static or
moves/rotates smoothly without drastic visual ﬁeld changes,
captures the detailed appearances of subjects of interest, as
shown in Fig. 1(b). We expect the collaborative tracking on
these two complementary views produces both global motion trajectories and local appearance details of the subjects.
In this paper, we tackle this collaborative tracking by
tracking multiple subjects on each view, together with identifying the same persons across the two complementary
views frame by frame, as shown in Fig 1. For this we basically need to accurately associate subjects between the two
views at any time and between different frames along each
video. Prior works (Xu et al. 2016; 2017) on multi-view object tracking usually assume the multiple horizontal views
from different angles, e.g., frontal, side and back views and
appearance consistency can still be applied for associating
subjects. Differently, in this paper we adopt a top view from

Introduction

Multiple object tracking especially human tracking is one of
the most crucial problems in AI and vision (Luo et al. 2015;
Wen et al. 2019), with many applications such as video
surveillance and environmental monitoring. Although many
advanced tracking algorithms are proposed and break the
performance records on public benchmarks in every year,
there are still many challenges e.g., occlusions and out-ofview problems, which are far from being well addressed in
tracking (Han, Guo, and Feng 2018; Feng et al. 2019).
While tracking has many applications (Guo et al. 2020),
typically two pieces of information can be provided by
tracking results: accurate trajectories and appearances of
the targets over time. This clearly introduces a conﬂict –
if the camera is too close to the targets, limited coverage
and frequent mutual occlusions prevent the accurate detection of their trajectories; if the camera is too far away from
the targets, it is difﬁcult to capture the detailed appearance
of targets that are important for many applications such as
∗

Co-corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10917

