The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Query-Efﬁcient Black-Box
Adversary with Zeroth-Order Natural Gradient Descent
Pu Zhao,1 Pin-Yu Chen,2 Siyue Wang,1 Xue Lin1
1

Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
{zhao.pu, wang.siy}@husky.neu.edu, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com, xue.lin@northeastern.edu
2

ity/robustness of DNNs has attracted ever-increasing attentions and efforts in the research ﬁeld known as adversarial
machine learning. A large amount of efforts have been devoted to: 1) designing adversarial perturbations in various
ML applications (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015;
Carlini and Wagner 2017; Chen et al. 2017a; Zhao et al.
2019c; Xu et al. 2018); 2) security evaluation methodologies to systematically estimate the DNN robustness (Biggio,
Fumera, and Roli 2014; Zhang, Weng, and et. al. 2018); and
3) defense mechanisms against adversarial attacks (Bulò,
Biggio, and et. al. 2017; Demontis, Melis, and et. al. 2018;
Madry et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019; 2018a; Xu et al. 2019).
This work mainly investigates the ﬁrst category to build the
groundwork towards developing potential defensive measures in reliable ML.

Abstract
Despite the great achievements of the modern deep neural
networks (DNNs), the vulnerability/robustness of state-ofthe-art DNNs raises security concerns in many application
domains requiring high reliability. Various adversarial attacks
are proposed to sabotage the learning performance of DNN
models. Among those, the black-box adversarial attack methods have received special attentions owing to their practicality
and simplicity. Black-box attacks usually prefer less queries
in order to maintain stealthy and low costs. However, most
of the current black-box attack methods adopt the ﬁrst-order
gradient descent method, which may come with certain deﬁciencies such as relatively slow convergence and high sensitivity to hyper-parameter settings. In this paper, we propose
a zeroth-order natural gradient descent (ZO-NGD) method to
design the adversarial attacks, which incorporates the zerothorder gradient estimation technique catering to the black-box
attack scenario and the second-order natural gradient descent
to achieve higher query efﬁciency. The empirical evaluations
on image classiﬁcation datasets demonstrate that ZO-NGD
can obtain signiﬁcantly lower model query complexities compared with state-of-the-art attack methods.

However, most of preliminary studies on this topic focus on the white-box setting where the target DNN model
is completely available to the attacker (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015; Carlini and Wagner 2017; Zhao et al.
2018). More speciﬁcally, the adversary can compute the gradients of the output with respect to the input to identify
the effect of perturbing certain input pixels, with complete
knowledge about the DNN model’s internal structure, parameters and conﬁgurations. Despite the theoretical interest,
it is unrealistic to adopt the white-box adversarial methods to
attack practical black-box threat models (Zhao et al. 2019b),
where the internal model states/conﬁgurations are not revealed to the attacker (e.g., Google Cloud Vision API). Instead, the adversary can only query the model by submitting
inputs and obtain the corresponding model outputs of prediction probabilities when generating adversarial examples.

Introduction
Modern technologies based on machine learning (ML) and
speciﬁcally deep learning (DL), have achieved signiﬁcant
breakthroughs (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015) in various applications. Deep neural network (DNN) serves as a
fundamental component in artiﬁcial intelligence. However,
despite the outstanding performance, many recent studies
demonstrate that state-of-the-art DNNs in computer vision
(Xie, Wang, and et. al. 2018), speech recognition (Alzantot,
Balaji, and Srivastava 2018) and deep reinforcement learning (Lin, Hong, and et. al. 2017) are vulnerable to adversarial
examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015), which
add carefully designed imperceptible distortions to legitimate inputs aiming to mislead the DNNs at test time. This
raises concerns of the DNN robustness in many applications
with high reliability and dependability requirements.
With the recent exploration of adversarial attacks in image classiﬁcation and objection detection, the vulnerabil-

In the black-box adversarial setting, it is often the case
that the less queries, the more efﬁcient an attack becomes.
Large amount of queries may be at the risk of exposing the
adversary or high ﬁnancial cost in the case where the query
is charged per query. Notably, to date most of the whitebox (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Carlini and
Wagner 2017) and black-box attacks (Chen et al. 2017b;
Ilyas et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2019a) are based on ﬁrst-order
gradient descent methods. Different from the widely utilized
ﬁrst-order optimization, the application of second-order optimization (Martens 2016) is less explored due to the large

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6909

