The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Word-Level Contextual Sentiment Analysis with Interpretability
Tomoki Ito,1 Kota Tsubouchi,2 Hiroki Sakaji,1 Tatsuo Yamashita,2 Kiyoshi Izumi1
1
Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 2 Yahoo Japan Corporation
m2015titoh@socsim.org, {ktsubouc, tayamash}@yahoo-corp.jp, {sakaji, izumi}@sys.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

see that the problem for this shop is caused by price, therefore, the price should be improved.
Several studies conducted on this topic; however, most
lack practicality or interpretability, which is a crucial problem in industrial usage. Methods using annotated datasets
for word-level contextual sentiments (Mohammad, Kiritchenko, and Zhu 2013; Nakov et al. 2013; Rosenthal et al.
2014; Schulder et al. 2017) or speciﬁc knowledge (Li et al.
2013; Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffman 2005; Kiritchenko and
Mohammad 2016) have been proposed. However, these approaches are not practical because such annotated datasets or
speciﬁc knowledge are typically not available for analyzing
specialized documents (e.g., legal or ﬁnancial documents) or
minor languages. Other approaches leveraging interpretation
through neural networks (Bach et al. 2017; Sundararajan,
Taly, and Yan 2017; Karen, Andrea, and Zisserman 2013;
Springenberg et al. 2015) were developed, which require
only reviews and their document-level sentiment tags. These
methods are practical because document-level tags are more
available than contextual word-level or phrase tags. However, they lack interpretability because they cannot explain
the process of the analysis; therefore, they cannot be applied
in cases where explanations are required.

Abstract
Word-level contextual sentiment analysis (WCSA) is an important task for mining reviews or opinions. When analyzing
this type of sentiment in the industry, both the interpretability
and practicality are often required. However, such a WCSA
method has not been established. This study aims to develop
a WCSA method with interpretability and practicality. To
achieve this aim, we propose a novel neural network architecture called Sentiment Interpretable Neural Network (SINN).
To realize this SINN practically, we propose a novel learning strategy called Lexical Initialization Learning (LEXIL).
SINN is interpretable because it can extract word-level contextual sentiment through extracting word-level original sentiment and its local and global word-level contexts. Moreover,
LEXIL can develop the SINN without any speciﬁc knowledge for context; therefore, this strategy is practical. Using
real textual datasets, we experimentally demonstrate that the
proposed LEXIL is effective for improving the interpretability of SINN and that the SINN features both the high WCSA
ability and high interpretability.

1
1.1

Introduction

Motivation

Word-level Contextual Sentiment Analysis (WCSA) is the
task for assigning word-level sentiment score to each term in
a review by considering the contextual inﬂuence to it from
the other terms. For example, “good” originally has a positive meaning. However, in the phrase “not good”, this word
is shifted by “not” and its sentiment becomes negative. This
WCSA is known to be valuable for mining reviews or opinions (Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffman 2005) because pinpointing positive or negative expressions as shown in the sentences below is often required in the industry.
(1) In total, we are in a bull+ market.
(2) This room is not clean− .
(3) Products in this shop are too expensive− .
By pinpointing positive or negative expressions, we can
identify the detailed positive or negative attitude of consumers. For example, from the third review listed above, we

1.2

Purpose

In response, this study aims to develop a WCSA method
with both the interpretability and practicality.
Interpretability To satisfy the interpretability, we aim to
develop a WCSA method that can extract word-level contextual sentiment in a review through extracting the following
word-level original sentiment, local word-level contexts, and
global word-level contexts, as shown in Figure 1.
1) Word-level original sentiment represents the sentiment
of each word where it originally has (e.g., scores in a word
sentiment dictionary (Hutto and Gilbert 2014)).
2) Local word-level context represents whether each term
in a review is shifted or not by the contexts of multiple words
or phrases (e.g., “up” in “did not go up.” and “bullish” in
“manipulate bullish opinion on the stock market”).
3) Global word-level context represents the important part
of an entire review.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4231

