The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CBNet: A Novel Composite Backbone Network Architecture for Object Detection
Yudong Liu,1 Yongtao Wang,1∗ Siwei Wang,1 Tingting Liang,1 Qijie Zhao,1 Zhi Tang,1 Haibin Ling2
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University
{bahuangliuhe, wyt, wangsiwei17, liangtingting, zhaoqijie, tangzhi}@pku.edu.cn
hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
In existing CNN based detectors, the backbone network is a
very important component for basic feature1 extraction, and
the performance of the detectors highly depends on it. In this
paper, we aim to achieve better detection performance by
building a more powerful backbone from existing ones like
ResNet and ResNeXt. Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel strategy for assembling multiple identical backbones by composite connections between the adjacent backbones, to form a
more powerful backbone named Composite Backbone Network (CBNet). In this way, CBNet iteratively feeds the output features of the previous backbone, namely high-level features, as part of input features to the succeeding backbone,
in a stage-by-stage fashion, and ﬁnally the feature maps of
the last backbone (named Lead Backbone) are used for object
detection. We show that CBNet can be very easily integrated
into most state-of-the-art detectors and signiﬁcantly improve
their performances. For example, it boosts the mAP of FPN,
Mask R-CNN and Cascade R-CNN on the COCO dataset by
about 1.5 to 3.0 points. Moreover, experimental results show
that the instance segmentation results can be improved as
well. Speciﬁcally, by simply integrating the proposed CBNet
into the baseline detector Cascade Mask R-CNN, we achieve
a new state-of-the-art result on COCO dataset (mAP of 53.3)
with a single model, which demonstrates great effectiveness
of the proposed CBNet architecture. Code will be made available at https://github.com/PKUbahuangliuhe/CBNet.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed Composite Backbone
Network (CBNet) architecture for object detection. CBNet
assembles multiple identical backbones (Assistant Backbones and Lead Backbone) by composite connections between the parallel stages of the adjacent backbones. This
way, it iteratively feeds the output features of the previous
backbone as part of input to the succeeding backbone, in
a stage-by-stage fashion, and ﬁnally outputs the features of
the last backbone (i.e., Lead Backbone) for object detection.
The red arrows represent composite connections.

Introduction

Object detection is one of the most fundamental problems in
computer vision, which can serve a wide range of applications such as autonomous driving, intelligent video surveillance, remote sensing, and so on. In recent years, great progresses have been made for object detection thanks to the
booming development of the deep convolutional networks
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), and a few excellent detectors have been proposed, e.g., SSD (Liu et al.

2016), Faster R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015), RetinaNet(Lin et
al. 2018), FPN (Lin et al. 2017a), Mask R-CNN (He et al.
2017), Cascade R-CNN (Cai and Vasconcelos 2018), etc.
Generally speaking, in a typical CNN based object detector, a backbone network is used to extract basic features for detecting objects, which is usually designed for
the image classiﬁcation task and pretrained on the ImageNet
dataset (Deng et al. 2009). Not surprisingly, if a backbone
can extract more representational features, its host detector will perform better accordingly. In other words, a more
powerful backbone can bring better detection performance,
as demonstrated in Table 1. Hence, starting from AlexNet
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), deeper and larger
(i.e., more powerful) backbones have been exploited by the

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Here and after, ”basic feature” refers in particular to the features that are extracted by the backbone network and used as the input to other functional modules in the detector like detection head,
RPN and FPN.
11653

