The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Universal Languages for Tractable Ontology Mediated Query Answering
Heng Zhang,1 Yan Zhang,2,3 Jia-Huai You,4 Zhiyong Feng,1 Guifei Jiang5∗
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematics, Western Sydney University, Penrith, Australia
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Technology and Science, Wuhan, China
4
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
5
College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
{heng.zhang, zyfeng}@tju.edu.cn, yan.zhang@westernsydney.edu.au, jyou@ualberta.ca, g.jiang@nankai.edu.cn
2

While all these languages are of their speciﬁc features and
hence are useful in different applications, it is not realistic
to implement OMQA-systems for all of them. So a natural question arises: Can we ﬁnd the largest one (in the expressiveness) among the family of ﬁrst-order rewritable (or
PTIME-tractable) OMQA-languages? Let us call the largest
language in the above sense a universal language. Clearly,
it is of great theoretical and practical importance to identify the existence of universal language w.r.t. some kind of
tractability, which is also the main task of this paper.

Abstract
An ontology language for ontology mediated query answering (OMQA-language) is universal for a family of OMQAlanguages if it is the most expressive one among this family.
In this paper, we focus on three families of tractable OMQAlanguages, including ﬁrst-order rewritable languages and languages whose data complexity of the query answering is in
AC0 or PTIME. On the negative side, we prove that there is,
in general, no universal language for each of these families
of languages. On the positive side, we propose a novel property, the locality, to approximate the ﬁrst-order rewritability,
and show that there exists a language of disjunctive embedded dependencies that is universal for the family of OMQAlanguages with locality. All of these results apply to OMQA
with query languages such as conjunctive queries, unions of
conjunctive queries and acyclic conjunctive queries.

It is worth noting that the universality is one of the major
principles for designing languages in both computer science
and logic. For example, almost all the traditional programming languages, including C, Java and Prolog, are known
to be universal for the family of Turing complete programming languages; propositional logic can express all boolean
functions; and by the well-known Lindström theorem the
ﬁrst-order logic is the largest one among the logics that enjoy both the compactness and the Löwenheim-Skolem property; see, e.g., (Ebbinghaus, Flum, and Thomas 1994). In
databases, ﬁrst-order language is shown to be universal for
the family of query languages with data complexity in AC0 ,
and Datalog universal for the family of query languages with
data complexity in PTIME; see, e.g., (Immerman 1999).

Introduction
Ontology mediated query answering (OMQA) is a paradigm
that generalizes the traditional database querying by enriching the database with a domain ontology (Poggi et al. 2008).
This paradigm has played an important role in the semantic
web (Calvanese et al. 2007; Baader, Brandt, and Lutz 2005),
data modelling (Berardi, Calvanese, and De Giacomo 2005),
data exchange (Fagin et al. 2005) and data integration (Lenzerini 2002), and has recently emerged as one of the central
issues in knowledge representation as well as in databases.
A long-term major topic for OMQA is to identify proper
languages that specify ontologies. There have been a large
number of ontology languages proposed for OMQA since
the mid 2000s. For instance, in description logics, the DLLite family (Calvanese et al. 2007), EL-family (Baader,
Brandt, and Lutz 2005) and other variants have been proposed and extensively studied. More recently, the Datalog±
family, a.k.a. existential rule languages, or dependencies in
databases, have been rediscovered as promising languages
for OMQA, see, e.g., (Baget et al. 2011; Calı̀, Gottlob, and
Lukasiewicz 2012; Calı̀, Gottlob, and Pieris 2012). Most of
these languages enjoy good computational properties such
as the ﬁrst-order rewritability or PTIME data complexity.

Some recent work in OMQA has been done along the line
of identifying universal languages. Calvanese et al. (2013)
proved that, under a certain syntactic classiﬁcation, some
languages in the DL-Lite family are the maximal fragments
of description logic with the ﬁrst-order rewritability. By regarding OMQA as traditional database querying, Gottlob,
Rudolph, and Simkus (2014) showed that weakly-guarded
tuple-generating dependencies (TGDs) captures the class of
EXPTIME queries; Rudolph and Thomazo (2015) proved
that general TGDs captures the class of recursively enumerable queries. In the setting of schema mapping, Zhang,
Zhang, and You (2015) showed that weakly-acyclic TGDs
is the most expressive language of TGDs with ﬁnite semioblivious chase. All of these results shed new insights on
understanding the expressiveness of existential rules, but it
is worth noting that OMQA is signiﬁcantly different from
both traditional database querying and schema mapping. To
understand the expressiveness in the framework of OMQA,

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3049

