The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Scale-Free Rain Streak
Removal via Self-Supervised Fractal Band Learning
Wenhan Yang,1 Shiqi Wang,1 Dejia Xu,2 Xiaodong Wang,3 Jiaying Liu2∗
1

City University of Hong Kong 2 Peking University 3 Beijing Institute of Electronic Engineering
{wyang34, shiqwang}@cityu.edu.hk, {dejia, liujiaying}@pku.edu.cn, casic wangxiaodong@126.com

Abstract
Data-driven rain streak removal methods, which most of rely
on synthesized paired data, usually come across the generalization problem when being applied in real cases. In this
paper, we propose a novel deep-learning based rain streak removal method injected with self-supervision to improve the
ability to remove rain streaks in various scales. To realize
this goal, we made efforts in two aspects. First, considering that rain streak removal is highly correlated with texture
characteristics, we create a fractal band learning (FBL) network based on frequency band recovery. It integrates commonly seen band feature operations with neural modules and
effectively improves the capacity to capture discriminative
features for deraining. Second, to further improve the generalization ability of FBL for rain streaks in various scales,
we add cross-scale self-supervision to regularize the network
training. The constraint forces the extracted features of inputs
in different scales to be equivalent after rescaling. Therefore,
FBL can offer similar responses based on solely image content without the interleave of scale and is capable to remove
rain streaks in various scales. Extensive experiments in quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate the superiority of our FBL for rain streak removal, especially for the real
cases where very large rain streaks exist, and prove the effectiveness of its each component. Our code will be public available at: https://github.com/ﬂyywh/AAAI-2020-FBL-SS.

(a) Input

(b) DetailNet (Fu et al. 2017)

(c) JORDER (Yang et al. 2017)

(d) Our FBL

Figure 1: Visual comparison of our fractal band learning
(FBL) with state-of-the-art approaches. In addition to removing small rain streaks as other methods, our FBL also
removes most of the larger rain streaks.

streaks cause severe intensity changes and light ﬂuctuations,
and hence obstruct and blur the background scene. An example of a rain streak image can be observed in Fig. 1(a).
As many degradation factors cause information loss, it
is highly ill-posed to address single image rain removal
problem. Previous methods (Kang, Lin, and Fu 2012;
Huang et al. 2014; Sun, Fan, and Wang 2014; Luo, Xu, and
Ji 2015) address the single image rain removal problem by
separating rain streaks and background images, namely the
corresponding rain-free versions, from their mixed versions.
Various models are developed to extract rain streaks and
background images based on their texture appearance patterns, such as frequency domain representation (Kang, Lin,
and Fu 2012), sparse representation (Luo, Xu, and Ji 2015),
and Gaussian mixture model (Li et al. 2016).
Recently, the rising of deep learning gives rise to deepnetwork based approaches. In (Fu et al. 2017), the image
detail layer without background interference is regarded as
the input, which directly reduces the mapping range from input to output and makes the learning process easier. In (Yang

Introduction
Bad weather conditions bring about a series of visibility
degradations, e.g. occluding background scenes, altering the
object content and changing contrast and color of images,
etc. Due to detail loss and signal distortion, these degradations cause visual unpleasure and result in the failure of
many outdoor computer vision applications, which built on
taking high quality clean video frames as their input. As
one of the most common degradations in rain frames, rain
∗
Corresponding author. This work is partially supported by
National Natural Science Foundation of China under contract
No.61772043, in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation under contract No.L182002, in part by the Hong Kong RGC Early
Career Scheme under Grant 9048122 (CityU 21211018), and in
part by Hong Kong ITF UICP under Grant 9440203.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12629

