The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Exponential Family Graph Embeddings
Abdulkadir Çelikkanat

Fragkiskos D. Malliaros

CentraleSupélec and Inria Saclay
University of Paris-Saclay
Gif-Sur-Yvette, France
abdulkadir.celikkanat@centralesupelec.fr

CentraleSupélec and Inria Saclay
University of Paris-Saclay
Gif-Sur-Yvette, France
fragkiskos.malliaros@centralesupelec.fr

users are similar, we need to obtain an informative representation of the users and their proximity — that potentially
is not fully captured by graph statistics (e.g., centrality criteria) (Chakrabarti, Faloutsos, and McGlohon 2010), kernel functions (Vishwanathan et al. 2010), or more generally
other handcrafted features extracted from the graph (LibenNowell and Kleinberg 2007). To deal with these challenges,
a recent paradigm in network analysis, known as network
representation learning (NRL), aims at ﬁnding vector representations of nodes (i.e., node embeddings), in such a way
that the structure of the network and its various properties
are preserved in lower-dimensional representation space.
The problem is typically expressed as an optimization task,
where the goal is to optimize the mapping function from
the graph space to a low-dimensional space, so that proximity relationships in the learned space reﬂect the structure
of the original graph (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Goyal and Ferrara 2018; Cai, Zheng, and Chang 2018). Furthermore, in most cases, the feature learning approach is
purely unsupervised. That way, after obtaining embeddings,
the learned features can further be used in any downstream
machine learning task, such as classiﬁcation and prediction.

Abstract
Representing networks in a low dimensional latent space is
a crucial task with many interesting applications in graph
learning problems, such as link prediction and node classiﬁcation. A widely applied network representation learning
paradigm is based on the combination of random walks for
sampling context nodes and the traditional Skip-Gram model
to capture center-context node relationships. In this paper,
we emphasize on exponential family distributions to capture
rich interaction patterns between nodes in random walk sequences. We introduce the generic exponential family graph
embedding model, that generalizes random walk-based network representation learning techniques to exponential family conditional distributions. We study three particular instances of this model, analyzing their properties and showing
their relationship to existing unsupervised learning models.
Our experimental evaluation on real-world datasets demonstrates that the proposed techniques outperform well-known
baseline methods in two downstream machine learning tasks.

Introduction
Graphs or networks have become ubiquitous as data from diverse disciplines can naturally be represented as graph structures. Characteristics examples include social, collaboration,
information and biological networks, or even networks that
are generated by textual information. Besides, graphs are
not only useful as models for data representation but can
be proven valuable in prediction and learning tasks. For example, one might wish to recommend new friendship relationships in social networks such as Facebook and LinkedIn,
predict the missing structure or the role of a protein in a
protein-protein interaction graph, or even to discover missing relations between entities in a knowledge graph. To that
end, the tasks of learning and analyzing large-scale realworld graph data drive several important applications, but
also pose a plethora of challenges.
The major challenge in machine learning on graphs is how
to incorporate information about its structure in the learning
model. For example, in the case of friendship recommendations in social networks (also known as the link prediction problem), in order to determine whether two unlinked

Initial studies in network representation learning mostly
focused on classical dimensionality reduction techniques via
matrix factorization (e.g., (Cao, Lu, and Xu 2015; Tang and
Liu 2009)). Although the success of such approaches in
capturing the structural properties of a network, they tend
to be, unfortunately, not efﬁcient for large scale networks.
Therefore, the community has concentrated on developing
alternative approaches, and inspired by the ﬁeld of natural
language processing (NLP) (Mikolov et al. 2013), randomwalk based methods have become a prominent line of research for network representation learning. Characteristic
examples of such approaches constitute D EEP WALK (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014) and N ODE 2V EC (Grover
and Leskovec 2016) models. Typically, those methods sample a set of random walks from the input graph, treating them
as the equivalent of sentences in natural language, while the
nodes visited by the walk are considered as the equivalent of
words. The point that essentially differentiates these methods, concerns the strategy that is followed to generate (i.e.,
sample) node sequences. The idea mainly aims to model

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3357

