The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reinforcement Learning Based Meta-Path
Discovery in Large-Scale Heterogeneous Information Networks
Guojia Wan,1,2 Bo Du,1,2∗ Shirui Pan,3 Gholamreza Haffari3
1

National Engineering Research Center for MultimediaSoftware, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China.
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China.
3
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
{guojiawan, remoteking}@whu.edu.cn, {Shirui.Pan, gholamreza.haffari}@monash.edu

Abstract

isPoliticianOf

Meta-paths are important tools for a wide variety of data
mining and network analysis tasks in Heterogeneous Information Networks (HINs), due to their ﬂexibility and interpretability to capture the complex semantic relation among
objects. To date, most HIN analysis still relies on handcrafting meta-paths, which requires rich domain knowledge
that is extremely difﬁcult to obtain in complex, large-scale,
and schema-rich HINs. In this work, we present a novel
framework, Meta-path Discovery with Reinforcement Learning (MPDRL), to identify informative meta-paths from complex and large-scale HINs. To capture different semantic information between objects, we propose a novel multi-hop reasoning strategy in a reinforcement learning framework which
aims to infer the next promising relation that links a source
entity to a target entity. To improve the efﬁciency, moreover,
we develop a type context representation embedded approach
to scale the RL framework to handle million-scale HINs.
As multi-hop reasoning generates rich meta-paths with various length, we further perform a meta-path induction step to
summarize the important meta-paths using Lowest Common
Ancestor principle. Experimental results on two large-scale
HINs, Yago and NELL, validate our approach and demonstrate that our algorithm not only achieves superior performance in the link prediction task, but also identiﬁes useful
meta-paths that would have been ignored by human experts.

BornIn

Barack Obama
Type:Person,President,
Writer,Activitist ...

isLocatedIn

Hawaii
Type: District

Gr

adu

ate

dIn
ate
c
o
isL

dF

rom

Type context

the USA
Type: Country

Columbia University
Type:University

Figure 1: A HIN with multiple types and multiple relations.
are annotated with multiple types. Due to their capability to retain the rich and complex inter-dependency between objects, HIN have recently attracted increasing research attention. However, the heterogeneity and complexity of a HIN also impose signiﬁcant challenges when engaging in relation analysis among objects, particularly in
large-scale networks. In order to cope with these restrictions, the concept of meta-path were proposed to capture
the semantic relation between objects (Sun et al. 2009;
2011).
Figure 1 illustrates examples meta-path between two
objects, Barack Obama and the USA. To understand the
relation between a person and a country, we can exisPoliticianOf
ploit the following meta-paths: a) Person
−→
BornIn
isLocatedIn
−→
Country,
Country, b) Person −→ District
GraduatedFrom
isLocatedIn
c) Person
−→
University
−→
Country.
Although they are different in length and involve different
intermediate objects, these meta-paths all help inference the
semantic relation of isCitizenOf(Person, Country). Thus, it
is easy to deduce from Figure 1 that Barack Obama is a citizen of the USA. As meta-paths carry rich semantic information, they have been widely used in many data mining and
network analysis tasks (Shi et al. 2016).
Most existing meta-path studies or meta-path guided research stipulate to predeﬁne enumerable sets of meta-paths,
which largely depends on domain experts and is labour-

Introduction
The complex interaction in real-world structured data, such
as social networks, biological networks, and knowledge
graphs, can be modeled as Heterogeneous Information Networks (HINs) (Sun and Han 2013), where objects and edges
∗

Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants
61822113, the National Key R&D Program of China under
Grant 2018YFA060550, the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei
Province under Grants 2018CFA050 and the Science and Technology Major Project of Hubei Province (Next-Generation AI Technologies) under Grant 2019AEA170. G. H. is partly supported
by a Future Fellowship from the Australian Research Council
(FT190100039).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6094

