The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Robust Stochastic Bandit Algorithms under
Probabilistic Unbounded Adversarial Attack
Ziwei Guan,1 Kaiyi Ji,1 Donald J. Bucci Jr.,2 Timothy Y. Hu,2
Joseph Palombo,2 Michael Liston,2 Yingbin Liang1
1

The Ohio State University, ECE Department
2015 Neil Ave, Columbus, OH 43210
2
Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Laboratories
Cherry Hill, NJ, 08002, USA
armed bandit formalism. Below we brieﬂy summarize major
models that are relevant to our study.
- The adversarial multi-armed bandit model, in which an
adversary is allowed to attack in each round with each attack subject to a bounded value. (Auer et al. 2002) proposed a robust EXP3 algorithm as a defense algorithm
and (Audibert and Bubeck 2009; Stoltz 2005; Bubeck and
Cesa-Bianchi 2012) further provided tighter bounds. (Jun
et al. 2018; Liu and Shroff 2019) showed that a small total
attack cost of O(log T ) makes UCB and -greedy algorithms fail with regret O(T ).
- The budget-bounded attack model, in which an adversary
has a total budget of attack value but can choose to attack only over some time instances. The aim of defense is
to achieve a regret that gradually transits between adversarial (the above always attack) and stochastic (never attack) models. (Lykouris, Mirrokni, and Paes Leme 2018)
provided a variety of such robust algorithms and (Gupta,
Koren, and Talwar 2019) further developed an algorithm
that improved the regret in (Lykouris, Mirrokni, and
Paes Leme 2018).
- The fractional attack model, in which the total rounds that
an adversary attacks is limited either by probability that
the adversary can attack or by the ratio of attacked rounds
to total rounds. The attack value at each round is also subject to a bounded value. (Kapoor, Patel, and Kar 2019)
proposed a robust RUCB-MAB algorithm, which uses
sample median to replace sample mean in UCB algorithm.
(Seldin and Slivkins 2014) proposed an EXP3-based algorithm which can achieve optimality in both stochastic and
adversarial cases.
- The heavy-tail outlier model, in which the observed reward can have heavy-tail values, whose distribution has
bounded ﬁrst moment and unbounded second moment.
(Bubeck, Cesa-Bianchi, and Lugosi 2013) proposed a robust Cantoni UCB algorithm that can defend against such
heavy-tail outliers.
We observe that all of the above adversarial models assume that the attack value (i.e., the adversarial cost) either
is bounded or has vanishing probability of occurrence. In
this paper, we study an adversarial attack model where the
attack value can be arbitrary and unbounded. To elaborate

Abstract
The multi-armed bandit formalism has been extensively studied under various attack models, in which an adversary can
modify the reward revealed to the player. Previous studies focused on scenarios where the attack value either is bounded
at each round or has a vanishing probability of occurrence.
These models do not capture powerful adversaries that can
catastrophically perturb the revealed reward. This paper investigates the attack model where an adversary attacks with a
certain probability at each round, and its attack value can be
arbitrary and unbounded if it attacks. Furthermore, the attack
value does not necessarily follow a statistical distribution.
We propose a novel sample median-based and explorationaided UCB algorithm (called med-E-UCB) and a medianbased -greedy algorithm (called med--greedy). Both of
these algorithms are provably robust to the aforementioned
attack model. More speciﬁcally we show that both algorithms
achieve O(log T ) pseudo-regret (i.e., the optimal regret without attacks). We also provide a high probability guarantee of
O(log T ) regret with respect to random rewards and random
occurrence of attacks. These bounds are achieved under arbitrary and unbounded reward perturbation as long as the attack
probability does not exceed a certain constant threshold. We
provide multiple synthetic simulations of the proposed algorithms to verify these claims and showcase the inability of existing techniques to achieve sublinear regret. We also provide
experimental results of the algorithm operating in a cognitive
radio setting using multiple software-deﬁned radios.

1

Introduction

Stochastic multi-armed bandit models capture the scenarios
where a player devises a strategy in order to access the optimal arm as often as possible. Such models have been used in
a broad range of applications including news article recommendation (Li et al. 2010), online advertising (Pandey et al.
2007), medical treatment allocation (Kuleshov and Precup
2014), and adaptive packet routing (Awerbuch and Kleinberg 2004). As security concerns have a critical impact in
these applications, stochastic multi-armed bandit models under adversarial attacks have attracted extensive attention. A
variety of attack models have been studied under the multic 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4036

