The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Multi-Level Dependencies for Robust Word Recognition
Zhiwei Wang,1∗ Hui Liu,1 Jiliang Tang,1 Songfan Yang,2 Gale Yan Huang,2 Zitao Liu2†
Michigan State University, {wangzh65, liuhui7, tangjili}@msu.edu
TAI AI Lab, TAL Education Group, {yangsongfan, galehuang, liuzitao}@100tal.com
1

2

In spite of the fact that a human can read the above sentence with little difﬁculty, it can cause a complete failure to
existing natural language processing systems such as Google
Translation Engine 2 . Building robust natural language processing systems is becoming increasingly important nowadays given severe consequences that can be made by adversarial samples (Xu et al. 2019c): carefully misspelled
spam emails that fool spam detection systems (Fumera, Pillai, and Roli 2006) deliberately designed input sentences that
force chatbot to emit offensive language (Wolf, Miller, and
Grodzinsky 2017; Dinan et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019), etc.
Thus, in this work, we focus on building a word recognition
framework which can denoise the misspellings such as those
shown in the Cambridge sentence. As suggested by psycholinguistic studies (Rayner, White, and Liversedge 2006;
Davis 2012), the humans can comprehend text that is noised
by jumbling internal characters while leaving the ﬁrst and
last characters of a word unchanged. Thus, an ideal word
recognition model is expected to emulate robustness of human language processing mechanism.
The beneﬁts of such framework are two-folds. The ﬁrst
is its recognition ability can be straightforwardly used to
correct misspellings. The second is its contribution to the
robustness of other natural language processing systems.
By serving as a denoising component, the word recognition framework can ﬁrstly clean the noised sentences before
they are inputted into other natural language processing systems (Pruthi, Dhingra, and Lipton 2019; Zhou et al. 2019).
From the human perspective, there are two types of information that play an essential role for us to recognize the
noised words (Perea et al. 2015). The ﬁrst is the characterlevel dependencies. Take the word ‘wlohe’ in the Cambridge
sentences as an example, it is extremely rare to see a ‘w’ sits
next to an ‘l’ in an English word. Instead, it is more natural
with ‘wh’. Thus, it is quite easy for humans to narrow down
possible correct forms of ‘wlohe’ to be ‘whole’ or ‘whelo’.
To ensure that it should be ‘whole’, we often need the second type of information: context information such as ‘but the
wrod as a wlohe.’, which is denoted as word-level dependencies in this paper. Intuitively, an effective word recognition framework should capture these multi-level depen-

Abstract
Robust language processing systems are becoming increasingly important given the recent awareness of dangerous situations where brittle machine learning models can be easily broken with the presence of noises. In this paper, we introduce a robust word recognition framework that captures
multi-level sequential dependencies in noised sentences. The
proposed framework employs a sequence-to-sequence model
over characters of each word, whose output is given to a
word-level bi-directional recurrent neural network. We conduct extensive experiments to verify the effectiveness of the
framework. The results show that the proposed framework
outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin and
they also suggest that character-level dependencies can play
an important role in word recognition. The code of the proposed framework and the major experiments are publicly
available1 .

Introduction
Most of the widely used language processing systems have
been built on neural networks that are highly effective,
achieving the performance comparable to humans (Devlin
et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2018). They are
also very brittle, however, as they could be easily broken with the presence of noises (Belinkov and Bisk 2017;
Zhao, Dua, and Singh 2017; Ebrahimi et al. 2017). However, the language processing mechanism of humans are
very robust. One representative example is the following
Cambridge sentence:
Aoccdrnig to a rscheearch at Cmabrigde Uinervtisy, it
deosn’t mttaer in waht oredr the ltteers in a wrod are,
the olny iprmoetnt tihng is taht the frist and lsat ltteer
be at the rghit pclae. The rset can be a toatl mses and
you can sitll raed it wouthit porbelm. Tihs is bcuseae
the huamn mnid deos not raed ervey lteter by istlef, but
the wrod as a wlohe.
∗

Work was done when interned at TAL AI Lab
The corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/DSE-MSU/MUDE
†

2

9250

https://translate.google.com/

