The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Source Domain Adaptation for Text Classiﬁcation via DistanceNet-Bandits
Han Guo, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{hanguo, ram, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Two major research areas in domain adaptation include
supervised domain adaptation and unsupervised domain
adaptation. In the former setup, limited training data from
the target domain is available to provide supervision signals (Daumé III 2009), whereas in the latter case, only unlabeled data from the target domain is available (Ganin et al.
2016; Long et al. 2017; Bousmalis et al. 2016; Sun, Feng,
and Saenko 2016; Sun and Saenko 2016; Tzeng et al. 2017).
In this work, we focus on the unsupervised domain adaptation. It has been shown that the domain adaptation performance is inﬂuenced by three major (and orthogonal) factors (Ben-David et al. 2010). The ﬁrst factor is the model
performance on the source task, which beneﬁts from recent
advancements in neural models and is orthogonal to our focus. The second factor is the difference in the labeling functions across domains, which is inherent to the nature of the
dataset and expected to be small in practice (Ben-David et al.
2010). The third factor represents a measure of divergence
of data distributions – if the data distribution between the
source and target domain is similar, we can reasonably expect a model trained on the source domain to perform well
on the target domain. Our work primarily focuses on the last
factor and aims to study the following two questions in the
context of NLP: how to accurately estimate the dissimilarity between a pair of domains (Sec. 3 and Sec. 6), and how
to leverage these domain dissimilarity measures to improve
domain adaptation learning (Sec. 4 and Sec. 7).

Abstract
Domain adaptation performance of a learning algorithm on
a target domain is a function of its source domain error and
a divergence measure between the data distribution of these
two domains. We present a study of various distance-based
measures in the context of NLP tasks, that characterize the
dissimilarity between domains based on sample estimates.
We ﬁrst conduct analysis experiments to show which of these
distance measures can best differentiate samples from same
versus different domains, and are correlated with empirical
results. Next, we develop a DistanceNet model which uses
these distance measures, or a mixture of these distance measures, as an additional loss function to be minimized jointly
with the task’s loss function, so as to achieve better unsupervised domain adaptation. Finally, we extend this model to
a novel DistanceNet-Bandit model, which employs a multiarmed bandit controller to dynamically switch between multiple source domains and allow the model to learn an optimal trajectory and mixture of domains for transfer to the lowresource target domain. We conduct experiments on popular
sentiment analysis datasets with several diverse domains and
show that our DistanceNet model, as well as its dynamic bandit variant, can outperform competitive baselines in the context of unsupervised domain adaptation.

1

Introduction

In situations where large-scale annotated datasets are available, supervised learning algorithms have achieved remarkable progress in various NLP challenges (LeCun, Bengio,
and Hinton 2015). Most supervised learning algorithms rely
on the assumption that data distribution during training is
the same as that during test. However, in many real-life scenarios, the data distribution of interest at test-time might be
different from that during training. The process of collecting
new datasets that reﬂect the new distribution is usually not
scalable due to monetary as well as time constraints. Hence,
the goal of domain adaptation is to construct a learning algorithm, which, given samples of observations from a source
domain, is able to adapt its performance to a target domain
where the data distribution could be different.

To this end, we ﬁrst provide a detailed study (comparison,
models, and analyses) of several domain distance measures
from the literature, with the goal of scalability (easy to calculate), differentiability (can be minimized), and interpretability (in a simple analytical form with well-studied properties),
namely L2 , Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton
et al. 2012), Fisher Linear Discriminant (FDA) (Friedman,
Hastie, and Tibshirani 2001), Cosine, and Correlation Alignment (CORAL) (Sun, Feng, and Saenko 2016). We start by
deﬁning these distance measures in Sec. 3, and provide a set
of analyses to assess them in Sec. 6: (1) the ability of these
distance measures to separate domains, and (2) the correlation between these distance measures and empirical results.
From these analyses, we note that there does not exist a single best distance measure that ﬁts all, and each measure pro-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7830

