The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CF-LSTM: Cascaded Feature-Based Long
Short-Term Networks for Predicting Pedestrian Trajectory
Yi Xu,1 Jing Yang,1∗ Shaoyi Du2†
2

1
Institute of Control Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
colorfulfuture@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {jasmine1976, dushaoyi}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is an important but difﬁcult
task in self-driving or autonomous mobile robot ﬁeld because there are complex unpredictable human-human interactions in crowded scenarios. There have been a large number
of studies that attempt to understand humans’ social behavior. However, most of these studies extract location features
from previous one time step while neglecting the vital velocity features. In order to address this issue, we propose a
novel feature-cascaded framework for long short-term network (CF-LSTM) without extra artiﬁcial settings or social
rules. In this framework, feature information from previous
two time steps are ﬁrstly extracted and then integrated as a
cascaded feature to LSTM, which is able to capture the previous location information and dynamic velocity information,
simultaneously. In addition, this scene-agnostic cascaded feature is the external manifestation of complex human-human
interactions, which can also effectively capture dynamic interaction information in different scenes without any other
pedestrians’ information. Experiments on public benchmark
datasets indicate that our model achieves better performance
than the state-of-the-art methods and this feature-cascaded
framework has the ability to implicitly learn human-human
interactions.

Figure 1: An illustration of a common scene where static interactions and dynamic interactions both occur. The pedestrian who is under an umbrella (framed by red dashed line)
has static interactions with stationary obstacles (tree and
bench), dynamic interactions with two other pedestrians,
which has inﬂuences on his/her future trajectory.

on the future trajectory occur in the scene. It mainly contains
two kinds shown in Figure 1: (1) static interactions caused
by stationary obstacles or some other certain objects in the
scene, which is straightforward and understandable; (2) dynamic interactions that take place among pedestrians, which
is nearly impossible to quantify such complex and often subtle human-human interactions.
Recently, a large number of LSTM-based models (Alahi
et al. 2016; Bisagno, Zhang, and Conci 2018) are proposed
to try to address this issue, and various mechanisms are designed to learn dynamic interactions (Vemula, Muelling, and
Oh 2018; Chandra et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019), deﬁning three inputs: (1) feature information of current location,
(2) feature information from previous one time step, and (3)
feature information of dynamic interactions. Although these
models achieve competitive performance, they are still incomplete and far from comprehensive, here are two limitations.
a. Feature information from previous one time step is
insufﬁcient.
Usually, hidden state in LSTM from previous one time

Introduction
Trajectory prediction of pedestrians has many applications in various ﬁelds such as autonomous driving (Lerner,
Chrysanthou, and Lischinski 2010), robot navigation (Luo et
al. 2018; Pellegrini et al. 2009; Vivacqua et al. 2017; Thrun
et al. 2002) and surveillance camera analysis (Leonard and
Durrant-Whyte 1990; Trautman and Krause 2010) Estimating the future positions of pedestrians accurately is necessary and beneﬁcial for such tasks (Luber et al. 2010). A big
challenge for trajectory prediction of pedestrians is that there
are many different interactions which have great inﬂuences
∗

Yi Xu and Jing Yang contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under
Grant No. 2017YFA0700800, and the National Natural Science
Foundation under Grant No. 61971343, 61773147 and 61573274.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12541

