The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Temporal Context Enhanced Feature Aggregation for Video Object Detection
Fei He,1,2 Naiyu Gao,1,2 Qiaozhe Li,1,2 Senyao Du,3 Xin Zhao,1,2 Kaiqi Huang1,2,4
1

CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Horizon Robotics
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{hefei2018, gaonaiyu2017, liqiaozhe2015}@ia.ac.cn, senyao.du@horizon.ai, {xzhao, kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

rare poses

normal

Abstract
Video object detection is a challenging task because of the
presence of appearance deterioration in certain video frames.
One typical solution is to aggregate neighboring features
to enhance per-frame appearance features. However, such a
method ignores the temporal relations between the aggregated frames, which is critical for improving video recognition accuracy. To handle the appearance deterioration problem, this paper proposes a temporal context enhanced network (TCENet) to exploit temporal context information by
temporal aggregation for video object detection. To handle
the displacement of the objects in videos, a novel DeformAlign module is proposed to align the spatial features from
frame to frame. Instead of adopting a ﬁxed-length window fusion strategy, a temporal stride predictor is proposed to adaptively select video frames for aggregation, which facilitates
exploiting variable temporal information and requiring fewer
video frames for aggregation to achieve better results. Our
TCENet achieves state-of-the-art performance on the ImageNet VID dataset and has a faster runtime. Without bellsand-whistles, our TCENet achieves 80.3% mAP by only aggregating 3 frames.

occlusion

method
(a)

ǥ

ǥ

ǥ

method
(b)

ǥ

ǥ

ǥ

method
(c)

ǥ

ǥ

ǥ

‫ݐ‬

Figure 1: Examples of object appearance deterioration in
video object detection. Method (a) is an image-based detector, method (b) is a detector employing the spatial feature
enhanced aggregation method, method (c) is our proposed
TCENet employing the temporal context enhanced aggregation method. When the zebra moves to a rare pose or is
occluded, the image-based detector fails to obtain a correct
box. Method (b) can help improve the results but it still performs inaccurate. TCENet performs the most accurate results among these methods.

Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved remarkable results in this task, including (Ren et al. 2015;
Redmon et al. 2016; Dai et al. 2016). Although they have
been successfully applied to image-based object detection,
video object detection remains a challenging problem. Object appearances in videos are usually deteriorated by motion blur or part occlusion, which are extremely difﬁcult for
image-based detectors.
To handle the object appearance deterioration problem,
one straightforward solution is to consider the rich temporal and motion context in videos and leverage information
from neighboring frames. Some methods (Kang et al. 2016;
2017; Han et al. 2016) exploit the video context in a postprocessing manner, in which frame-based bounding boxes
are ﬁrstly predicted by an image detector and then linked

across time. However, these post-processing procedures cannot be uniﬁed into an end-to-end trainable framework. In
contrast, some methods (Zhu et al. 2017a; Wang et al. 2018a;
Bertasius, Torresani, and Shi 2018) attempt to exploit the
video context to improve the per-frame feature by intuitive
feature fusion. In these methods, ﬁxed-length neighboring
frames are used to enhance the appearance features at a reference frame, which is hereinafter referred to as spatial feature enhanced aggregation (SFEA) method. However, such
SFEA approaches may ignore the temporal relations between the aggregated frames. Speciﬁcally, the performance
of these methods is almost unaffected when shufﬂing the order of aggregated frames. It indicates that these models may
not beneﬁt from the temporal context modeling by ignoring
the order of aggregated frames. By only performing appearance feature representation, it may be difﬁcult to recognize
some objects with severe appearance deterioration, such as
rare poses, part occlusion.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10941

