The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Co-Attention Hierarchical Network: Generating
Coherent Long Distractors for Reading Comprehension
Xiaorui Zhou,1 Senlin Luo,1 Yunfang Wu2∗
2

1
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology
MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
{zhouxr, luosenlin}@bit.edu.cn, wuyf@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Shyness is the cause of much unhappiness for a great many people.
Shy people are anxious and self-conscious; that is, they are over
concerned with their own appearance and actions. … It is clear that,
while self-awareness is a healthy quality, overdoing it is harmful.
Can shyness be completely got rid of ,or at least reduced? … Living
on the impossible leads to absence of inferiority. Each one of us has
his or her own characteristics. We are interested in our own personal
ways. The better we understand ourselves. the easier it becomes to
live up to our chances for a rich and fulfilling life
.------question-----We can learn from the passage that shyness can
------original distractor-----help us to live up to our full development.
enable us to understand ourselves better.
have nothing to do with lack of self esteem.
------original answer-----block our chances for a successful life.
------Generated distractors of our strongest baseline-----requires a lot of wealth.
provides a lot of people 's attention.
requires a lot of people to seek help.
------Generated distractors of our proposed model-----leads people 's feeling of humor.
decides people 's own characteristics.
decides people 's emotional image and actions.

In reading comprehension, generating sentence-level distractors is a signiﬁcant task, which requires a deep understanding of the article and question. The traditional entity-centered
methods can only generate word-level or phrase-level distractors. Although recently proposed neural-based methods like
sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) model show great potential
in generating creative text, the previous neural methods for
distractor generation ignore two important aspects. First, they
didn’t model the interactions between the article and question, making the generated distractors tend to be too general or not relevant to question context. Second, they didn’t
emphasize the relationship between the distractor and article,
making the generated distractors not semantically relevant to
the article and thus fail to form a set of meaningful options. To
solve the ﬁrst problem, we propose a co-attention enhanced
hierarchical architecture to better capture the interactions between the article and question, thus guide the decoder to generate more coherent distractors. To alleviate the second problem, we add an additional semantic similarity loss to push the
generated distractors more relevant to the article. Experimental results show that our model outperforms several strong
baselines on automatic metrics, achieving state-of-the-art performance. Further human evaluation indicates that our generated distractors are more coherent and more educative compared with those distractors generated by baselines.

Figure 1: An example from our dataset, with the generated
distractors of our strongest baseline and our proposed model,
we use colors and underlines to indicate the semantic connection between MCQ segments and the article text.

Introduction
Reading comprehension (RC) is an advanced cognitive activity of human beings, which involves interpretation of
the text and making complex inferences (Chen, Bolton,
and Manning 2016). The most popular form of assessment
for reading comprehension is Multiple Choice Question
(MCQ), since MCQs have many advantages including quick
evaluation, less testing time, consistent scoring, and automatic evaluation (RAO CH and Saha 2018). Besides the article itself, a MCQ consists of three elements: (i) stem, the
question body; (ii) key, the correct answer; (iii) distractors,
alternative answers used to distract examinees from the correct answer. The effectiveness of MCQs depends not only

on the validity of the question and the correct answer, but
also on the quality of distactors (Goodrich 1977). Among
all methods for creating good MCQs, ﬁnding reasonable
distractors is crucial and usually the most time-consuming
(Liang et al. 2018).
In real examinations, a question for reading comprehension usually requires summarizing the article, or making
inferences about a certain detail in the article. Figure 1
shows an example of MCQ from the RACE (Lai et al. 2017)
dataset, which records real English exams for middle and
high school Chinese students. Different from the SQuAD
(Rajpurkar et al. 2016) dataset which is widely used in
RC research, in RACE the answer is a newly-generated se-

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9725

