The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cost-Accuracy Aware Adaptive Labeling for Active Learning
Ruijiang Gao

Maytal Saar-Tsechansky

University of Texas at Austin
ruijiang@utexas.edu

University of Texas at Austin
maytal@mail.utexas.udu

Turk (AMT), have emerged to offer unprecedented scalability towards such tasks. Nevertheless, in the settings we consider here, selecting labelers’ (and corresponding costs and
accuracies) and the instances they will label to produce the
best model at a given cost remains an open problem.
Traditional active learning (Lewis and Gale 1994; Gal,
Islam, and Ghahramani 2017; Tang and Huang 2019) has received signiﬁcant attention, and considers the problem of selecting instances for labeling when a single labeler produces
labels at the same, ﬁxed cost and with perfect labeling accuracy. Because labels of all instances are assumed to have the
same accuracy and cost, traditional active learning frameworks aim to identify the most informative training instances
from which to induce a model. However, in many real settings, acquiring labels from labelers presents greater complexity. AMT, for example, offers access to workers from
around the world, with different expertise and varying costs.
Indeed, prior social science research has shown that different
payments lead to different qualities of work, and that different relationships between payment and quality can arise at
different times or for different tasks (Mason and Watts 2009;
Kazai 2011; Kazai, Kamps, and Milic-Frayling 2013).
More recent work considered multiple noisy workers,
yet assumed that either all labelers exhibit the same quality (Ipeirotis et al. 2014; Lin, Weld, and others 2014;
Donmez, Carbonell, and Schneider 2010), or that all labelers have the same cost per label and that the labeling quality is independent of the instance being labeled
(Donmez, Carbonell, and Schneider 2009; Yan et al. 2011;
2014). The closest work to the problem we consider here
is by Huang et al. (2017), where instance difﬁculty, labeler expertise, and varying costs across labelers are considered. Huang et al. (2017) use a different criterion to select labelers and instance than the one we develop here; as
we discuss below, in the most common setting in practice,
where labelers are not adversarial (Ipeirotis et al. 2014;
Yan et al. 2011; Lin, Weld, and others 2014; Donmez, Carbonell, and Schneider 2009), this criterion appears to be
prone to consistently choose low payment options, even
when the labeling quality is poor and such choices undermine learning signiﬁcantly.
In this paper, we propose a novel criterion utilizing gen-

Abstract
Conventional active learning algorithms assume a single labeler that produces noiseless label at a given, ﬁxed cost, and
aim to achieve the best generalization performance for given
classiﬁer under a budget constraint. However, in many real
settings, different labelers have different labeling costs and
can yield different labeling accuracies. Moreover, a given labeler may exhibit different labeling accuracies for different
instances. This setting can be referred to as active learning
with diverse labelers with varying costs and accuracies, and
it arises in many important real settings. It is therefore beneﬁcial to understand how to effectively trade-off between labeling accuracy for different instances, labeling costs, as well as
the informativeness of training instances, so as to achieve the
best generalization performance at the lowest labeling cost.
In this paper, we propose a new algorithm for selecting instances, labelers (and their corresponding costs and labeling
accuracies), that employs generalization bound of learning
with label noise to select informative instances and labelers so
as to achieve higher generalization accuracy at a lower cost.
Our proposed algorithm demonstrates state-of-the-art performance on ﬁve UCI and a real crowdsourcing dataset.

Introduction
Supervised learning has achieved great successes over the
years and has a signiﬁcant impact on practice in a growing
variety of predictive tasks. In many settings, however, labels
for training instances are not readily available, but can be
acquired from different labelers at different costs; often, different labelers may exhibit varying labeling accuracies, and
a given labeler can have different labeling accuracies across
different instances, possibly as a result of experience or prior
knowledge. Given this setting and a model induction algorithm, it is important to understand how to best select labelers and instances they will label so as to induce a model with
the highest generalization performance for a given labeling
cost. In practice, such challenges arise in important applications, where scientists, medical professionals, or crowd of
lay workers can be used to label a possibly large number
of instances. In recent years, large-scale crowdsourcing and
online labor market platforms, such as Amazon Mechanical
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2569

