The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bayes-Adaptive Monte-Carlo Planning and Learning for Goal-Oriented Dialogues
Youngsoo Jang,1 Jongmin Lee,1 Kee-Eung Kim1,2
1
2

School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{ysjang, jmlee}@ai.kaist.ac.kr, kekim@kaist.ac.kr

other agent (Lewis et al. 2017; Yarats and Lewis 2018), but
these remedies do not fundamentally address the problem.
As for the issue of diverging from human language, interleaving reinforcement learning (i.e. goal-based training) and
supervised learning (i.e. maximum-likelihood training) has
been proposed and widely adopted, but it still suffers from
divergence from human language even with carefully chosen
hyper-parameters. Recently, latent representation models for
actions (or sentences) (Yarats and Lewis 2018; Zhao, Xie,
and Eskénazi 2019) have been proposed to disentangle the
semantics of the utterance and the natural language generation. In the framework, goal-based training was performed in
the space of the latent variables instead of directly optimizing utterances. While these approaches can successfully prevent diverging from human language in principle, their goalbased learning process relying on the REINFORCE gradient
update is still unstable and is prone to local optima.

Abstract
We consider a strategic dialogue task, where the ability to infer the other agent’s goal is critical to the success of the conversational agent. While this problem can be naturally formulated as Bayesian planning, it is known to be a very difﬁcult problem due to its enormous search space consisting
of all possible utterances. In this paper, we introduce an efﬁcient Bayes-adaptive planning algorithm for goal-oriented
dialogues, which combines RNN-based dialogue generation
and MCTS-based Bayesian planning in a novel way, leading to robust decision-making under the uncertainty of the
other agent’s goal. We then introduce reinforcement learning for the dialogue agent that uses MCTS as a strong policy improvement operator, casting reinforcement learning
as iterative alternation of planning and supervised-learning
of self-generated dialogues. In the experiments, we demonstrate that our Bayes-adaptive dialogue planning agent signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art in a negotiation dialogue domain. We also show that reinforcement learning via
MCTS further improves end-task performance without diverging from human language.

In this paper, we introduce Bayes-adaptive dialogue planning (BADP), which integrates dialogue generation based
on RNN and approximate Bayes-optimal planning based on
Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) in a novel way. BADP assumes a generative model for sampling dialogue utterances,
typically represented by RNN conditioned on the dialogue
history and the goal of the other agent. Then, it searches
for the best response among the sampled utterances, while
maintaining the posterior distribution over the goals of the
other agent. This allows BADP to simultaneously keep the
dialogue natural to human and to be robust to the uncertainty of the other agent’s intent. BADP tames the curse of
dimensionality and the curse of history in Bayesian planning by adopting sample-based tree search and root sampling that avoids repeated expensive posterior update within
the tree search, as introduced in Bayes-adaptive MonteCarlo planning (BAMCP) (Guez, Silver, and Dayan 2012;
2013).

Introduction
Building an end-to-end conversational agent for the goaloriented dialogue is one of the most promising applications
of artiﬁcial intelligence, yet very challenging mainly due to
the following two reasons: First, since the other agent’s goal
is not directly observable, the agent should be able to plan
under the uncertainty of the other agent’s goal. While this
can be naturally formulated as Bayesian planning, computing Bayes-optimal policy itself is generally infeasible except
for very small-scale problems. Second, optimizing the agent
through goal-based training by vanilla reinforcement learning (e.g. REINFORCE) is inefﬁcient and unstable due to the
high variance of policy gradient estimator, and it typically
leads to divergence from human language (Lewis et al. 2017;
Buck et al. 2018).
Due to the inherent difﬁculty of Bayesian planning, existing works for the end-to-end goal-based dialogue agent
either do not perform multi-step planning or just adopt a
simple dialogue rollout with an arbitrarily ﬁxed goal of the

We then leverage this approach for the reinforcement
learning of the goal-oriented dialogue agent, which uses
MCTS as a powerful policy improvement operator. MCTS
explores combinatorial action sequences thus its search result can be dramatically better than the simple one-step
greedy action, as can be seen from the great success of Alpha(Go) Zero (Silver et al. 2017; 2018). Therefore, super-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7994

