The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Stochastic Online Learning with Probabilistic Graph Feedback
Shuai Li,1 Wei Chen,2 Zheng Wen,3 Kwong-Sak Leung4
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Microsoft Research, 3 DeepMind, 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
1
shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn, 2 weic@microsoft.com, 3 zhengwen@google.com, 4 ksleung@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

and Shamir 2011; Alon et al. 2015a; Kocák et al. 2014;
Cohen, Hazan, and Koren 2016; Kocák, Neu, and Valko
2016b) and stochastic settings (Caron et al. 2012; Buccapatnam, Eryilmaz, and Shroff 2014; Tossou, Dimitrakakis, and
Dubhashi 2017; Wu, György, and Szepesvári 2015). While
many of them assume self-loops on the feedback graphs,
some succeed to remove this assumption (Alon et al. 2015a;
Wu, György, and Szepesvári 2015) where the reward of
the selected action might be invisible. This general setting
would ﬁt into the partial monitoring framework (Bartók et
al. 2014; Komiyama, Honda, and Nakagawa 2015), but the
literature on the latter mainly focus on ﬁnite case where the
possible outcomes are ﬁnite. We also consider general feedback graphs that do not assume self-loops.

Abstract
We consider a problem of stochastic online learning with general probabilistic graph feedback, where each directed edge
in the feedback graph has probability pij . Two cases are covered. (a) The one-step case, where after playing arm i the
learner observes a sample reward feedback of arm j with independent probability pij . (b) The cascade case where after playing arm i the learner observes feedback of all arms
j in a probabilistic cascade starting from i – for each (i, j)
with probability pij , if arm i is played or observed, then a
reward sample of arm j would be observed with independent
probability pij . Previous works mainly focus on deterministic
graphs which corresponds to one-step case with pij ∈ {0, 1},
an adversarial sequence of graphs with certain topology guarantees, or a speciﬁc type of random graphs. We analyze the
asymptotic lower bounds and design algorithms in both cases.
The regret upper bounds of the algorithms match the lower
bounds with high probability.

1

Though some studies assume feedback graphs could vary
over time or even invisible to the learner before selecting
actions (Kocák et al. 2014; Tossou, Dimitrakakis, and Dubhashi 2017), most works focus on deterministic graphs or
an adversarial list of graphs with certain topology guarantees. To the best of our knowledge, only a few of them work
on probabilistic graphs with (Kocák, Neu, and Valko 2016a;
Alon et al. 2017) on adversarial case and (Liu, Buccapatnam, and Shroff 2018) on stochastic case and they only discuss about Erdös-Rényi random graphs (Erdős and Rényi
1960). Recall that an Erdös-Rényi graph with parameter p
is by random sampling the edge of every pair of nodes with
probability p independently.

Introduction

Stochastic online learning is a general framework of sequential decision problem. At each time, the learner selects (or
plays) an action from a given ﬁnite action set, receives some
random reward and observes some random feedback. One
simplest, though often unrealistic, feedback model is fullinformation feedback where the learning agent can observe
the random rewards of all actions no matter which action
is selected. Another popular feedback model is bandit feedback where only the random reward of the selected action
is revealed to the learner (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer
2002). Recent studies further generalize them to graph feedback where the feedback model is characterized by a (directed) graph (Mannor and Shamir 2011). Each edge (i, j)
means the learner will observe the random reward of action
j if playing action i. This problem is motivated by advertisements where the response for a vacation advertisement could
provide side-information for a similar vacation place and social networks where the response from a user to a promotion
could infer her neighbors to similar offers.
The problem of online learning with graph feedback
has been extensively studied in both adversarial (Mannor

We consider general probabilistic feedback graphs in both
the one-step case and the cascade case. The one-step case is
the usual one where the learner observes reward of j if edge
(i, j) exists in the random graph and i is selected. The cascade case assumes the learner observes reward of j if there
is a (directed) path from i to j in the random graph and i
is selected. The observations of the cascade case, in other
words, follow a probabilistic cascading starting from the selected action — for each edge (i, j) with probability pij , if
action i is either played or observed, then with an independent probability pij a random reward sample of action j will
be observed. As a motivating example, consider the information propagation in social networks. If selecting a user in
a social network causes an information cascade in the social
network, one may be able to observe further feedback from

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4675

