The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Object-Guided Instance Segmentation for Biological Images
Jingru Yi,1∗ Hui Tang,2 Pengxiang Wu,1 Bo Liu,1 Daniel J. Hoeppner,3
Dimitris N. Metaxas,1 Lianyi Han,2 Wei Fan2
1

Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
2
Tencent Hippocrates Research Labs, Palo Alto, CA94306, USA
3
Lieber Institute for Brain Development, MD 21205, USA
jy486@cs.rutgers.edu

based instance segmentation. Box-free instance segmentation methods segment the object instances by analyzing the
instance morphology properties (e.g., object contours, textures, and shapes) without the aid of object bounding boxes.
Box-free instance segmentation methods usually suffer from
separating the touching objects. For example, DCAN (Chen
et al. 2016) and Deep Watershed (Bai and Urtasun 2017) are
prone to over-segmentation in the scenarios of unclear object boundaries. Cosine Embedding (Payer et al. 2018a) separates the touching objects through pixel embedding clustering, but it tends to generate fragmentary segmentation. Some
other methods, such as StarDist (Schmidt et al. 2018), try to
solve the clustering problem using object shape information,
yet their application is limited to convex-shape objects.

Abstract
Instance segmentation of biological images is essential for
studying object behaviors and properties. The challenges,
such as clustering, occlusion, and adhesion problems of the
objects, make instance segmentation a non-trivial task. Current box-free instance segmentation methods typically rely
on local pixel-level information. Due to a lack of global
object view, these methods are prone to over- or undersegmentation. On the contrary, the box-based instance segmentation methods incorporate object detection into the segmentation, performing better in identifying the individual instances. In this paper, we propose a new box-based instance
segmentation method. Mainly, we locate the object bounding boxes from their center points. The object features are
subsequently reused in the segmentation branch as a guide to
separate the clustered instances within an RoI patch. Along
with the instance normalization, the model is able to recover
the target object distribution and suppress the distribution
of neighboring attached objects. Consequently, the proposed
model performs excellently in segmenting the clustered objects while retaining the target object details. The proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art performances on three biological datasets: cell nuclei, plant phenotyping dataset, and
neural cells.

Box-based instance segmentation methods combine object detection and segmentation. They locate the bounding
boxes of the objects from a global perspective and subsequently reﬁne the instance segmentation within a cropped
region of interest (RoI) patch. An accurate object detector plays a crucial role in the box-based instance segmentation methods. The current box-based instance segmentation methods (He et al. 2017; Yi et al. 2019c; 2019a) generally adopt the anchor box-based object detectors, which
spread the anchor boxes densely on the feature maps and
predict the offsets to the anchor boxes. However, the anchor
box-based object detector suffers from a severe imbalance
issue between the positive and negative anchor boxes, which
would result in slow training and sub-optimal detection performances (Law and Deng 2018). Also, the RoIAlign-based
methods, such as Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017), predict
coarse segmentation masks for objects within the ﬁxed-size
RoI patches (e.g., 14 × 14), losing the ﬁne details of the
objects. Keypoint Graph (Yi et al. 2019b) proposes to use
the keypoint-based object detector and a separate segmentation branch to solve these issues. When achieving better
performance, it fails to localize the small objects where the
ﬁve keypoint circles of a bounding box would overlap. To
deal with this problem, several works (Ribera et al. 2019;
Zhou, Wang, and Krähenbühl 2019) suggest locating objects
through their center points. The center keypoint detection allows more small objects to be localized. Besides, detecting
only one keypoint for each instance removes the complex

Introduction
Instance segmentation is a task that assigns the instance labels to every pixel of the input images. In biological images,
instance segmentation is a fundamental step in analyzing the
object behaviors and properties, such as cell interaction, nuclei treatment reaction, and plant phenotyping. Instance segmentation of biological images is challenging due to the object clustering, adhesion, and occlusion. Besides, the biological tasks usually require capturing the ﬁne details of the instances, such as the leaf stalking and cell protrusions. A fast
and accurate instance segmentation tool will beneﬁt a lot to
the biological society.
Existing methods of instance segmentation can be divided
into two types: box-free instance segmentation and box∗
This work was funded partly by NSF 1763523, 1747778,
1733843, 1703883 grants.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12677

