The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relational Learning for Joint Head and Human Detection
Cheng Chi,1,3∗ Shifeng Zhang,2,3∗† Junliang Xing,2,3 Zhen Lei,2,3 Stan Z. Li,2,3,4 Xudong Zou1,3
1

Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macao, China
chicheng15@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {shifeng.zhang, jlxing, zlei, szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, xdzou@mail.ie.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Head and human detection have been rapidly improved with
the development of deep convolutional neural networks.
However, these two tasks are often studied separately without considering their inherent correlation, leading to that 1)
head detection is often trapped in more false positives, and
2) the performance of human detector frequently drops dramatically in crowd scenes. To handle these two issues, we
present a novel joint head and human detection network,
namely JointDet, which effectively detects head and human
body simultaneously. Moreover, we design a head-body relationship discriminating module to perform relational learning
between heads and human bodies, and leverage this learned
relationship to regain the suppressed human detections and
reduce head false positives. To verify the effectiveness of
the proposed method, we annotate head bounding boxes of
the CityPersons and Caltech-USA datasets, and conduct extensive experiments on the CrowdHuman, CityPersons and
Caltech-USA datasets. As a consequence, the proposed JointDet detector achieves state-of-the-art performance on these
three benchmarks. To facilitate further studies on the head
and human detection problem, all new annotations, source
codes and trained models are available at https://github.com/
ChiCheng123/JointDet.

(a) Remove head false positives

(b) Recall suppressed bodies

Figure 1: Effectiveness of JointDet. (a) Remove head false
positives: red bounding boxes are the head detection results,
and yellow dotted bounding boxes are the removed false
positives. (b) Recall missing bodies: red bounding boxes are
the human detection results after NMS, and green bounding
boxes are the recalled results from suppressed detections.

Introduction

utilizes spatial semantic relations between pedestrian head
and other body parts. However, how to reduce the false positives, such as hair, hands and elbows shown in Figure 1(a),
still remains an active research direction. Tracing the main
cause, the lack of adequate features and contextual informations is the main difﬁculty.
As for human detection, occlusion is one of the main
challenges, especially in the crowded scenes (Zhang et al.
2019b). Some efforts have been made to handle occlusion.
The repulsion loss proposed in (Wang et al. 2018) pushes
each proposal not only to approach its designated target,
but also to keep it away from the other ground truth objects and their corresponding designated proposals. The attention model (Zhang, Yang, and Schiele 2018) employs an
attention network employing an attention mechanism across
channels with guidances. The Bi-box model (Zhou and Yuan
2018) proposes a network to simultaneously detect pedestrian and estimate occlusion by regressing two bounding

Head and human detection are two important research topics
in computer vision ﬁeld with various applications, such as
human behavior analysis, intelligent video surveillance and
automatic driving. Although great progress has been made
by deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on general
object detection (Ren et al. 2017; Dai et al. 2016; Lin et
al. 2017a; Liu et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2017b; Zhang et al.
2018b), research in the realm of these two subtasks remains
challenging due to their characteristics.
Head detection has experienced tremendous development
in recent years. The context-aware CNN model (Vu, Osokin,
and Laptev 2015) employs a pairwise CNN to model pairwise relations among heads. The HeadNet (Chen et al. 2018)
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10647

