The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Causal Transfer for Imitation
Learning and Decision Making under Sensor-Shift
Jala Etesami, Philipp Geiger
Bosch Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence - BCAI
Robert Bosch GmbH
71272 Renningen, Germany
{Jalal.Etesami, Philipp.W.Geiger}@de.bosch.com

Abstract
Learning from demonstrations (LfD) is an efﬁcient paradigm
to train AI agents. But major issues arise when there are differences between (a) the demonstrator’s own sensory input, (b)
our sensors that observe the demonstrator and (c) the sensory
input of the agent we train.
In this paper, we propose a causal model-based framework for
transfer learning under such “sensor-shifts”, for two common
LfD tasks: (1) inferring the effect of the demonstrator’s actions
and (2) imitation learning. First we rigorously analyze, on the
population-level, to what extent the relevant underlying mechanisms (the action effects and the demonstrator policy) can
be identiﬁed and transferred from the available observations
together with prior knowledge of sensor characteristics. And
we device an algorithm to infer these mechanisms. Then we
introduce several proxy methods which are easier to calculate,
estimate from ﬁnite data and interpret than the exact solutions,
alongside theoretical bounds on their closeness to the exact
ones. We validate our two main methods on simulated and
semi-real world data.

1

Figure 1: In highway drone data, the indicator light of the
lead car would be missing, introducing a hidden common
cause between acceleration of demonstrator car and lane
changing behavior of the lead car.
Assume we want to use such data to learn, say, how an
acceleration action A of a “demonstrator car” affects the lane
changing behavior Z of a “lead car” in front of it on the
slower lane, as depicted in Figure 1. Slightly simplifying
reality, assume the indicator light of the lead car serves as
a perfect coordination device: it is on if and only if, subsequently, (1) the demonstrator car decelerates and (2) the lead
car changes lane to the fast lane. Now assume we just use
the variables recorded in the drone data, where the indicator
light is not contained, estimate P (Z|A) from it, and naively
consider it as the causal effect of A on Z.
This leads us to the conclusion that an agent in the place
of the demonstrator can arbitrarily chose any acceleration or
deceleration action as A, and the lead car will perfectly adapt
Z and only change lane when agent decelerates – which in
practice can lead to crashes. In the language of causal models
(Pearl 2009; Spirtes et al. 2000), the indicator light is a hidden
common cause (confounder).

Introduction

Motivation. Learning from demonstrations is an important
paradigm to train AI agents (Argall et al. 2009; Schaal 1999;
Ho and Ermon 2016; Jeon, Seo, and Kim 2018). Ideally, one
would like to harness as much cheaply available (and relevant) demonstrator data as possible. But major issues arise
when there are differences between the sensors of demonstrator, us and agent we train. When ignoring such issues, or
addressing them in a naive way, wrong and potentially harmful conclusions can result: about demonstrator’s behavior and
the demonstrator’s actions’ effects on the environment.

Main tasks, approach and contributions: In this paper,
we address learning from demonstrations (LfD) under sensorshift, i.e., when there are differences between (a) the demonstrator’s own sensory input, (b) our sensors that observe the
demonstrator and (c) the sensory input of the agent we train.
Speciﬁcally, we consider two closely related “subtasks” of
LfD: (1) inferring the effect of the demonstrator’s decisions
(as in Example 1) and (2) imitating the demonstrator.
Our approach is based on causal models (Pearl 2009;
Spirtes et al. 2000; Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017),

Example 1 (Highway drone data). In the development of
self-driving cars, recently drones have been deployed to ﬂy
over highways and record the behavior of human-driven cars
(Krajewski et al. 2018; Zhan et al. 2019). Clearly, in such
drone recordings, some crucial variables are either more noisy
than observed from within the car, or completely missing,
such as indicator lights.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10118

