The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Large-Scale Multi-View Subspace Clustering in Linear Time
Zhao Kang,1 Wangtao Zhou,1 Zhitong Zhao,1 Junming Shao,1 Meng Han,2∗ Zenglin Xu1,3∗
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
School of Management and Economics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
3
Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen 518055, China
{zkang, zlxu}@uestc.edu.cn

the application of subspace clustering from large-scale data
sets.
Recently, much work have been developed to accelerate
subspace clustering. For example, (Wang et al. 2014) proposes a data selection approach; a scalable SSC based on
orthogonal matching pursuit is developed in (You, Robinson, and Vidal 2016); a fast solver for SSC is proposed in
(Pourkamali-Anaraki and Becker 2018); accelerated LRR is
also developed (Fan et al. 2018; Xiao et al. 2015); a sampling approach is used in (Li and Zhao 2017). Unfortunately,
they all target for single-view scenario and can not deal with
multi-view data.
With the advance of information technology, many practical data come from multiple channels or appear in muliple
modalities, i.e., the same object can be described in different kinds of features (Kang et al. 2019c; Yin et al. 2018;
Zhan et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Yao et al. 2019; Tang
et al. 2019). Different feature sets often characterize different yet complementary information. For instance, an image can have heterogeneous features, such as Garbor, HoG,
SIFT, GIST, and LBP; an artical can be written in different
languages. Accordingly, it is crucial to develop multi-view
learning method to incorporate the useful informaiton from
different views.
There has been growing interest in developing multiview subspace clustering (MVSC) algorithms. For example,
MVSC (Gao et al. 2015) method learns a graph representation for each view and all graphs are assumed to share a
unique cluster matrix; (Cao et al. 2015) applies a diversity
term to explore the complementarity information; (Luo et al.
2018) explores both consistency and speciﬁcity of different
views; (Wang et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2017) perform MVSC
in latent representation; (Brbić and Kopriva 2018) imposes
both low-rank and sparsity constraints on the graph; (Kang
et al. 2019a; 2020) learn one partition for each view and
them perform a fusion in partition space. In terms of clustering accuracy, these methods are attractive. Nevertheless,
their computation efﬁciency, at least O(n2 k) complexity, is
largely ignored. In the era of big data, it has been witnessed
that many applications involve large-scale multi-view data.
Therefore, their severely unaffordable complexity precludes
MVSC from real-world applications with big data. More-

Abstract
A plethora of multi-view subspace clustering (MVSC) methods have been proposed over the past few years. Researchers
manage to boost clustering accuracy from different points of
view. However, many state-of-the-art MVSC algorithms, typically have a quadratic or even cubic complexity, are inefﬁcient and inherently difﬁcult to apply at large scales. In the
era of big data, the computational issue becomes critical. To
ﬁll this gap, we propose a large-scale MVSC (LMVSC) algorithm with linear order complexity. Inspired by the idea of
anchor graph, we ﬁrst learn a smaller graph for each view.
Then, a novel approach is designed to integrate those graphs
so that we can implement spectral clustering on a smaller
graph. Interestingly, it turns out that our model also applies to
single-view scenario. Extensive experiments on various largescale benchmark data sets validate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of our approach with respect to state-of-the-art clustering methods.

Introduction
During the last decade, subspace clustering has been explored extensively due to its promising performance (Huang
et al. 2019; Peng, Kang, and Cheng 2017). Basically, it is
based on the assumption that the data points are drawn from
multiple low-dimensional subspaces and each group ﬁts into
one of the low-dimensional subspaces. Signiﬁcant progress
has been made to uncover such underlying subspaces.
Among the various subspace clustering approaches, spectral clustering based methods such as low-rank representation (LRR) (Liu et al. 2013; Kang, Peng, and Cheng 2015)
and sparse subspace clustering (SSC) (Elhamifar and Vidal
2013) have achieved great success. SSC ﬁnds a sparse representation of data points while LRR ﬁnds the low-rank structure of subspace. Afterwards, the spectral clustering algorithm is performed on such new representation (Ng, Jordan,
and Weiss 2002). For n data points, the ﬁrst step typically
takes O(n2 ) or O(n3 ) time while the second step requires
O(n3 ) or at least O(n2 k) time, where k is the number of
clusters. Therefore, these two time comsuming steps debar
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4412

