The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Tandem Inference: An Out-of-Core Streaming
Algorithm for Very Large-Scale Relational Inference
Sriram Srinivasan∗

Eriq Augustine∗

Lise Getoor

UC Santa Cruz
ssriniv9@ucsc.edu

UC Santa Cruz
eaugusti@ucsc.edu

UC Santa Cruz
getoor@ucsc.edu

knowledge graphs (Pujara et al. 2013), diagnosis of physical systems (Chen, Chen, and Qian 2014), and information
retrieval (Srinivasan et al. 2019b).
While SRL methods have seen a great deal of success,
they face a major challenge when scaling to large datasets.
The beneﬁt of easily generating large graphical models from
a few template rules can turn into a curse as the graphical
models can quickly grow to intractable sizes that do not ﬁt
in memory. Consider a simple transitive rule: Link(A, B) ∧
Link(B, C) → Link(A, C), commonly used in conjunction with link prediction tasks. When this rule is instantiated
(grounded) with a simple dataset of 1000 entries, a graphical
model with a billion potentials is generated.
To address this issue, several approaches have been proposed. Lifted inference (de Salvo Braz, Amir, and Roth
2005; Singla and Domingos 2008; den Broeck et al. 2011;
Kersting 2012; Sarkhel et al. 2014; Kimmig, Mihalkova, and
Getoor 2015; Srinivasan et al. 2019a) is a commonly employed and effective approach that exploits symmetry in the
data to generate a more compact model on which to perform
inference. While effective in many settings, a key drawback of these approaches is that evidence or noisy data can
break symmetries, making lifting less effective. To address
this issue, approximate lifting approaches have also been
proposed (Sen, Deshpande, and Getoor 2009; den Broeck,
Choi, and Darwiche 2012; Venugopal and Gogate 2014;
Das et al. 2019) which exploit approximate symmetries, allowing for greater and more robust compression. However,
if the ground model lacks signiﬁcant symmetry, approximate
lifting may improve tractability only at the cost of correctness.
Several approaches orthogonal to lifted inference have
also been proposed that attempt to perform efﬁcient grounding by utilizing hybrid database approaches (Niu et al.
2011), exploiting the structure of rules (Augustine and
Getoor 2018), perform efﬁcient approximate counting for
faster inference (Venugopal, Sarkhel, and Gogate 2015;
Sarkhel et al. 2016; Das et al. 2016), or distributing models
across multiple machines (Magliacane et al. 2015). However
these methods, while quite useful, only provide partial solutions to grounding and efﬁcient inference at scale. The hybrid database approach increases runtime substantially, ex-

Abstract
Statistical relational learning (SRL) frameworks allow users
to create large, complex graphical models using a compact,
rule-based representation. However, these models can quickly
become prohibitively large and not ﬁt into machine memory.
In this work we address this issue by introducing a novel technique called tandem inference (TI). The primary idea of TI is
to combine grounding and inference such that both processes
happen in tandem. TI uses an out-of-core streaming approach
to overcome memory limitations. Even when memory is not
an issue, we show that our proposed approach is able to do
inference faster while using less memory than existing approaches. To show the effectiveness of TI, we use a popular
SRL framework called Probabilistic Soft Logic (PSL). We
implement TI for PSL by proposing a gradient-based inference engine and a streaming approach to grounding. We show
that we are able to run an SRL model with over 1B cliques in
under nine hours and using only 10 GB of RAM; previous approaches required more than 800 GB for this model and are
infeasible on common hardware. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest SRL model ever run.

1

Introduction

Statistical relational learning (SRL) (Richardson and
Domingos 2006; Getoor and Taskar 2007; Raedt and Kersting 2011) is an effective method of combining weighted
ﬁrst-order logic with probabilistic inference to make highquality, structured predictions. A characterizing trait of SRL
is the ability to generate large graphical models from a
small set of logical templates (rules). Several different SRL
frameworks have been proposed, each exploring different
types of graphical models, inference algorithms, or hyperparameter learning methods (Richardson and Domingos 2006;
Bach et al. 2017; Venugopal, Sarkhel, and Gogate 2016).
SRL methods have achieved state-of-the-art results in a varied set of domains such as image classiﬁcation (Aditya,
Yang, and Baral 2018), activity recognition (London et al.
2013), natural language processing (Ebrahimi, Dou, and
Lowd 2016), recommender systems (Kouki et al. 2015),
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10259

