The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Regularized Wasserstein Means for Aligning Distributional Data
Liang Mi, Wen Zhang, Yalin Wang
Arizona State University
{liangmi, wzhan139, ylwang}@asu.edu

source sample is mapped to the weighted mean of its corresponding target sample(s) (Ye and others 2017).
In this paper, we raise the problem of regularizing the
Wasserstein means. In addition to ﬁnding a mean that yields
the minimum transportation cost, in many cases we also
want to insert certain properties so that it satisﬁes other criteria. A common technique is adding regularization terms
to the objective function. While most of the existing work,
e.g. (Cuturi 2013; Courty and others 2017b), focus on regularizing the optimal transportation itself, we address the
mean update rule and show the beneﬁt from regularizing it.
We introduce a new framework to compute OT-based sparse
representation with regularization. We base our method on
variational transportation (Mi and others 2018) which produces a map between the source and the target distributions in a many-to-one fashion. Different from directly mapping the source into the weighted average of its correspondence (Ye and others 2017; Courty and others 2017b;
Mi and others 2018), we propose to regularize the mapping
to cope with speciﬁc problems – domain adaptation, point
set registration, and skeleton layout. The resulting mean, or
centroid, can well represent the key property of the distribution while maintaining a small reconstruction error. Code is
available at https://github.com/icemiliang/pyvot

Abstract
We propose to align distributional data from the perspective
of Wasserstein means. We raise the problem of regularizing Wasserstein means and propose several terms tailored to
tackle different problems. Our formulation is based on the
variational transportation to distribute a sparse discrete measure into the target domain. The resulting sparse representation well captures the desired property of the domain while
reducing the mapping cost. We demonstrate the scalability
and robustness of our method with examples in domain adaptation, point set registration, and skeleton layout.

Introduction
Aligning distributional data is fundamental to many problems in machine learning. From the early work on histogram
manipulation, e.g. (Stark 2000), to the recent work on generative modeling, e.g. (Beecks and others 2011), researchers
have proposed various alignment techniques that beneﬁt numerous ﬁelds including domain adaptation, e.g. (Sun and
others 2016), and shape registration, e.g. (Ma and others
2016). A universal approach to aligning distributional data
is through optimizing an objective function that measures
the loss of the map between them. Regarding one distribution as the ﬁxed target and the other the source, the alignment process in general follows an iterative manner where
we alternatively update their correspondence and transform
the source. When the source has much fewer samples or in a
lower dimension, the process is essentially ﬁnding a sparse
representation (Bengio and others 2013).
The optimal transportation (OT) loss, or the Wasserstein
distance, has proved itself to be superiors in many aspects over several other distances (Gibbs and others 2002;
Arjovsky and others 2017), beneﬁting various learning algorithms. By regarding the Wasserstein distance as a metric,
researchers have been able to compute a sparse mean (Ho
and others 2017) of a distribution, which is a special case
of the Wasserstein barycenter problem (Agueh and others
2011) when there is only one target distribution. While OT
algorithms ﬁnd the correspondence between the distributions, updating the mean can simply follow the rule that each

Related Work
Optimal Transportation
The optimal transportation (OT) problem was raised introduced by Monge (Monge 1781) in the 18th century, which
sought a mass-preserving transportation map between distributional data with the minimum cost. It resurfaced in 1940s
when Kantorovich (Kantorovich 1942) introduced a relaxed
version where mass can be split and provided the classic
linear programming solution. A breakthrough for the masspreserving, or non-mass splitting, OT happened in the early
1990s when Brenier (Brenier 1991) proved its existence under quadratic Euclidean cost. In more recent years, fast algorithms for computing, or approximating, OT have been
proposed in both lines of research – non-mass-preserving,
e.g. (Rabin and others 2011; Cuturi 2013; Solomon and others 2015) and mass-preserving, e.g. (Mérigot 2011; Lévy
2015; Kolouri and others 2016; Chen and others 2019).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5166

