The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cross-Lingual Low-Resource
Set-to-Description Retrieval for Global E-Commerce
Juntao Li,1,2∗ Chang Liu,1,2∗ Jian Wang,3 Lidong Bing,3
Hongsong Li,3 Xiaozhong Liu,4 Dongyan Zhao,1,2 Rui Yan1,2†
1

Center for Data Science, Academy for
Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
4
Indiana University, Bloomington, USA
{lijuntao, liuchang97, zhaody, ruiyan}@pku.edu.cn, binglidong@gmail.com,
{eric.wj, hongsong.lhs}@alibaba-inc.com, liu237@indiana.edu
Abstract
With the prosperous of cross-border e-commerce, there is an
urgent demand for designing intelligent approaches for assisting e-commerce sellers to offer local products for consumers
from all over the world. In this paper, we explore a new task of
cross-lingual information retrieval, i.e., cross-lingual set-todescription retrieval in cross-border e-commerce, which involves matching product attribute sets in the source language
with persuasive product descriptions in the target language.
We manually collect a new and high-quality paired dataset,
where each pair contains an unordered product attribute set
in the source language and an informative product description in the target language. As the dataset construction process is both time-consuming and costly, the new dataset only
comprises of 13.5k pairs, which is a low-resource setting and
can be viewed as a challenging testbed for model development and evaluation in cross-border e-commerce. To tackle
this cross-lingual set-to-description retrieval task, we propose a novel cross-lingual matching network (CLMN) with
the enhancement of context-dependent cross-lingual mapping
upon the pre-trained monolingual BERT representations. Experimental results indicate that our proposed CLMN yields
impressive results on the challenging task and the contextdependent cross-lingual mapping on BERT yields noticeable
improvement over the pre-trained multi-lingual BERT model.

Figure 1: An example training pair sampled from the collected dataset, where a Chinese product attribute set is given
for retrieving a proper persuasive description in English.

eign language to a local product. Compared with generationbased methods, retrieved product descriptions are more understandable and accessible to overseas users, and training a
retrieval model requires less paired data. Accordingly, we
formulate this problem as a cross-lingual information retrieval (CLIR) task for global e-commerce, i.e., ranking foreign product descriptions against a local product with an attribute set (Litschko et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019).
Conventional CLIR systems mainly comprise of two components: machine translation and monolingual information
retrieval. According to the translation direction, these systems are further categorized into translating the local language to the foreign one and translating the foreign language
to the local one. By doing so, the CLIR task is converted to
a monolingual setting through the machine translation system (Nie 2010; Rücklé, Swarnkar, and Gurevych 2019). Although these systems are conceptual simple and natural, they
are restricted by the performance of machine translation system. Thus, directly modeling CLIR with recent deep neural
information retrieval models is promising (Hui et al. 2018;
McDonald, Brokos, and Androutsopoulos 2018). However,
while performing well, existing deep IR models require a
large amount of labeled training data, which is expensive

Introduction
Cross-border online shopping has become popular in the
past few years, and e-commerce platforms start to pay more
effort in improving their user experience. To increase the
conversion rate, one critical aspect is how to display products to overseas customers with persuasive and informative descriptions. Fortunately, there already exist various local and cross-national e-commerce platforms, e.g., Amazon,
eBay, Taobao, Lazada, with multi-lingual persuasive descriptions of products from all over the world, making it possible for retrieving a feasible product description in the for∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@pku.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8212

