The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Level Head-Wise Match and
Aggregation in Transformer for Textual Sequence Matching
Shuohang Wang,1,2∗ Yunshi Lan,1 Yi Tay,3† Jing Jiang,1 Jingjing Liu2
1

Singapore Management University, 2 Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research, 3 Nanyang Technological University
{shwang.2014, yslan.2015, jingjiang}@smu.edu.sg, ytay017@e.ntu.edu.sg, jingjl@microsoft.com

Abstract
Transformer has been successfully applied to many natural language processing tasks. However, for textual sequence matching, simple matching between the representation of a pair
of sequences might bring in unnecessary noise. In this paper, we propose a new approach to sequence pair matching
with Transformer, by learning head-wise matching representations on multiple levels. Experiments show that our proposed
approach can achieve new state-of-the-art performance on
multiple tasks that rely only on pre-computed sequence-vectorrepresentation, such as SNLI, MNLI-match, MNLI-mismatch,
QQP, and SQuAD-binary.

Q1
Q2
L

Is there a reason why we should travel alone?
What are,some reasons to travel alone?
is duplicated

P

Two young children in blue jerseys, one with
the number 9 and one with the number 2 are
standing on the wooden steps in a bathroom
and washing their hands in a sink.
Two kids in numbered jerseys want their hands.
Entailment

H
L

Table 1: Examples from Quora Question Pairs (QQP) dataset
for duplicated question detection and Stanford Natural Language Inference dataset for text entailment. “Q1” and “Q2”
are the question pair. “P” represents the premise and “H” the
hypothesis. “L” is the label.

Introduction
Textual sequence matching is important for many natural
language processing tasks, such as textual entailment (Bowman et al. 2015), paraphrase identiﬁcation (Dolan and Brockett 2005), question answering (Tan et al. 2015), etc. There
has been a large amount of work focusing on this problem,
from exploring classic human-crafted features (Wan et al.
2006), to tree-based neural structures (Mou et al. 2016;
Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015), and a large number of
attention-based models (Rocktäschel et al. 2015; Yin et al.
2015; Parikh et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2017). Table 1 provides
two examples of real sequence matching problems on duplicated question detection and text entailment.
Across the rich history of sequence matching research,
there have been two main streams of studies for solving
this problem1 . The ﬁrst utilizes a sequence encoder (e.g.,
LSTM/CNN) to obtain static low-dimensional vector representations of sequence pairs. Subsequently, a parameterized
function (e.g., Multi-layered Perceptron) is applied on top
of the representations to learn a matching score (Bowman et
al. 2015; Mou et al. 2016; Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015;
Lin et al. 2017). The second direction learns to aggregate

word and phrase level interactions using cross-sentence attention, learning the entire matching function in an end-toend fashion (Rocktäschel et al. 2015; Wang and Jiang 2016;
Yin et al. 2015; Devlin et al. 2019).
While models that utilize cross-sentence attention typically
achieve better performance (Devlin et al. 2019), the encoders
are unfortunately not re-usable. Hence, new sequence pairs
require re-computation of word/phrasal alignments. Consequently, this incurs additional computation costs. Conversely,
models that learn static representations enjoy reuse of their
ﬁxed vector representations and are therefore inherently more
efﬁcient (i.e., we only need to compute the scoring function
on top of the pre-computed representations). As pointed out
by Reimers and Gurevych (2019), ﬁnding the most similar
sentence pair in a collection of n = 10,000 sentences need
to run original BERT n × (n − 1)/2 = 49, 995, 000 times.
By making use of static representations, we only need to
run BERT n times together with some much cheaper matrix
multiplications, which will reduce the running time from 65
hours to 5 seconds. Moreover, this inherent scalability beneﬁt enables querying of up to millions of documents (Das
et al. 2019) or answers (Seo et al. 2018), which provides a
greater recall/coverage in open domain question answering.
Our work, inspired by this advantage, focuses on improving

∗

Work done when the author was at Singapore Management
University
†
Now working at Google
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
As classiﬁed in the leaderboard of SNLI, https://nlp.stanford.
edu/projects/snli/.
9209

