The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Solving Online Threat Screening Games using
Constrained Action Space Reinforcement Learning
Sanket Shah,1 Arunesh Sinha,1 Pradeep Varakantham,1 Andrew Perrault,2 Milind Tambe2

School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, {sankets, aruneshs, pradeepv}@smu.edu.sg
Center for Research on Computation and Society, Harvard University, aperrault@g.harvard.edu, milind tambe@harvard.edu
1

2

summer of 2016 (Dastin 2016). Additionally, intelligent adversaries can exploit any gaps in screening and cause catastrophic damage to these critical establishments. Screening
gaps can arise due to the use of a less effective, but faster,
screening method for high-risk passengers, which can happen as the combination of more passengers and limited resources can result in the unavailability of the “right” screening method.
Online resource allocation is a problem of interest in
many domains including transportation (Simao et al. 2009) –
allocating taxis to customers, emergency response (Maxwell
et al. 2010) – allocating ambulances to emergencies, and airports – allocating terminals to arriving aeroplanes. Threat
screening is also an online resource allocation problem, but
in the presence of an observing adversary. Given that adversaries can monitor resource allocation strategies and exploit
any gaps in them, game-theoretic models and approaches
have been used to consider robust or risk-averse objectives
rather than traditional expected objectives (e.g., expected
revenue, expected delay).
One such model is the Threat Screening Game (TSG)
model introduced in Brown et al. (2016). Here, a strategic attacker attempts to enter a secure area while the defender uses
teams of limited-capacity screening resources (with varying efﬁcacies) to thwart them. However, despite enhancements made in subsequent work (McCarthy, Vayanos, and
Tambe 2017), this model suffers from a lack of adaptability
as screening strategies are ﬁxed for every hour. Further, all
versions of the model assume a favourable rate of passenger arrival within each time-window such that no screening
resource is idle within the hour. We address these shortcomings with a novel online allocation model and a completely
new solution approach.
Our ﬁrst contribution is an online version of the threat
screening problem, in which the screening strategy is decided adaptively, based on the current queue lengths, as the
screenees arrive. We show experimentally that this leads to
a much better characterization and optimization of the average delay time faced by screenees at no loss to security
risk (measured as attacker utility) compared to past work.
Further, while past models have used a weight to balance
the risk of missing an attacker and average delay time, we

Abstract
Large-scale screening for potential threats with limited resources and capacity for screening is a problem of interest
at airports, seaports, and other ports of entry. Adversaries
can observe screening procedures and arrive at a time when
there will be gaps in screening due to limited resource capacities. To capture this game between ports and adversaries,
this problem has been previously represented as a Stackelberg
game, referred to as a Threat Screening Game (TSG). Given
the signiﬁcant complexity associated with solving TSGs and
uncertainty in arrivals of customers, existing work has assumed that screenees arrive and are allocated security resources at the beginning of the time-window. In practice,
screenees such as airport passengers arrive in bursts correlated with ﬂight time and are not bound by ﬁxed timewindows. To address this, we propose an online threat screening model in which the screening strategy is determined adaptively as a passenger arrives while satisfying a hard bound on
acceptable risk of not screening a threat. To solve the online
problem, we ﬁrst reformulate it as a Markov Decision Process
(MDP) in which the hard bound on risk translates to a constraint on the action space and then solve the resultant MDP
using Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). To this end, we
provide a novel way to efﬁciently enforce linear inequality
constraints on the action output in DRL. We show that our
solution allows us to signiﬁcantly reduce screenee wait time
without compromising on the risk.

1

Introduction

Screening for potential threats entering large safety-sensitive
establishments (e.g., airports, seaports, museums) using the
right subset of available screening methods (e.g., metal detectors, advanced imaging technology, pat-down) is an important defensive activity undertaken by various agencies
around the world. However, the sheer scale of the problem
at these large establishments with a large number of screenees and various screening methods makes screening in a
timely fashion with limited resources quite challenging. For
example, average delays for air passengers in Chicago, USA
jumped to 2 hours due to higher passenger volume in the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2226

