The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FACT: Fused Attention for Clothing
Transfer with Generative Adversarial Networks
Yicheng Zhang,1 Lei Li,2 Li Song,1,3 Rong Xie,1 Wenjun Zhang1
1

Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{ironic, song li, xierong, zhangwenjun}@sjtu.edu.cn
2
SenseTime, Shanghai, China
lilei@sensetime.com
3
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Abstract
2ULJLQ

Clothing transfer is a challenging task in computer vision
where the goal is to transfer the human clothing style in
an input image conditioned on a given language description.
However, existing approaches have limited ability in delicate
colorization and texture synthesis with a conventional fully
convolutional generator. To tackle this problem, we propose
a novel semantic-based Fused Attention model for Clothing
Transfer (FACT), which allows ﬁne-grained synthesis, high
global consistency and plausible hallucination in images. Towards this end, we incorporate two attention modules based
on spatial levels: (i) soft attention that searches for the most
related positions in sentences, and (ii) self-attention modeling
long-range dependencies on feature maps. Furthermore, we
also develop a stylized channel-wise attention module to capture correlations on feature levels. We effectively fuse these
attention modules in the generator and achieve better performances than the state-of-the-art method on the DeepFashion
dataset. Qualitative and quantitative comparisons against the
baselines demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

&RQGLWLRQHGRQ'LIIHUHQW/DQJXDJH'HVFULSWLRQV

D

6HJPHQWDWLRQ

2ULJLQ

6HJPHQWDWLRQ

7DUJHW

6HJPHQWDWLRQ

7DUJHW

E

Figure 1: Examples of our clothing transfer results. (a) Generated examples conditioned on different language descriptions. (b) Two-stage generation under the guidance of semantic segmentation.

leveraging semantic information at the word level to generate high quality images. Moreover, there are hardly any
works focusing on exploiting feature correlations in clothing transfer, which makes it difﬁcult for GANs to reason and
hallucinate (such as folds, arms).
To tackle these problems, we propose a novel semanticbased Fused Attention model for Clothing Transfer (FACT)
with Generative Adversarial Networks. Our model is composed of two stages, namely deformation GAN and synthesis GAN. In the ﬁrst stage, we address the deformation
problem by transferring the segmentation map of an input
image according to a sentence. As shown in Figure 1(b),
the generated segmentation map depicts the rough sketch
of the desired image and is fed to the next stage as a semantic guidance. In the second stage, the generator learns
to synthesize a ﬁne-grained target image conditioned on the
transferred segmentation map and the sentence. To obtain
better visual quality, we incorporate three attention layers
in the second stage generator. Firstly, soft attention enables
each location of feature maps to search for the most relevant words in the input sentence, which effectively reinforcing ﬁne-grained text-to-image synthesis. Secondly, selfattention serves as a complement to the locality of conventional convolutions. In virtue of the self-attention mechanism, the correlations among different spatial regions on fea-

Introduction
The human clothing transfer is a challenging and complicated task where the goal is to transfer the dressing style of
a person in a given image conditioned on an input language
description, while preserving his/her pose, identity and body
shape (as shown in Figure 1(a)). This task can be extended
to plenty of new applications in different areas including
the photo editing, ﬁlm-making industry, virtual try-on services etc. In recent years, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN) (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015; Goodfellow et
al. 2014; Denton et al. 2015) has shown impressive results in
domain transfer tasks such as facial attributes transfer (Shen
and Liu 2017; Choi et al. 2018; Xiao, Hong, and Ma 2018;
Pumarola et al. 2018) and makeup transfer (Li et al. 2018).
Despite all these successes, the area of human clothing transfer remains to be exploited. However, with a conventional
fully convolutional generator conditioned on sentence representations, existing approaches are strongly limited in ﬁnding long-range correlations in images and are ineffective in
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12894

