The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CopyMTL: Copy Mechanism for Joint Extraction
of Entities and Relations with Multi-Task Learning
§

Daojian Zeng,∗§ Haoran Zhang,∗† Qianying Liu‡

Changsha University of Science & Technology, Changsha, 410114, China
†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, 61820, USA
‡
Kyoto University, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan
zengdj916@163.com, haoranz6@illinois.edu, ying@nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract

7H[W

6WHYHQ-REVZDVERUQRQ)HEUXDU\ LQ6DQ)UDQFLVFR&DOLIRUQLD

&RS\5( BirthDay Jobs, 1955 

Joint extraction of entities and relations has received significant attention due to its potential of providing higher performance for both tasks. Among existing methods, CopyRE
is effective and novel, which uses a sequence-to-sequence
framework and copy mechanism to directly generate the relation triplets. However, it suffers from two fatal problems.
The model is extremely weak at differing the head and tail
entity, resulting in inaccurate entity extraction. It also cannot predict multi-token entities (e.g. Steven Jobs). To address these problems, we give a detailed analysis of the reasons behind the inaccurate entity extraction problem, and
then propose a simple but extremely effective model structure
to solve this problem. In addition, we propose a multi-task
learning framework equipped with copy mechanism, called
CopyMTL, to allow the model to predict multi-token entities. Experiments reveal the problems of CopyRE and show
that our model achieves signiﬁcant improvement over the
current state-of-the-art method by 9% in NYT and 16% in
WebNLG (F1 score). Our code is available at https://github.
com/WindChimeRan/CopyMTL

*ROG

BirthPlace JobsFrancisco

BirthDay Steven Jobs, February 19  BirthPlace Steven Jobs, San Francisco

Figure 1: CopyRE predicts the entity pointer refers to the
word position in the source sentence. The colored tokens
show the limitation of CopyRE which cannot predict multiple tokens.

2014), where joint models can beneﬁt from such interdependencies.
Recent studies on joint models of entity and relation extraction have three major research lines: Table Filling, Tagging, and Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq). Among these
approaches, the table ﬁlling method (Gupta, Schütze, and
Andrassy 2016; Adel and Schütze 2017) requires the model
to enumerate over all possible entity pairs, which leads to a
heavy computational burden. The tagging method (Zheng et
al. 2017) suffers from the overlapping relation problem that
the model cannot assign different relation tags to one token.
To solve this problem, the followers (Takanobu et al. 2018;
Dai et al. 2019) run tagging on a sentence for multiple
turns, which is akin to the table ﬁlling method together with
the heavy computational burden. Relatively speaking, the
Seq2Seq method is neither plagued with overlapping relations nor with excessive computations. Seq2Seq model receives the unstructured text as input and directly decodes the
entity-relation triples as a sequential output. This concise approach also matches with the human annotation process, that
the annotators ﬁrst read the sentences, understand the meaning and then point out the entity-relation pairs sequentially.
Currently, CopyRE (Zeng et al. 2018) is the most powerful Seq2Seq based joint extraction method which expands a
Seq2Seq framework with copy mechanism in the decoder.
The copying mechanism allows the model to avoid the outof-vocabulary (OOV) problem. Despite their promising result, the model still suffers from two major drawbacks.
First, the entity copying in CopyRE is unstable and it depends on an unnatural mask to differ the head (h) and tail (t)
entities. Experimental results show that CopyRE nearly ran-

Introduction
As a key technology for automatic Knowledge Graph (KG)
construction, relation extraction has received widespread attention in recent years. Relation extraction aims to automatically learn triplets (relation, head, tail) from the unstructured text without human intervention.
Early studies use pipeline models (Nadeau and Sekine
2007; Chan and Roth 2011), where they cast the relation
extraction problem into two separate tasks, i.e. Named Entity Recognition (NER) to extract the entities and Relation
Classiﬁcation. They ﬁrst recognize the entities and then predict the relations between entities. However, pipeline models
suffer from obvious drawbacks (Roth and Yih 2007). Each
component limits the performance because of the error cascading effect and there is no chance for the model to correct mistakes. In addition, such pipeline models cannot capture the explicit relation between the two subtasks (Li and Ji
∗

Corresponding authors, equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9507

