The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Quadruply Stochastic Gradient Method for Large Scale
Nonlinear Semi-Supervised Ordinal Regression AUC Optimization
Wanli Shi,1 Bin Gu,1,2∗ Xiang Li,3 Heng Huang4,2
1

School of Computer & Software, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, P.R.China
2
JD Finance America Corporation
3
Computer Science Department, University of Western Ontario, Canada
4
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
wanlishi@nuist.edu.cn, jsgubin@gmail.com, lxiang2@uwo.ca, heng.huang@pitt.edu
squared error. However, Waegeman, De Baets and Boullart,
(2008) have shown that OR models which minimize these
errors do not necessarily impose a good ranking on the
data. To handle this problem, many researchers start to use
AUC or concordance index in solving OR problems since
AUC is deﬁned on an ordinal scale, such as (Waegeman,
De Baets, and Boullart 2008; Waegeman and De Baets 2010;
Fürnkranz, Hüllermeier, and Vanderlooy 2009; Uematsu and
Lee 2014). We summarized several representative OR algorithms in Table 1.

Abstract
Semi-supervised ordinal regression (S2 OR) problems are
ubiquitous in real-world applications, where only a few ordered instances are labeled and massive instances remain unlabeled. Recent researches have shown that directly optimizing concordance index or AUC can impose a better ranking
on the data than optimizing the traditional error rate in ordinal regression (OR) problems. In this paper, we propose
an unbiased objective function for S2 OR AUC optimization
based on ordinal binary decomposition approach. Besides, to
handle the large-scale kernelized learning problems, we propose a scalable algorithm called QS3 ORAO using the doubly stochastic gradients (DSG) framework for functional optimization. Theoretically, we prove that our method can converge to the optimal solution at the rate of O(1/t), where t
is the number of iterations for stochastic data sampling. Extensive experimental results on various benchmark and realworld datasets also demonstrate that our method is efﬁcient
and effective while retaining similar generalization performance.

However, existing AUC optimization methods focus on
supervised OR problems, and none of them can be applied
to semi-supervised learning problems. The main challenge
is how to incorporate unlabeled instances into the AUC optimization process. For the semi-supervised learning research
ﬁeld in general, many existing methods, such as (Seah,
Tsang, and Ong 2012; Fujino and Ueda 2016), have leveraged the cluster assumptions, which states that similar instances tend to share the same label, to solve this problem. However, the clustering assumption is rather restrictive and may mislead a model towards a biased solution.
Nevertheless, recent works (Sakai, Niu, and Sugiyama 2018;
Xie and Li 2018) have shown that the clustering assumption
is actually unnecessary at least for binary classiﬁcation problems. In the same vein, we propose an objective function of
S2 OR AUC optimization based on ordinal binary decomposition without using the clustering assumption. Speciﬁcally, for a k classes OR problem, we use k − 1 hyperlanes
to decompose the orginal problem into k − 1 binary semisupervised AUC optimization problems, where the AUC risk
can be viewed as a linear combination of AUC risk between
labeled instances and AUC risk between labeled and unlabeled instances. Then, the overall AUC risk in S2 OR is
equivalent to the mean of AUC for k − 1 subproblems.

Introduction
Supervised ordinal regression (OR) problems have made
great process in the past few decades, such as (Chu and
Keerthi 2007; Fathony, Bashiri, and Ziebart 2017; Niu et
al. 2016; Gu et al. 2015). However, in various practical
ﬁelds, such as facial beauty assessment (Yan 2014), credit
rating (Kim and Ahn 2012), social sciences (Fullerton and
Xu 2012) or more, collecting a large amount of ordinal labeled instances is time-consuming, while unlabeled data are
available in abundance. Often, the ﬁnite ordinal data are insufﬁcient to learn a good ordinal regression model. To improve the performance of the classiﬁers, one needs to incorporate unlabeled instances into the training process. So
far, semi-supervised ordinal regression (S2 OR) problems
have attracted great attention in machine learning communities, such as (Srijith, Shevade, and Sundararajan 2013;
Seah, Tsang, and Ong 2012).
To evaluate the performance of an OR model, many metrics could be used, e.g., the mean absolute error, the mean

Nonlinear data structures widely exist in many real-world
problems, and kernel method is a typical way to solve such
problems. However, kernel-based methods are hardly scalable. Speciﬁcally, the kernel matrix needs O(n2 d) operations to be calculated and O(n2 ) to be stored, where n denotes the number of training data and d denotes the dimensionality of the data. Besides, the bottlenecks of the computational complexities become more severe in solving pair-

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5734

