The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

InteractE: Improving Convolution-Based Knowledge
Graph Embeddings by Increasing Feature Interactions
Shikhar Vashishth,1∗ Soumya Sanyal,1∗ Vikram Nitin,2†
Nilesh Agrawal,1 Partha Talukdar1
1

Indian Institute of Science, 2 Columbia University
{shikhar, soumyasanyal, anilesh, ppt}@iisc.ac.in
vikram.nitin@columbia.edu

However, most existing KGs are incomplete (Dong et al.
2014). The task of link prediction alleviates this drawback
by inferring missing facts based on the known facts in a KG.
A popular approach for solving this problem involves learning a low-dimensional representation for all entities and relations and utilizing them to predict new facts. In general,
most existing link prediction methods learn to embed KGs
by optimizing a score function which assigns higher scores
to true facts than invalid ones. These score functions can be
classiﬁed as translation distance based (Bordes et al. 2013;
Xiao, Huang, and Zhu 2016; Wang et al. 2014a) or semantic matching based (Nickel, Rosasco, and Poggio 2016;
Liu, Wu, and Yang 2017).
Recently, neural networks have also been utilized to learn
the score function (Socher et al. 2013; Ravishankar, Chandrahas, and Talukdar 2017; Dettmers et al. 2018). The motivation behind these approaches is that shallow methods like
TransE (Bordes et al. 2013) and DistMult (Yang et al. 2014)
are limited in their expressiveness. As noted in (Dettmers et
al. 2018), the only way to remedy this is to increase the size
of their embeddings, which leads to an enormous increase in
the number of parameters and hence limits their scalability
to larger knowledge graphs.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have the advantage of using multiple layers, thus increasing their expressive power, while at the same time remaining parameterefﬁcient. (Dettmers et al. 2018) exploit these properties and
propose ConvE - a model which applies convolutional ﬁlters
on stacked 2D reshapings of entity and relation embeddings.
Through this, they aim to increase the number of interactions
between components of these embeddings.
In this paper, we conclusively establish that increasing the
number of such interactions is beneﬁcial to link prediction
performance, and show that the number of interactions that
ConvE can capture is limited. We propose InteractE, a novel
CNN based KG embedding approach which aims to further
increase the interaction between relation and entity embeddings.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
1. We propose InteractE, a method that augments the expressive power of ConvE through three key ideas – feature permutation, ”checkered” feature reshaping, and cir-

Abstract
Most existing knowledge graphs suffer from incompleteness,
which can be alleviated by inferring missing links based on
known facts. One popular way to accomplish this is to generate low-dimensional embeddings of entities and relations,
and use these to make inferences. ConvE, a recently proposed
approach, applies convolutional ﬁlters on 2D reshapings of
entity and relation embeddings in order to capture rich interactions between their components. However, the number
of interactions that ConvE can capture is limited. In this paper, we analyze how increasing the number of these interactions affects link prediction performance, and utilize our observations to propose InteractE. InteractE is based on three
key ideas – feature permutation, a novel feature reshaping,
and circular convolution. Through extensive experiments, we
ﬁnd that InteractE outperforms state-of-the-art convolutional
link prediction baselines on FB15k-237. Further, InteractE
achieves an MRR score that is 9%, 7.5%, and 23% better than
ConvE on the FB15k-237, WN18RR and YAGO3-10 datasets
respectively. The results validate our central hypothesis – that
increasing feature interaction is beneﬁcial to link prediction
performance. We make the source code of InteractE available
to encourage reproducible research.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are structured representations of
facts, where nodes represent entities and edges represent relationships between them. This can be represented as a collection of triples (s, r, o), each representing a relation r between a ”subject-entity” s and an ”object-entity” o. Some
real-world knowledge graphs include Freebase (Bollacker et
al. 2008), WordNet (Miller 1995), YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007), and NELL (Mitchell et al. 2018).
KGs ﬁnd application in a variety of tasks, such as relation extraction (Mintz et al. 2009; Vashishth et al. 2018),
question answering (Bordes, Chopra, and Weston 2014),
canonicalization (Vashishth, Jain, and Talukdar 2018), recommender systems (Zhang et al. 2016), and dialog systems
(Ma et al. 2015).
∗

contributed equally to this paper.
Research done at Indian Institute of Science.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3009

