The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Uncertainty-Aware Multi-Shot Knowledge
Distillation for Image-Based Object Re-Identiﬁcation
Xin Jin,1∗ Cuiling Lan,2† Wenjun Zeng,2 Zhibo Chen1†

University of Science and Technology of China1 Microsoft Research Asia2
jinxustc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {culan, wezeng}@microsoft.com, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Object re-identiﬁcation (re-id) aims to identify a speciﬁc object across times or camera views, with the person re-id and
vehicle re-id as the most widely studied applications. Re-id is
challenging because of the variations in viewpoints, (human)
poses, and occlusions. Multi-shots of the same object can
cover diverse viewpoints/poses and thus provide more comprehensive information. In this paper, we propose exploiting the multi-shots of the same identity to guide the feature
learning of each individual image. Speciﬁcally, we design an
Uncertainty-aware Multi-shot Teacher-Student (UMTS) Network. It consists of a teacher network (T-net) that learns the
comprehensive features from multiple images of the same object, and a student network (S-net) that takes a single image
as input. In particular, we take into account the data dependent heteroscedastic uncertainty for effectively transferring
the knowledge from the T-net to S-net. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to make use of multi-shots of
an object in a teacher-student learning manner for effectively
boosting the single image based re-id. We validate the effectiveness of our approach on the popular vehicle re-id and person re-id datasets. In inference, the S-net alone signiﬁcantly
outperforms the baselines and achieves the state-of-the-art
performance.

1

(a1)

(a2)

(b1)

(b2)

Figure 1: Challenges in image-based re-id: (a1) Inconsistency of visible body regions; and (b1) Lack of comprehensive information from a single image. Observation and Motivation: multi-shot images make it easier to identify whether
they are the same person/vehicle as shown in (a2) and (b2).
in inconsistency of visible object regions across images (see
Fig. 1(a1)) and lack of comprehensive information from a
single image (see Fig. 1(b1)) for matching, and spatial semantics misalignment.
Generally, for a speciﬁc object (e.g., person, vehicle),
multiple images captured from different viewpoints or times
can provide more comprehensive information, making the
identiﬁcation much easier (see Fig. 1(a2) and (b2)). For example, the difference between the rear of the vehicle is difﬁcult to identify from the two single images in Fig. 1(b1)
but the difference becomes very obvious when comparing
the two sets of multi-shot images shown in Fig. 1(b2). It is
worth noting that for image-based re-id, only a single image
is available as a query during inference/testing. The exploration of comprehensive information of multi-shot images is
underexplored and remains an open problem.
In this paper, we propose an Uncertainty-aware Multishot Teacher-Student (UMTS) Network for exploiting the
multi-shot images to enhance the image-based object reid performance in a teacher-student manner, without increasing the inference complexity or changing the inference
setting. We achieve this by distilling knowledge from the
multi-shots of the same object and applying it to guide single shot network learning. Fig. 2 shows the ﬂowchart of

Introduction

Object re-identiﬁcation (re-id) aims to identify/match a speciﬁc object in different places, times, or camera views, from
either images or video clips, for the purpose of tracking or
retrieval. Because of the high demand in practice, person reid and vehicle re-id are two dominant research areas for object re-id. In this work, we focus on the popular image-based
person and vehicle re-id tasks.
Images to be matched typically have large variations in
terms of capturing viewpoints, (human) poses, lighting, and
occlusions, making re-id a challenging task (Subramaniam,
Chatterjee, and Mittal 2016; Su et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017;
Zhao et al. 2017; Ge et al. 2018; Qian et al. 2018; Zhang et
al. 2019; Wang et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018b). These result
∗

This work was done when Xin Jin was an intern at MSRA.
Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11165

