The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Generate Maps from Trajectories
Sijie Ruan,1,2,3 Cheng Long,4 Jie Bao,2,3 Chunyang Li,1 Zisheng Yu,1
Ruiyuan Li,1,2,3 Yuxuan Liang,5 Tianfu He,6,2,3 Yu Zheng1,2,3
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
JD Intelligent Cities Research, Beijing, China, 3 JD Intelligent Cities Business Unit, JD Digits, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
5
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
6
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{sjruan, yuzisheng}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, c.long@ntu.edu.sg, {baojie, ruiyuan.li}@jd.com
{lichunyang 1, yuxliang, Tianfu.D.He, msyuzheng}@outlook.com
Abstract

Accurate and updated road network data is vital in many
urban applications, such as car-sharing, and logistics. The
traditional approach to identifying the road network, i.e.,
ﬁeld survey, requires a signiﬁcant amount of time and effort. With the wide usage of GPS embedded devices, a
huge amount of trajectory data has been generated by different types of mobile objects, which provides a new opportunity to extract the underlying road network. However,
the existing trajectory-based map recovery approaches require many empirical parameters and do not utilize the prior
knowledge in existing maps, which over-simpliﬁes or overcomplicates the reconstructed road network. To this end, we
propose a deep learning-based map generation framework,
i.e., DeepMG, which learns the structure of the existing road
network to overcome the noisy GPS positions. More speciﬁcally, DeepMG extracts features from trajectories in both spatial view and transition view and uses a convolutional deep
neural network T2RNet to infer road centerlines. After that, a
trajectory-based post-processing algorithm is proposed to reﬁne the topological connectivity of the recovered map. Extensive experiments on two real-world trajectory datasets conﬁrm that DeepMG signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-theart methods.

(a) GT.

(b) Point.

(c) Line.

Figure 1: Motivation Examples.

two consecutive GPS points of the dataset. As could be noticed, using the point cloud for map generation would be
incapable of distinguishing parallel roads that are spatially
close and using the line segments for map generation would
result in many redundant edges. And such a case would be
even worse if the sampling rate decreases.
Despite the challenges of map generation, many methods have been developed for this problem, which can
be categorized into three classes: 1) Clustering-based approach (Edelkamp and Schrödl 2003; Chen et al. 2016;
Stanojevic et al. 2018), which ﬁrst generates a set of road
ends using some clustering algorithm based on geospatial distances and direction similarities and then links the
road ends as road segments by using trajectories; 2) Tracemerging based approach (Cao and Krumm 2009), which
scans trajectories sequentially and for each one, either
merges it to some existing road segments or generates some
new road segments if no suitable merging operations are
possible; 3) Kernel density estimation (KDE) based approach (Biagioni and Eriksson 2012b; Wang, Wang, and
Li 2015), which performs KDE on the point cloud and extracts a map afterward. While these existing methods provide some insights for map generation, they still suffer from
various types of issues. Consider the clustering-based and
trace-merging based approaches. Since they generate road
segments somehow based on the line segments between consecutive points, in cases that trajectories are sampled with
low rates, they would generate many shortcuts that do not
exist in a real map. Besides, these approaches are ineffective in distinguishing parallel road segments towards the

Introduction
With the increased population mobility and the rising of carsharing service, accurate and updated road network data becomes vital. Conventional approaches for collecting road
network data such as ﬁeld surveys are costly and laborintensive. With the wide usage of GPS embedded devices,
a huge amount of trajectory data has been generated by different types of mobile objects (Zheng et al. 2014), which
provides a new opportunity to extract the underlying road
network. Yet, generating a map from trajectories is a nontrivial task, which is mainly because trajectories usually involve GPS noises and are collected with different sampling
rates. To illustrate this, we present in Fig 1 a) the map near
a roundabout area in Beijing, b) the GPS point cloud based
on a taxi trajectory dataset and c) the line segments between
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
890

