The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weakly Supervised Learning Meets Ride-Sharing User Experience Enhancement
Lan-Zhe Guo,1 Feng Kuang,2 Zhang-Xun Liu,2 Yu-Feng Li,1 Nan Ma,2 Xiao-Hu Qie2∗
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Didi Chuxing, Beijing, China
{guolz, liyf}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {kuangfeng, liuzhangxun, mandyma.edu, tiger.qie}@didiglobal.com

et al. 2018), i.e., only a small subset of training data is
given with labels whereas the other data remains unlabeled; inaccurate supervised data (Frénay and Verleysen
2014), i.e., the given labels have not always been groundtruth and inexact supervised data (Carbonneau et al. 2018),
i.e., only coarse-grained labels are given. Weakly supervised learning (WSL) has attracted considerable attention,
which has consequently resulted in a large number of WSL
methods, e.g., (Liu and Ziebart 2014; Oliver et al. 2018;
Hendrycks et al. 2018).
In previous studies on weakly supervised learning, a basic
assumption is that there is only one kind of weak supervision
in training data. However, in many real-world applications
such as ride-sharing user experience enhancement, such an
assumption is difﬁcult to hold. In Didi ride-sharing comment
data, it suffers from severe label noises, i.e., collected labels
from comment questions in ride-sharing user experience are
low-quality since they can easily be inﬂuenced by subjective factors (e.g., emotions) and many misoperations of the
passengers. Meanwhile, there is also severe label distribution bias, i.e., label distributions between training and testing
data are different, because the negative comments in ridesharing user experience are rare and they are dynamically
changing with time.
It is evident that single type weakly supervised learning
could not tackle the problem concerned in this paper. For
example, label noise learning methods ignore the label distribution bias which may seriously hurt the performance in
practice; while label distribution bias correction methods assume that the ground-truth label is accessible to each instance, which is not the case in our situations. Note that the
data scenario studied in this paper is quite different from the
previous weakly labeled studies. We call such a problem as
‘compound weakly supervised learning’.
In this paper, a novel method named CWSL is proposed
and veriﬁed on Didi ride-sharing comment data, where the
goal is to pre-detect negative comments and help improve
ride-sharing user experience. It is crucial to decrease the inﬂuence of noisy instances in the training stage at the same
time correct the label distribution bias to make the model
work well in practice. In our method, an instance reweight
strategy is employed to cope with severe labeling noise by

Abstract
Weakly supervised learning aims at coping with scarce labeled data. Previous weakly supervised studies typically assume that there is only one kind of weak supervision in data.
In many applications, however, raw data usually contains
more than one kind of weak supervision at the same time.
For example, in user experience enhancement from Didi, one
of the largest online ride-sharing platforms, the ride comment
data contains severe label noise (due to the subjective factors
of passengers) and severe label distribution bias (due to the
sampling bias). We call such a problem as ‘compound weakly
supervised learning’. In this paper, we propose the CWSL
method to address this problem based on Didi ride-sharing
comment data. Speciﬁcally, an instance reweighting strategy
is employed to cope with severe label noise in comment data,
where the weights for harmful noisy instances are small. Robust criteria like AUC rather than accuracy and the validation
performance are optimized for the correction of biased data
label. Alternating optimization and stochastic gradient methods accelerate the optimization on large-scale data. Experiments on Didi ride-sharing comment data clearly validate the
effectiveness. We hope this work may shed some light on applying weakly supervised learning to complex real situations.

Introduction
Conventional supervised learning has achieved great success
in various applications. Most successful techniques, such as
deep learning, require ground-truth labels to be given for a
big training data set. In many real-world applications, however, it can be difﬁcult to attain strong supervision due to
the fact that the hand-labeled data sets are time-consuming
and expensive to collect. Thus, it is desirable for machine
learning techniques to be able to work well with weakly supervised data (Zhou 2017).
Compared to the data in traditional supervised learning,
weakly supervised data does not have a large amount of
precise label information. Typically, three types of weakly
supervised data exist: incomplete supervised data (Oliver
∗

This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (61772262) and Didi research fund. Yu-Feng
Li is the corresponding author of this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4052

