The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Forgetting to Learn Logic Programs
Andrew Cropper
University of Oxford
andrew.cropper@cs.ox.ac.uk

However, no approach has been shown to work on
many (>10,000) tasks. Moreover, most approaches struggle even on few tasks (Quinlan 1990; Ferri, HernándezOrallo, and Ramı́rez-Quintana 2001). By contrast, humans
easily learn thousands of diverse concepts. If we want to
develop human-like AI systems that support lifelong learning – a grand challenge in AI (Silver, Yang, and Li 2013;
Lake et al. 2017) – then we need to overcome this limitation.
We think the key limitation with existing approaches is that
they save all learned programs to the BK, which is a problem because too much irrelevant BK is detrimental to learning performance (Srinivasan, Muggleton, and King 1995;
Srinivasan, King, and Bain 2003). The Blumer bound
(Blumer et al. 1987)1 helps explain this problem. This bound
states that given two hypothesis spaces, searching the smaller
space will result in fewer errors compared to the larger space,
assuming that the target hypothesis is in both spaces. Here
lies the problem: how to choose a learner’s hypothesis space
so that it is large enough to contain the target hypothesis yet
small enough to be efﬁciently searched.
To address this problem, we explore the idea of forgetting.
In this approach, a learner continually grows and shrinks its
hypothesis space by adding and removing programs to and
from its BK. We claim that forgetting can improve learning
performance, especially when learning from many tasks. To
support this claim, we make the following contributions:

Abstract
Most program induction approaches require predeﬁned, often
hand-engineered, background knowledge (BK). To overcome
this limitation, we explore methods to automatically acquire
BK through multi-task learning. In this approach, a learner
adds learned programs to its BK so that they can be reused to
help learn other programs. To improve learning performance,
we explore the idea of forgetting, where a learner can additionally remove programs from its BK. We consider forgetting in
an inductive logic programming (ILP) setting. We show that
forgetting can signiﬁcantly reduce both the size of the hypothesis space and the sample complexity of an ILP learner. We
introduce Forgetgol, a multi-task ILP learner which supports
forgetting. We experimentally compare Forgetgol against approaches that either remember or forget everything. Our experimental results show that Forgetgol outperforms the alternative
approaches when learning from over 10,000 tasks.

1

Introduction

A major challenge in machine learning is inductive bias:
how to choose a learner’s hypothesis space so that it is large
enough to contain the target hypothesis, yet small enough to
be searched efﬁciently (Baxter 2000). A major challenge in
program induction is how to chose a learner’s background
knowledge (BK), which in turn deﬁnes the hypothesis space.
Most approaches need predeﬁned, often hand-engineered,
BK (Law, Russo, and Broda 2014; Balog et al. 2017; Evans
and Grefenstette 2018; Ellis et al. 2018b). By contrast, we
want a learner to automatically learn BK.
Several approaches (Dechter et al. 2013; Ellis et al. 2018a;
Cropper 2019) learn BK through meta-learning. The idea is
to use knowledge gained from solving one problem to help
solve a different problem. For instance, Lin et al. (2014) use
this approach on 17 string transformation problems. They automatically identify easier problems, learn programs for them,
and then reuse the learned programs to help learn programs
for more difﬁcult problems. The authors experimentally show
that their multi-task approach performs substantially better
than a single-task approach because learned programs are
frequently reused. They also show that this approach leads to
a hierarchical library of reusable programs.

• We deﬁne forgetting in an inductive logic programming
(ILP) setting (Section 3). We show that forgetting can
reduce both the size of the hypothesis space (Theorem 2)
and the sample complexity of an ILP learner (Theorem 3).
We show that optimal forgetting is NP-Hard (Theorem 1).
• We introduce Forgetgol, a multi-task ILP learner that continually learns, saves, and forgets programs (Section 4).
We introduce two forgetting methods: syntactical and statistical forgetting, the latter based on Theorem 2.
• We experimentally show on two datasets (robots and Lego)
that forgetting can substantially improve learning performance when learning from over 10,000 tasks (Section 5).
This experiment is the ﬁrst to consider the performance of
a learner on many tasks.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3676

The bound is a reformulation of Lemma 2.1.

