The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Differentiable Algorithm for Marginalising Changepoints
Hyoungjin Lim, Gwonsoo Che, Wonyeol Lee, Hongseok Yang
School of Computing
KAIST, South Korea
{lmkmkr, gche, wonyeol, hongseok.yang}@kaist.ac.kr

of time-series models that assume a ﬁxed number of changepoints. Our algorithm runs in O(mn) time where m is the
number of changepoints and n the number of time steps.
We do not know of any O(mn)-time algorithm that directly
solves this changepoint-marginalisation problem. The class
of models handled by our algorithm is broad, including nonMarkovian time-series models.
Our marginalisation algorithm is differentiable with respect to its inputs, which enables the use of gradient-based
algorithms for posterior inference and parameter learning on changepoint models. Since changepoints are discrete, gradient-based algorithms cannot be applied to these
models, unless changepoints are marginalised out. In fact,
marginalising discrete variables, such as changepoints, is
a trick commonly adopted by the users of the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo algorithm or its variant (Stan Development Team 2018). Our algorithm makes the trick a viable
option for changepoint models. Its O(mn) time complexity ensures low marginalisation overhead. Its differentiability implies that the gradients of marginalised terms can be
computed by off-the-shelf automated differentiation tools
(Paszke et al. 2017; Abadi et al. 2016). In the paper, we
demonstrate these beneﬁts of our algorithm for posterior inference.
The key insight of our algorithm is that the likelihood of
latent variables with changepoints marginalised out can be
expressed in terms of quantities that satisfy recursive relationships. The algorithm employs dynamic programming to
compute these quantities efﬁciently. Its O(mn) time complexity comes from this dynamic programming scheme, and
its differentiability comes from the fact that dynamic programming uses only differentiable operations. In our experiments with an inference problem, the algorithm outperforms
existing alternatives.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In §2, we describe our algorithm and its theoretical properties, and in §3,
we explain how this algorithm can be used to learn model
parameters from given data. In §4, we describe our experiments where we apply the algorithm to a posterior-inference
problem. In §5, we put our results in the context of existing
work on changepoint models and differentiable algorithms,
and conclude the paper.

Abstract
We present an algorithm for marginalising changepoints in
time-series models that assume a ﬁxed number of unknown
changepoints. Our algorithm is differentiable with respect to
its inputs, which are the values of latent random variables
other than changepoints. Also, it runs in time O(mn) where
n is the number of time steps and m the number of changepoints, an improvement over a naive marginalisation method
with O(nm ) time complexity. We derive the algorithm by
identifying quantities related to this marginalisation problem,
showing that these quantities satisfy recursive relationships,
and transforming the relationships to an algorithm via dynamic programming. Since our algorithm is differentiable,
it can be applied to convert a model non-differentiable due
to changepoints to a differentiable one, so that the resulting
models can be analysed using gradient-based inference or
learning techniques. We empirically show the effectiveness
of our algorithm in this application by tackling the posterior
inference problem on synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

Time-series data from, for instance, econometrics, medical science, and political science (Erdman and Emerson
2008; Lio and Vannucci 2000; Spokoiny and others 2009;
Haynes, Eckley, and Fearnhead 2017; Reeves et al. 2007;
Lung-Yut-Fong, Lévy-Leduc, and Cappé 2012) often show
abrupt regime shifts, so that analysing those data commonly
requires reasoning about the moments of these shifts, called
changepoints. Two popular reasoning tasks are inferring the
number of changepoints and detecting the speciﬁc values or
distributions of the changepoints. Information found from
these tasks enables the use of different statistical models for
different segments of the data, identiﬁed by changepoints,
which leads to accurate analysis of the data. However, due
to the discrete nature of changepoints, developing efﬁcient
algorithms for the tasks is tricky, and often requires an insight into the structure of a class of models used.
In the paper, we study the problem of marginalising
changepoints, which has been under-explored compared
with the two tasks mentioned above. We present a differentiable algorithm for marginalising changepoints for a class
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4828

