The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Parameterized Indexed Value Function for
Efﬁcient Exploration in Reinforcement Learning
Tian Tan,1∗† Zhihan Xiong,2∗ Vikranth R. Dwaracherla3
1

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University
2
Department of Statistics, Stanford University
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
{tiantan, zxiong9, vikranth}@stanford.edu

and Ghahramani 2016) and variational inference (Fortunato
et al. 2017), (Touati et al. 2018), these methods are typically not suitable for sequential decision making (Osband,
Aslanides, and Cassirer 2018). Instead, ensemble sampling
(Osband et al. 2016), (Lu and Van Roy 2017), (Osband,
Aslanides, and Cassirer 2018), which represents uncertainty
by learning an approximate posterior distribution over value
functions via bootstrapping, has achieved remarkable success in RL. Each member in the ensemble, typically a neural
network, learns a mapping from the input state or feature
space to action values from a perturbed version of the observed data. However, ensemble sampling methods demand
learning and maintaining many neural networks in parallel,
which can be both computation and memory intensive.
Index sampling (Dwaracherla, Van Roy, and Ibrahimi
2019) offers a possibility to distill the ensemble process into
a “single” network which learns a mapping from the state or
feature space and a random index space to the action values.
The random index z, can be thought as an independent random variable drawn from a ﬁxed distribution pz . After learning this mapping, the resulting model can be approximately
sampled from the posterior over networks conditioned on
the observed data by passing different indices. Therefore,
one effectively samples a value function from its posterior
by sampling a random index z.
In this paper, we consider index sampling via a class of
Gaussian indexed value functions as we explicitly parameterize the action-value function as Qz (x, a) = ν(x, a) +
m(x, a)z, where (x, a) represents a state-action pair, z ∼
N (0, 1), v(x, a) and m(x, a) are real valued functions representing mean and standard deviation of the action-values
or commonly known as Q-values. We present an algorithm to learn such a parameterized indexed value function via a distributional variation of temporal difference
(TD) learning, which we refer to as the distributional TD
or Wasserstein TD when Wasserstein distance is used as
the distance metric. We provethat this algorithm
 enjoys

 H 2 |X | |A| L in ﬁnitea Bayesian regret bound of O
horizon episodic MDPs, where H is the episode length, L
is the number of episodes, and |X | and |A| are the cardinality of the state and action spaces. Then, we propose a
dual-network architecture Parameterized Indexed Networks

Abstract
It is well known that quantifying uncertainty in the actionvalue estimates is crucial for efﬁcient exploration in reinforcement learning. Ensemble sampling offers a relatively
computationally tractable way of doing this using randomized value functions. However, it still requires a huge amount
of computational resources for complex problems. In this paper, we present an alternative, computationally efﬁcient way
to induce exploration using index sampling. We use an indexed value function to represent uncertainty in our actionvalue estimates. We ﬁrst present an algorithm to learn parameterized indexed value function through a distributional
version of temporal difference in a tabular setting and prove
its regret bound. Then, in a computational point of view, we
propose a dual-network architecture, Parameterized Indexed
Networks (PINs), comprising one mean network and one uncertainty network to learn the indexed value function. Finally,
we show the efﬁcacy of PINs through computational experiments.

Introduction
Efﬁcient exploration is a long-established problem and an
active research area in reinforcement learning (RL). It is
well known in the RL community that maintaining an uncertainty estimate in the value functions is crucial for efﬁcient exploration (Russo et al. 2018), (Ghavamzadeh et al.
2015), (Osband, Aslanides, and Cassirer 2018). Conventionally, dithering methods, such as -greedy and Boltzmann greedy, induce exploration by randomly selecting and experimenting with actions. This is one of the common exploration schemes used in many applications (Mnih et al. 2015),
(He et al. 2015), (Tan et al. 2019), for its simplicity. However, these schemes do not take uncertainty into account in
their value estimates. As a result, they require a huge amount
of data to learn a desirable policy through dithering in an environment with sparse and delayed reward signals.
Although there has been a growing interest in quantifying
uncertainty, such as dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), (Gal
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

5948

