The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Social Inﬂuence Does Matter: User Action Prediction for In-Feed Advertising
Hongyang Wang,1 Qingfei Meng,1,2 Ju Fan,∗1 Yuchen Li,3
Laizhong Cui,4 Xiaoman Zhao,1 Chong Peng,2 Gong Chen,2 Xiaoyong Du1
1

Renmin University of China, 2 Tencent, 3 Singapore Management University, 4 Shenzhen University
{harpuia, fanj, xiaomanzhao, duyong}@ruc.edu.cn, {zoemeng, michaelpeng, natchen}@tencent.com,
yuchenli@smu.edu.sg, cuilz@szu.edu.cn

marketing” that maximizes social actions; gaint social media platforms, such as Facebook, also take engagement as a
crucial advertising metric1 .
As a crucial step to promote user engagements, this paper
studies social action prediction: given an ad exposure to a
user, it predicts whether the user will perform social action
on the ad. This problem is inherently different from clickthrough rate (CTR) prediction, which is studied in conventional advertising (Guo et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2016). Unlike
the click behavior, social actions of a user in the scenario of
in-feed advertising would be very likely inﬂuenced by her
friends. For example, after noticing that some friends have
liked an ad, the user may be encouraged to join her friends
and interact with the ad. According to some marketing studies (Edelman 2013), consumers trust their peers’ opinions of
products over companies’. Unfortunately, the existing prediction techniques overlook such social inﬂuence.
However, it is very challenging to utilize social inﬂuence
for in-feed advertising, as social interactions among users on
the same ads are highly sparse. Firstly, in the social interaction network (SIN) built on same-ad interaction data, users
have very few neighbors: the average degree of the SIN is
much less than that of general social networks. Secondly,
similar users may not be connected or may be far away from
each other in the SIN. The prominent sparsity challenge
makes the existing methods inadequate for in-feed ads. For
example, DeepInf (Qiu et al. 2018) is the state-of-the-art social inﬂuence prediction approach designed for general social network settings. It predicts action status of a user by
considering her neighbors’ features and action status. However, it is not effective for in-feed advertising as very limited
neighbor information is available due to the sparsity.
To address the challenge, we introduce an end-to-end approach to learn predictive signals in social inﬂuence for
boosting social action prediction. First, we propose to model
who tends to be inﬂuenced. We introduce the topological
feature learning into in-feed advertising by extracting a subgraph of each user as its neighborhood and encoding topology of the neighborhood. The intuition is that the topology
reﬂects whether the user is in the “center” or “peripheral”
of a neighborhood that tends to inﬂuence her. The topolog-

Abstract
Social in-feed advertising delivers ads that seamlessly ﬁt inside a user’s feed, and allows users to engage in social actions (likes or comments) with the ads. Many businesses pay
higher attention to “engagement marketing” that maximizes
social actions, as social actions can effectively promote brand
awareness. This paper studies social action prediction for infeed advertising. Most existing works overlook the social inﬂuence as a user’s action may be affected by her friends’
actions. This paper introduces an end-to-end approach that
leverages social inﬂuence for action prediction, and focuses
on addressing the high sparsity challenge for in-feed ads. We
propose to learn inﬂuence structure that models who tends
to be inﬂuenced. We extract a subgraph with the near neighbors a user interacts with, and learn topological features of
the subgraph by developing structure-aware graph encoding
methods. We also introduce graph attention networks to learn
inﬂuence dynamics that models how a user is inﬂuenced by
neighbors’ actions. We conduct extensive experiments on real
datasets from the commercial advertising platform of WeChat
and a public dataset. The experimental results demonstrate
that social inﬂuence learned by our approach can signiﬁcantly
boost performance of social action prediction.

Introduction
Social media in-feed advertising delivers ads in the form of a
native feeds stream for smooth user experience. This emerging format of advertising has become one of the most effective advertising methods (Fan, Lu, and Gupta 2017), and
been widely adopted by social platform market leaders like
Facebook, Twitter and WeChat.
One key characteristic of in-feed advertising is that a user
can engage in social actions with an ad as with other common contents, such as likes and comments. And such actions
are visible to the user’s friends, who are also exposed with
the same ad. Then, the users can interact with their friends
by liking the same ad or replying to friends’ comments. Evidently, the more people engage with the ads, the more likely
they have interest in the products/business in the ads. Thus,
many businesses pay higher attention to the “engagement
∗

Ju Fan is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

246

https://www.facebook.com/business/news/pageinsights

