The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cross-Modal Subspace Clustering via Deep Canonical Correlation Analysis
Quanxue Gao,1 Huanhuan Lian,1∗ Qianqian Wang,1† Gan Sun2
1

2

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China.
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
qxgao@xidian.edu.cn, lianhh1212@163.com, qianqian174@foxmail.com, sungan1412@gmail.com

Abstract

Different
modalities

For cross-modal subspace clustering, the key point is how to
exploit the correlation information between cross-modal data.
However, most hierarchical and structural correlation information among cross-modal data cannot be well exploited due
to its high-dimensional non-linear property. To tackle this
problem, in this paper, we propose an unsupervised framework named Cross-Modal Subspace Clustering via Deep
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CMSC-DCCA), which incorporates the correlation constraint with a self-expressive
layer to make full use of information among the inter-modal
data and the intra-modal data. More speciﬁcally, the proposed
model consists of three components: 1) deep canonical correlation analysis (Deep CCA) model; 2) self-expressive layer;
3) Deep CCA decoders. The Deep CCA model consists of
convolutional encoders and correlation constraint. Convolutional encoders are used to obtain the latent representations
of cross-modal data, while adding the correlation constraint
for the latent representations can make full use of the information of the inter-modal data. Furthermore, self-expressive
layer works on latent representations and constrain it perform
self-expression properties, which makes the shared coefﬁcient matrix could capture the hierarchical intra-modal correlations of each modality. Then Deep CCA decoders reconstruct data to ensure that the encoded features can preserve the
structure of the original data. Experimental results on several
real-world datasets demonstrate the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

X1

Different
subspaces
Deep
Encoding

Z1

Z1S1

Z2

Z 2S 2

Z1

Z1S1

S1

Z1
S2

S

Z2

X2

Similar
subspaces

Different
modalities
Deep
Encoding

S1
A better

Z1

X1

Z2

Maximize
Correlation

X2

Selfexpression

Z 2S 2

S2

S

Z2

Figure 1: The illustration shows the inﬂuence of correlation constraint. The learned features of two modalities in
the subspace are quite different without the correlation constraint, which resulting a bad shared coefﬁcient matrix S, because it’s too difﬁcult to reﬂect the different structure of two
modalities simultaneously. However, combining the correlation constraint with a self-expressive layer, we can learn a
better shared coefﬁcient matrix S. X1 and X2 are the input
data. Z1 and Z2 are the latent representations in subspace.
S1 and S2 are the self-expression coefﬁcient matrices.

Introduction
In machine learning, classiﬁcation (Liu, Tsang, and Müller
2017; Liu and Tsang 2017) and clustering are two core
tasks. However, clustering task has attracted considerable
attention due to the fact that label information is difﬁcult
to obtain in real applications. Most traditional clustering
methods mainly focus on the clustering problem of lowdimensional data. Generally, traditional clustering methods
can be roughly divided into ﬁve categories: 1) Non-negative
matrix factorization (NMF) clustering (Akata, Thurau, and

Bauckhage 2011); 2) Multi-kernel learning strategy (Guo
et al. 2014); 3) Subspace clustering methods (Chaudhuri et
al. 2009); 4) Self-representation based methods (Yin et al.
2015); 5) Graph constraint based methods (Xia et al. 2014;
Nie, Cai, and Li 2017). Among these above methods, subspace and self-representation based methods have received
a lot of attention and achieved remarkable results. However,
these traditional methods adopt shallow and linear embedding functions to reveal the intrinsic structure of data, which
cannot simulate the high-dimensional nonlinear characteristics of data very well. Especially, for subspace clustering
methods, high-dimensional data can easily lead to “curse of
dimensionality”.

∗

Corresponding author: Huanhuan Lian
Corresponding author: Qianqian Wang
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3938

