The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

OF-MSRN: Optical Flow-Auxiliary Multi-Task Regression Network
for Direct Quantitative Measurement, Segmentation and Motion Estimation
Chengqian Zhao,1 Cheng Feng,2 Dengwang Li,1∗ Shuo Li3,4
1
Shandong Key Laboratory of Medical Physics and Image Processing &
Shandong Institute of Industrial Technology for Health Sciences and Precision Medicine,
School of Physics and Electronics, Shandong Normal University, Jinan, Shandong 250358, China
2
Department of Ultrasound, The Second Afﬁliated Hospital, Southern University of Science and Technology,
Shenzhen Third People’s Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
3
Department of Medical Imaging, Western University, London, ON, Canada, 4 Digital Image Group, London, ON, Canada
chengqian zhao@139.com, lidengwang@sdnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Comprehensively analyzing the carotid artery is critically signiﬁcant to diagnosing and treating cardiovascular diseases.
The object of this work is to simultaneously achieve direct
quantitative measurement and automated segmentation of the
lumen diameter and intima-media thickness as well as the
motion estimation of the carotid wall. No work has simultaneously achieved the comprehensive analysis of carotid artery
due to three intractable challenges: 1) Tiny intima-media is
more challenging to measure and segment; 2) Artifact generated by radial motion restrict the accuracy of measurement
and segmentation; 3) Occlusions on diseased carotid walls
generate dynamic complexity and indeterminacy. In this paper, we propose a novel optical ﬂow-auxiliary multi-task regression network named OF-MSRN to overcome these challenges. We concatenate multi-scale features to a regression
network to simultaneously achieve measurement and segmentation, which makes full use of the potential correlation
between the two tasks. More importantly, we creatively explore an optical ﬂow auxiliary module to take advantage of
the co-promotion of segmentation and motion estimation to
overcome the restrictions of the radial motion. Besides, we
evaluate consistency between forward and backward optical
ﬂow to improve the accuracy of motion estimation of the diseased carotid wall. Extensive experiments on US sequences
of 101 patients demonstrate the superior performance of OFMSRN on the comprehensive analysis of the carotid artery
by utilizing the dual optimization of the optical ﬂow auxiliary module.

Figure 1: Challenges of simultaneously achieving direct
quantitative measurement, segmentation and motion estimation of the carotid artery. The tiny structure of CIMT, radial
motion, and diseased carotid wall cause the loss of expression features and discriminative information.

et al. 2003; Bots et al. 2005; Naqvi and Lee 2014) have veriﬁed that carotid artery lumen diameter (CALD) and intimamedia thickness (CIMT) are risk indicators for many cardiovascular diseases. The CALD is the distance between
lumen-intima interfaces at the near wall (NLI) and far wall
(FLI), and the CIMT is the distance between FLI and mediaadventitia interface at the far wall (MA). Bots et al. (Bots,
Hofman, and Grobbee 1997) have indicated that CIMT is
related to changes in local shear stress and tensile stress and
maybe a direct function of CALD. Simultaneously quantifying CALD and CIMT is great signiﬁcance. Besides, increased stiffness of the carotid artery is signiﬁcantly correlated to the incidence of cardiovascular diseases. Estimating
the periodical motion of the carotid wall is the basis for analyzing the stiffness. In arterial wall dynamics, CALD and
CIMT are crucial factors in evaluating carotid artery elas-

Introduction
Comprehensive analysis of carotid artery based on direct quantitative measurement, automated segmentation, and
motion estimation is signiﬁcant to diagnosing and treating
cardiovascular diseases. A series of clinical researches (Alan
∗

Corresponding author. This work was funded by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (61971271), the Taishan
Scholars Project of Shandong Province (Tsqn20161023) and the
Primary Research and Development Plan of Shandong Province
(No. 2018GGX101018).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1218

