The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

BAR — A Reinforcement Learning
Agent for Bounding-Box Automated Reﬁnement
Morgane Ayle,1 Jimmy Tekli,2,3 Julia El-Zini,1 Boulos El-Asmar,2 Mariette Awad1
1

Maroun Semaan Faculty of Engineering and Architecture, American University of Beirut, Lebanon
2
Université de Franche Comté, Belfort, France
3
BMW Group, Munich, Germany
{mna61, jwe04}@mail.aub.edu, mariette.awad@aub.edu.lb,
{jimmy.tekli, boulos.el-asmar}@bmw.de

Over the years, Deep Learning (DL) has demonstrated great
superiority over traditional learning-based approaches in a
wide range of computer vision applications (Yang et al.
2019). Object detection and recognition DL techniques allow machines to visualize their environments with high accuracy (Zhang et al. 2018). Hence, companies in many industrial sectors started integrating DL approaches in order to
assist human workers and speed up chain processes at their
manufacturing sites (Wang et al. 2018) by installing cameras
and gathering images speciﬁc for their use-cases. Unfortunately, accurately labeling these datasets requires excessive
human effort and a considerable amount of time, and the
conﬁdentiality of the data renders the use of crowd-sourcing
platforms such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (Buhrmester,
Kwang, and Gosling 2011) impossible. Furthermore, the image annotation process is highly prone to human error. For

instance, target objects might be wrongly labeled when a human annotator is biased to label one side of the target object.
Moreover, after the whole dataset has been labeled, the Region of Interest (RoI) of the target object might change because of industrial circumstances. In these cases, all labels
need to be re-adjusted, resulting in unexpected delays and
extra costs.
A lot of research (Papadopoulos et al. 2014; 2016; 2017;
Yao et al. 2012; Konyushkova et al. 2018) has been recently
oriented at reducing the labeling time and avoiding crowdsourcing techniques by developing methods that are less
time consuming than manual labeling. To the best of our
knowledge, existing methods generate bounding-boxes (bboxes) around the target object and no attempts have been
made in the literature to correct inaccurate b-boxes.
This work aims at enhancing the accuracy of existing
b-boxes, i.e. annotations, to obtain “cleaner” data1 to be
used in industrial use-cases, while reducing the human intervention needed. For this purpose, we implemented BAR
(Bounding-box Automated Reﬁnement), a Reinforcement
Learning (RL) agent that learns from human examples to
correct inaccurate annotations. Hence, instead of manually
labeling new images to increase the dataset size, human effort is limited to correcting inaccurate annotations. After
learning to ﬁnd an optimal strategy to correct these annotations, BAR applies its knowledge on new images. We adopt
two approaches in order to train BAR: an ofﬂine approach
using Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) in which the
agent is trained by batches, and an online approach using
Contextual Bandits (CB) in which the agent is re-trained after every new image. We also compare the advantages and
limitations of both approaches with different initializations,
i.e. methods that generate initial b-boxes. Finally, we show
that for all initializations, at least one of the two approaches
successfully improves the annotations, with an increase in
Intersection-over-Union (IoU) with the ground-truths of up
to 0.28, and a decrease in human intervention by 30%-82%.
Our contributions in this work are:
• BAR, an RL agent that improves the quality of existing
b-boxes through ofﬂine (DRL) and online (CB) methods.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
“Clean” data means it is uniformly annotated across the dataset
and the b-boxes tightly enclose the RoI of the target object

Abstract
Research has shown that deep neural networks are able to
help and assist human workers throughout the industrial sector via different computer vision applications. However, such
data-driven learning approaches require a very large number
of labeled training images in order to generalize well and
achieve high accuracies that meet industry standards. Gathering and labeling large amounts of images is both expensive
and time consuming, speciﬁcally for industrial use-cases. In
this work, we introduce BAR (Bounding-box Automated Reﬁnement), a reinforcement learning agent that learns to correct inaccurate bounding-boxes that are weakly generated by
certain detection methods, or wrongly annotated by a human,
using either an ofﬂine training method with Deep Reinforcement Learning (BAR-DRL), or an online one using Contextual Bandits (BAR-CB). Our agent limits the human intervention to correcting or verifying a subset of bounding-boxes
instead of re-drawing new ones. Results on a car industryrelated dataset and on the PASCAL VOC dataset show a consistent increase of up to 0.28 in the Intersection-over-Union of
bounding-boxes with their desired ground-truths, while saving 30%-82% of human intervention time in either correcting
or re-drawing inaccurate proposals.

1

Introduction

2561

