The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Select, Answer and Explain: Interpretable
Multi-Hop Reading Comprehension over Multiple Documents
Ming Tu, Kevin Huang, Guangtao Wang, Xiaodong He, Bowen Zhou
JD AI Research
{ming.tu, kevin.huang3, guangtao.wang, jing.huang, xiaodong.he, bowen.zhou}@jd.com

Abstract

Question: What government position was held by the woman
who portrayed Corliss Archer in the ﬁlm Kiss and Tell?
Document 1, Kiss and Tell (1945 ﬁlm): Kiss and Tell is a 1945
American comedy ﬁlm starring then 17-year-old Shirley Temple as Corliss Archer. In the ﬁlm, two teenage girls cause their
respective parents much concern when they start to become interested in boys. The parents’ bickering about which girl is the
worse inﬂuence causes more problems than it solves.
Document 2, Shirley Temple: Shirley Temple Black (April 23,
1928 - February 10, 2014) was an American actress, singer,
dancer, businesswoman, and diplomat who was Hollywood’s
number one box-ofﬁce draw as a child actress from 1935 to
1938. As an adult, she was named United States ambassador
to Ghana and to Czechoslovakia and also served as Chief of
Protocol of the United States.
Answer: Chief of Protocol
Supporting facts: [“Kiss and Tell (1945 ﬁlm)”,0], [“Shirley
Temple”,0], [“Shirley Temple”,1]

Interpretable multi-hop reading comprehension (RC) over
multiple documents is a challenging problem because it demands reasoning over multiple information sources and explaining the answer prediction by providing supporting evidences. In this paper, we propose an effective and interpretable Select, Answer and Explain (SAE) system to solve
the multi-document RC problem. Our system ﬁrst ﬁlters out
answer-unrelated documents and thus reduce the amount of
distraction information. This is achieved by a document classiﬁer trained with a novel pairwise learning-to-rank loss. The
selected answer-related documents are then input to a model
to jointly predict the answer and supporting sentences. The
model is optimized with a multi-task learning objective on
both token level for answer prediction and sentence level for
supporting sentences prediction, together with an attentionbased interaction between these two tasks. Evaluated on HotpotQA, a challenging multi-hop RC data set, the proposed
SAE system achieves top competitive performance in distractor setting compared to other existing systems on the leaderboard.

Figure 1: An example from HotpotQA dev set (only 2 documents are shown). Supporting facts formatted as [document
title, sentence id] are annotated in blue.

Introduction
Machine Reading Comprehension (RC) or Question answering (QA) has seen great advancement in recent years.
Numerous neural models have been proposed (Seo et al.
2016; Xiong, Zhong, and Socher 2016; Tay et al. 2018)
and achieved promising performances on several different
MRC data sets, such as SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016;
Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018), NarrativeQA (Kočiskỳ et
al. 2018) and CoQA (Reddy, Chen, and Manning 2019).
The performance was further boosted after the release of
the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model (Devlin et al. 2019), which has delivered
state-of-the-art performance on several RC/QA data sets.
Most existing research in machine RC/QA focuses on answering a question given a single document or paragraph.
Although the performance on these types of tasks have been
improved a lot over the last few years, the models used in
these tasks still lack the ability to do reasoning across multiple documents when a single document is not enough to

ﬁnd the correct answer (Chen and Durrett 2019). In order to
improve a machine’s ability to do multi-hop reasoning over
multiple documents, recently several multi-hop QA data sets
have been proposed to promote the related research, such
as W IKI H OP (Welbl, Stenetorp, and Riedel 2018) and HotpotQA (Yang et al. 2018). These data sets are challenging
because they require models to be able to do multi-hop reasoning over multiple documents and under strong distraction. HotpotQA also encourages explainable QA models by
providing supporting sentences for the answer, which usually come from several documents (a document is called
”gold doc” if it contains the answer or it contains supporting
sentences to the answer). One example from HotpotQA is
shown in Figure 1. Besides the answer “Chief of Protocol”,
HotpotQA also annotates supporting sentences (text in blue)
in gold documents to explain the choice of that answer.
To solve the multi-hop multi-document QA task, two research directions have been explored. The ﬁrst direction focuses on applying or adapting previous techniques that are

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9073

