The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Optical Flow in Deep Visual Tracking
Mikko Vihlman, Arto Visala
Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto University
PO Box 15500, FIN-00076 Aalto, Finland
{mikko.vihlman, arto.visala}@aalto.ﬁ

During the past years, visual tracking has been dominated
by correlation ﬁlters and deep trackers. Discriminative correlation ﬁlters model the target object based on a single
frame and adapt the learned representation in online fashion based on subsequent frames during the tracking process.
They are traditionally based on handcrafted or shallow features but can also be built on deep features. Correlation ﬁlters are efﬁcient but often not discriminative enough in complex conditions. Deep models trained end-to-end for tracking can be more discriminative. Deep neural networks have
been used successfully in applications such as image recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), object detection (Girshick et al. 2014; Ren et al. 2015), semantic
segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) and action recognition (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). Recently,
large datasets like the ILSVRC (Russakovsky et al. 2015)
dataset for object detection in video have enabled large-scale
ofﬂine training to learn generic features for tracking.
One approach to ease the learning process is to present
the data in a new way using traditional methods of computer vision. For instance, (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014)
has shown that feeding the network with the optical ﬂow between consecutive frames instead of raw frames can notably
improve the performance of deep networks in action recognition. The improvement arguably results from the fact that
the network does not need to implicitly learn how to compute optical ﬂow or to understand that the ﬂow information
is useful. In this paper, we argue that optical ﬂow could similarly be useful for deep visual tracking.
The tracking literature focuses heavily on the ﬁnal performance of the trackers, often providing little insight into why
the trackers perform well. Instead, this paper deliberately
concentrates on analyzing the learned representations. This
is highly important as it can increase the understanding of
how existing trackers work and reveal sources of good tracking performance. In this paper, the focus is on the role of optical ﬂow. The analysis is done by modifying the architecture
of the GOTURN tracker (Held, Thrun, and Savarese 2016),
one typical approach to deep visual tracking. The goal is to
ﬁnd out if the tracker uses implicit representations of optical ﬂow, how useful the representations are, and how using
optical ﬂow more explicitly affects the tracking process. In
addition to being one of the few papers analyzing the representations learned by deep trackers, this paper is among

Abstract
Single-target tracking of generic objects is a difﬁcult task
since a trained tracker is given information present only in
the ﬁrst frame of a video. In recent years, increasingly many
trackers have been based on deep neural networks that learn
generic features relevant for tracking. This paper argues that
deep architectures are often ﬁt to learn implicit representations of optical ﬂow. Optical ﬂow is intuitively useful for
tracking, but most deep trackers must learn it implicitly. This
paper is among the ﬁrst to study the role of optical ﬂow in
deep visual tracking. The architecture of a typical tracker is
modiﬁed to reveal the presence of implicit representations of
optical ﬂow and to assess the effect of using the ﬂow information more explicitly. The results show that the considered
network learns implicitly an effective representation of optical ﬂow. The implicit representation can be replaced by an
explicit ﬂow input without a notable effect on performance.
Using the implicit and explicit representations at the same
time does not improve tracking accuracy. The explicit ﬂow
input could allow constructing lighter networks for tracking.

Introduction
The goal of single-target visual tracking is to ﬁnd the location of a speciﬁc object in subsequent video frames given
the location of the object in the beginning of the video. Visual tracking has several applications in computer vision and
automation. For instance, surveillance systems use tracking to automatically follow certain individuals whereas autonomous vehicles need tracking to follow the road, trafﬁc signs and obstacles. Research often focuses on tracking either objects of a given class, e.g. people or vehicles,
or generic objects of any class. This paper concentrates on
single-target tracking of generic objects.
Despite extensive research, visual tracking remains an active and challenging ﬁeld of study. Real-world videos involve many complicating factors such as occlusions, nonrigid transformations, movements of the camera and changes
in illumination. Learning to track is difﬁcult since the goal
is to track previously unseen objects in new environments;
a pretrained tracker is initialized using only the information
present in the beginning of the sequence.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12112

