The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TraceHub - A Platform to Bridge the Gap
between State-of-the-Art Time-Series Analytics and Datasets
Shubham Agarwal,1 Christian Muise,1 Mayank Agarwal,1 Sohini Upadhyay,2
Zilu Tang,3 Zhongshen Zeng,2 Yasaman Khazaeni4
1
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 2,4 IBM Research, 3 IBM Cloud and Cognitive Software
{Shubham.Agarwal, Christian.Muise, Mayank.Agarwal, Sohini.Upadhyay, Zilu.Tang, Zhongshen.Zeng}@ibm.com,
Yasaman.Khazaeni@us.ibm.com

reducing their worth to dataset owners. To best demonstrate
TraceHub’s value to both analytics and dataset owners, we
present in this paper a use-case focusing on a recent analytics that generates easily interpretable contrastive explanations between two groups of events in data using its temporal
properties (Kim et al. 2019).

Abstract
In this paper, we present TraceHub - a platform that connects new non-trivial state-of-the-art time-series analytics
with datasets from different domains. Analytics owners can
run their insights on new datasets in an automated setting to
ﬁnd insight’s potential and improve it. Dataset owners can
ﬁnd all possible types of non-trivial insights based on latest research. We provide a plug-n-play system as a set of
Dataset, Transformer pipeline, and Analytics APIs for both
kinds of users. We show a usefulness measure of generated
insights across various types of analytics in the system. We
believe that this platform can be used to bridge the gap between time-series analytics and datasets by signiﬁcantly reducing the time to ﬁnd the true potential of budding timeseries research and improving on it faster.

Architecture
TraceHub’s architecture consists of three main components : Data loaders, Transformer Pipelines and Analytics. The system offers APIs to plug in a custom dataset,
transformer or analytics. Figure 1 shows the architecture
overview.
Data Loaders TraceHub loads data by automatically
detecting the type of values. It is then represented as traces
where each trace is a sequence of events in time. The splitting of data into traces happens based on a certain attribute
of the data speciﬁed by the user.

Introduction
The ubiquity of temporal data across disciplines has drawn
the attention of researchers over the last few decades. Formally, (Brockwell and Davis 1986) describes time series as
a series of observations xi , where each observation x corresponds to a speciﬁc time t. In this paper, we focus on discrete, multivariate time series.
TraceHub is a playground where separate analytics
and dataset owners can plug in time-series analytics and
datasets as APIs. The system then runs automated transformer pipelines to generate insights from plugged in analytics against the datasets, allowing dataset owners to access
new analyses and enabling analytics owners to ﬁnd new use
cases and inspiration for model improvement. TraceHub
also reports the usefulness of the generated insights.
Time-series data has been studied extensively across the
ﬁelds of predictive analysis, classiﬁcation, anomaly detection, clustering, and temporal data mining. The abundance of
unlabeled data has precipitated a need for unsupervised approaches like clustering time series which aims to learn the
distribution generating given data point, avoiding assumptions between time series (Khaleghi et al. 2016).
While the above approach tackles unsupervised time series data, the insights generated are not easily interpretable,

Transformer Pipelines TraceHub comes with a number of standard out-of-the-box data transformers like onehot encoding, missing value handling, quantiling, binarizing column, etc. The Transformer API of TraceHub also
allows the user to deﬁne a custom transformation for traces.
The system automates the transformer pipeline by suggesting the applicable ones on the traces. The user can then
choose which of the applicable transformers to apply.
Analytics After the transformer pipeline is completed, the
resulting output of traces is fed to analytics which then generates insights along with a usefulness score of it.

Evaluation
In this section, we validate and evaluate the capabilities of
TraceHub on a simulated business process dataset of a
loan processing workﬂow. 1

Simulated Loan Application Dataset
We simulate the workﬂow for a simpliﬁed loan application
in order to demonstrate TraceHub’s capabilities. Each loan

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13600

We thank Vatche Isahagian, IBM Research for the dataset.

