The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Multi-Scale Approach for Graph Link Prediction
Lei Cai,1 Shuiwang Ji2
1

Washington State University, 2 Texas A&M University
lei.cai@wsu.edu, sji@tamu.edu

However, in many real-world tasks like friend recommendation (Adamic and Adar 2003), movie recommendation
(Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009), knowledge graph completion (Nickel et al. 2016) and metabolic network reconstruction (Oyetunde et al. 2016), the input data is represented
as graphs for link prediction (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg
2007). It is challenging to re-scale the graph data directly
and apply it to link prediction tasks.
There have been many methods proposed to solve link
prediction problems (Kipf and Welling 2016b; Perozzi, AlRfou, and Skiena 2014; Tang et al. 2015; Qiu et al. 2018).
One class of these methods are heuristic methods (Lü and
Zhou 2011), which employ a heuristic function to compute the similarity between two nodes and evaluate the existence of link. The heuristic function can compute the similarity score using a subgraph or the whole graph (Bar-Yossef
and Mashiach 2008). However, these methods employ predeﬁned heuristic function to compute the score and predict
the existence of link. They cannot achieve satisfactory performance on different kinds of graphs (Zhang and Chen
2018). To enable heuristic methods to perform well on different graphs, (Zhang and Chen 2018) proposed the SEAL
framework, which can learn graph structure features of an
enclosing subgraph and transform the link prediction problem to a graph classiﬁcation problem.
Although SEAL framework works well for link prediction tasks, it only employs a single scale enclosing subgraph
as the input. SEAL employs graph convolutional neural layers (Kipf and Welling 2016a) to aggregate node features in
the graph and extract representative features for each enclosing graph. Although the node information can be propagated deeper by stacking more graph convolution layers,
each node is most inﬂuenced by its neighbors (Xu et al.
2018). Therefore, if nodes in a neighborhood contain similar and redundant information, the performance of graph
convolution network will be affected. In this situation, long
range neighbor information is required to achieve better performance for link prediction tasks.
To tackle this challenge, we propose a node aggregation
method which transforms the input enclosing subgraph into
different scales. By employing the proposed node aggregation method on the original graph, we can obtain a new en-

Abstract
Deep models can be made scale-invariant when trained
with multi-scale information. Images can be easily made
multi-scale, given their grid-like structures. Extending this
to generic graphs poses major challenges. For example, in
link prediction tasks, inputs are represented as graphs consisting of nodes and edges. Currently, the state-of-the-art model
for link prediction uses supervised heuristic learning, which
learns graph structure features centered on two target nodes.
It then learns graph neural networks to predict the existence
of links based on graph structure features. Thus, the performance of link prediction models highly depends on graph
structure features. In this work, we propose a novel node aggregation method that can transform the enclosing subgraph
into different scales and preserve the relationship between
two target nodes for link prediction. A theory for analyzing the information loss during the re-scaling procedure is
also provided. Graphs in different scales can provide scaleinvariant information, which enables graph neural networks
to learn invariant features and improve link prediction performance. Our experimental results on 14 datasets from different areas demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods by employing multi-scale graphs
without additional parameters.

Introduction
Multi-scale learning is an effective method to improve the
performance of deep learning model for image-to-image
tasks such as semantic segmentation (Chen et al. 2018b).
Instances in different scales make the identifying and labeling difﬁcult using convolutional neural networks since these
instances should be labeled by considering a different range
of pixels. For example, a face can be identiﬁed by only considering the human body nearby. However, Identifying a car
depends on long range information. This problem can be addressed by a multi-scale convolution neural network, which
takes images in different scales as input to increase the robustness of models.
Image data is easy to re-scale and applied to multi-scale
learning framework since it has grid-like structures. Pixels
in the image also contain locality and order information.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3308

