The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Corpus Wide Argument Mining—A Working Solution
Liat Ein-Dor, Eyal Shnarch, Lena Dankin, Alon Halfon, Benjamin Sznajder,
Ariel Gera, Carlos Alzate, Martin Gleize, Leshem Choshen, Yufang Hou,
Yonatan Bilu, Ranit Aharonov, Noam Slonim
IBM Research AI
{liate, eyals, lenad, alonhal, benjams, arielge, leshem.choshen, yonatanb, ranita, noams}@il.ibm.com
{carlos.alzate, martin.gleize, yhou}@ie.ibm.com
For an argument retrieval system to be of practical use
requires: (1) high precision, and (2) wide coverage. The former is important because in order to make a case one typically employs several arguments, all of which need to be
relevant and persuasive. For example, if one aims to retrieve
3 such arguments, then even a precision of 0.9 might not be
enough, as it implies a 0.27 probability of getting at least one
of the arguments wrong. While previous work made great
advancements in argument retrieval, such high precision was
far from being attained. The second requirement is what sets
a practical system from a proof-of-concept. Indeed, previous work mostly focused on a small set of topics and a corresponding moderate-sized corpus. Here we achieve wide
coverage by demonstrating how to perform corpus–wide argument mining over massive corpora.
Our starting point is the approach of Levy et al. (2017),
which was the ﬁrst to depart from the document-based
dogma, aiming to detect topic-relevant arguments by indexing the sentences of a corpus, and retrieving them directly.
This Sentence-Level (SL) approach can potentially detect a
much larger set of argumentative texts taken from a wider
set of articles, including articles not focused on the topic directly, and which are probably overlooked by the documentlevel approach.
On the other hand, a main challenge emerging from the
SL approach is the skewness of the data. When such an
approach is applied naively, only a very small fraction of
the data are positive examples (relevant arguments). Such
an imbalanced dataset is known to be the bane of many supervised machine-learning algorithms. Indeed, this problem
is also apparent in the document-level approach, in cases
where it is common for the topic to be discussed also in nonargumentative contexts, but is more acute with the SL approach. Previous work either focused on topics for which argumentative content is abundant, or used weak-supervision
to try and mitigate the problem.
Our approach is different from previous SL works in three
important aspects: (1) We demonstrate for the ﬁrst time how
to leverage supervised–learning techniques for this task,
achieving considerably stronger results than earlier works,
which adopted the weak–supervision paradigm; (2) We develop an efﬁcient labeling methodology, reminiscent to active learning, which, alongside query-based ﬁltering of the
corpus, addresses the data imbalance problem; (3) we report

Abstract
One of the main tasks in argument mining is the retrieval
of argumentative content pertaining to a given topic. Most
previous work addressed this task by retrieving a relatively
small number of relevant documents as the initial source for
such content. This line of research yielded moderate success,
which is of limited use in a real-world system. Furthermore,
for such a system to yield a comprehensive set of relevant
arguments, over a wide range of topics, it requires leveraging a large and diverse corpus in an appropriate manner. Here
we present a ﬁrst end-to-end high-precision, corpus-wide argument mining system. This is made possible by combining
sentence-level queries over an appropriate indexing of a very
large corpus of newspaper articles, with an iterative annotation scheme. This scheme addresses the inherent label bias in
the data and pinpoints the regions of the sample space whose
manual labeling is required to obtain high-precision among
top-ranked candidates.

1

Introduction

Starting with the seminal work of Mochales Palau and
Moens (2009), argument mining has mainly focused on the
following tasks - identifying argumentative text segments
within a given document; labeling these text segments according to the type of argument and its stance; and elucidating the discourse relations among the detected arguments.
Typically, the considered documents were argumentative in
nature, taken from a well deﬁned domain, such as legal documents or student essays. More recently, some attention had
been given to the corresponding retrieval task - given a controversial topic, retrieve arguments with a clear stance towards this topic. This is usually done by ﬁrst retrieving –
manually or automatically – documents relevant to the topic,
and then using argument mining techniques to identify relevant argumentative segments therein. This documents-based
approach was originally explored over Wikipedia (Levy et
al. 2014; Rinott et al. 2015), and more recently over the entire Web (Stab et al. 2018). This approach is most suitable
for topics of much controversy, where one can ﬁnd documents directly addressing the debate, in which relevant argumentative text segments are abundant.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7683

