The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Particle Filter Recurrent Neural Networks
Xiao Ma,∗ Peter Karkus,∗ David Hsu, Wee Sun Lee
National University of Singapore
{xiao-ma, karkus, dyhsu, leews}@comp.nus.edu.sg

thus increasing the number of network parameters and the
amount of data required for training.
We introduce Particle Filter Recurrent Neural Networks
(PF-RNNs), a new family of RNNs that seeks to improve
belief approximation without lengthening the latent vector
h, thus reducing the data required for learning. Particle ﬁltering (Del Moral 1996) is a model-based belief tracking algorithm. It approximates the belief as a set of sampled states
that typically have well-understood meaning. PF-RNNs borrow from particle ﬁltering the idea of approximating the
belief as a set of weighted particles, and combine it with
the powerful approximation capacity of RNNs. PF-RNN
approximates the variable and multi-modal belief as a set
of weighted latent vectors {h1 , h2 , . . .} sampled from the
same distribution. Like standard RNNs, PF-RNNs follow a
model-free approach: PF-RNNs’ latent vectors are learned
distributed representations, which are not necessarily interpretable. As an alternative to the Gaussian based ﬁlters,
e.g., Kalman ﬁlters, particle ﬁltering is a non-parametric
approximator that offers a more ﬂexible belief representation (Del Moral 1996); it is also proven to give a tighter
evidence lower bound (ELBO) in the data generation domain (Burda, Grosse, and Salakhutdinov 2015). In our case,
the approximate representation is trained from data to optimize the prediction performance. For effective training with
gradient methods, we employ a fully differentiable particle
ﬁlter algorithm that maintains the latent belief. See Fig. 1 for
a comparison of RNN and PF-RNN.
We apply the underlying idea of PF-RNN to gated RNNs,
which are easy to implement and have shown strong performance in many sequence prediction tasks. Speciﬁcally,
we propose PF-LSTM and PF-GRU, the particle ﬁlter extensions of Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Cho
et al. 2014). PF-LSTM and PF-GRU serve as drop-in replacements for LSTM and GRU, respectively. They aim
to learn a better belief representation from the same data,
though at a greater computational cost.
We evaluated PF-LSTM and PF-GRU on 13 data sets:
3 synthetic dataset for systematic understanding and 10 realworld datasets with different sample sizes for performance
comparison. The experiments show that our PF-RNNs out-

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been extraordinarily successful for prediction with sequential data. To tackle
highly variable and multi-modal real-world data, we introduce Particle Filter Recurrent Neural Networks (PF-RNNs),
a new RNN family that explicitly models uncertainty in its internal structure: while an RNN relies on a long, deterministic
latent state vector, a PF-RNN maintains a latent state distribution, approximated as a set of particles. For effective learning,
we provide a fully differentiable particle ﬁlter algorithm that
updates the PF-RNN latent state distribution according to the
Bayes rule. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed PFRNNs outperform the corresponding standard gated RNNs
on a synthetic robot localization dataset and 10 real-world sequence prediction datasets for text classiﬁcation, stock price
prediction, etc.

Introduction
Prediction with sequential data is a long-standing challenge
in machine learning. It has many applications, e.g., object
tracking (Blake and Isard 1997), speech recognition (Xiong
et al. 2018), and decision making under uncertainty (Somani et al. 2013). For effective prediction, predictors require
“memory”, which summarizes and tracks information in the
input sequence. The memory state is generally not observable, hence the need for a belief, i.e., a posterior state distribution that captures the sufﬁcient statistic of the input for
making predictions. Modeling the belief manually is often
difﬁcult. Consider the task of classifying news text—treated
as a sequence of words—into categories, such as politics,
education, economy, etc. It is difﬁcult to handcraft the belief
representation and dynamics for accurate classiﬁcation.
State-of-the-art sequence predictors often use recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), which learn a vector h of deterministic time-dependent latent variables as an approximation to the belief. Real-world data, however, are highly variable and often multi-modal. To cope with the complexity of
uncertain real-world data and achieve better belief approximation, one could increase the length of latent vector h,
∗

equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5101

