The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁcient Querying from Weighted Binary Codes
Zhenyu Weng, Yuesheng Zhu
Communication and Information Security Laboratory, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
{wzytumbler, zhuys}@pku.edu.cn

high-dimensional feature vectors into compact binary codes.
Since these feature vectors may represent image data, video
data, or other multimedia data, the hashing methods can be
used in various multimedia retrieval applications.
However, the number of possible Hamming distance is
limited and different binary codes may share the same Hamming distance to the given binary query. To alleviate this ambiguity problem and further improve the performance of binary codes, weighted binary codes are used (Fan et al. 2013;
Gordo et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2013). By assigning bitwise
weights to each bit of binary codes, the distance between a
pair of binary codes is calculated by weighted Hamming distance instead of Hamming distance. For example, (Huang,
Wei, and Zhang 2017; Fan et al. 2013) are designed to learn
the weights for the binary image descriptors to improve their
discriminative power for image matching. And (Duan et al.
2015; Weng et al. 2016) are designed to learn the weights
for the binary codes generated by different hashing methods
to improve their search accuracy for multimedia retrieval.
Although weighted binary codes can alleviate the ambiguity problem, querying from the binary codes by weighted
Hamming distance is slower than that by Hamming distance.
To accelerate the querying process from the weighted binary codes, some methods (Gordo et al. 2014) use lookup
tables to compute the query-independent values in advance.
However, it is still an exhaustive linear scan. Some methods (Duan et al. 2015; Norouzi, Punjani, and Fleet 2014) use
Hamming distance to ﬁnd the neighbors that have the smallest Hamming distance to the query and rank them according to the weighted Hamming distance. This non-exhaustive
way is fast but cannot return the nearest weighted binary
codes of the query accurately, resulting in a degraded performance of weighted binary codes in the application.
In this paper, we propose a new method to rank the
weighted binary codes and return the nearest weighted binary codes of the query in a non-exhaustive but accurate
way. The diagram of our method is shown in Fig. 1. Based
on the multi-index hash tables (Norouzi, Punjani, and Fleet
2014) on the binary code substrings, our method can efﬁciently choose the candidates in each table and merge the
candidates to select the nearest weighted binary codes of
the query. Theoretical analysis is provided to prove the our

Abstract
Binary codes are widely used to represent the data due to their
small storage and efﬁcient computation. However, there exists an ambiguity problem that lots of binary codes share the
same Hamming distance to a query. To alleviate the ambiguity problem, weighted binary codes assign different weights
to each bit of binary codes and compare the binary codes
by the weighted Hamming distance. Till now, performing the
querying from the weighted binary codes efﬁciently is still an
open issue. In this paper, we propose a new method to rank the
weighted binary codes and return the nearest weighted binary
codes of the query efﬁciently. In our method, based on the
multi-index hash tables, two algorithms, the table bucket ﬁnding algorithm and the table merging algorithm, are proposed
to select the nearest weighted binary codes of the query in
a non-exhaustive and accurate way. The proposed algorithms
are justiﬁed by proving their theoretic properties. The experiments on three large-scale datasets validate both the search
efﬁciency and the search accuracy of our method. Especially
for the number of weighted binary codes up to one billion,
our method shows a great improvement of more than 1000
times faster than the linear scan.

Introduction
With the explosive growth of data, binary codes are widely
used to represent the data due to their small storage and
efﬁcient computation. Given a query, the nearest binary
codes can be ranked and returned efﬁciently by computing the Hamming distance between the query and the binary codes. BRISK (Leutenegger, Chli, and Siegwart 2011),
ORB (Rublee et al. 2011), and other binary image descriptors (Balntas, Tang, and Mikolajczyk 2018) are designed to represent the image data, and successfully used in
various applications, including image matching, 3D reconstruction and object recognition. End-to-end feature learning methods (Li et al. 2019; Song et al. 2018) based on
the neural networks extract the binary codes from the images and are widely used in image retrieval and cross retrieval. In addition to these speciﬁc image binary codes,
hashing methods (Liu et al. 2014; 2017; Lin et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2018) are used to map different
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12346

