The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generating Realistic Stock Market Order Streams
Junyi Li,1 Xintong Wang,2 Yaoyang Lin,3 Arunesh Sinha,4 Michael P. Wellman2
1

University of Pittsburgh, 2 University of Michigan,
Harvard University, 4 Singapore Management University
jul116@pitt.edu, {xintongw, wellman}@umich.edu, yaoyanglin@g.harvard.edu, aruneshs@smu.edu.sg
3

both the generator and critic conditional on history of orders.
The main innovation in the Stock-GAN network architecture
lies in two deliberately crafted features of the generator. The
ﬁrst is a separate neural network that is used to approximate
the double auction mechanism underlying stock exchanges.
This pre-trained network is embedded in the generator enabling it to model order processing and transaction generation.
The second feature is the inclusion of order-book information
in the conditioning history of the network. The order book
captures the key features of market state that are not directly
apparent from order history segments.
Our second contribution is a mathematical characterization of the distribution learned by the generator. We show
that our designed generator models the stock market data
stream as arising from a stochastic process with ﬁnite memory dependence. The stochastic process view also makes
precise the conditional distribution that the generator is learning as well the joint distribution that the critic of the WGAN
distinguishes by estimating the earth mover’s distance. The
stochastic process has no closed form representation, which
necessitates the use of a neural network to learn it.
Finally, we experiment with synthetic and real market data.
The synthetic data is produced using a stock market simulator that has been used in several agent-based ﬁnancial
studies (Wellman and Wah 2017), but is far from real market
data. The real market data was obtained from OneMarketData, a ﬁnancial data provider. We propose ﬁve statistics
for evaluating stock market data, such as the distribution of
price and quantity of orders, inter-arrival times of orders, and
the best bid and best ask evolution over time. We compare
against other baseline generative models such as recurrent
conditional variational auto-encoder (VAE) and DCGAN instead of WGAN within Stock-GAN. We perform an ablation
study showing the usefulness of our generator structure design as elaborated above. Overall, Stock-GAN is able to best
generate realistic data compared to the alternatives. An appendix in the full version provides all additional results and
code for our work.

Abstract
We propose an approach to generate realistic and highﬁdelity stock market data based on generative adversarial
networks (GANs). Our Stock-GAN model employs a conditional Wasserstein GAN to capture history dependence of
orders. The generator design includes specially crafted aspects
including components that approximate the market’s auction
mechanism, augmenting the order history with order-book
constructions to improve the generation task. We perform an
ablation study to verify the usefulness of aspects of our network structure. We provide a mathematical characterization of
distribution learned by the generator. We also propose statistics to measure the quality of generated orders. We test our
approach with synthetic and actual market data, compare to
many baseline generative models, and ﬁnd the generated data
to be close to real data.

1

Introduction

Financial markets are among the most well-studied and
closely watched complex multiagent systems in existence.
Well-functioning ﬁnancial markets are critical to the operation of a complex global economy, and small changes in
the efﬁciency or stability of such markets can have enormous ramiﬁcations. Accurate modeling of ﬁnancial markets
can support improved design and regulation of these critical institutions. There is a vast literature on ﬁnancial market
modeling, though still a large gap between the state-of-art
and the ideal. Analytic approaches provide insight through
highly stylized model forms. Agent-based models accommodate greater dynamic complexity, and are often able to
reproduce “stylized facts” of real-world markets (LeBaron
2006). Currently lacking, however, is a simulation capable of
producing market data at high ﬁdelity and high realism. Our
aim is to develop such a model, to support a range of market
design and analysis problems. This work provides a ﬁrst step,
learning a high-ﬁdelity generator from real stock market data
streams.
Our main contribution is Stock-GAN: an approach to produce realistic stock market order streams from real market
data. We utilize a conditional Wasserstein GAN (WGAN)
(Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Mirza and Osindero
2014) to capture the time-dependence of order streams, with

2

Related Work and Background

WGAN is a well-known GAN variant (Goodfellow et al.
2014; Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017). Most prior work
on generation of sequences using GANs has been in the
domain of text generation (Press et al. 2017; Zhang et al.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
727

