The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Compressed Self-Attention for Deep Metric Learning
Ziye Chen,1 Mingming Gong,2 Yanwu Xu,3 Chaohui Wang,4 Kun Zhang,5 Bo Du1∗
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne
3
Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh
4
Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR 8049), CNRS, ENPC, ESIEE Paris, UPEM, F-77455 Marne-la-Vallée, France
5
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
{ziyechen, remoteking}@whu.edu.cn, mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au,
yanwuxu@pitt.edu, chaohui.wang@u-pem.fr, kunz1@cmu.edu
2

amples are far apart. In visual recognition, deep metric
learning have been successfully applied to various tasks,
such as person re-identiﬁcation (Sun et al. 2018; Wang et
al. 2018a), face recognition (Deng et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2018), and local descriptor learning (Mishchuk et al. 2017;
Xu et al. 2019).
However, because of the local nature of convolution operators, the features in the shallow layers of CNNs are not able
to capture long-range dependencies. While long-range dependencies can be captured in deep layers, optimization algorithms may have trouble in discovering appropriate values
for the parameters that carefully coordinate multiple layers
to capture those dependencies (Zhang et al. 2018). Increasing the convolutional kernel size can partially address this
issue, but at the same time it introduces more parameters as
well and necessitates more training data.
In this paper, we aim to enhance the self-attention (SA)
mechanism for modeling rich long-range contextual dependencies in deep metric learning. Originally proposed in the
ﬁeld of natural language processing (NLP) (Vaswani et al.
2017), SA has shown promising results in vision tasks such
as video analysis (Wang et al. 2018b), image segmentation
(Fu et al. 2019), and image generation (Zhang et al. 2018;
Gong et al. 2019). Because SA calculates response at a position as a weighted sum of the features at all positions, where
the calculation of the weights only requires a small number of parameters, it can capture long-range contextual interactions with high statistical efﬁciency. However, SA requires computation of pairwise similarities among all the
spatial positions, which leads to high computation and memory costs, and thus limits its usage to small inputs.
To address this problem, we propose a new SA module, called compressed self-attention (CSA), which is able
to boost metric learning accuracy with little additional computation or memory cost. Instead of computing an attention map for each spatial location, our CSA only requires
computation of a small number of base attention maps for
a small number of base feature vectors. The original input
is then processed by these base attention maps to produce
elementary outputs. Finally, the output at each location can
be simply obtained by an adaptive weighted average of the
elementary outputs. Due to the inherent redundancy of at-

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to enhance self-attention (SA) mechanism for deep metric learning in visual perception, by capturing richer contextual dependencies in visual data. To this
end, we propose a novel module, named compressed selfattention (CSA), which signiﬁcantly reduces the computation and memory cost with a neglectable decrease in accuracy with respect to the original SA mechanism, thanks to the
following two characteristics: i) it only needs to compute a
small number of base attention maps for a small number of
base feature vectors; and ii) the output at each spatial location can be simply obtained by an adaptive weighted average of the outputs calculated from the base attention maps.
The high computational efﬁciency of CSA enables the application to high-resolution shallow layers in convolutional
neural networks with little additional cost. In addition, CSA
makes it practical to further partition the feature maps into
groups along the channel dimension and compute attention
maps for features in each group separately, thus increasing the
diversity of long-range dependencies and accordingly boosting the accuracy. We evaluate the performance of CSA via
extensive experiments on two metric learning tasks: person
re-identiﬁcation and local descriptor learning. Qualitative and
quantitative comparisons with latest methods demonstrate the
signiﬁcance of CSA in this topic.

Introduction
Metric learning aims at ﬁnding appropriate similarity measures between pairs of data samples that preserve desired
distance structures, which is of great importance for visual recognition. With the remarkable success of convolutional neural networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), recent works have demonstrated promising results on learning semantic feature embeddings where similar examples are close to each other and dissimilar ex∗

Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants
61822113, the National Key R & D Program of China under
Grant 2018YFA060550, the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei
Province under Grants 2018CFA050 and the Science and Technology Major Project of Hubei Province (Next-Generation AI Technologies) under Grant 2019AEA170.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3561

