The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

PI-RCNN: An Efﬁcient Multi-Sensor 3D Object
Detector with Point-Based Attentive Cont-Conv Fusion Module∗
Liang Xie,1,2 Chao Xiang,1 Zhengxu Yu,1 Guodong Xu,1,2
Zheng Yang,2 Deng Cai,1,3 Xiaofei He1,2
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, Hangzhou, China
{lilydedbb, yuzxfred}@gmail.com, {chaoxiang, memoiry, dcai}@zju.edu.cn, {yangzheng, xiaofeihe}@fabu.ai
Abstract
LIDAR point clouds and RGB-images are both extremely
essential for 3D object detection. So many state-of-the-art
3D detection algorithms dedicate in fusing these two types
of data effectively. However, their fusion methods based on
Bird’s Eye View (BEV) or voxel format are not accurate. In
this paper, we propose a novel fusion approach named Pointbased Attentive Cont-conv Fusion(PACF) module, which
fuses multi-sensor features directly on 3D points. Except for
continuous convolution, we additionally add a Point-Pooling
and an Attentive Aggregation to make the fused features more
expressive. Moreover, based on the PACF module, we propose a 3D multi-sensor multi-task network called PointcloudImage RCNN(PI-RCNN as brief), which handles the image
segmentation and 3D object detection tasks. PI-RCNN employs a segmentation sub-network to extract full-resolution
semantic feature maps from images and then fuses the multisensor features via powerful PACF module. Beneﬁcial from
the effectiveness of the PACF module and the expressive semantic features from the segmentation module, PI-RCNN can
improve much in 3D object detection. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the PACF module and PI-RCNN on the KITTI
3D Detection benchmark, and our method can achieve stateof-the-art on the metric of 3D AP.

Figure 1: The challenges of LIDAR-based 3D detection. In
the left case, we can not distinguish the vehicle from the
background only through sparse 3D structure captured by
LIDAR. The right case shows that the LIDAR points become
too sparse for a car far away, even only several points.

Meanwhile, some works(Mousavian et al. 2017; Li et al.
2019a; Ku, Pon, and Waslander 2019) try to estimate 3D
location and dimension of objects via monocular images.
Comparing with point clouds, RGB-images have more regular and dense data format and have richer semantic information to distinguish vehicles and background. However, the
nature of 2D image determines that 3D detection algorithms
based on monocular images suffer from low precision.
To address these challenges, many state-of-the-art methods (Chen et al. 2017; Ku et al. 2018; Liang et al. 2018;
Qi et al. 2018; Liang et al. 2019) combine the data of multiple sensors to remedy the semantic loss of point clouds.
(Chen et al. 2017; Ku et al. 2018) directly merge the features from images and BEV(birds-eye-view) maps. (Qi et al.
2018) employ a cascade structure to predict 3D objects via
a frustum from the 2D detection bounding box. (Liang et
al. 2018) apply continuous convolution(Wang et al. 2018) to
fuse multi-sensor features.
However, the direct fusion like (Chen et al. 2017; Ku et al.
2018) ignore the extremely different perspectives of RGBimages and Birds-view maps. The 3D detection based on
frustum(Qi et al. 2018) suffers from the weakness of 2D detection and involves many points of background or other instances because of occlusion. Although (Liang et al. 2018)
apply continuous convolution to overcome the challenge of

Introduction
With the rapid development of autonomous driving, 3D detection attracts more and more attention. LIDAR is the most
common 3D sensor in autonomous driving. There are existing works detecting 3D objects from LIDAR points(Zhou
and Tuzel 2018; Yan, Mao, and Li 2018; Yang, Luo, and
Urtasun 2018; Lang et al. 2019; Shi, Wang, and Li 2019;
Li et al. 2019b). However, although LIDAR points can capture the 3D structures of objects, they do not have enough
semantic information and suffer from the sparsity of points.
The loss of semantics causes tough and confusing scenes
which the model is hard to tackle. The sparsity of LIDAR
points, especially the points far away, brings difﬁculties for
the network to recognize. Figure 1 shows these challenges.
∗

Deng Cai is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12460

