The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Two Birds with One Stone: Investigating Invertible
Neural Networks for Inverse Problems in Morphology
Gözde Gül Şahin, Iryna Gurevych
Research Training Group AIPHES and UKP Lab,
Department of Computer Science, Technische Universität Darmstadt
www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de
www.aiphes.tu-darmstadt.de

Ardizzone et al. 2019) and geophysics (Snieder and Trampert 1999), natural language processing (NLP) has not yet
witnessed an explicit exploration, mostly due to the discrete
nature of human language. However NLP contains many
tasks that resemble inverse problems such as semantic parsing ↔ text generation, morphological analysis ↔ morphological generation, text-to-data (e.g., database records) ↔
data-to-text generation and many more. Recently, the NLP
ﬁeld has replaced traditional discrete representations of text
with dense and low-dimensional continuous ones, referred
to as word/sentence vectors. This has enabled us to reformulate some of the classical morphological tasks as inverse
problems within an existing framework that has been previously employed for such problems in other ﬁelds.
Inverse problems always exist together with their forward
problem. Even so, traditional methods in NLP, optimize the
inverse problems in an isolated fashion via a supervised loss
for direct posterior probability learning, p(x | y), causing
challenges for ill-posed problems, i.e., multiple possible x
values in y → x 1 . In addition, the direct formulation ignores the connection to its forward problem, losing the potential to exploit the shared knowledge between those two.
Furthermore, direct optimization of those problems requires
two dedicated models to be trained separately, increasing the
computational requirements.
Recently, a new class of neural networks, called Invertible
Neural Networks (INNs), have been introduced by Ardizzone et al. (2019) following the research line of Dinh,
Krueger, and Bengio; Dinh, Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio;
Kingma and Dhariwal (2014; 2017; 2018). INNs offer three
key functionalities: (i) modeling inverse problems within a
single network (shared parameters), (ii) having an invertible architecture that allows getting the inverse mapping
y → x for free during prediction; and enables efﬁcient bidirectional training (i.e., training the network at both ends);
and (iii) addressing the ill-posed problems via an additional
latent output variable z to have a one-to-one input and output
mapping as x ↔ [y, z].
In this work, we model two well-known morphologi-

Abstract
Most problems in natural language processing can be approximated as inverse problems such as analysis and generation at
variety of levels from morphological (e.g., cat+Plural↔cats)
to semantic (e.g., (call + 1 2)↔“Calculate one plus two.”).
Although the tasks in both directions are closely related,
general approach in the ﬁeld has been to design separate
models speciﬁc for each task. However, having one shared
model for both tasks, would help the researchers exploit
the common knowledge among these problems with reduced
time and memory requirements. We investigate a speciﬁc
class of neural networks, called Invertible Neural Networks
(INNs) (Ardizzone et al. 2019) that enable simultaneous optimization in both directions, hence allow addressing of inverse problems via a single model. In this study, we investigate INNs on morphological problems casted as inverse problems. We apply INNs to various morphological tasks with
varying ambiguity and show that they provide competitive
performance in both directions. We show that they are able
to recover the morphological input parameters, i.e., predicting the lemma (e.g., cat) or the morphological tags (e.g., Plural) when run in the reverse direction, without any signiﬁcant
performance drop in the forward direction, i.e., predicting the
surface form (e.g., cats).

Introduction
Inverse problem is a general term used in natural sciences
and mathematics to describe the process of recovering the
hidden model parameters, x, from a set of observations,
y. In general, the forward problem, i.e., generating observations/outputs from parameters, is well-deﬁned; while the
inverse problem is generally ill-posed, i.e., no (unique) solution exists. For instance, inferring seismic properties of
the Earth’s interior from surface observations is a typical inverse problem in geophysics (Snieder and Trampert 1999);
since forward problem is well-deﬁned and can be simulated by a forward model, recovering the seismic properties that lead to a speciﬁc surface value is ill-posed. Although inverse problems have been tackled in many ﬁelds
such as imaging (Bertero and Boccacci 1998; Adler et al.
2019), astronomy (Osborne, Armstrong, and Fletcher 2019;

1

In case of a unique solution, we refer to it as a well-posed
inverse problem, otherwise it is named as ill-posed following Kabanikhin (2008)

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7814

