The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Temporally Grounding Language Queries in
Videos by Contextual Boundary-Aware Prediction
Jingwen Wang, Lin Ma, Wenhao Jiang
Tencent AI Lab
{jaywongjaywong, forest.linma, cswhjiang}@gmail.com

Text Query: Tricks are shown and people fly down the mountain.

Abstract
The task of temporally grounding language queries in videos
is to temporally localize the best matched video segment corresponding to a given language (sentence). It requires certain
models to simultaneously perform visual and linguistic understandings. Previous work predominantly ignores the precision of segment localization. Sliding window based methods
use predeﬁned search window sizes, which suffer from redundant computation, while existing anchor-based approaches
fail to yield precise localization. We address this issue by
proposing an end-to-end boundary-aware model, which uses
a lightweight branch to predict semantic boundaries corresponding to the given linguistic information. To better detect semantic boundaries, we propose to aggregate contextual information by explicitly modeling the relationship between the current element and its neighbors. The most conﬁdent segments are subsequently selected based on both anchor and boundary predictions at the testing stage. The proposed model, dubbed Contextual Boundary-aware Prediction
(CBP), outperforms its competitors with a clear margin on
three public datasets.

1

46s

147s
(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) The task of temporally grounding language
queries in videos. (b) Positive and negative training segments deﬁned in anchor-based approaches given the sentence query in (a).

2017; Hendricks et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018c; Wu and Han
2018; Liu et al. 2018b; Ge et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019). Because the desired segments are of varied durations, these
methods cannot guarantee the complete coverage of all segments, and thus tend to produce inaccurate temporal boundaries. Other research tried to avoid this problem by designing
single-stream models (Buch et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018)
using LSTMs. Although LSTMs effectively aggregate video
information, the thresholding of positive and negative samples loses boundary information. As shown in Figure 1 (b),
segments overlapped with the ground truth more than a predeﬁned threshold (e.g., 0.5) are all labeled as positive samples during training stage. Therefore, the model could be
confused to localize the best matched segment at prediction.
A complementary approach to improve the precision of localization is to add a location offset regression branch to the
anchor-based approaches (Gao et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2019;
Ge et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2018b). However, the added offset
regression could fail when the model is unable to localize the
best anchor, since the calculated offsets need to be added to
the predicted anchor to generate ﬁnal grounding time stamp
(See Table 2 for comparison).

Introduction

Videos are increasingly popular in the social network. As
most videos contain both activities of interest and complicated background content, temporal activity localization is
of key importance for video analysis. Recently, the task of
temporally grounding language queries in videos has been
attracting research interest from the vision community (Gao
et al. 2017; Hendricks et al. 2017). The task aims to localize
the activity of interest corresponding to a language query.
This task is challenging because both videos and sentences
need to be deeply incorporated to differentiate ﬁne-grained
details of different video segments and to perform segment
localization. In this paper, we identify and tackle the main
challenge on this task, namely, how to improve the localization precision of the desired segment given a language
query.
Prior work predominantly ignores the precision of segment boundaries. Sliding window based methods scan the
video by predeﬁned windows of different sizes (Gao et al.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12168

