The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning End-to-End Scene Flow by Distilling Single Tasks Knowledge
Filippo Aleotti, Matteo Poggi, Fabio Tosi, Stefano Mattoccia
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy

Abstract
Scene ﬂow is a challenging task aimed at jointly estimating the 3D structure and motion of the sensed environment.
Although deep learning solutions achieve outstanding performance in terms of accuracy, these approaches divide the
whole problem into standalone tasks (stereo and optical ﬂow)
addressing them with independent networks. Such a strategy
dramatically increases the complexity of the training procedure and requires power-hungry GPUs to infer scene ﬂow
barely at 1 FPS. Conversely, we propose DWARF, a novel and
lightweight architecture able to infer full scene ﬂow jointly
reasoning about depth and optical ﬂow easily and elegantly
trainable end-to-end from scratch. Moreover, since ground
truth images for full scene ﬂow are scarce, we propose to
leverage on the knowledge learned by networks specialized
in stereo or ﬂow, for which much more data are available, to
distill proxy annotations. Exhaustive experiments show that
i) DWARF runs at about 10 FPS on a single high-end GPU
and about 1 FPS on NVIDIA Jetson TX2 embedded at KITTI
resolution, with moderate drop in accuracy compared to 10×
deeper models, ii) learning from many distilled samples is
more effective than from the few, annotated ones available.

1

Figure 1: End-to-end scene ﬂow with DWARF. (a) Superimposed reference images at time t1 and t2 , (b) estimated
optical ﬂow, (c) disparity and (d) disparity change.
al. 2016) and optical ﬂow (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015). Thus,
more recent approaches to scene ﬂow leveraged this novel
paradigm stacking together single-task architectures (Ilg et
al. 2018; Ma et al. 2019). However, this strategy is demanding as well and requires separate and speciﬁc training for
each network and does not fully exploit the inherent dependency between the tasks, e.g. the ﬂow of 3D objects depends on their distance, their motion and camera ego-motion
(Taniai, Sinha, and Sato 2017), as a single model could. On
the other hand, either synthetic or real datasets annotated
with full scene ﬂow labels are rare compared to those disposable for stereo and ﬂow alone. This constraint limits the
knowledge available to a single network compared to the one
exploitable by an ensemble of specialized ones.
To tackle previous issues, in this paper, we propose a
novel lightweight architecture for scene ﬂow estimation
jointly inferring disparity, optical ﬂow and disparity change
(i.e., the depth component of 3D motion). We design a custom layer, namely 3D correlation layer, by extending the formulation used to tackle the two tasks singularly (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2015; Mayer et al. 2016), in order to encode matching relationships across the four images. Moreover, to overcome the constraint on training data, we recover the missing
knowledge leveraging standalone, state-of-the-art networks
for stereo and ﬂow to generate proxy annotations for our single scene ﬂow architecture. Using this strategy on the KITTI
dataset (Menze and Geiger 2015), we distill about 20× samples compared to the number of ground truth images available, enabling for more effective training and thus to more
accurate estimations.
Our architecture for scene ﬂow estimation through
Disparity, Warping and Flow (dubbed DWARF) can be el-

Introduction

The term Scene Flow refers to the three-dimensional dense
motion ﬁeld of a scene (Vedula et al. 1999) and enables to
effectively model both 3D structure and movements of the
sensed environment, crucial for a plethora of high-level tasks
such as augmented reality, 3D mapping and autonomous
driving. Dense scene ﬂow inference requires the estimation
of two crucial cues for each observed point: depth and motion across frames acquired over time. Such cues can be obtained deploying two well-known techniques in computer
vision: stereo matching and optical ﬂow estimation. The ﬁrst
one aims at inferring the disparity (i.e. depth) by matching
pixels across two rectiﬁed images acquired by synchronized
cameras, the second at determining the 2D motion between
corresponding pixels across two consecutive frames, thus
requiring at least four images for full scene ﬂow estimation. For years, solutions to scene ﬂow (Behl et al. 2017)
have been rather accurate, yet demanding in terms of computational costs and runtime. Meanwhile, deep learning established as state-of-the-art for stereo matching (Mayer et
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10435

