The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Less Is Better: Unweighted Data Subsampling via Inﬂuence Function
∗

†

‡

Zifeng Wang,1 Hong Zhu,2 Zhenhua Dong,2 Xiuqiang He,2 Shao-Lun Huang1
1

Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
Email: wangzf18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zhuhong8, dongzhenhua, hexiuqiang1}@huawei.com,
shaolun.huang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
signiﬁcant burden on computation, some large-scale deep
learning models require hundreds even thousands of GPUs.
Speciﬁcally, the subsampling approaches are initially proposed to cope with the last challenge. By virtue of subtle
sampling regime, the selected subset can best approximate
the original full set in terms of data distribution, hence the
model can be trained on a compressed version of data set. In
our work, we attempt to design sampling regime that can not
only reduce the computation complexity, but also deal with
several other ERM’s difﬁculties. For instance, reweighting
examples by sampling probabilities to ﬁx mismatch between
P and Q, and dropping noisy samples to strengthen the
model’s generalization ability.
Our work can be outlined in four points. First, instead of
approaching the full-set-model θ̂, we prove that the model
θ̃ trained by a selected subset through our subsampling
method can outperform the θ̂; second, we propose several
probabilistic sampling functions, and analyze how the sampling function inﬂuences the worst-case risk (Bagnell 2005)
changes over a χ2 -divergence ball. We further propose a surrogate metric to measure the conﬁdence degree of the sampling methods over the observed distribution, which is useful
for evaluating model’s generalization ability on a set of distributions; third, for the sake of implementation efﬁciency,
the Hessian-free mixed Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient
(PCG) method is used to compute the inﬂuence function
(IF) in sparse scenarios; last, complete experiments are conducted on diverse tasks to demonstrate our methods superiority over the existing state-of-the-art subsampling methods1 .

Abstract
In the time of Big Data, training complex models on largescale data sets is challenging, making it appealing to reduce data volume for saving computation resources by subsampling. Most previous works in subsampling are weighted
methods designed to help the performance of subset-model
approach the full-set-model, hence the weighted methods
have no chance to acquire a subset-model that is better than
the full-set-model. However, we question that how can we
achieve better model with less data? In this work, we propose
a novel Unweighted Inﬂuence Data Subsampling (UIDS)
method, and prove that the subset-model acquired through
our method can outperform the full-set-model. Besides, we
show that overly conﬁdent on a given test set for sampling
is common in Inﬂuence-based subsampling methods, which
can eventually cause our subset-model’s failure in out-ofsample test. To mitigate it, we develop a probabilistic sampling scheme to control the worst-case risk over all distributions close to the empirical distribution. The experiment results demonstrate our methods superiority over existed subsampling methods in diverse tasks, such as text classiﬁcation,
image classiﬁcation, click-through prediction, etc.

Introduction
Bigger data can probably train a better model. It is almost
the common sense nowadays for machine learning and deep
learning practitioners. In the classical Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) theory, it assumes that our training samples and test samples are i.i.d drawn from the same distribution. The learning theory tries to minimize the estimate
of the generalization risk, namely the empirical risk. Therefore, when training samples are large enough, we can have
hypothesis function working well on the test set by optimizing on the empirical risk.
However, the ERM faces several challenges: 1) a model
is learned from training set which is generated by P (x, y) =
ptrain (x)p(y|x), and the model is tested on Q(x, y) =
qtest (x)p(y|x). The distribution shift from P to Q violates
the ERM’s basic assumption; 2) unknown noise in data
and its label is common in reality, causing some examples harmful for model’s performance (Szegedy et al. 2014;
Zhang et al. 2019); 3) training on large data sets imposes

Related work
There are two main ideas to cope with the ERM challenges aforementioned: 1) pessimistic method that tries to
learn model robust to noise or bad examples, including l2 norm regularization, Adaboost (Freund and Schapire 1997),
hard example mining (Malisiewicz, Gupta, and Efros 2011)
and focal loss (Lin et al. 2017); and 2) optimistic method
that modiﬁes the input distribution directly. There are several genres of optimistic methods: the example reweighting
method is used for dealing with distribution shift by (Bagnell 2005; Hu et al. 2016), and handling data bias by (Kumar,
Packer, and Koller 2010; Ren et al. 2018); the sample selection method is applied to inspect and ﬁx mislabeled data by

∗

Work done at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab as an intern.
This author contributes equally with Zifeng Wang.
‡
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1
The code can be found at https://github.com/RyanWangZf/
Inﬂuence Subsampling

6340

