The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Planar Prior Assisted PatchMatch Multi-View Stereo
Qingshan Xu, Wenbing Tao∗
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing
School of Artiﬁcal Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{qingshanxu, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
The completeness of 3D models is still a challenging problem in multi-view stereo (MVS) due to the unreliable photometric consistency in low-textured areas. Since low-textured
areas usually exhibit strong planarity, planar models are advantageous to the depth estimation of low-textured areas. On
the other hand, PatchMatch multi-view stereo is very efﬁcient
for its sampling and propagation scheme. By taking advantage of planar models and PatchMatch multi-view stereo, we
propose a planar prior assisted PatchMatch multi-view stereo
framework in this paper. In detail, we utilize a probabilistic
graphical model to embed planar models into PatchMatch
multi-view stereo and contribute a novel multi-view aggregated matching cost. This novel cost takes both photometric consistency and planar compatibility into consideration,
making it suited for the depth estimation of both non-planar
and planar regions. Experimental results demonstrate that our
method can efﬁciently recover the depth information of extremely low-textured areas, thus obtaining high complete 3D
models and achieving state-of-the-art performance.

(a) Reference image

(b) Ground truth

(c) Triangulation

(d) ACMP (Ours)

Figure 1: Illustration of discrimination and depth maps
obtained by our method. The piecewise planar priors (c)
through triangulation can adaptively gain discrimination for
different low-textured areas. This helps to obtain better
depth estimation for large low-textured areas (d).

Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to estimate the dense 3D
model of the scene from a given set of calibrated images.
Due to its wide applications in virtual/augmented reality and
3D printing and so on, much progress has been made in this
domain (Furukawa and Ponce 2010; Strecha, Fransens, and
Van Gool 2006; Merrell et al. 2007; Goesele et al. 2007;
Liu et al. 2009; Schönberger et al. 2016) in the last few
years. However, recovering a dense and realist 3D model
is still a challenging problem since the depth estimation in
low-textured areas always fails.
The failure of depth estimation in low-textured areas
mainly comes from the unreliable photometric consistency
measure in these areas. As low-textured areas always appear
in smooth homogeneous surfaces (Figure 1), many methods (Woodford et al. 2009; Gallup, Frahm, and Pollefeys
2010) assume that these surfaces are piecewise planar. Then,
they formulate this prior as a regularization term in a global

energy framework to recover the depth estimation in lowtextured areas. Due to the difﬁculty in solving such optimization problems, the efﬁciency of these methods is low
and they are easy to be trapped in local optima. Recently,
PatchMatch multi-view stereo methods (Zheng et al. 2014;
Galliani, Lasinger, and Schindler 2015; Schönberger et al.
2016; Xu and Tao 2019) become popular as their used
PatchMatch-based optimization (Barnes et al. 2009) makes
depth map estimation efﬁcient and accurate. As these methods do not explicitly model the planar priors, these methods
still encounter the failure in low-textured areas. Based on
the individual advantages of planar prior models and PatchMatch multi-view stereo, we expect to construct a planar
prior assisted PatchMatch multi-view stereo framework to
efﬁciently recover the depth estimation in low-textured areas.
To embed the planar prior models into PatchMatch multi-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12516

