The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fully Convolutional Network for Consistent Voxel-Wise Correspondence
Yungeng Zhang,1 Yuru Pei,1∗ Yuke Guo,2 Gengyu Ma,3 Tianmin Xu,4 Hongbin Zha1
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), Department of Machine Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Luoyang Institute of Science and Technology, Luoyang, China
3
uSens Inc., San Jose, USA
4
School of Stomatology, Peking University, Beijing, China
{zhangyungeng, yrpei}@pku.edu.cn, guoyuke02@aliyun.com,
{magengyu, tmxuortho}@gmail.com, zha@cis.pku.edu.cn
Recent works on the deformable registration (Rohé et al.
2017; Yang et al. 2017; Sokooti et al. 2017; Krebs et al.
2017; Balakrishnan et al. 2018; Dalca et al. 2018) have
shown the merits of the CNN-based regression for dense
correspondence. In the supervised deep learning framework,
the ground-truth corresponding landmarks and DVFs are required for the training (Rohé et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2017;
Sokooti et al. 2017; Krebs et al. 2017). Since the manual labeling of volumetric images is more laborious than
the ordinary 2D images and prone to the practitioners’ experiences, the learning suffers from the limited training
data. The unsupervised frameworks follow the spatial transformer network (STN) to minimize the voxel-wise appearance differences (Balakrishnan et al. 2018; Dalca et al. 2016;
2018). The existing systems solve the patch-wise registration to relieve the memory burden (Dalca et al. 2016), or
to solve the unidirectional maps to the template or the atlas (Balakrishnan et al. 2018; Dalca et al. 2016). In order to
get the invertible one-to-one map, the additional diffeomorphic integration layer is needed to obtain the ﬁnal registration ﬁeld from the estimated velocity ﬁeld (Dalca et al. 2018;
Krebs et al. 2019).

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a fully convolutional network-based
dense map from voxels to invertible pair of displacement vector ﬁelds regarding a template grid for the consistent voxelwise correspondence. We parameterize the volumetric mapping using a convolutional network and train it in an unsupervised way by leveraging the spatial transformer to minimize the gap between the warped volumetric image and the
template grid. Instead of learning the unidirectional map, we
learn the nonlinear mapping functions for both forward and
backward transformations. We introduce the combinational
inverse constraints for the volumetric one-to-one maps, where
the pairwise and triple constraints are utilized to learn the
cycle-consistent correspondence maps between volumes. Experiments on both synthetic and clinically captured volumetric cone-beam CT (CBCT) images show that the proposed
framework is effective and competitive against state-of-theart deformable registration techniques.

1

Introduction

To ﬁnd the dense voxel-wise correspondence of a volume
pair is an essential task of a variety of applications in
medical images analysis (Sotiras, Davatzikos, and Paragios
2013), such as statistical shape analysis (Lombaert, Arcaro,
and Ayache 2015) and the label propagation of predeﬁned
landmarks and segmentation (Kanavati et al. 2017). The
dense correspondence can be used in the studies of the preand post-treatment assessments to ﬁnd the structure progression due to longitudinal operations and growths, especially
for adolescent patients.
The traditional deformable registration techniques rely
on online non-linear iterative optimization to minimize the
voxel-wise appearance difference, together with a regularization term to maintain the smoothness of the displacement vector ﬁelds (DVFs). Concerning the large set of parameters to be solved in the volumetric image registration,
the optimization solving is computationally intensive and
prone to be stunned in a local minimum (Pluim, Maintz, and
Viergever 2003).

There are several papers exploring the usage of cycle consistency to improve the maps computed between pairs of 3D
shapes or 2D images. Huang et al. present a time-consuming
optimization approach to compute a set of new maps of 3D
shapes aligned with initial maps considering cycle consistency (Huang et al. 2012). Zhou et al. propose to utilize
4-cycle consistency as a supervisory signal to address correspondence between 2D images, leveraging additional 3D
CAD models (Zhou et al. 2016). In this paper, we aim at
ﬁnding cycle-consistent voxel-wise correspondence of a volume corpus and introduce a fully convolutional network to
obtain both the forward and backward parameterized transformation functions between an input volume and a shared
template. Following the STN (Jaderberg et al. 2015), we
minimize the gap between the warped volumetric image
and the target and learn the network in an unsupervised
way. We introduce a combinational inverse constraint to enforce the invertibility of forward and backward transformation pair regarding the template for the one-to-one mapping.
Further, we utilize the arbitrary pair and triplet volumes in

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12935

