The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Spatio-Temporal Deformable Convolution
for Compressed Video Quality Enhancement
Jianing Deng,1 Li Wang,2 Shiliang Pu,2 Cheng Zhuo1∗
1

College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
Hikvision Research Institute
{dengjn, czhuo}@zju.edu.cn, {wangli7, pushiliang}@hikvision.com
Abstract

Recent years have witnessed remarkable success of deep
learning methods in quality enhancement for compressed
video. To better explore temporal information, existing methods usually estimate optical ﬂow for temporal motion compensation. However, since compressed video could be seriously distorted by various compression artifacts, the estimated optical ﬂow tends to be inaccurate and unreliable,
thereby resulting in ineffective quality enhancement. In addition, optical ﬂow estimation for consecutive frames is generally conducted in a pairwise manner, which is computational
expensive and inefﬁcient. In this paper, we propose a fast yet
effective method for compressed video quality enhancement
by incorporating a novel Spatio-Temporal Deformable Fusion
(STDF) scheme to aggregate temporal information. Speciﬁcally, the proposed STDF takes a target frame along with its
neighboring reference frames as input to jointly predict an
offset ﬁeld to deform the spatio-temporal sampling positions
of convolution. As a result, complementary information from
both target and reference frames can be fused within a single Spatio-Temporal Deformable Convolution (STDC) operation. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves
the state-of-the-art performance of compressed video quality
enhancement in terms of both accuracy and efﬁciency.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of compression artifacts. Videos are
compressed by the latest H.265/HEVC coding algorithm.
During the past decades, extensive works have been conducted on artifacts removal or quality enhancement for single compressed image. Traditional methods (Foi, Katkovnik,
and Egiazarian 2007; Zhang et al. 2013) reduced artifacts by
optimizing the transform coefﬁcients for speciﬁc compression standard, thus they are hard to extend to other compression schemes. With the recent advances in Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs), CNN-based methods (Dong et al.
2015; Tai et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2017; 2019) have also
emerged for image quality enhancement. They usually learn
a non-linear mapping to directly regress the artifact-free image from a large amount of training data, leading to impressive results with high efﬁciency. However, these methods
cannot be directly extended to compressed video since they
treat frames independently and thus fail to exploit temporal
information.
On the other hand, there is only limited study on quality enhancement for compressed video. Yang et al. ﬁrst proposed Multi-Frame Quality Enhancement (MFQE 1.0) approach to leverage temporal information for VQE (Yang et
al. 2018). Speciﬁcally, high quality frames in compressed
video are utilized as reference frame to help enhancing quality of neighboring low quality target frame via a novel
Multi-Frame CNN (MF-CNN). Recently, an upgraded version MFQE 2.0 (Guan et al. 2019) was introduced to further

Introduction

Nowadays, video content has become a major fraction of
digital network trafﬁc and is still growing (Wien 2015). To
transmit video under limited bandwidth, video compression
is indispensable to signiﬁcantly reduce the bit-rate. However, compression algorithms, such as H.264/AVC (Wiegand
et al. 2003) and H.265/HEVC (Sullivan, Ohm, and Wiegand
2013), often introduce various artifacts in the compressed
video, especially at low bit-rate. As shown in Figure 1, such
artifacts may considerably diminish video quality, resulting
in degradation of Quality of Experience (QoE). The distorted contents in low-quality compressed video may also
reduce performance of subsequent vision tasks (e.g., recognition, detection, tracking) in low-bandwidth applications
(Galteri et al. 2017; Lu et al. 2019). Thus, it’s crucial to study
on compressed video quality enhancement (VQE).
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10696

