The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

To Avoid the Pitfall of Missing Labels in
Feature Selection: A Generative Model Gives the Answer
Yuanyuan Xu,1 Jun Wang,2 Jinmao Wei1∗
1

2

College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China
College of Mathematics and Statistics Science, Ludong University, Shandong 264025, China
{xuyuanyuan, junwang}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, weijm@nankai.edu.cn

belers, intentionally or accidentally. Taking an intentional
example, in image or text learning, human labelers tend to
only annotate a few keyword labels that describe the most
obvious visual or semantic contents, a.k.a. “positive labels”.
Those rare or ambiguous contents are commonly omitted
without being labeled, which we call “unobserved labels” in
this work. From the accidental aspect, labelers could hardly
be exposed to all of the samples in massive scale, which also
leads to the existence of numerous unobserved labels.
A critical issue is that the candidate label set is typically
huge, and the labels that are irrelevant with the described
items are also abandoned by labelers, a.k.a. “negative labels”. For example, the label “iceberg” could hardly be associated with a “desert” image. This comes to a problem
that, negative labels and unobserved labels are compounded
in the pool of “missing label”. This issue has not received
enough attention by existing feature selection approaches;
yet, it is crucial because the nature of two kinds of labels is
entirely disparate. They make different contributions in determining whether a feature is discriminative for the learning
prototype; the negative labels provide deﬁnite negative feedback information, while the unobserved labels give nothing
back. This is the core motivation of our study, that is, we attempt to accurately trace the unobserved labels and preclude
them from the process of feature selection.
Existing multi-label feature selection to deal with the incomplete label cases includes the label embedding line and
the imputation line. The former family of approaches simply treats all of the missing labels as the negative ones,
and the latter family randomly assumes the positions of the
unobserved labels in the incomplete label matrix and predicts their positive or negative values. The manipulation of
the label embedding family is apparently inconsistent with
the reality, and that of the imputation family seems superﬁcially complicated, because (1) randomly positioning the
unobserved labels is unreasonable; and (2) no method could
promise an absolutely perfect prediction for the unobserved
labels, and an indiscreet prediction inevitably introduces
new noises and further deteriorates the performance of feature selection.
In this study, we concentrate on tackling the following
challenges to prevent the participation of the unobserved la-

Abstract
In multi-label learning, instances have a large number of
noisy and irrelevant features, and each instance is associated
with a set of class labels wherein label information is generally incomplete. These missing labels possess two sides like
a coin; people cannot predict whether their provided information for feature selection is favorable (relevant) or not (irrelevant) during tossing. Existing approaches either superﬁcially consider the missing labels as negative or indiscreetly
impute them with some predicted values, which may either
overestimate unobserved labels or introduce new noises in selecting discriminative features. To avoid the pitfall of missing
labels, a novel uniﬁed framework of selecting discriminative
features and modeling incomplete label matrix is proposed
from a generative point of view in this paper. Concretely, we
relax Smoothness Assumption to infer the label observability, which can reveal the positions of unobserved labels, and
employ the spike-and-slab prior to perform feature selection
by excluding unobserved labels. Using a data-augmentation
strategy leads to full local conjugacy in our model, facilitating simple and efﬁcient Expectation Maximization (EM)
algorithm for inference. Quantitative and qualitative experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
approach under various evaluation metrics.

Introduction
Feature selection is an important part in machine learning, which aims at selecting the most discriminative features to reduce dimensionality and computation costs, improve the learning performance of models, and better understand the inherent regularities in data (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003). In the feature selection for multi-label cases,
most approaches (Gu, Li, and Han 2011; Ma et al. 2012a;
2012b) capture label correlations to help better select the
most discriminative features across multiple labels, which
can improve the learning performance in prediction phrase.
Nevertheless, these approaches have all assumed training
data with complete label assignments.
In practice, however, it is difﬁcult to attain complete labels; a considerable number of labels are left aside by la∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6534

