The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Match to Rank Model for Personalized Click-Through Rate Prediction
Ze Lyu, Yu Dong, Chengfu Huo, Weijun Ren
Alibaba Group
{lvze.lz, dongyu.dy, chengfu.huocf, afei}@alibaba-inc.com

conversion behaviors. And click-through rate (CTR) prediction has received much attention from communities of both
academia and industry.

Abstract
Click-through rate (CTR) prediction is a core task in the
ﬁeld of recommender system and many other applications.
For CTR prediction model, personalization is the key to improve the performance and enhance the user experience. Recently, several models are proposed to extract user interest
from user behavior data which reﬂects user’s personalized
preference implicitly. However, existing works in the ﬁeld of
CTR prediction mainly focus on user representation and pay
less attention on representing the relevance between user and
item, which directly measures the intensity of user’s preference on target item. Motivated by this, we propose a novel
model named Deep Match to Rank (DMR) which combines
the thought of collaborative ﬁltering in matching methods for
the ranking task in CTR prediction. In DMR, we design Userto-Item Network and Item-to-Item Network to represent the
relevance in two forms. In User-to-Item Network, we represent the relevance between user and item by inner product
of the corresponding representation in the embedding space.
Meanwhile, an auxiliary match network is presented to supervise the training and push larger inner product to represent higher relevance. In Item-to-Item Network, we ﬁrst calculate the item-to-item similarities between user interacted
items and target item by attention mechanism, and then sum
up the similarities to obtain another form of user-to-item relevance. We conduct extensive experiments on both public and
industrial datasets to validate the effectiveness of our model,
which outperforms the state-of-art models signiﬁcantly.

Personalization is the key to improve the performance
of CTR prediction and enhance the user experience. Many
deep learning based methods have been proposed for CTR
prediction, which can learn implicit feature interactions and
enhance the model capability. Most of these methods pay
attention on designing network structure for automatic feature interactions (Cheng et al. 2016; He and Chua 2017;
Wang et al. 2017). Recently, several models are proposed
to extract user interest from user behavior data like click
and purchase (Zhou et al. 2018; 2019), which is very important for recommendation settings where users do not show
their interest explicitly. To represent user interest, item-toitem relevance between user interacted item and target item
is considered. However, these models mainly focus on user
representation and neglect to represent the user-to-item relevance. The user-to-item relevance directly measures user’s
personalized preference on target item, which is carefully
modeled in collaborative ﬁltering based matching methods.
Based on these observations, we propose a novel model
called Deep Match to Rank (DMR) which uses the thought
of collaborative ﬁltering in matching methods to capture the
user-to-item relevance, consequently improving the performance of CTR prediction. User-to-Item Network and Itemto-Item network are the two sub-networks in DMR to represent the user-to-item relevance respectively. In User-to-Item
Network, we directly calculate relevance between user and
item by inner product of the corresponding representation in
the embedding space, where the user representation is extracted from user behavior. In consideration of that more
recent behaviors reﬂect user’s temporal interest better, we
apply attention mechanism to adaptively learn the weight
for each behavior with regard to its position in behavior sequence. Meanwhile, we propose an auxiliary match network
to push larger inner product to represent higher relevance
and help ﬁt the User-to-Item Network better. The auxiliary
match network alone can be viewed as a matching method,
whose task is to predict which item to be clicked next according to user’s historical behavior, and we jointly train
the matching model and ranking model in DMR. In Item-

Introduction
Matching and ranking are two classic stages for information
retrieval in recommender system. At the stage of matching,
aka. candidate generation, a small set of candidates are retrieved from the whole item set by matching user with items.
Collaborative ﬁltering based methods are widely used to calculate the user-to-item relevance and select most relevant
items. At the ranking stage, ranking models assign comparable scores to the candidates generated by different matching
methods, and the top-N scoring items are presented to the
end-user. User click is a very important evaluation metric in
recommender system, which is the basis of all subsequent
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
156

