The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Planning with Abstract Learned
Models While Learning Transferable Subtasks
John Winder,1 Stephanie Milani,2 Matthew Landen,3 Erebus Oh,1
Shane Parr,4 Shawn Squire,1 Marie desJardins,5 and Cynthia Matuszek1
1

University of Maryland, Baltimore County, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Georgia Institute of Technology,
4
University of Massachusetts Amherst, 5 Simmons University
like the depth and width of the hierarchy. While option/skill
discovery research attempts to address these limitations,
many assumptions currently remain, such as ad hoc heuristics for transfer mappings, how state abstraction functions
are acquired (MacGlashan et al. 2015). As a result, it remains a signiﬁcant issue that learned subtasks are speciﬁc
to the context in which they are learned, both the training
environment and the hierarchy in which they are embedded.
The ultimate aim of this research is to develop a method
by which an agent can autonomously construct a robust hierarchy of subtasks and their models. To support planning
and task transfer, these subtasks should: (1) be independent
of one another, meaning that each subtask is a complete
Markov decision process unto itself, solvable without relying on other subtasks; and (2), be modular, meaning that
they can be swapped in or out of a hierarchy. Intuitively,
these constraints encode the requirement that subtasks can
be added and removed without breaking the learned hierarchy and can be transferred to new tasks.
We introduce Planning with Abstract Learned Models
(PALM), a novel method for assembling task components
into subtasks with self-contained, local models. When deployed to a new task, PALM computes each subtask’s model
while preserving its independence. The main contributions
of this work are as follows:

Abstract
We introduce an algorithm for model-based hierarchical reinforcement learning to acquire self-contained transition and
reward models suitable for probabilistic planning at multiple
levels of abstraction. We call this framework Planning with
Abstract Learned Models (PALM). By representing subtasks
symbolically using a new formal structure, the lifted abstract
Markov decision process (L-AMDP), PALM learns models
that are independent and modular. Through our experiments,
we show how PALM integrates planning and execution, facilitating a rapid and efﬁcient learning of abstract, hierarchical models. We also demonstrate the increased potential for
learned models to be transferred to new and related tasks.

1

Introduction

Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) acquires a model
of an agent’s interaction with its surroundings. In this set of
approaches, the learned model captures the stochastic effects
of actions on future states and rewards. Once a model has
been acquired, an agent can use it for probabilistic planning
to anticipate behaviors that will lead to a well-chosen path
through state space.
For challenging tasks in a complex environment, one
common technique is to “divide and conquer,” breaking
down an overall task into a hierarchy of separate, smaller
subtasks that are easier to solve and, ideally, reusable. Such
subtasks are commonly represented and variously discussed
in RL literature as skills (Konidaris, Kaelbling, and LozanoPerez 2018) and options (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999).
However, in practice, hierarchical reinforcement learning
(HRL) often relies on an expert’s manual encoding of domain knowledge to design hierarchies of subtasks. These
methods directly encode a designer’s preconceptions and
bias, due to the speciﬁcation of subtasks’ structure and
scope. For example, HRL techniques such as MAXQ (Dietterich 2000), HAM (Parr and Russell 1998; Bai and Russell 2017) and AMDP hierarchies (Gopalan et al. 2017),
as well as most work on options, depend on experts specifying an interlocking hierarchy of subtasks. Methods that
do learn structure, such as MLSH (Frans et al. 2017) and
HIRO (Nachum et al. 2018), still predetermine properties

1. Lifted Abstract Markov Decision Process (L-AMDP):
an independent, modular subtask representation.
2. PALM P HASE -2: a process for converting task hierarchies learned from demonstrations into lifted AMDPs.
3. PALM P HASE -3: an algorithm for acquiring transition
models for all useful subtasks in a hierarchy via integrated planning and learning.

2

Background & Related Work

Our work on learning hierarchies of independent, modular
subtasks is in the general research area of reinforcement
learning (RL). An RL scenario considers an agent that executes actions determined by some policy, receives feedback
(reward), observes the change in its world state, and updates
its policy to increase the expected reward.
Such scenarios are deﬁned by Markov decision processes
(MDPs), M = S, A, T, R, γ, comprised of: a set of states
S; a set of actions A; a transition probability distribution T :

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9992

