The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Attractive or Faithful?
Popularity-Reinforced Learning for Inspired Headline Generation
Yun-Zhu Song,1 Hong-Han Shuai,1 Sung-Lin Yeh,2 Yi-Lun Wu,1 Lun-Wei Ku,3 Wen-Chih Peng1
1

National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan, 2 National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
3
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
{yunzhusong.eed07g, hhshuai, w86763777.eed08g}@nctu.edu.tw,
ff936tw@gapp.nthu.edu.tw, lwku@iis.sinica.edu.tw, wcpeng@g2.nctu.edu.tw
e.g., “15 tweets that sum up married life perfectly. (number 13 is hilarious)”. Nevertheless, the clickbait approaches,
though effective at the beginning, make users feel annoyed
and eventually reluctant to read anything from these websites. It is important to generate attractive headlines while
still being faithful to the content.
Headline generation can be regarded as a branch of the
article summarization tasks and categorized into extractivebased methods and abstractive-based methods. Extractivebased methods generate headlines by selecting a sentence
from the article (Higurashi et al. 2018). In contrast, abstractive methods generate the headline by understanding the article and summarizing the idea in one sentence (Takase et al.
2016; Hayashi and Yanagimoto 2018). These two kinds of
approaches both generate faithful headlines that help readers
understand the content at the ﬁrst glance. However, most existing headline generation approaches do not take the attractiveness into consideration. Zhang et al. observe that interrogative headlines usually attract more clicks and thus formulate the headline generation task as Question Headline
Generation (QHG) (Zhang et al. 2018). Nevertheless, the
QHG approach is limited since 1) not every article is suitable for question headlines (e.g., obituaries) and 2) it looks
annoying if every headline is in an interrogative form. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work using the
data-driven approach to generate both faithful and attractive
headlines in a general form.
However, inspired headline generation introduces at least
three new research challenges. First, there are currently only
public datasets for the headline generation, and none of them
contains information relating to attractiveness, e.g., views,
comments, or shares. Second, even with datasets and the
extractive-abstractive architecture, it is still challenging to
incorporate the attractiveness and faithfulness of information for the extractive-abstractive architecture since i) attractiveness and faithfulness are evaluated based on the sentences rewritten by the abstractor but the gradient can not
propagate through the non-differentiable operations of the
extractor, and ii) the dependency between extractor and abstractor may lead to slow convergence, i.e., when the extractor is weak and selects a sentence without any popularityrelated words, it is difﬁcult for the abstractor to rewrite it
into an attractive one. Third, generating headlines based on
meaning faithfulness may sometimes conﬂict with attrac-

Abstract
With the rapid proliferation of online media sources and published news, headlines have become increasingly important
for attracting readers to news articles, since users may be
overwhelmed with the massive information. In this paper, we
generate inspired headlines that preserve the nature of news
articles and catch the eye of the reader simultaneously. The
task of inspired headline generation can be viewed as a speciﬁc form of Headline Generation (HG) task, with the emphasis on creating an attractive headline from a given news
article. To generate inspired headlines, we propose a novel
framework called POpularity-Reinforced Learning for inspired Headline Generation (PORL-HG). PORL-HG exploits
the extractive-abstractive architecture with 1) Popular Topic
Attention (PTA) for guiding the extractor to select the attractive sentence from the article and 2) a popularity predictor
for guiding the abstractor to rewrite the attractive sentence.
Moreover, since the sentence selection of the extractor is not
differentiable, techniques of reinforcement learning (RL) are
utilized to bridge the gap with rewards obtained from a popularity score predictor. Through quantitative and qualitative
experiments, we show that the proposed PORL-HG significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art headline generation
models in terms of attractiveness evaluated by both human
(71.03%) and the predictor (at least 27.60%), while the faithfulness of PORL-HG is also comparable to the state-of-theart generation model.

Introduction
“A good basic selling idea, involvement and relevancy, of
course, are as important as ever, but in the advertising din
of today, unless you make yourself noticed and believed, you
ain’t got nothing”
— Leo Burnett (1891-1971)
Nowadays, users are overwhelmed with rapidly-increasing
number of articles from not only news websites but also
social media. Therefore, headlines have become more and
more important for attracting readers to articles. Articles
with eye-catching headlines often attract more attention and
receive more views or shares, which is important to content
providers since the number of views can be monetized with
AD networks and bring revenue. To improve the view rate,
some content farms use clickbait headlines to attract users,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8910

