The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Uncorrected Least-Squares Temporal Difference with Lambda-Return
Takayuki Osogami
IBM Research - Tokyo
osogami@jp.ibm.com

methods, which is known as TD(λ), that mix MC and TD.
Here, λ is a parameter between 0 and 1, where TD(0) reduces to TD, and TD(1) reduces to MC. A study shows that
TD(1) tends to suffer from the high variance of MC returns,
while TD(0) tends to suffer from the bias in the estimator of
return; the optimal choice is often 0 < λ < 1 (Sutton 1988).
The second classiﬁcation is with respect to how the value
function is updated. Two popular approaches are stochastic approximation and least-squares methods. In both approaches, the value function can be updated every time a
new sample of data is obtained. With stochastic approximation, the value function is updated by the amount that
is controlled by a step size (learning rate). On the other
hand, a least-squares method recursively computes a matrix and a vector, which are used to compute the weights
of the value function in a way that mean squared error is
minimized. In the literature, a TD(λ) method with stochastic approximation is simply referred to as TD(λ) (Sutton
1988), and a least-squares TD(λ) method is referred to as
LSTD(λ) (Boyan 2002). LSTD(λ) is sometimes called recursive LSTD(λ) to emphasize the recursive procedure, but
we simply call LSTD(λ) in this paper.
Stochastic approximation has the advantage of small
computational complexity per step (speciﬁcally, linear in
the number of weights, while least-squares methods have
quadratic complexity). On the other hand, least-squares
methods tend to be sample efﬁcient (Boyan 2002; Bradtke
and Barto 1996; Xu, He, and Hu 2002), because they fully
utilize available data (sufﬁcient information is kept in the
recursively computed matrix and vector)1 . Also, the performance of TD(λ) is sensitive to the step size and the initial
weights, while LSTD(λ) does not suffer from this sensitivity.
In general, LSTD(λ) approximates the value function with a
linear function, which we also assume throughout the paper.
Recently, van Seijen and Sutton; van Seijen et al. (2014;
2016) have proposed true online TD(λ) and showed that it
has sound theoretical basis and empirically performs better
than conventional TD(λ). This motivates us to re-examine
conventional LSTD(λ) by Boyan (2002), which has been derived from conventional TD(λ) and shown to converge to the

Abstract
Temporal difference, TD(λ), learning is a foundation of reinforcement learning and also of interest in its own right
for the tasks of prediction. Recently, true online TD(λ) has
been shown to closely approximate the “forward view” at
every step, while conventional TD(λ) does this only at the
end of an episode. We re-examine least-squares temporal
difference, LSTD(λ), which has been derived from conventional TD(λ). We design Uncorrected LSTD(λ) in such a way
that, when λ = 1, Uncorrected LSTD(1) is equivalent to
the least-squares method for the linear regression of Monte
Carlo (MC) return at every step, while conventional LSTD(1)
has this equivalence only at the end of an episode, since the
MC return is corrected to be unbiased. We prove that Uncorrected LSTD(λ) can have smaller variance than conventional
LSTD(λ), and this allows Uncorrected LSTD(λ) to sometimes outperform conventional LSTD(λ) in practice. When
λ = 0, however, Uncorrected LSTD(0) is not equivalent to
LSTD. We thus also propose Mixed LSTD(λ), which matches
conventional LSTD(λ) at λ = 0 and Uncorrected LSTD(λ)
at λ = 1. In numerical experiments, we study how the three
LSTD(λ)s behave under limited training data.

1

Introduction

A fundamental problem in reinforcement learning is in
learning the value function, which maps a state to the expected cumulative reward (expected return) that can be obtained from that state with a policy under consideration (Sutton and Barto 2018). Effectiveness of reinforcement learning
algorithms relies on the quality of the estimated value function. Learning the value function is also of interest in its own
right for the purpose of prediction. As such, there has been
a signiﬁcant amount of work on learning the value function,
where the existing methods may be classiﬁed in two ways.
The ﬁrst classiﬁcation is with respect to Monte Carlo
(MC) or Temporal Difference (TD). An MC method estimates the value function directly on the basis of sampled
sequences of immediate rewards (i.e., MC returns). On the
other hand, a TD method utilizes the relation that the return
from a state is equal to the immediate reward from that state
plus the return from the next state. There is also a family of
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The inefﬁciency of stochastic approximation may be alleviated
by the use of replay memory (Lin 1993)

5323

