The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Global Context-Aware Progressive
Aggregation Network for Salient Object Detection
Zuyao Chen,1 Qianqian Xu,2 Runmin Cong,3 Qingming Huang1,2,4,5

∗

1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, ICT, CAS, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
4
Key Lab. of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS, Beijing, China
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
chenzuyao17@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, rmcong@bjtu.edu.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved competitive performance in salient object detection, in which how
to learn effective and comprehensive features plays a critical
role. Most of the previous works mainly adopted multiplelevel feature integration yet ignored the gap between different features. Besides, there also exists a dilution process
of high-level features as they passed on the top-down pathway. To remedy these issues, we propose a novel network
named GCPANet to effectively integrate low-level appearance features, high-level semantic features, and global context features through some progressive context-aware Feature Interweaved Aggregation (FIA) modules and generate
the saliency map in a supervised way. Moreover, a Head Attention (HA) module is used to reduce information redundancy and enhance the top layers features by leveraging the
spatial and channel-wise attention, and the Self Reﬁnement
(SR) module is utilized to further reﬁne and heighten the input features. Furthermore, we design the Global Context Flow
(GCF) module to generate the global context information at
different stages, which aims to learn the relationship among
different salient regions and alleviate the dilution effect of
high-level features. Experimental results on six benchmark
datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods both quantitatively and qualitatively.

Figure 1: Sample results of our method compared with others. (a) Image; (b) Ground truth; (c) GCPANet (Ours); (d)
PiCANet-R (Liu, Han, and Yang 2018); (e) BASNet (Qin et
al. 2019).

layers to gradually enlarge the receptive ﬁelds of network
and extracts high-level semantic information. As pointed
out in previous works (Luo et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2017),
due to the pyramid-like CNNs structure, low-level features
usually have larger spatial size and more ﬁne-grained details, while high-level features tend to gain more semantic
knowledge and discard some meaningless or irrelevant detail information. Generally speaking, the high-level features
are beneﬁcial to the coarse localization of salient objects,
whereas the low-level features that contain the spatial structural details are suitable to reﬁne boundaries. However, there
remains several problems for the FCN-based methods: (1)
Due to the gap between different level features, the simple
combination of semantic information and appearance information is insufﬁcient and lacks consideration of the different contribution of different features for salient object detection; (2) Most of the previous works ignored the global
context information, which beneﬁts for deducing the relationship among multiple salient regions and producing more
complete saliency result.
To remedy the above mentioned issues, we propose a
novel network named Global Context-Aware Progressive
Aggregation Network (GCPANet), which consists of four
modules: Feature Interweaved Aggregation (FIA) module,
Self Reﬁnement (SR) module, Head Attention (HA) module,
and Global Context Flow (GCF) module. Considering the
characteristics difference between multiple level features,

Introduction
Salient object detection aims to detect interesting regions
that attract human attention in an image (Cong et al. 2018a).
As an efﬁcient preprocessing technique, salient object detection beneﬁts a wide range of applications such as image
understanding (Zhang, Du, and Zhang 2014), image retrieval
(Gao et al. 2015), and object tracking (Hong et al. 2015).
In recent years, the development of deep learning, especially the emergence of Fully Convolutional Network
(Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), has greatly boosted
the progress of salient object detection (Zhao et al. 2015;
Li and Yu 2016; Wang et al. 2016). Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) stacks multiple convolution layers and pooling
∗

The corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10599

