The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Posterior-GAN: Towards Informative and Coherent
Response Generation with Posterior Generative Adversarial Network
Shaoxiong Feng,1∗ Hongshen Chen,2 Kan Li,1 Dawei Yin2
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Data Science Lab, JD.com
{shaoxiongfeng, likan}@bit.edu.cn,
ac@chenhongshen.com, yindawei@acm.org

Abstract
Neural conversational models learn to generate responses by
taking into account the dialog history. These models are typically optimized over the query-response pairs with a maximum likelihood estimation objective. However, the queryresponse tuples are naturally loosely coupled, and there exist multiple responses that can respond to a given query,
which leads the conversational model learning burdensome.
Besides, the general dull response problem is even worsened when the model is confronted with meaningless response training instances. Intuitively, a high-quality response
not only responds to the given query but also links up to the
future conversations, in this paper, we leverage the queryresponse-future turn triples to induce the generated responses
that consider both the given context and the future conversations. To facilitate the modeling of these triples, we further propose a novel encoder-decoder based generative adversarial learning framework, Posterior Generative Adversarial
Network (Posterior-GAN), which consists of a forward and
a backward generative discriminator to cooperatively encourage the generated response to be informative and coherent
by two complementary assessment perspectives. Experimental results demonstrate that our method effectively boosts the
informativeness and coherence of the generated response on
both automatic and human evaluation, which veriﬁes the advantages of considering two assessment perspectives.

Figure 1: Dialogue examples with various responses regarding informativeness and coherence.
given query, so call one-to-many phenomenon, which leads
the conversational model learning burdensome. In DailyDialog (Li et al. 2017b) corpus, at least 13% utterances contain
more than one response (Csaky, Purgai, and Recski 2019).
What’s more, the notorious general dull response problem
is even worsened when the model is confronted with meaningless response training instances. In another public available corpus OpenSubtitles (OSDb), 113K sentences contain the sequence “I don’t know” in the training set (Li et
al. 2016a). Not to mention other similar meaningless responses like “haha”, “what are you talking about?”, etc. The
one-to-many phenomenon and non-negligible proportion of
generic responses in the training corpus cause the neural response generation model prone to generate short, bland, or
even irrelevant responses. In Figure 1, for the given query
talking about the traveling experience, the ﬁrst response is
much shorter and uninformative compared with the other
two responses, while the second one seems to be informative
enough but meanders away from the conversational subject,
especially in terms of the following conversations. The third
response is not only informative but also coherent with both
the query and the next utterance.
It is often the case that a high-quality response not only
responds to the given query but also links up to the future
conversations, in this paper, we propose to utilize queryresponse-future turn triples instead of the query-response
pairs to train the response generation model. Convention-

Introduction
Generative conversational models are drawing an increasing
amount of interests (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Vinyals and
Le 2015; Serban et al. 2016; 2017b; 2017a; Li et al. 2016a;
2016b; 2017a; Mou et al. 2016; Zhao, Zhao, and Eskénazi
2017; Xing et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2017; 2018a; Zhang et
al. 2018a; 2018b). Most existing generative conversational
models are based on a Seq2Seq architecture (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014). These models consider conversation
history to learn to generate responses and are optimized over
the query-response pairs.
However, the query-response tuples are naturally loosely
coupled, there exist multiple responses that can respond to a
∗

Work done at Data Science Lab, JD.com.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7708

