The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Automated Spectral Kernel Learning
Jian Li,1,2 Yong Liu,∗1,2 Weiping Wang1
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lijian9026, liuyong, wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
The generalization performance of kernel methods is largely
determined by the kernel, but spectral representations of
stationary kernels are both input-independent and outputindependent, which limits their applications on complicated
tasks. In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient learning framework that incorporates the process of ﬁnding suitable kernels and model training. Using non-stationary spectral kernels and backpropagation w.r.t. the objective, we obtain favorable spectral representations that depends on both inputs
and outputs. Further, based on Rademacher complexity, we
derive data-dependent generalization error bounds, where we
investigate the effect of those factors and introduce regularization terms to improve the performance. Extensive experimental results validate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm and coincide with our theoretical ﬁndings.

Figure 1: The overview of ASKL.
random features is limited because stationary kernels are
input-independent and output-independent. Yaglom’s theorem, rather than Bochner’s theorem, provides more general
forms which encompass both stationary and non-stationary
kernels via inverse Fourier transform (Yaglom 1987; Samo
and Roberts 2015). Recently, due to its general and concise spectral statements, non-stationary kernels have been
applied to Gaussian process regression (Remes, Heinonen,
and Kaski 2017; Sun et al. 2019).
Hyper parameters for kernels determine the performance
of kernel methods. Meanwhile, kernel selection approaches
have been well-studied (Liu and Liao 2014; Li et al. 2017;
Ding et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018; 2019). However, due to the
separation of kernel selection and model training, those techniques are inefﬁcient and lead the undesirable performance.
In this paper, to achieve better performance ability for kernel methods, we propose an efﬁcient algorithm, namely Automated Spectral Kernel Learning (ASKL), learning suitable
kernels and model weights together. A brief overview is illustrated in Figure 1. On the algorithmic front, ASKL consists of: (1) non-stationary kernels to obtain input-dependent
features, (2) backpropagation w.r.t the objective to make features output-dependent, (3) regularization terms to achieve
sharper generalization error bounds. On the theoretical front,
the theoretical underpinning is Rademacher complexity theory, which indicates how the feature mappings affect the performance and suggests ways to reﬁne the algorithm.

Introduction
Kernel methods have achieved great success in many conventional domains over past decades, while they show relatively inferior performance on complicated tasks nowadays.
The fundamental limitation of common kernels has been revealed that they are both stationary and monotony (Bengio,
Delalleau, and Roux 2006). The stationary property shows
that stationary kernels only depend on the distance x − x 
while are free from the input x itself. The monotony property indicates that values of stationary kernels decrease over
the distance, ignoring the long-range interdependence.
Spectral approaches were developed to fully characterize stationary kernels with concise representation forms,
such as sparse spectrum kernels (Quiñonero-Candela et al.
2010), sparse mixture kernels (Wilson and Adams 2013)
and random Fourier features methods to handle with large
scale settings (Rahimi and Recht 2007; Le, Sarlós, and
Smola 2013; Li, Liu, and Wang 2019). With sound theoretical guarantees, namely Bochner’s theorem (Rudin 1962;
Stein 2012), spectral kernels are constructed from the inverse Fourier transform in the frequency domain. Although
approximate spectral representation provides an efﬁcient approach for stationary spectral kernels, the performance of
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4618

