The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

A Machine Learning Approach to Identity
Houses with High Lead Tap Water Concentrations
Seyedsaeed Hajiseyedjavadi1, Michael Blackhurst2, Hassan A. Karimi1
{ 1, School of Computing and Information, 2 Center for Social and Urban Research}, University of Pittsburgh, USA
{seh138, mfb30, hkarimi}@pitt.edu

Abstract
Over a century separates initial lead service lateral installations
from the federal regulation of lead in drinking water. As such,
municipalities often do not have adequate information describing installations of lead plumbing. Municipalities thus face
challenges such as reducing exposure to lead in drinking water,
spreading scarce resources for gathering information, adopting
short-term protection measures (e.g., providing filters), and
developing longer-term prevention strategies (e.g., replacing
lead laterals). Given the spatial and temporal patterns to properties, machine learning is seen as a useful tool to reduce uncertainty in decision making by authorities when addressing
lead in water. The Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority
(PWSA) is currently addressing these challenges in Pittsburgh
and this paper describes the development and application of a
model predicting high tap water concentrations (> 15 ppb) for
PWSA customers. The model was developed using spatial
cross validation to support PWSA’s interest in applying predictions in areas without training data. The model’s AUROC is
71.6% and primarily relies on publicly available property tax
assessment data and indicators of lateral material collected by
PWSA as they meet regulatory requirements.

Introduction
Exposure to lead can cause serious health effects, particularly in children. Lead in paint, soil, and water are the primary sources of exposure risks (Gould 2009).
By 1900, lead was a predominant material used for residential water laterals in U.S. cities owing to its ease of installation and resistance to corrosion. The water later–or
water service pipe–connects a building’s interior plumbing
to the main water system. As awareness of lead’s negative
public health effects grew, installations of lead laterals
were eventually phased out. In 1986, federal regulations
were revised to ban the use of lead plumbing (US EPA
2013)
However, many homes are still served by lead water laterals, which are the primary source of lead in drinking waCopyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13300

ter in the U.S. As a result, federal guidelines require public
water municipalities to monitor for lead concentration in
their customers’ taps. When lead tap water concentrations
are elevated and subsequent treatment changes cannot control lead levels, municipalities are mandated to replace lead
laterals until consecutive samples fall below federally accepted levels (US EPA 2015)
Municipalities can struggle to initiative effective replacement strategies due to missing information describing
initial lead lateral installations and subsequent replacements. In the short-run, municipalities often provide customers with point-of-use protection (bottled water, water
filters) and initiate lateral material inventory efforts, such
as excavating laterals or inspecting them through curb boxes (Enking 2019; Ingber 2019)
Recent events in Pittsburgh, PA, demonstrate these challenges. The Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority
(PWSA) provides drinking water to nearly all of the City
of Pittsburgh, including approximately 70,000 residential
customers. In 2016, tap water samples collected by the
PWSA exceeded federal and state action levels for lead.
PWSA thus entered a replacement mandate in June 2016
and is still operating under this mandate. In addition to replacements, PWSA recently implemented the use of orthophosphate as a corrosion control, and currently provides
free water filters to affected residents (Shoemaker 2018)
and has started building an inventory of water lateral materials through digitizing historical records, inspecting curb
boxes, and excavations.
The inventory of service line materials is critical in
providing a cost-effective replacement program. Excavating a service line and determining that the materials are not
lead (or galvanized iron which is treated the same as lead
at PWSA) is costly and diverts resources from the important work of actually replacing lead service lines.
Therefore, having an accurate inventory is an important
first-step in any lead service line replacement program.
New approaches are needed to accurately predict the locations and numbers of lead service lines in a community.

