The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Computing Team-Maxmin Equilibria in
Zero-Sum Multiplayer Extensive-Form Games
Youzhi Zhang, Bo An
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{yzhang137, boan}@ntu.edu.sg

results about multiplayer games except for games with special structures, e.g., congestion games (Shoham and LeytonBrown 2008), or the algorithm without theoretical guarantee (Brown and Sandholm 2019). It is not only because it
is hard to compute the NE, which is PPAD-complete (Chen
and Deng 2005) even for 3-player games, but also because
the NE is not unique (or not exchangeable) in multiplayer
games, which will make it difﬁcult for each player to select
a strategy independently and then form an NE with other
players’ strategies (Brown and Sandholm 2019).
The Team-Maxmin Equilibrium (TME) is a solution concept for the situation where a team of players with the same
utility function take actions independently against an adversary (von Stengel and Koller 1997; Basilico et al. 2017;
Celli and Gatti 2018). TMEs have some fascinating properties, e.g., it is the NE maximizing the utility of the team and
always exists. Speciﬁcally, it is unique in general, which can
avoid the equilibrium selection problem. Moreover, TMEs
can capture many real-world scenarios. For example, in multiplayer poker games, all except one of them may form a
team and play against the target player, i.e., they share the
same goal but take actions independently (e.g., the setting
of poker games in Brown and Sandholm (2019) avoids that
players can communicate to correlate their actions). In addition to recreational applications, in security games, the US
Coast Guard and other different police departments schedule
and patrol independently against the attacker at major ports
such as the New York port (Jiang et al. 2013).
However, it is challenging to compute a TME in
Extensive-Form Games (EFGs), which is FNP-hard and
formulated as a non-convex programming problem (Celli
and Gatti 2018) even each player’s (sequence-form) strategy space is linear in the size of EFGs. The current approach (Celli and Gatti 2018) to compute this TME is
only to solve the non-convex problem directly by using the
state-of-the-art global optimization solver BARON (Khajavirad and Sahinidis 2018). Unfortunately, BARON does
not scale well (Celli and Gatti 2018). On the other hand,
in EFGs, some efﬁcient algorithms (Celli and Gatti 2018;
Farina et al. 2018) are proposed to compute CorrelatedTeam Maxmin Equilibria (CTMEs), where team players correlate their strategies. However, if team players transform a
CTME into the mixed strategy proﬁle, they may obtain an
arbitrarily large loss (see the next section for details). There-

Abstract
The study of ﬁnding the equilibrium for multiplayer games is
challenging. This paper focuses on computing Team-Maxmin
Equilibria (TMEs) in zero-sum multiplayer Extensive-Form
Games (EFGs), which describes the optimal strategies for a
team of players who share the same goal but they take actions independently against an adversary. TMEs can capture
many realistic scenarios, including: 1) a team of players play
against a target player in poker games; and 2) defense resources schedule and patrol independently in security games.
However, the study of efﬁciently ﬁnding TMEs within any
given accuracy in EFGs is almost completely unexplored. To
ﬁll this gap, we ﬁrst study the inefﬁciency caused by computing the equilibrium where team players correlate their strategies and then transforming it into the mixed strategy proﬁle
of the team and show that this inefﬁciency can be arbitrarily
large. Second, to efﬁciently solve the non-convex program
for ﬁnding TMEs directly, we develop the Associated Recursive Asynchronous Multiparametric Disaggregation Technique (ARAMDT) to approximate multilinear terms in the
program with two novel techniques: 1) an asynchronous precision method to reduce the number of constraints and variables for approximation by using different precision levels
to approximate these terms; and 2) an associated constraint
method to reduce the feasible solution space of the mixedinteger linear program resulting from ARAMDT by exploiting the relation between these terms. Third, we develop a
novel iterative algorithm to efﬁciently compute TMEs within
any given accuracy based on ARAMDT. Our algorithm is orders of magnitude faster than baselines in the experimental
evaluation.

1

Introduction

The design of algorithms for agents to make complex decisions in an interactive environment is an important component in artiﬁcial intelligence (Russell and Norvig 2016).
Recently, the computational study in the non-cooperative environment has achieved many results for two-player games,
for example, security games (Sinha et al. 2018) and poker
games (Brown and Sandholm 2018). The key solution concepts behind these results are the well-known Nash Equilibrium (NE) (Nash 1951) and Stackelberg equilibrium
(Conitzer and Sandholm 2006). However, there are fewer
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2318

