The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Causal Discovery from Multiple Data Sets with Non-Identical Variable Sets
Biwei Huang,1 Kun Zhang,1 Mingming Gong,2 Clark Glymour1
1

Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
{biweih, cg09}@andrew.cmu.edu, kunz1@cmu.edu, mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au

2

Over the last decade, thanks to the improved ability to
collect and store “big data” and closer cooperation across
laboratories, we are able to accumulate more variables and
data for analysis, while each lab may only measure a subset
of them. For instance, in biology, to understand the gene expression process, each researcher or each lab is responsible
for measuring a part of the genes or proteins. In electrophysiology, in each experiment, an electrode might only record
activities generated by one or several nearby neurons, and it
impedes recording and analyzing information ﬂows between
distinct areas. A solution is to record a subset of target areas
in each experiment and repeat the experiments several times.
Thus, it is desirable to perform causal discovery from
multiple data sets with non-identical sets of variables. A typical proposal to solve the problem is to analyze each data
set separately and then integrate the results. However, this
procedure may again suﬀer the confounding problem due to
missing variables in each data set. In addition, it ignores the
information shared by diﬀerent data sets and may suﬀer low
statistical reliability, especially when the sample size from
each data set is small while the data dimension is high.
Several approaches have been proposed to dealing with
the above scenario, such as the Integration of Overlapping
Networks (ION) algorithm (Danks, Glymour, and Tillman
2009) and Causal discovery from Overlapping INtErventions (COmbINE) (Triantaﬁllou and Tsamardinos 2015).
They use conditional independence information to ﬁnd a
partial ancestral graph (PAG) on each data set independently
and then search for PAGs over the integrated set of variables
that are consistent with the input PAGs from all data sets.
With this line of approaches, the ﬁnal causal graph over the
integrated set of variables is generally not unique and usually has large indeterminacies. Moreover, statistical ineﬃciency may aﬀect the estimation of individual PAGs, especially in the case when the sample sizes of some data sets
are small, and further aﬀect the accuracy of ﬁnal results.
In this paper, we focus on the linear, non-Gaussian case,
where the causal relations are linear and noise variables are
non-Gaussian. Interestingly, in this case, we are able to develop a principled method to uniquely identify causal relationships over the integrated set of variables from multiple
data sets, called Causal Discovery from Multiple data sets
with Non-identical variables (CD-MiNi). It also allows distribution shifts across data sets (some approaches can handle

Abstract
A number of approaches to causal discovery assume that
there are no hidden confounders and are designed to learn
a ﬁxed causal model from a single data set. Over the last
decade, with closer cooperation across laboratories, we are
able to accumulate more variables and data for analysis, while
each lab may only measure a subset of them, due to technical
constraints or to save time and cost. This raises a question of
how to handle causal discovery from multiple data sets with
non-identical variable sets, and at the same time, it would
be interesting to see how more recorded variables can help
to mitigate the confounding problem. In this paper, we propose a principled method to uniquely identify causal relationships over the integrated set of variables from multiple data
sets, in linear, non-Gaussian cases. The proposed method also
allows distribution shifts across data sets. Theoretically, we
show that the causal structure over the integrated set of variables is identiﬁable under testable conditions. Furthermore,
we present two types of approaches to parameter estimation:
one is based on maximum likelihood, and the other is likelihood free and leverages generative adversarial nets to improve scalability of the estimation procedure. Experimental
results on various synthetic and real-world data sets are presented to demonstrate the eﬃcacy of our methods.

1

Introduction

Learning causal relationships is one of the fundamental tasks
in scientiﬁc developments. As it is often diﬃcult to carry
out randomized experiments, inferring causal relations from
purely observational data, known as causal discovery, has
drawn much attention. Most approaches in causal discovery
are designed to learn causal relationships from a single data
set generated by a ﬁxed causal model, and they often assume
that there are no hidden confounders (Spirtes, Glymour, and
Scheines 1993; Heckerman, Geiger, and Chickering 1995;
Shimizu et al. 2006; Zhang and Hyvärinen 2009), with several exceptions. Dealing with the confounding problem is
challenging–much eﬀort has been made, but existing methods usually resort to rather strong assumptions (e.g., graph
structure constraints over observed variables or latent variables), and the estimated graphs usually have large indeterminacies (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 1993; R. Silva and
Spirtes 2006; Hoyer et al. 2008; Anandkumar et al. 2013).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10153

