The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Beyond Pairwise Comparisons in Social
Choice: A Setwise Kemeny Aggregation Problem
Hugo Gilbert

Tom Portoleau

Olivier Spanjaard

Gran Sasso Science Institute
67100 L’Aquila, Italy
hugo.gilbert@gssi.it

LAAS-CNRS, IRIT-CNRS
Université de Toulouse
31400 Toulouse, France
tom.portoleau@laas.fr

Sorbonne Université
CNRS, LIP6,
75005 Paris, France
olivier.spanjaard@lip6.fr

jority graph alone, and all other SWFs1 . The majority graph
is obtained from the input rankings by deﬁning one vertex
per alternative c and by adding an edge from c to c if c
is preferred to c in a strict majority of input rankings. In
the weighted majority graph, each edge is weighted by the
majority margin. The many SWFs that rely on these graphs
alone take therefore only pairwise comparisons into account
to determine an output ranking. For a compendium of these
SWFs, we refer to the book by Brandt et al. (2016).
The importance of this class of SWFs can be explained
by their connection with the Condorcet consistency property, stating: if there is a Condorcet winner (i.e., an alternative with outgoing edges to every other ones in the majority
graph), then it should be ranked ﬁrst in the output ranking.
Nevertheless, as shown by Baldiga and Green (2013), the
lack of Condorcet consistency is not necessarily a bad thing,
because this property may come into contradiction with the
objective of maximizing voters’ agreement with the output
ranking. The following example illustrates this point.

Abstract
In this paper, we advocate the use of setwise contests for aggregating a set of input rankings into an output ranking. We
propose a generalization of the Kemeny rule where one minimizes the number of k-wise disagreements instead of pairwise disagreements (one counts 1 disagreement each time the
top choice in a subset of alternatives of cardinality at most k
differs between an input ranking and the output ranking). After an algorithmic study of this k-wise Kemeny aggregation
problem, we introduce a k-wise counterpart of the majority
graph. It reveals useful to divide the aggregation problem into
several sub-problems. We conclude with numerical tests.

1

Introduction

Rank aggregation aims at producing a single ranking from
a collection of rankings of a ﬁxed set of alternatives. In social choice theory (e.g., Moulin 1991), where the alternatives are candidates to an election and each ranking represents the preferences of a voter, aggregation rules are called
Social Welfare Functions (SWFs). Apart from social choice,
rank aggregation has proved useful in many applications, including preference learning (Cheng and Hüllermeier 2009;
Clémençon, Korba, and Sibony 2018), collaborative ﬁltering
(Wang et al. 2014), genetic map creation (Jackson, Schnable,
and Aluru 2008), similarity search in databases systems (Fagin, Kumar, and Sivakumar 2003) and design of web search
engines (Altman and Tennenholtz 2008; Dwork et al. 2001).
In the following, we use interchangeably the terms “input
rankings” and “preferences”, “output ranking” and “consensus ranking”, as well as “alternatives” and “‘candidates”.
The well-known Arrow’s impossibility theorem states that
there exists no aggregation rule satisfying a small set of desirable properties (Arrow 1950). In the absense of an “ideal”
rule, various aggregation rules have been proposed and studied. Following Fishburn’s classiﬁcation (1977), we can distinguish between the SWFs for which the output ranking can
be computed from the majority graph alone, those for which
the output ranking can be computed from the weighted ma-

Example 1 (Baldiga and Green, 2013). Consider an election with 100 voters and 3 candidates c1 , c2 , c3 , where 49
voters have preferences c1  c2  c3 , 48 have preferences
c3  c2  c1 and 3 have preferences c2  c3  c1 . Candidate c2 is the Condorcet winner, but is the top choice of
only 3 voters. In contrast, candidate c1 is in slight minority
against c2 and c3 , but c1 is the top choice of 49 voters. This
massive gain in agreement may justify to put c1 instead of c2
in ﬁrst position of the output ranking.
Following Baldiga and Green (2013), we propose to handle this tension between the pairwise comparisons (leading to ranking c2 ﬁrst) and the plurality choice (leading to
ranking c1 ﬁrst) by using SWFs that take into account not
only pairwise comparisons but setwise contests. More precisely, given input rankings on a set C of candidates and
k ∈ {2, . . . , |C|}, the idea is to consider the plurality score of
each candidate c for each subset S ⊆ C such that 2 ≤ |S| ≤ k,
where the plurality score of c for S is the number of voters
for which c is the top choice in S. The results of setwise con1

Fishburn’s classiﬁcation actually applies to social choice functions, which prescribe a subset of winning alternatives from a collection of rankings, but the extension to SWFs is straightforward.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1982

