The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Can We Predict the Election Outcome from Sampled Votes?
Evi Micha, Nisarg Shah
University of Toronto
{emicha, nisarg}@cs.toronto.edu

are n individuals (a.k.a. voters), and we are given a voting
rule f1 which can make the desired collective decision given
the preferences of all n voters. Instead, we observe the preferences of only k out of n voters, and our goal is to design a
voting rule f2 which, when applied on the k observed preferences, predicts the outcome of f1 on all n preferences.
This framework has two immediate motivations. As described so far, we could think of f1 as the idealized voting rule we would like to implement if every individual
votes, and f2 as the voting rule we should really implement
if only a fraction of individuals are expected to vote. Alternatively, we can imagine a setting where voting rule f1
is implemented for an upcoming election, and we would
like to conduct a poll to observe a subset of preferences
and use f2 to predict the outcome of the upcoming election. Predicting outcomes of political elections using surveys has been extensively studied (Tumasjan et al. 2010;
Rothschild and Wolfers 2011; Walther 2015; Graefe 2014;
Lewis-Beck and Tien 1999; Lewis-Beck 2005; Dey and
Bhattacharyya 2015).
One question still lingers: Which k out of n voters would
participate? If they are adversarially chosen, it is not difﬁcult to see that predicting the election outcome is impossible.
For instance, if 49 out of 100 voters report that they prefer
alternative a over alternative b, it is impossible to know if
this is in fact the majority opinion. In the worst case, each of
the remaining 51 voters might prefer b over a. However, we
can argue that this is an unlikely scenario.
In this work, we assume that the k voters are sampled
from a distribution.1 This raises a number of questions:
Which voting rule f2 , given the k observed votes, would
best predict the outcome of f1 on all n votes? When is it
optimal to simply apply the same voting rule on the observed votes (i.e. f2 = f1 )? Which voting rules f1 can be
predicted well? If we have stochastic information about the
unobserved votes, how do we incorporate it into the prediction rule f2 ? Such questions are the focus of this work.

Abstract
In the standard model of voting, it is assumed that a voting
rule observes the ranked preferences of each individual over a
set of alternatives and makes a collective decision. In practice,
however, not every individual votes. Is it possible to make a
good collective decision for a group given the preferences of
only a few of its members?
We propose a framework in which we are given the ranked
preferences of k out of n individuals sampled from a distribution, and the goal is to predict what a given voting rule would
output if applied on the underlying preferences of all n individuals. We focus on the family of positional scoring rules,
derive a strong negative result when the underlying preferences can be arbitrary, and discover interesting phenomena
when they are generated from a known distribution.

1

Introduction

The aim of voting is to make a good collective decision for a
group of individuals based on the preferences of its members over a set of alternatives. In the vast literature published on voting since the work of Condorcet [1785], numerous voting rules have been proposed which intuitively
provide different notions of what makes an outcome best for
the group. Additionally, the literature offers several frameworks that deﬁne which collective decisions are good, and
allow evaluating as well as systematically designing voting rules; examples include the axiomatic approach (Arrow
1951; Moulin 1988), distance rationalizability (Meskanen
and Nurmi 2008; Elkind, Faliszewski, and Slinko 2015),
noisy voting (Young 1988; Caragiannis, Procaccia, and Shah
2016), and implicit utilitarian voting (Procaccia and Rosenschein 2006; Boutilier et al. 2015). However, most of this
literature assumes that the voting rule in question is able to
observe the preferences of every individual in the group.
In most real-world applications, only a fraction of the
members actually participate in voting. The goal of the
decision-making system is then to predict what the right collective decision is for the whole group (including individuals
whose preferences are not observed) given the preferences
of some of its members. In this work, we assume that there

1

Our main results hold for all possible distributions, but we provide additional results for the special case where the k voters are
sampled uniformly at random from all n voters.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2176

