The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Optimizing Nondecomposable Data
Dependent Regularizers via Lagrangian
Reparameterization Offers Signiﬁcant Performance and Efﬁciency Gains
Sathya N. Ravi, Abhay Venkatesh, Glenn M. Fung, Vikas Singh
sathya@uic.edu, abhayvenkate@wisc.edu, gfung@amfam.com, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

classes (Rippel et al. 2015) or seeking decorrelated autoencoder latent codes (Cheung et al. 2014). On the other hand,
artiﬁcial data corruption is also a form of regularization –
dropout induces a regularization on the Fisher information
matrix of the samples (Wager, Wang, and Liang 2013). More
recently, the results in (Mou et al. 2018) offer a nice treatment
of the form of data-dependent regularization that emerges
from popular methods such as batch norm and AdaGrad.

Abstract
Data dependent regularization is known to beneﬁt a wide variety of problems in machine learning. Often, these regularizers
cannot be easily decomposed into a sum over a ﬁnite number
of terms, e.g., a sum over individual example-wise terms. The
Fβ measure, Area under the ROC curve (AUCROC) and Precision at a ﬁxed recall (P@R) are some prominent examples that
are used in many applications. We ﬁnd that for most medium to
large sized datasets, scalability issues severely limit our ability
in leveraging the beneﬁts of such regularizers. Importantly, the
key technical impediment despite some recent progress is that,
such objectives remain difﬁcult to optimize via backpropapagation procedures. While an efﬁcient general-purpose strategy
for this problem still remains elusive, in this paper, we show
that for many data-dependent nondecomposable regularizers
that are relevant in applications, sizable gains in efﬁciency
are possible with minimal code-level changes; in other words,
no specialized tools or numerical schemes are needed. Our
procedure involves a reparameterization followed by a partial
dualization – this leads to a formulation that has provably
cheap projection operators. We present a detailed analysis of
runtime and convergence properties of our algorithm. On the
experimental side, we show that a direct use of our scheme signiﬁcantly improves the state of the art IOU measures reported
for MSCOCO Stuff segmentation dataset.

1

From Decomposable to Nondecomposable datadependent regularizers. A number of data-dependent
regularizers described above can be written as a sum
of individual example-wise estimates of the regularizer.
This setting is desirable because in order to run a SGD
type algorithm, we simply pick a random sample to get
an unbiased estimate of the gradient. But a number of
application domains often necessitate a regularization criteria
that may not decompose in this manner. In such settings, a
random sample (minibatch) of the dataset does not provide
us an unbiased gradient – biased gradients are known
to adversely impact both the qualitative and quantitative
performance of the training procedure, see (Chen and Luss ).
Why are Nondecomposable regularizers relevant?
Consider the situation where we would like to ensure that
the performance of a statistical model is uniformly good
over groups induced via certain protected attributes (such
as race or gender), see Figure 1. Or alternatively, we want
that when updating an algorithm in a manufacturing process, the new system’s behavior should mostly remain similar
with respect to some global measures such as makespan
(Limentani et al. 2005). (Cotter et al. 2019) shows applications of various shape constraints that are associated with
set functions. And ﬁnally, when pooling datasets from multiple sites, global characteristics of Precision-Recall should
be (approximately) preserved across sites (Zhou et al. 2017).
Essentially, these applications suggest that the performane of
a model in expectation (on the entire population), does not
automatically guarantee that the model will perform well on
speciﬁc subgroups. Motivated by these issues encountered
in various real world problems, recently (Cotter et al. 2018)
presents a comprehensive study of the computational aspects
of learning problems with rate constraints – there, the constrained setting is preferred (over penalized setting) due to

Introduction

Data dependent regularization is a mature and effective
strategy for many problems in machine learning. In semisupervised learning (Corduneanu and Jaakkola 2006), the
marginal distribution of the examples may serve to inﬂuence the estimation of the conditional distribution and
in SVMs, one could optimize the maximum relative margin based on the data distribution, rather than the absolute margin. In modern deep learning, data-dependent
regularization is routinely used in both explicit and implict ways. A regularizer can take the form of certain geometric or clustering-type constraints (Lezama et al. 2018;
Zhu et al. 2018) on the representations that are learned by the
network – using the distribution overlap between different
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5487

