The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Comparison of Architectures and Pretraining
Methods for Contextualized Multilingual Word Embeddings
Niels van der Heijden

Samira Abnar

Ekaterina Shutova

ILLC, University of Amsterdam
n.vanderheijden@student.uva.nl

ILLC, University of Amsterdam
s.abnar@uva.nl

ILLC, University of Amsterdam
e.shutova@uva.nl

2018) improved upon CoVe by making the contextualized
embeddings deep by combining information from multiple
layers of their LSTM encoder trained with language modelling objective. Finally, the Transformer-based (Vaswani et
al. 2017) BERT model (Devlin et al. 2018) broke the performance records across many downstream NLP tasks, achieving up to 7.6% absolute improvement over the previous state
of the art.
However, in the multilingual setting, the effects of contextualization are still relatively unexplored. One exception includes the work of Schuster et al, (2019) that generalizes the
work of Lample et al, (2017a) to the ELMo model by viewing a contextual word embedding as a context-dependent
shift from the (static) mean embedding of a word. The mean
embeddings are aligned across languages using adversarial training. This technique, however, does not outperform
the non-contextualized embedding baseline in half of the
performed experiments when no supervised anchored alignment is given and does not allow for large-scale joint training
across languages.
Meanwhile, recent multilingual NLP research has moved
away from solely word-level representations to training
“massively” multilingual sentence encoders. Artetxe and
Schwenk, (2018) proposed a method for learning languageagnostic sentence embeddings (LASER) for 93 languages
with a single shared encoder and limited aligned data. More
speciﬁcally, they trained a deep LSTM-encoder to embed
sentences in all (93) languages into a shared space such
that semantically similar sentences in different languages
appear close to each other in this space. Using this model
the researchers advanced the state of the art on zero-shot
cross-lingual natural language inference for 13 out of 14
languages in the XNLI (Conneau et al. 2018) dataset. Following these advances, Lample and Conneau, (2019) incorporated multilingual language pretraining into the BERT
model (Devlin et al. 2018), coining their model XLM (crosslingual language model), and again further improved the performance on all XNLI languages. Such multilingual sentence encoders have so far been applied and evaluated in
sentence-level tasks. Yet, they provide a promising starting
point for learning multilingual contextualized word representations needed for word-level classiﬁcation tasks and investigating the effects of contextualisation in multilingual
word-representation models.

Abstract
The lack of annotated data in many languages is a well-known
challenge within the ﬁeld of multilingual natural language
processing (NLP). Therefore, many recent studies focus on
zero-shot transfer learning and joint training across languages
to overcome data scarcity for low-resource languages. In this
work we (i) perform a comprehensive comparison of state-ofthe-art multilingual word and sentence encoders on the tasks
of named entity recognition (NER) and part of speech (POS)
tagging; and (ii) propose a new method for creating multilingual contextualized word embeddings, compare it to multiple
baselines and show that it performs at or above state-of-theart level in zero-shot transfer settings. Finally, we show that
our method allows for better knowledge sharing across languages in a joint training setting.

Introduction
With the aim of extending the global reach of NLP technology, much recent research has focused on the development
of multilingual models. Due to the lack of annotated data and
resources in many languages, these models typically rely
on multilingual joint learning or zero-shot transfer learning
across languages. Much of this research has utilized multilingual word embeddings (Lample et al. 2017a; Artetxe,
Labaka, and Agirre 2018), that project words in multiple languages into a shared multilingual semantic space, such that
translations of words across these languages appear close in
the new space. Such general-purpose multilingual word embeddings then serve as a basis for joint or transfer learning
focused on a particular task.
On the other hand, current best performing monolingual
approaches have moved away from static to contextualized
word embeddings. Such contextualisation allows the models to address the long-standing problem of polysemy and
dynamically model contextual meaning variation. The ﬁrst
such model, CoVe (McCann et al. 2017), used a deep LSTM
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) encoder pretrained in
a machine translation task to contextualize word vectors.
This work paved the way for contextualized word embeddings by showing their superiority over the static ones on
downstream tasks such as named entity recognition (NER)
and question answering. Shortly after, ELMo (Peters et al.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9090

