The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Interpretable Rumor Detection in Microblogs by Attending to User Interactions
Ling Min Serena Khoo, Hai Leong Chieu

Zhong Qian, Jing Jiang

DSO National Laboratories
12 Science Park Drive
Singapore 118225
{klingmin, chaileon}@dso.org.sg

Singapore Management University
80 Stamford Road
Singapore 178902
qianzhongqz@163.com, jingjiang@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

Source Claim:
“walmart donates $10,000 to support darren wilson and the on going
racist police murders #ferguson #boycottwalmart URL”

We address rumor detection by learning to differentiate between the community’s response to real and fake claims in
microblogs. Existing state-of-the-art models are based on tree
models that model conversational trees. However, in social
media, a user posting a reply might be replying to the entire
thread rather than to a speciﬁc user. We propose a post-level
attention model (PLAN) to model long distance interactions
between tweets with the multi-head attention mechanism in a
transformer network. We investigated variants of this model:
(1) a structure aware self-attention model (StA-PLAN) that
incorporates tree structure information in the transformer network, and (2) a hierarchical token and post-level attention
model (StA-HiTPLAN) that learns a sentence representation
with token-level self-attention. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the ﬁrst to evaluate our models on two rumor detection
data sets: the PHEME data set as well as the Twitter15 and
Twitter16 data sets. We show that our best models outperform
current state-of-the-art models for both data sets. Moreover,
the attention mechanism allows us to explain rumor detection
predictions at both token-level and post-level.

1

R_1

R_2

R_3

R_4

“@70torinoman
@TefPoe Though it
wouldn't surprise
me, is there proof
of this? Just
googled &
couldn't ﬁnd.”

“@70torinoman
@TefPoe Walmart
donates $10k to Darren
Wilson?! No way this is
true, right? Source?
Link? #Ferguson
#sayitaintso”

“@70torinoman
#thanksWalmart donates
$10,000to defend #Wilson
after beaten instruggle
for gun w/250LB man
#Ferguson
http://t.co/g3Jku9YuGt”

“@70torinoman
...Well I will be
paying off that credit
card and never
returning!! I will not
shop somewhere that
condones murder!!”

R_1_1

R_2_1

R_3_1

“@lyburtus1
@70torinoman
@TefPoe yeah I
googled it to I'm the
type to jump all over
what's on social
media”

“@davidgrelle
@70torinoman
@TefPoe not true WM
can't support this due
to laws regulAting
public cos”

“@SAGandAFTRA
@70torinomanThat pic is
not of #MikeBrown. Lie
debunked ﬁrst week after
shooting.”

Figure 1: Sample of a thread from Twitter15 resulting from
a fake claim.

Hence, the interaction between users as well as the content shared could be captured for fake news detection. We
discuss brieﬂy two state-of-the-art models (Ma, Gao, and
Wong 2018b; Kumar and Carley 2019).
Ma et al. (2018b) organized the source claim and its responding tweets in a tree structure as shown in Figure 1.
Each tweet is represented as a node; the top node would
be the source claim and the children of a node are tweets
that have responded to it directly. They modeled the spread
of information in a propagation tree using recursive neural
networks. Signals from different nodes are aggregated recursively in either a bottom-up or a top-down manner. Information is propagated from the child node to the parent
node in the bottom-up model and vice versa in a top-down
model. Similarly, Kumar et al. (2019) organized conversation threads with a tree structure and explored several variants of branch and tree LSTMs for rumour detection.
Both papers used tree models with the intention of modelling structural information present in the conversation
thread. Information is propagated either from the parent to
the child or vice versa in tree models. However, the thread
structure in social media conversations might be unclear.
Each user is often able to observe all the replies in different
branches of the conversation. A user debunking a fake news

Introduction

The spread of fake news can have far reaching and devastating effects. $130 billion in stock value was wiped out in
minutes after a false Associated Press’s tweet claimed that
Barack Obama was injured following an explosion in 2013
(Rapoza 2017). Some researchers even believe that fake
news has affected the outcome of the 2016 United States
presidential election (Gunther, Beck, and Nisbet 2018). The
severity of the impact of fake news warrants the need for an
effective and automated means of detecting fake news and
has hence spurred much research in this area.
Our work focuses on the detection of fake claims using
community response to such claims. This area of research
exploits the collective wisdom of the community by applying natural language processing to comments directed
towards a claim (see Figure 1). The key principle behind
such works is that users on social media would share opinions, conjectures and evidences for inaccurate information.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8783

