The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reinforcement Learning When All Actions Are Not Always Available
Yash Chandak,1 Georgios Theocharous,2 Blossom Metevier,1 Philip S. Thomas1
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2 Adobe Research
{ychandak, bmetevier, pthomas}@cs.umass.edu, theochar@adobe.com

transitions, partial observability, and even different (deterministic) action availability depending on the state, it cannot
efﬁciently incorporate stochastic action sets. As a result, algorithms designed for MDPs are not well suited to our setting of
interest. Recently, Boutilier et al. (2018) laid the foundations
for stochastic action set Markov decision processes (SASMDPs), that extends MDPs to include stochastic action sets.
They also showed how the Q-learning and value iteration
algorithms, two classic algorithms for approximating optimal
solutions to MDPs, can be extended to SAS-MDPs.
In this paper we show that the lack of convergence guarantees of the Q-learning algorithm, when using function approximators in the MDP setting can potentially get exacerbated
in the SAS-MDP setting. We therefore derive policy gradient
and natural policy gradient algorithms for the SAS-MDP setting and provide conditions for their almost-sure convergence.
Critically, since the introduction of stochastic action sets introduces further uncertainty in the decision making process,
variance reduction techniques are of increased importance.
We therefore derive new approaches to variance reduction for
policy gradient algorithms that are unique to the SAS-MDP
setting. We validate our new algorithms empirically on tasks
inspired by real-world problems with stochastic action sets.

Abstract
The Markov decision process (MDP) formulation used to
model many real-world sequential decision making problems
does not efﬁciently capture the setting where the set of available decisions (actions) at each time step is stochastic. Recently, the stochastic action set Markov decision process (SASMDP) formulation has been proposed, which better captures
the concept of a stochastic action set. In this paper we argue
that existing RL algorithms for SAS-MDPs can suffer from
potential divergence issues, and present new policy gradient
algorithms for SAS-MDPs that incorporate variance reduction
techniques unique to this setting, and provide conditions for
their convergence. We conclude with experiments that demonstrate the practicality of our approaches on tasks inspired by
real-life use cases wherein the action set is stochastic.

Introduction
In many real-world sequential decision making problems,
the set of available decisions, which we call the action
set, is stochastic. In vehicular routing on a road network
(Gendreau, Laporte, and Séguin 1996) or packet routing on
the internet (Ribeiro, Sidiropoulos, and Giannakis 2008),
the goal is to ﬁnd the shortest path between a source
and destination. However, due to construction, trafﬁc, or
other damage to the network, not all pathways are always
available. In online advertising (Tan and Srikant 2012;
Mahdian, Nazerzadeh, and Saberi 2007), the set of available ads can vary due to ﬂuctuations in advertising budgets
and promotions. In robotics (Feng and Yan 2000), actuators
can fail. In recommender systems (Harper and Skiba 2007),
the set of possible recommendations can vary based on product availability. These examples capture the broad idea and
motivate the question we aim to address: how can we develop
efﬁcient learning algorithms for sequential decision making
problems wherein the action set can be stochastic?
Sequential decision making problems without stochastic
action sets are typically modeled as Markov decision processes (MDPs). Although the MDP formulation is remarkably
ﬂexible, and can incorporate concepts like stochastic state

Related Work
While there is extensive literature on solving sequential decision problems modeled as MDPs (Sutton and Barto 2018),
there are few methods designed to handle stochastic action
sets. Recently, Boutilier et al. (2018) laid the foundation for
studying MDPs with stochastic action sets by deﬁning the
new SAS-MDP problem formulation, which we review in
the background section. After deﬁning SAS-MDPs, Boutilier
et al. (2018) presented and analyzed the model-based value
iteration and policy iteration algorithms and the model-free
Q-learning algorithm for SAS-MDPs.
In the bandit setting, wherein individual decisions are optimized rather than sequences of dependent decisions, sleeping
bandits extend the standard bandit problem formulation to allow for stochastic action sets (Kanade, McMahan, and Bryan
2009; Kleinberg, Niculescu-Mizil, and Sharma 2010). We
focus on the SAS-MDP formulation rather than the sleeping
bandit formulation because we are interested in sequential

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3381

