The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Local Regularizer Improves Generalization
Yikai Zhang,1∗ Hui Qu,1* Dimitris Metaxas,1 Chao Chen2
1

Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
Departments of Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University
{yz422, hui.qu, dnm}@cs.rutgers.edu, chao.chen.cchen@gmail.com
2

which are believed to generalize well (Chaudhari et al. 2017;
Wu, Zhu, and others 2017). While reducing generalization
gap, these regularizors also introduce bias to the objective
function. With a biased objective function, the optimization
result may not achieve the lowest possible empirical risk. As
the performance of a model is determined by both the empirical risk and the performance gap, it is preferable to have
regularizors introducing minimal or no bias, while achieving
small generalization gap. In this work, we aim at such goal
and investigate whether a regularizor can improve the generalization of deep learning model without biasing the loss
function?.
We answer this question by introducing proximal type
penalty function to regularize deep net training (Rockafellar
1976; Combettes and Pesquet 2011; Parikh, Boyd, and others
2014). At t-th iteration of the training, the proximal type
quadratic penalty λ/2w − wt−1 22 enforces search region
of parameter w to be close to wt−1 . It works as a local regularizor so each gradient step is relatively stable. Different from
regularizors that directly apply to loss, the proximal type
regularizor is only used to stablize each gradient decent step
and does not affect the loss or objective function. Therefore
the local regularizor serves as an Unbiased Regularizor.
The proximal type algorithm has been well applied in
machine learning problems (Xiao and Zhang 2014; ShalevShwartz and Zhang 2014; Lin, Mairal, and Harchaoui 2015;
Li et al. 2014; 2014). As a quadratic function, the proximal
regularizor improves the convexity of loss surface, and thus
accelerates optimization algorithms (Lin, Mairal, and Harchaoui 2015; Allen-Zhu 2018a; 2018b; Paquette et al. 2018;
Nesterov 2012). Recently, researchers have revisited such
regularizor in non-convex optimization context, due to its
power in convexifying loss surface and improving optimization efﬁciency. However, so far, little is known about its
generalization power.
In this paper, we study local regularized optimization algorithm which applies proximal type regularizor to stabilize
training process. Speciﬁcally, we focus on methods that combines such local regularizor with SGD (called LRSGD) and
prove for the ﬁrst time that local regularizor can indeed improve generalization bound of SGD. Our analysis relies on
the algorithmic stability property of a training algorithm, i.e,
the prediction of a trained model does not change much when
one training sample is switched. Such stability of a learning

Abstract
Regularization plays an important role in generalization of
deep learning. In this paper, we study the generalization
power of an unbiased regularizor for training algorithms
in deep learning. We focus on training methods called Locally Regularized Stochastic Gradient Descent (LRSGD). An
LRSGD leverages a proximal type penalty in gradient descent steps to regularize SGD in training. We show that by
carefully choosing relevant parameters, LRSGD generalizes
better than SGD. Our thorough theoretical analysis is supported by experimental evidence. It advances our theoretical
understanding of deep learning and provides new perspectives on designing training algorithms. The code is available
at https://github.com/huiqu18/LRSGD.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved great success in practice. Due
to its expressive power, deep models can easily ﬁt data and
achieve sufﬁciently low empirical risk (Raghu et al. 2017;
Lin and Jegelka 2018; Cohen, Sharir, and Shashua 2016;
Brutzkus et al. 2017). Meanwhile, it is crucial to have a better
control of the generalization performance. In recent years,
substantial work has been done toward understanding and
improving generalization of deep nets. (Zhang et al. 2016;
Belkin, Ma, and Mandal 2018; Belkin, Hsu, and Mitra 2018;
Neyshabur et al. 2017; Arora et al. 2018).
In machine learning, regularization is known to improve
generalization both theoretically and empirically (Tibshirani 1996; Hoerl and Kennard 2000; Krogh and Hertz 1992;
Bousquet and Elisseeff 2002; Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2001). In addition to classical regularization, new regularizors have been speciﬁcally designed for deep learning.
Spectral norm based regularizors (Yoshida and Miyato 2017;
Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018; Farnia, Zhang, and Tse
2019; Miyato et al. 2018) are applied to improve performance
of deep learning in applications. In (Neyshabur et al. 2018;
Bartlett, Foster, and Telgarsky 2017; Golowich, Rakhlin,
and Shamir 2018), analysis suggests that parameter with
smaller norm leads to tighter generalization bounds. Entropy based regularizor (Chaudhari et al. 2017) is proposed
to encourage training algorithm to produce ﬂat minimas,
∗

equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6861

