The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Bayesian Nonparametric Learning of Rules and
Plans from Demonstrations with a Learned Automaton Prior
Brandon Araki,1 Kiran Vodrahalli,2 Thomas Leech,1,3
Cristian-Ioan Vasile,1 Mark Donahue,3 Daniela Rus1
1

CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Columbia University
3
MIT Lincoln Laboratory
{araki, tleech, cvasile}@mit.edu, knv2109@columbia.edu, mark.donahue@ll.mit.edu, rus@csail.mit.edu
behavior. These properties were achieved by designing a hierarchical model with high-level actions represented by an
FSA and incorporating the FSA into a differentiable planning algorithm. However, in addition to expert trajectories,
this model requires the trajectories to be labeled with the
current automaton state at every time step, which is almost
equivalent to requiring the user to know the automaton ahead
of time.
In this paper, we remove the necessity of FSA state labels by interpreting the learning problem as solving a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) where
the hidden states and transitions correspond to an unknown
FSA. We model the FSA as part of a hidden Markov model
(HMM), which represents the composition of a planning
policy with the POMDP. Learning the HMM is challenging
because the FSA state labels, transitions, and the number of
FSA states are all unknown. We ﬁt the HMM with stochastic
variational inference (SVI) on expert demonstration data, simultaneously learning the unknown FSA and planning over
the resulting MDP.
We also use spectral techniques applied to a matrix representation of an automaton to create a prior for the FSA.
We report considerable improvements over baselines in several domains, including two robotic manipulation tasks with
real-world experiments. Because our model satisﬁes the interpretability and manipulability properties from Araki et al.
(2019b), we can zero-shot generalize to new tasks and ﬁx
mistakes in incorrect models without additional demonstrations.

Abstract
We introduce a method to learn imitative policies from expert demonstrations that are interpretable and manipulable.
We achieve interpretability by modeling the interactions between high-level actions as an automaton with connections to
formal logic. We achieve manipulability by integrating this
automaton into planning, so that changes to the automaton
have predictable effects on the learned behavior. These qualities allow a human user to ﬁrst understand what the model has
learned, and then either correct the learned behavior or zeroshot generalize to new, similar tasks. We build upon previous
work by no longer requiring additional supervised information which is hard to collect in practice. We achieve this by
using a deep Bayesian nonparametric hierarchical model. We
test our model on several domains and also show results for a
real-world implementation on a mobile robotic arm platform.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) is a method for producing desired
behaviors in agents with expert demonstrations [Abbeel and
Ng (2004), Daumé III, Langford, and Marcu (2009), Ross,
Gordon, and Bagnell (2011)]. IL is a successful approach
in many tasks including camera control, speech imitation,
and self-driving for cars [Taylor et al. (2017), Codevilla et
al. (2018), Ho and Ermon (2016)]. Despite these successes,
current approaches to IL fall short of human learning, particularly in the domain of multi-step tasks. When a human
learns a complicated task, such as driving or preparing a
meal, they can explain, at a high level, the rules they followed or the steps they took to perform the task. Furthermore, if the rules change or if they want to, say, cook a
slightly different dish, they can easily alter their behavior
to adapt to the new circumstances. Most current approaches
to IL cannot achieve this level of ﬂexibility because their
learned policies are black boxes.
Our prior work, Araki et al. (2019b), introduces the notions of interpretability and manipulability. A policy is
called interpretable if the relations between its high-level
actions are deﬁned by a ﬁnite state automaton (FSA), and it
is manipulable if, by changing the transitions in the FSA, a
human user can produce predictable changes in the learned

1.1

Contributions

1. We solve logic-structured POMDPs by learning a planning policy from task demonstrations alone, extending
ideas from the differentiable planning literature.
2. We use spectral techniques applied to a matrix representation of a ﬁnite automaton to design a novel prior for
nonparametric hierarchical Bayesian models.
3. Our model learns the FSA transition matrix, allowing us
to interpret the rules that the model has learned.
4. We explain how to modify the learned transition matrix
to manipulate the behavior of the agent on a real-world
robotic platform in the contexts of packing a lunchbox
and opening a locked cabinet.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10026

