The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Active Goal Recognition
Maayan Shvo, Sheila A. McIlraith
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
{maayanshvo, sheila}@cs.toronto.edu

often matched between the observed behavior of the actor
and pre-deﬁned plan libraries (e.g., (Kautz and Allen 1986;
Avrahami-Zilberbrand and Kaminka 2005)), the past decade
has seen the rise of plan and goal recognition approaches
that utilize planning domains as a form of generative model
(e.g., (Ramı́rez and Geffner 2009; Sohrabi, Riabov, and
Udrea 2016)). Further, a body of previous work has identiﬁed that performing the recognition online, while the actor’s plan is still being carried out, is critical and has thus
proposed efﬁcient approaches geared towards online recognition (e.g., (Vered et al. 2018)). In the ofﬂine setting, the
body of work on goal recognition design can also be seen to
endow the observer with agency to modify the environment
(Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2014), improve observability via
sensor placement (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2016) or to provide the actor with information (Keren et al. 2020) to beneﬁt recognition during the eventual runtime. Most closely
related to our work is a body of work that has provided
the observer with agency to act in the world during runtime and disambiguate the hypothesis space. Kabanza et al.
(2010) propose to provoke the actor into performing actions
that will reveal its goal and Mirsky et al. (2018) formulate
the sequential plan recognition process wherein the actor is
queried about its ongoing plan, leading to hypothesis elimination. While our motivations partially overlap, these works
require the observer to affect the state of the world or interact
with the actor in order to eliminate hypotheses.
The main contributions of this paper are: (1) a formalization of active goal recognition; and (2) an algorithm for
active goal recognition and a landmark-based approach for
hypothesis elimination which leverage automated planning.
We evaluate our approach in a diversity of domains using
off-the-shelf planning and goal recognition tools. Our evaluation demonstrates the merits of providing agency to the observer, and the effectiveness of our approach in potentially
enhancing the observational power of the observer.

Abstract
The objective of goal recognition is to infer a goal that accounts for the observed behavior of an actor. In this work,
we introduce and formalize the notion of active goal recognition in which we endow the observer with agency to sense,
reason, and act in the world with a view to enhancing and
possibly expediting goal recognition, and/or to intervening in
goal achievement. To this end, we present an algorithm for
active goal recognition and a landmark-based approach to the
elimination of hypothesized goals which leverages automated
planning. Experiments demonstrate the merits of providing
agency to the observer, and the effectiveness of our approach
in potentially enhancing the observational power of the observer, as well as expediting and in some cases making possible the recognition of the actor’s goal.

1

Introduction

Goal recognition is the problem of inferring a goal that accounts for the observed behavior of an actor. We observe that
in many real-world settings the observer cannot passively
wait for the natural evolution of the world in order to disambiguate the actor’s goal. Indeed we advocate for the observer
to be active and proactive in the goal recognition process.
To advance this view of goal recognition, we introduce
and formalize the notion of active goal recognition where
we endow the observer with agency to actively sense, act, or
react as part of the goal recognition process. An active observer therefore has the potential to increase observational
power, expedite, and in some cases make possible (where
without observer agency, it was impossible) the recognition
of the actor’s goal. We cast the observer’s task of deciding
how to act in service of the recognition process as a contingent planning task, and discuss some of the challenges to
this characterization in the general case.
Goal recognition is situated within the broader ﬁeld of
plan, activity, and intent recognition whose various subproblems are concerned, together, with inferring not only
the actor’s ‘top-level’ goal, but also the plan that achieves
this goal (where the plan being carried out by the actor is
possibly independent of a speciﬁc goal), and even the ‘lowlevel’ actions, or activities of the actor (Sukthankar et al.
2014). While approaches to goal (and plan) recognition have

2

Background

Automated planning
is the task of selecting a goalleading plan based on a high-level description of the world.
In this work we give agency to our observer to sense, act,
or react. The determination of observer behavior fundamentally involves planning under partial observability with sensing actions. Such planning is typically referred to as con-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9957

