The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Induction of Subgoal Automata for Reinforcement Learning
Daniel Furelos-Blanco,1 Mark Law,1 Alessandra Russo,1 Krysia Broda,1 Anders Jonsson2
1
Imperial College London, United Kingdom, 2 Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
{d.furelos-blanco18, mark.law09, a.russo, k.broda}@imperial.ac.uk, anders.jonsson@upf.edu

al. 2018), but also in related areas like automated planning
(Bonet, Palacios, and Geffner 2009; Hu and De Giacomo
2011; Segovia-Aguas, Jiménez, and Jonsson 2018). However, these RL approaches use handcrafted automata instead
of learning them from data. It is largely an open problem in
RL how to autonomously decompose a task into an automaton that can be exploited during the RL process.
In this paper, we address this problem and propose ISA
(Induction of Subgoal Automata for Reinforcement Learning), a method for learning and exploiting a minimal automaton from observation traces perceived by an RL agent.
These automata are called subgoal automata since each
transition is labeled with a subgoal, which is a boolean
formula over a set of observables. Subgoal automata can
be expressed in a logic programming format and, thus, be
learned using state-of-the-art inductive logic programming
(ILP) systems (Law, Russo, and Broda 2015). The resulting
subgoal automaton can be exploited by an RL algorithm that
learns a different policy for each automaton state, each aiming to achieve a subgoal. This decomposition allows learning
multiple subpolicies simultaneously and transferring knowledge across multiple tasks. ISA interleaves the RL and automaton learning processes such that the agent can immediately leverage the new (partially correct) learned subgoal
automaton: when a trace is not correctly recognized by the
automaton, a new one is learned.
We evaluate ISA in several gridworld problems and show
that it learns subgoal automata and policies for each of these.
Speciﬁcally, it performs similarly to a method for which automata are given in advance. Furthermore, the learned automata can be exploited to speed up convergence through
reward shaping and transfer learning.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces
the background of our work. Section 3 formally presents the
problem we address and our method for solving it, while
Section 4 describes the results. We discuss related work in
Section 5 and conclude in Section 6.

Abstract
In this work we present ISA, a novel approach for learning
and exploiting subgoals in reinforcement learning (RL). Our
method relies on inducing an automaton whose transitions are
subgoals expressed as propositional formulas over a set of observable events. A state-of-the-art inductive logic programming system is used to learn the automaton from observation
traces perceived by the RL agent. The reinforcement learning
and automaton learning processes are interleaved: a new reﬁned automaton is learned whenever the RL agent generates
a trace not recognized by the current automaton. We evaluate ISA in several gridworld problems and show that it performs similarly to a method for which automata are given in
advance. We also show that the learned automata can be exploited to speed up convergence through reward shaping and
transfer learning across multiple tasks. Finally, we analyze
the running time and the number of traces that ISA needs to
learn an automata, and the impact that the number of observable events have on the learner’s performance.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998) is a
family of algorithms where an agent acts in an environment
with the purpose of maximizing the total amount of reward
it receives. These algorithms have played a key role in major
breakthroughs like human-level video game playing (Mnih
et al. 2015) or mastering complex board games (Silver et al.
2018). However, current methods lack the ability to generalize and transfer between tasks. For example, they cannot
learn to play chess using the knowledge of shōgi.
Advances in achieving generalization and transfer in RL
are mainly due to abstractions (Ho et al. 2019; Konidaris
2019). Hierarchical reinforcement learning methods, which
divide a single task into several subtasks that can be solved
separately, are among the most promising approaches to abstracting RL tasks. Common frameworks for hierarchical RL
are HAMs (Parr and Russell 1997), options (Sutton, Precup,
and Singh 1999) and MAXQ (Dietterich 2000).
Abstract hierarchies can be naturally represented using
automata, which have been used effectively in task abstraction, not only in RL (Parr and Russell 1997; Toro Icarte et

2

Background

In this section we brieﬂy summarize the key background
concepts used throughout the paper: reinforcement learning
and inductive learning of answer set programs.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3890

