The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Mechanism Design with Predicted Task Revenue for Bike Sharing Systems
Hongtao Lv,1 Chaoli Zhang,1 Zhenzhe Zheng,1 Tie Luo,2 Fan Wu,1∗ Guihai Chen1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Department of Computer Science, Missouri University of Science and Technology, USA
{lvhongtao, chaoli zhang, zhengzhenzhe, fwu}@sjtu.edu.cn, tluo@mst.edu, gchen@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
2

route planning and typically uses linear programming techniques, as has been extensively studied under static models (Maggioni et al. 2019; Schuijbroek, Hampshire, and
Van Hoeve 2017) and dynamic models (Kek et al. 2009;
Angeloudis, Hu, and Bell 2014). However, this approach is
costly and not eco-friendly in terms of carbon footprint.
Another approach is to design incentive mechanisms to
motivate users to reposition bicycles at platform-desired locations for rebalancing supply and demand. This falls under the research area of crowdsourcing (Fricker and Gast
2016) which takes advantage of the power of crowd to complete tasks that are otherwise difﬁcult (Luo et al. 2016). With
this idea, Ghosh and Varakantham (2017) proposed a solution that generates repositioning tasks together with the use
of bike trailers, and pays users using the Vickrey-ClarkeGroves (VCG) mechanism. Singla et al. (2015) introduced a
crowdsourcing method that offers users monetary incentive
for parking their bikes at recommended locations.
However, most of existing mechanisms for this problem
have not considered the predicted revenue (or value) of a
repositioning task. Such predicted values are made available in recent years, due to the prosperity of deep learning technique which can well predict the bike demand
in such systems (Yang et al. 2016; Li and Zheng 2019;
Zhang et al. 2016). With this predictive power, the expected
revenue or value of a repositioning task can be easily obtained. Therefore, the platform would assign a task to a user
only if the payment to the user does not exceed the predicted
revenue. This constraint is akin to the “reserve price” in forward auctions which are used to promote revenue. In our
problem, it is used to better control the payments and thereby
increase the proﬁt of the platform. This constraint is generally overlooked in prior work on bike sharing or crowdsourcing (Angelopoulos et al. 2018; Gagan Goel and Singla 2013;
Vaze 2017). For instance with classic budget feasible mechanisms such as (Singer 2010), the payment to a winning user
is determined by the bids of other users and/or the budget.
But in our case, this payment is invalid if it is above the value
of the task assigned to the winning user.
In this paper, we propose a solution called Truthful
and budget-feasible incentive mechanism with Predicted
Task revenue (TruPreTar) for the bike rebalancing problem,
which we model as a reverse auction. In this auction, users
bid for repositioning tasks and the platform determines task

Abstract
Bike sharing systems have been widely deployed around the
world in recent years. A core problem in such systems is
to reposition the bikes so that the distribution of bike supply is reshaped to better match the dynamic bike demand.
When the bike-sharing company or platform is able to predict the revenue of each reposition task based on historic
data, an additional constraint is to cap the payment for each
task below its predicted revenue. In this paper, we propose
an incentive mechanism called TruPreTar to incentivize users
to park bicycles at locations desired by the platform toward
rebalancing supply and demand. TruPreTar possesses four
important economic and computational properties such as
truthfulness and budget feasibility. Furthermore, we prove
that even when the payment budget is tight, the total revenue still exceeds or equals the budget. Otherwise, TruPreTar achieves 2-approximation as compared to the optimal
(revenue-maximizing)
√ solution, which is close to the lower
bound of at least 2 that we also prove. Using an industrial
dataset obtained from a large bike-sharing company, our experiments show that TruPreTar is effective in rebalancing bike
supply and demand and, as a result, generates high revenue
that outperforms several benchmark mechanisms.

Introduction
Bike sharing is a new transportation mode with many beneﬁts in offering convenience and ﬂexibility as well as lowering economic cost. By 2015, more than 7000 bike sharing systems have been deployed around the world (Laporte,
Meunier, and Calvo 2015). However, the ﬂexibility of bike
sharing systems, in particular the “anywhere-parking” convenience, brings forth a serious issue of imbalance between
the distribution of bike supply and demand. This leads to
many users being unable to ﬁnd a bicycle nearby when they
need it, and ultimately affects company revenue adversely.
Hence, there is an urgent need to rebalance the supply and
demand by repositioning the bicycles, which we refer to as
a bike rebalancing problem.
There are two approaches to solving this problem. One
is to relocate bicycles by the staff of the bike-sharing company or platform, for example using trucks. This involves
∗

F. Wu is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2144

