The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Local Search with Dynamic-Threshold Conﬁguration Checking
and Incremental Neighborhood Updating for Maximum k-plex Problem
Peilin Chen,1 Hai Wan,1∗ Shaowei Cai,2* Jia Li,1 Haicheng Chen1
2

1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn, {chenpl7, lijia49, chenhch8}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, caisw@ios.ac.cn

graph with n vertices is a k-plex if each vertex of this graph
has at least n − k neighbors. The maximum k-plex problem,
that is, to ﬁnd a k-plex of maximum size on a given graph
with a given integer k, has received increasing attention from
researchers in the ﬁelds of social network analysis and data
mining (Kondo and Okubo 2012; Xiao et al. 2017; Conte et
al. 2018; Gao et al. 2018).
As with MCP, the maximum k-plex problem is known
to be NP-hard (Balasundaram, Butenko, and Hicks 2011).
Practical methods for this problem can be mainly categorized into exact algorithms and heuristic ones. Balasundaram, Butenko, and Hicks (2011) proposed a branch-andbound algorithm based on a polyhedral study of this problem. McClosky and Hicks (2012) developed two branchand-bound algorithms adapted from combinatorial clique algorithms. Recently, Xiao et al. (2017) proposed an exact algorithm which breaks the trivial exponential bound of 2n for
maximum k-plex problem with k ≥ 3. Gao et al. (2018) proposed several graph reduction methods and integrated them
into a brand-and-bound algorithm.
However, these exact methods do not scale well and several heuristic approaches, mainly local search (LS) ones,
have been proposed for solving large and hard instances. Gujjula, Seshadrinathan, and Meisami (2014) proposed a hybrid metaheuristic based on the GRASP method. Miao and
Balasundaram (2017) improved the construction procedure
to provide a better initial solution for GRASP method. Zhou
and Hao (2017) developed a tabu search algorithm named
FD-TS which achieved state-of-the-art performance.
Though LS algorithms have made some achievement on
this challenging problem, it has some limitations, a major one of which is the cycling problem (Hoos and Stützle
2004). When the search process is cycling, it is stuck in local optima and frequently visits a small group of a candidate
solution. For a long time, much effort has been devoted to
reducing the cycling problem in local search. Tabu search
(Glover and Laguna 1998) maintains a short-term memory
of the recent search steps and forbid reversing the recent
changes. Conﬁguration Checking (Cai, Su, and Sattar 2011)
remembers local state change and reduces global cycling
problem by prohibiting cycling locally.
Different from the tabu method, Conﬁguration Checking

Abstract
The Maximum k-plex Problem is an important combinatorial
optimization problem with increasingly wide applications. In
this paper, we propose a novel strategy, named Dynamicthreshold Conﬁguration Checking (DCC), to reduce the cycling problem of local search. Due to the complicated neighborhood relations, all the previous local search algorithms
for this problem spend a large amount of time in identifying feasible neighbors in each step. To further improve the
performance on dense and challenging instances, we propose Double-attributes Incremental Neighborhood Updating
(DINU) scheme which reduces the worst-case time complexity per iteration from O(|V | · ΔG ) to O(k · ΔG ). Based on
DCC strategy and DINU scheme, we develop a local search
algorithm named DCCplex. According to the experiment
result, DCCplex shows promising result on DIMACS and
BHOSLIB benchmark as well as real-world massive graphs.
Especially, DCCplex updates the lower bound of the maximum k-plex for most dense and challenging instances.

Introduction
In social network analysis, detecting a large cohesive subgraph is a fundamental and extensively studied topic with
various applications. Clique is a classical and ideal model
in the ﬁeld of cohesive subgraph detection. The Maximum
Clique Problem (MCP), that is, to ﬁnd a complete graph of
maximum size in a given graph, is a fundamental problem in
graph theory and ﬁnds wide application in many ﬁelds, such
as biochemistry and genomics (Butenko and Wilhelm 2006;
Pullan 2007), wireless network (Lakhlef 2015; Luo et al.
2015), data mining (Boginski, Butenko, and Pardalos 2006;
Conte et al. 2018) and many others.
However, in some real-world applications, the networks
of interest may be built based on empirical data with noises
and faults. In these cases, large cohesive subgraphs hardly
appear as ideal cliques. To tackle this problem, many clique
relaxation models have been proposed (Luce 1950; Mokken
1979; Pattillo et al. 2013). In this paper, we focus on k-plex,
a degree-based clique relaxation model. A simple undirect
∗
corresponding author and having equal contribution with the
ﬁrst author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2343

