The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Uniﬁed Graph and Low-Rank Tensor Learning for Multi-View Clustering
Jianlong Wu,1,2,3∗ Xingxu Xie,3* Liqiang Nie,1 Zhouchen Lin,3,4† Hongbin Zha3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University
2
Zhejiang Laboratory
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
4
Samsung Research China – Beijing (SRC-B)
jlwu1992@sdu.edu.cn, {xyxie, zlin}@pku.edu.cn, nieliqiang@gmail.com, zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

of features to represent it in different aspect. Under this circumstance, each pose, modality, or type of feature can be regarded as a speciﬁc view. Multi-view clustering is proposed
to make full use of multi-view information to improve the
clustering performance.

Abstract
Multi-view clustering aims to take advantage of multiple
views information to improve the performance of clustering. Many existing methods compute the afﬁnity matrix by
low-rank representation (LRR) and pairwise investigate the
relationship between views. However, LRR suffers from the
high computational cost in self-representation optimization.
Besides, compared with pairwise views, tensor form of all
views’ representation is more suitable for capturing the highorder correlations among all views. Towards these two issues,
in this paper, we propose the uniﬁed graph and low-rank tensor learning (UGLTL) for multi-view clustering. Speciﬁcally,
on the one hand, we learn the view-speciﬁc afﬁnity matrix
based on projected graph learning. On the other hand, we
reorganize the afﬁnity matrices into tensor form and learn
its intrinsic tensor based on low-rank tensor approximation.
Finally, we unify these two terms together and jointly learn
the optimal projection matrices, afﬁnity matrices and intrinsic low-rank tensor. We also propose an efﬁcient algorithm
to iteratively optimize the proposed model. To evaluate the
performance of the proposed method, we conduct extensive
experiments on multiple benchmarks across different scenarios and sizes. Compared with the state-of-the-art approaches,
our method achieves much better performance.

The construction of afﬁnity matrix is a key step for clustering. In general, based on the afﬁnity matrices of all views,
multi-view clustering hopes to learn an intrinsic matrix,
which can well capture both the consistent and complementary information among all views. With this comprehensive representation, we can further improve the performance of clustering. There are already many multi-view
clustering methods. Many recent works explore the correlations among views based on the subspace clustering with
self-representation. For example, (Cao et al. 2015) utilizes
the Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) as a diversity term, and (Wang et al. 2017) introduces a positionaware exclusivity term to explore the complementarity. Instead of investigating correlations between pairwise views,
(Xie et al. 2018) stacks the subspace representation matrices
of all different views into a tensor and extract the integrated
representation based on tensor low-rank decomposition. Although these subspace clustering based multi-view methods
obtain good results, the computational complexity of selfrepresentation optimization is O(n3 ), which is very high and
limits their extension to large dataset. Towards this issue,
(Wu, Lin, and Zha 2019) proposes the robust tensor principle component analysis based on ﬁxed afﬁnity matrices,
which are computed by the normalized Gaussian kernel of
Markov chain based spectral clustering. But the separation
of afﬁnity matrix computing and comprehensive representation learning makes the solution sub-optimal for clustering.

Introduction
Along with the arrival of information age, it is easy to get a
large number of multimedia data from the Internet and social media. However, the label information is often absent.
While it costs much time and money to label the data, we can
rely on clustering techniques (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2002;
Liu et al. 2013; Wu et al. 2019) to investigate the correlations
among data. There are many classic clustering methods,
such as the k-means, spectral clustering, and subspace clustering (Liu et al. 2013; 2015). These traditional approaches
achieve very good performance, but they mainly focus on
single view input. In practice, the data is often collected in
multiple poses and sources, such as image, text, or video.
Even for a speciﬁc sample, we can also extract various kinds

In view of the above existing limitations, in this paper,
we propose a novel uniﬁed graph and low-rank tensor learning (UGLTL) method for multi-view clustering. Speciﬁcally,
to construct the afﬁnity matrices, we learn view-speciﬁc projection matrix so that we can accurately compute similarity between samples according to their distance in the projected subspace. The computation cost is much lower than
the self-representation based methods. Second, by stacking
the multi-view afﬁnity matrices into a tensor, we learn the
low-rank tensor by the tensor Singular Value Decomposi-

∗

Equal contributions
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6388

