The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

URNet : User-Resizable Residual Networks with Conditional Gating Module
Sangho Lee,∗1 Simyung Chang,∗12 Nojun Kwak†1
1

Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
Samsung Electronics, Suwon, Korea
{shlee223, timelighter, nojunk}@snu.ac.kr

Block

Block

Block

Block

Block

Convolutional Neural Networks are widely used to process
spatial scenes, but their computational cost is ﬁxed and depends on the structure of the network used. There are methods to reduce the cost by compressing networks or varying its computational path dynamically according to the input image. However, since a user can not control the size of
the learned model, it is difﬁcult to respond dynamically if
the amount of service requests suddenly increases. We propose User-Resizable Residual Networks (URNet), which allows users to adjust the computational cost of the network as
needed during evaluation. URNet includes Conditional Gating Module (CGM) that determines the use of each residual
block according to the input image and the desired cost. CGM
is trained in a supervised manner using the newly proposed
scale(cost) loss and its corresponding training methods. URNet can control the amount of computation and its inference
path according to user’s demand without degrading the accuracy signiﬁcantly. In the experiments on ImageNet, URNet
based on ResNet-101 maintains the accuracy of the baseline
even when resizing it to approximately 80% of the original
network, and demonstrates only about 1% accuracy degradation when using about 65% of the computation.

Block

Block

Abstract
Cat

scale 1.0

Block

Block

Increase of service requests

Cat

scale 0.3

Figure 1: The concept of URNet. Our method uses the entire
network when resources are sufﬁcient. If the number of service requests increases, the system or a user can change the
scale(the size of the computational cost) of the network to
use only a fraction of the entire blocks, thereby reducing the
amount of computation in the network and processing the
increased requests in time.

at test time, rather than ﬁxed all the time. But these works
only change the network path for each input, e.g., easy samples follow the path with less computation but complex samples require maximum available computation. Therefore,
these works can not take care of the demand from the external environment. They are dynamic but cannot resize on
our own purpose.
In this paper, we suggest a model that can adjust its computational cost by dropping some of its components. It follows given user’s demand by itself, like 70% or 50% of maximum resource for usage, at any inference time. Our model is
also variant to input samples, but its computational cost does
not deviate signiﬁcantly from the desired one. It is robust to
the environment where the resources per request are limited
or dynamically changing over time, and therefore, it ﬁts such
applications as in a backend server or background applications in a client. Figure 1 intuitively describes our concept.
Our model is basically a plain ResNet (He et al. 2016) architecture with additional gate modules located between neighboring blocks. Our gate module is computationally very
cheap compared to the backbone network. Like the works

Introduction
Generally, the computational graph in a deep neural network
is ﬁxed and unchanged during inference time. But in many
situations of real applications, there may be the case that the
system needs to handle various amounts of computation per
request (Herbst, Kounev, and Reussner 2013). For example,
in the situation that the number of requests is rapidly increasing but the system is forced to respond quickly, it is better for
the system to dynamically allocate less resource for requests
within a moderate performance degradation bound.
There are many researches that suggest static compressed
model(Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Howard et al. 2017;
Iandola et al. 2016). Unlike these works, recent researches
(Wu et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2017) suggest the methods that a
neural network dynamically changes its computation graph
∗

These authors also contributed equally to this work
This author is a corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4569

