The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A New Ensemble Adversarial Attack Powered by Long-Term Gradient Memories
Zhaohui Che,1 Ali Borji,2 Guangtao Zhai,1∗ Suiyi Ling,3 Jing Li,4 Patrick Le Callet3
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
MarkableAI Inc., Brooklyn, NY 11201 USA
3
Université de Nantes, Nantes, France
4
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
More importantly, some adversarial examples crafted against
an ensemble of pre-trained source models can transfer to
other new target models, thus pose a security threat to blackbox applications (when the attackers have no access to the
target models). Despite adopting diverse architectures and parameters, source and target models often share similar decision boundaries. Therefore, if an adversary is capable of
fooling several source models concurrently, it can potentially capture intrinsic transferable adversarial information
that may allow it to fool a broad class of other black-box
target models. Current ensemble attacks, however, only consider a limited number of source models to craft an adversary, and obtain poor transferability. In this paper, we propose a novel black-box attack, dubbed Serial-Mini-BatchEnsemble-Attack (SMBEA). SMBEA divides a large number
of pre-trained source models into several mini-batches. For
each single batch, we design 3 new ensemble strategies to
improve the intra-batch transferability. Besides, we propose a
new algorithm that recursively accumulates the “long-term”
gradient memories of the previous batch to the following
batch. This way, the learned adversarial information can be
preserved and the inter-batch transferability can be improved.
Experiments indicate that our method outperforms state-ofthe-art ensemble attacks over multiple pixel-to-pixel vision
tasks including image translation and salient region prediction. Our method successfully fools two online black-box
saliency prediction systems including DeepGaze-II (Kummerer 2017) and SALICON (Huang et al. 2017). Finally,
we also contribute a new repository to promote the research
on adversarial attack and defense over pixel-to-pixel tasks:
https://github.com/CZHQuality/AAA-Pix2pix.

Figure 1: The general idea of the proposed attack. Our attack divides a large number of pre-trained source models
into several mini-batches. For each batch, we craft an adversary that fools multiple intra-batch source models. We
also recursively accumulate the “long-term” gradient memories of previous batch to the following batch, in order to
preserve the learned adversarial information and to improve
inter-batch transferability. The red dashed lines denote that
the crafted adversarial example can fool the previous source
models, and also successfully fools the black-box target
models.

fer across different models. That is, the adversary crafted
against some pre-trained source models can transfer to other
new target models. Despite the source and target models
adopting diverse architectures and parameters, they may
share similar decision boundaries. Thus, if an adversary can
fool several source models, it can capture the intrinsic transferable adversarial information that allows it to fool a broad
class of other black-box target models. The transferability of
adversarial examples provides a potential chance to launch
black-box attacks without having access to the target model.
In contrary, white-box attacks require all information of target model, thus they are not practical in real world.
Particularly, adversarial attack serves as an efﬁcient surrogate to evaluate the robustness of deep networks before they
are deployed in real world, especially for security-related
applications, e.g. autonomous driving (Yang and Hsu 2017;
Alletto et al. 2016) and face veriﬁcation (Sharif et al. 2016;
Dong et al. 2019). Therefore, exploring adversarial attacks,
especially the transferable black-box ones, is critical to demystifying the fragility of deep neural networks.

Introduction
Deep neural networks, despite their great success in various
vision tasks, are susceptible to adversarial attacks (Szegedy
et al. 2014; Goodfellow et al. 2015). The adversarial attacks
add some quasi-imperceptible perturbations to the original
input, to signiﬁcantly change the model output. More importantly, some well-designed adversarial examples can trans∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3405

