The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Communicate Implicitly by Actions
Zheng Tian,1 Shihao Zou,1 Ian Davies,1 Tim Warr,1 Lisheng Wu,1
Haitham Bou Ammar,1,2 Jun Wang1
1

University College London, 2 Huawei R&D UK
{zheng.tian.11, shihao.zou.17, ian.davies.12, tim.warr.17, lisheng.wu.17}@ucl.ac.uk
haitham.bouammar@huawei.com
jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

for facilitating collaboration in MARL, explicit communication channels come at additional computational and memory
costs, making them difﬁcult to deploy in decentralized control (Roth, Simmons, and Veloso 2006).
Environments where explicit communication is difﬁcult
or prohibited are common. These settings can be synthetic
such as those in games, e.g., bridge and Hanabi, but also
frequently appear in real-world tasks such as autonomous
driving and autonomous ﬂeet control. In these situations,
humans rely upon implicit communication as a means of information exchange (Rasouli, Kotseruba, and Tsotsos 2017)
and are effective in learning to infer the implicit meaning behind others’ actions (Heider and Simmel 1944). The ability
to perform such inference requires the attribution of a mental state and reasoning mechanism to others. This ability is
known as theory of mind (Premack and Woodruff 1978). In
this work, we develop agents that beneﬁt from considering
others’ perspectives and thereby explore the further development of machine theory of mind (Rabinowitz et al. 2018).
Previous works have considered ways in which an agent
can, by observing an opponent’s behavior, build a model of
opponents’ characteristics, objectives or hidden information
either implicitly (He et al. 2016; Bard et al. 2013) or explicitly (Raileanu et al. 2018; Li and Miikkulainen 2018). Whilst
these works are of great value, they overlook the fact that an
agent should also consider that it is being modeled and adapt
its behavior accordingly, thereby demonstrating a theory of
mind. For instance, in collaborative tasks, a decision-maker
could choose to take actions which are informative to its
teammates, whereas, in competitive situations, agents may
act to conceal private information to prevent their opponents
from modeling them effectively.
In this paper, we propose a generic framework, titled policy belief learning (PBL), for learning to cooperate in imperfect information multi-agent games. Our work combines
opponent modeling with a policy that considers that it is being modeled. PBL consists of a belief module, which models
other agents’ private information by considering their previous actions, and a policy module which combines the agent’s
current observation with their beliefs to return a distribution
over actions. We also propose a novel auxiliary reward for
encouraging communication by actions, which is integrated

Abstract
In situations where explicit communication is limited, human
collaborators act by learning to: (i) infer meaning behind their
partner’s actions, and (ii) convey private information about
the state to their partner implicitly through actions. The ﬁrst
component of this learning process has been well-studied in
multi-agent systems, whereas the second — which is equally
crucial for successful collaboration — has not. To mimic both
components mentioned above, thereby completing the learning process, we introduce a novel algorithm: Policy Belief
Learning (PBL). PBL uses a belief module to model the other
agent’s private information and a policy module to form a
distribution over actions informed by the belief module. Furthermore, to encourage communication by actions, we propose a novel auxiliary reward which incentivizes one agent
to help its partner to make correct inferences about its private information. The auxiliary reward for communication is
integrated into the learning of the policy module. We evaluate our approach on a set of environments including a matrix
game, particle environment and the non-competitive bidding
problem from contract bridge. We show empirically that this
auxiliary reward is effective and easy to generalize. These results demonstrate that our PBL algorithm can produce strong
pairs of agents in collaborative games where explicit communication is disabled.

Introduction
In collaborative multi-agent systems, communication is essential for agents to learn to behave as a collective rather
than a collection of individuals. This is particularly important in the imperfect information setting, where private information becomes crucial to success. In such cases, efﬁcient communication protocols between agents are needed
for private information exchange, coordinated joint-action
exploration, and true world-state inference.
In typical multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
settings, designers incorporate explicit communication
channels hoping to conceptually resemble language or verbal communication which are known to be important for human interaction (Baker et al. 1999). Though they can be used
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7261

