The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Stable Prediction with Model Misspeciﬁcation and Agnostic Distribution Shift∗
Kun Kuang,1,2† Ruoxuan Xiong,3 Peng Cui,2 Susan Athey,3 Bo Li2
1

Zhejiang University
Tsinghua University
3
Stanford University
kunkuang@zju.edu.cn, {rxiong, athey}@stanford.edu, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

is misspeciﬁed, it may exploit subtle statistical relationships
among features present in the training data to improve prediction, resulting in inaccuracy of parameter estimation and
instability of prediction across test data sets with different
distributions.
To correct the distribution shift between training and test
data, many methods have been proposed in domain adaption (Bickel, Brückner, and Scheffer 2009; Ben-David et al.
2010) and transfer learning (Pan and Yang 2009). The motivation of these methods is to adjust the distribution of training data to mimic the distribution of test data, so that a predictive algorithm trained on training data can minimize the
predictive error on test data. These methods achieve good
performance in practice, however, they require the test data
as prior knowledge. Hence, they cannot be applied to address the agnostic distribution shift problem.
Recently, some algorithms have been proposed to address the agnostic distribution shift from unknown test data,
including domain generalization (Muandet, Balduzzi, and
Schölkopf 2013), causal transfer learning (Rojas-Carulla et
al. 2018) and invariant causal prediction (Peters, Bühlmann,
and Meinshausen 2016) etc. Their motivation is to explore
the invariant structure between predictors and the response
variable across multiple training datasets for prediction. But
they cannot well handle the case of distribution shifts that
are not observed in the training data. Moreover, they do
not consider the interaction of distribution shift and model
misspeciﬁcation. Recently, some papers (Kuang et al. 2018;
Shen et al. 2018) were proposed to address stable prediction problem using methods drawn from the literature on
causal inference, achieving improved performance. But they
did not consider the model misspeciﬁcation and their algorithms were restricted to the predictive setting with binary
predictors and binary response variable.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of stable prediction with model misspeciﬁcation and agnostic distribution
shift, where we assume that all features (predictors) X fall
into one of two categories: one category includes the stable features S, which have causal effects on outcome Y that
are invariant across environments (e.g., across training and
test sets). The other category includes the unstable features
V, which have no causal effects on outcome, but may be

Abstract
For many machine learning algorithms, two main assumptions are required to guarantee performance. One is that the
test data are drawn from the same distribution as the training data, and the other is that the model is correctly speciﬁed. In real applications, however, we often have little prior
knowledge on the test data and on the underlying true model.
Under model misspeciﬁcation, agnostic distribution shift between training and test data leads to inaccuracy of parameter
estimation and instability of prediction across unknown test
data. To address these problems, we propose a novel Decorrelated Weighting Regression (DWR) algorithm which jointly
optimizes a variable decorrelation regularizer and a weighted
regression model. The variable decorrelation regularizer estimates a weight for each sample such that variables are decorrelated on the weighted training data. Then, these weights are
used in the weighted regression to improve the accuracy of estimation on the effect of each variable, thus help to improve
the stability of prediction across unknown test data. Extensive
experiments clearly demonstrate that our DWR algorithm can
signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy of parameter estimation
and stability of prediction with model misspeciﬁcation and
agnostic distribution shift.

Introduction
Predicting unknown outcomes based on a model estimated
on a training data set is a common machine learning problem. Many machine learning algorithms have been proposed
and shown to be very successful for prediction when the test
data have the same distribution as the training data or the
model speciﬁcation is correct. In real applications, however,
we rarely know the underlying true model for prediction,
and we cannot guarantee the unknown test data will have the
same distribution as the training data. For example, different
geographies, schools, or hospitals may draw from different
demographics, and the correlation structure among demographics may also vary (e.g. one ethnic group may be more
or less disadvantaged in different geographies). If the model
∗

All authors of this paper are corresponding authors.
Most of this work was done while Kun Kuang was a Ph.D.
student in Tsinghua University
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4485

