The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Constraint-Based Approach to Learning and Explanation∗
Gabriele Ciravegna,1,2 Francesco Giannini,2 Stefano Melacci,2 Marco Maggini,2 Marco Gori2
1

Department of Information Engineering (DIINFO), University of Florence, Florence, Italy
gabriele.ciravegna@uniﬁ.it
2
Department of Information Engineering and Science (DIISM), University of Siena, Siena, Italy
{fgiannini, mela, maggini, marco}@diism.unisi.it

Abstract

5XOH6SDFH

In the last few years we have seen a remarkable progress from
the cultivation of the idea of expressing domain knowledge by
the mathematical notion of constraint. However, the progress
has mostly involved the process of providing consistent solutions with a given set of constraints, whereas learning “new”
constraints, that express new knowledge, is still an open challenge. In this paper we propose a novel approach to learning of constraints which is based on information theoretic
principles. The basic idea consists in maximizing the transfer
of information between task functions and a set of learnable
constraints, implemented using neural networks subject to L1
regularization. This process leads to the unsupervised development of new constraints that are fulﬁlled in different subportions of the input domain. In addition, we deﬁne a simple procedure that can explain the behaviour of the newly devised constraints in terms of First-Order Logic formulas, thus
extracting novel knowledge on the relationships between the
original tasks. An experimental evaluation is provided to support the proposed approach, in which we also explore the regularization effects introduced by the proposed InformationBased Learning of Constraint (IBLC) algorithm.

1

&RQFHSW6SDFH

,QSXW6SDFH

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Input, concept and rule spaces, that are associated to input data x, task functions f (x) and constraints
φj (f (x)) = 0, j = 1, . . . , c, and ψz (f (x)) = 0, z =
1, . . . , m, respectively. (b) Learning task functions subject
to given constraints φj (f (x)) = 0, j = 1, . . . , c (dotted
connections are identity mappings). (c) Learning task functions subject to given constraints and learning of constraints
ψz (f (x)) = 0, z = 1, . . . , m, where m = 4 in this example.
input space (e.g., co-occurrence on some samples, exclusivity, ...). Given a test example, our approach can provide
a logic-based explanation of the discovered relationships in
the space region to which the example belongs. Another innovative aspect of the proposed approach is that the learned
knowledge conditions the development of the task functions
themselves. This introduces a regularization effect also improving the overall accuracy of the developed functions.
More formally, in this framework we distinguish among
the problem of learning a set of task functions in the input
space, subject to given constraints that implement the available knowledge on the problem at hand, and the problem
of learning “new” constraints in the concept space to which
the task functions belong. Constraints belong to what we refer to as the rule space, as sketched in Fig. 1 (a). Learning
new knowledge is the outcome of a developmental process
in which the task functions are progressively learnt in the input space (stage 1) and, afterwards, it is learnt how the task
functions are related in the concept space (stage 2). An alternate optimization scheme is progressively iterated, reﬁning
the task functions subject to given-and-new constraints, and
improving the newly devised constraining functions.

Introduction

We consider a generic multi-task learning problem in which
the goal is to learn a set of unknown functions, also called
task functions, given some labeled examples and knowledge
about the way the tasks are related. While some of the relationships among tasks are known proprieties of the considered environment, new relation patterns, that are not known
in advance, could also exist. This paper presents a learning framework in which, instead of only focusing on the
development of the task functions accordingly to the available knowledge, we are also interested in determining new
knowledge. We consider the case in which such knowledge
is represented by a set of logic rules that compactly explain
how the task functions are related in some regions of the
∗

This work was partly supported by the PRIN 2017 project
RexLearn, funded by the Italian Ministry of Education, University
and Research (grant no. 2017TWNMH2).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3658

