The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Price of Fairness in Budget Division and Probabilistic Social Choice
Marcin Michorzewski,1 Dominik Peters,2 Piotr Skowron1
1
University of Warsaw, 2 Carnegie Mellon University
marcin.michorzewski@gmail.com, dominikp@cs.cmu.edu, p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl

Suppose a group of agents needs to divide a common budget
among different projects, and we wish to vote over this division. For example, a city might wish to allocate a part of its
spending according to the preferences of its residents over
different uses (“participatory budgeting”; Cabannes, 2004).
Or participants of a workshop might decide how to divide
the workshop time among different discussion topics. We
are interested in settings where the common budget is perfectly divisible, and each project can receive an arbitrary
fraction of the resource. Thus, an outcome of the voting process can be seen as a vector of non-negative numbers, one
for each project, summing up to 1. Each agent is assumed
to have preferences over these distributions. This framing
suggests that we can use probabilistic social choice functions

(Brandt 2017) to guide the voting process: a probabilistic
social choice function takes as input a proﬁle of preferences,
and returns a probability distribution over projects, which we
interpret as a division of the budget.
Arbitrary preferences over the set of distributions can be
complicated and difﬁcult to elicit, so the literature usually
assumes that preferences come from some restricted class,
such as von Neumann–Morgenstern preferences (i.e., additive
and linear), or given by ordinal rankings over the projects
which are then extended to preferences over distributions
in some natural way. We will use approval voting: agents
indicate, for each project, whether they approve or disapprove
it, and we assume that the utility of an agent is equal to
the fraction of the budget spent on approved projects.1 This
setting has been introduced by Bogomolnaia, Moulin, and
Stong (2005). Approval ballots make it easy for agents to
express their preferences, and they are easy to elicit. The
approval-based setup is well-studied and many rules and
fairness notions have been proposed.
Given agents’ approval preferences, a natural approach is
to pick the budget division that maximizes utilitarian social
welfare (i.e., the sum of agents’ utilities). Suppose there are
ten agents, six of which approve {a}, and four approve {b}.
Then spending 100% of the budget on a maximizes social
welfare, since shifting spending from b to a increases welfare.
In general, the utilitarian rule will always spend the entire
budget on projects with the highest approval score. While
this behavior may be desirable in some contexts, often it is
undesirable to completely ignore minority interests. In the
kinds of settings mentioned in the beginning, it seems more
appropriate to spend 60% on a and 40% on b.
The focus of several early papers about aggregation rules
for participatory budgeting was social welfare maximization
(e.g., Goel et al., 2019; Benade et al., 2017). Indeed, it seems
desirable for the budget division to have high utilitarian social welfare, so that voters have, on average, high satisfaction.
But this may not be the only goal, and several recent papers
have worked on formalizing notions of fairness and proportionality in this setting (e.g., Aziz, Lee, and Talmon, 2018;
Fain, Munagala, and Shah, 2018; Talmon and Faliszewski,

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Thus, we do not allow decreasing or increasing returns, nor do
we consider substitutes and complements.

Abstract
A group of agents needs to divide a divisible common resource
(such as a monetary budget) among several uses or projects.
We assume that agents have approval preferences over projects,
and their utility is the fraction of the budget spent on approved
projects. If we maximize utilitarian social welfare, the entire
budget will be spent on a single popular project, even if a
substantial fraction of the agents disapprove it. This violates
the individual fair share axiom (IFS) which requires that for
each agent, at least 1/n of the budget is spent on approved
projects. We study the price of imposing such fairness axioms
on utilitarian social welfare. We show that no division rule
√satisfying IFS can guarantee to achieve more than an O(1/ m)
fraction of maximum utilitarian welfare, in the worst case.
However, imposing stronger group fairness conditions (such
as the core) does not come with an increased price, since both
the conditional utilitarian rule√and the Nash rule match this
bound and guarantee an Ω(1/ m) fraction. The same guarantee is attained by the rule under which the spending on a
project is proportional to its approval score. We also study a
family of rules interpolating between the utilitarian and the
Nash rule, quantifying a trade-off between welfare and group
fairness. An experimental analysis by sampling using several
probabilistic models shows that the conditional utilitarian rule
achieves very high welfare on average.

1

Introduction

2184

