The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Safe Sample Screening for Robust Support Vector Machine
Zhou Zhai,1 Bin Gu,1,2 * Xiang Li,3 Heng Huang4
1

School of Computer & Software, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, P.R.China
2
JD Finance America Corporation
3
Computer Science Department, University of Western Ontario, Canada
4
Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
zhouzhai@nuist.edu.cn, {jsgubin, henghuanghh}@gmail.com, lxiang2@uwo.ca

through clipping the convex hinge loss to the non-convex
ramp loss, and has been shown to perform remarkably well
under the noisy environment.

Abstract
Robust support vector machine (RSVM) has been shown to
perform remarkably well to improve the generalization performance of support vector machine under the noisy environment. Unfortunately, in order to handle the non-convexity
induced by ramp loss in RSVM, existing RSVM solvers often adopt the DC programming framework which is computationally inefﬁcient for running multiple outer loops. This hinders the application of RSVM to large-scale problems. Safe
sample screening that allows for the exclusion of training
samples prior to or early in the training process is an effective
method to greatly reduce computational time. However, existing safe sample screening algorithms are limited to convex
optimization problems while RSVM is a non-convex problem. To address this challenge, in this paper, we propose two
safe sample screening rules for RSVM based on the framework of concave-convex procedure (CCCP). Speciﬁcally, we
provide screening rule for the inner solver of CCCP and another rule for propagating screened samples between two successive solvers of CCCP. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst work of safe sample screening to a non-convex optimization problem. More importantly, we provide the security
guarantee to our sample screening rules to RSVM. Experimental results on a variety of benchmark datasets verify that
our safe sample screening rules can signiﬁcantly reduce the
computational time.

The non-convex objective function of RSVM can be
viewed as a difference of convex (DC) (Sriperumbudur and
Lanckriet 2009) programming problem which is normally
solved by the concave-convex procedure (CCCP) (Yuille
and Rangarajan 2003; Collobert et al. 2006) algorithm. The
CCCP algorithm iteratively solves a sequence of constrained
convex optimization problems. For each loop of CCCP algorithm, it solves a surrogate convex optimization problem
which linearizes the concave part of the original DC programming problem. The inner surrogate convex optimization problem is very similar to the problem of SVM, and
is normally solved by the sequential minimal optimization
(SMO) algorithm (Platt 1998; Vapnik 2013). As pointed out
in (Chang and Lin 2011), the time complexity of SMO algorithm is O(nκ ), where 1 < κ < 2.3, n is the number of the
training samples. Thus, the time complexity of CCCP algorithm to solve RSVM is O(tnκ ), where t is the number of
loops of the CCCP algorithm. The high computational cost
severely hinders the implementation of RSVM and its application to big data.
To address the above challenging problem, one promising approach is safe screening. Ghaoui et al. (2010) ﬁrst
exploited safe screening rules to discard inactive features
prior to starting a Lasso solver. They exploited the geometric
quantities of the feature space to bound the Lasso dual solution to be within a compact region and only need to solve a
smaller optimization problem on the reduced datasets which
leads to huge savings in the computational cost and memory usage. Since then, the concept of safe screening has
been expanded in two main directions. The ﬁrst direction is
called sequential screening, which performs screening along
the entire regularization path which is the sequence of optimal solutions w.r.t. different values of regularization parameter. Sequential screening relies on an additional feasible or optimal solution obtained in advance, which can provide a warm start of the screening process. This direction
has been pursued in (Wang et al. 2013; 2014; Liu et al. 2013;
Xu and Ramadge 2013; Xiang, Wang, and Ramadge 2016;
El Ghaoui, Viallon, and Rabbani 2011). However, they are

Introduction
In supervised learning, support vector machine (SVM)
(Chang and Lin 2011; Platt 1998; Cortes and Vapnik 1995)
is a powerful classiﬁcation method that is widely used
to separate data by maximizing the margin between two
classes. However, real-world data tend to be massive in
quantity but with quite a few unreliable outliers. Traditional
SVM usually use convex hinge loss function to calculate the
loss of misclassiﬁed samples. Since the convex function is
unbounded and puts an extremely large penalty on outliers,
traditional SVM is unstable in the presence of outliers. Robust support vector machine (RSVM) (Wu and Liu 2007;
Shen et al. 2003; Xu, Crammer, and Schuurmans 2006) suppresses the inﬂuence of outliers on the decision function
* Contact Author
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6981

