The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Optimal Margin Distribution Learning in Dynamic Environments
Teng Zhang,1 Peng Zhao,2 Hai Jin1∗
1

National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
Services Computing Technology and System Lab, Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
2
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
{tengzhang, hjin}@hust.edu.cn, zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn

and achieved superior generalization performance to the traditional large margin based methods. After that, the optimal
margin distribution learning has turned into a promising research direction and attracted a lot of attentions, just to name
a few, Zhou and Zhou (2016) exploit it to handle unequal
misclassiﬁcation cost; Cheng, Zhang, and Wen (2016) use
it for imbalanced data; Ou et al. (2017) applies it to feature
elimination; Zhang and Zhou (2018a; 2018b) extends it to
clustering and semi-supervised learning settings.
Although this new learning paradigm has achieved many
successes under batch learning settings, it remains open
for online learning settings (Rosenblatt 1958; Freund and
Schapire 1999; Li and Long 1999; Kivinen, Smola, and
Williamson 2001; Zhao, Hoi, and Jin 2011), in particular,
the changing environments in which the underlying decision function varies over time (Hazan and Seshadhri 2009;
Besbes, Gur, and Zeevi 2015). In this paper, we proposes the
dynamic optimal margin distribution machine, whose basic
idea is to simultaneously maintain a set of candidate learners, dynamically adjust their weights according to the performances, and ﬁnally perform a majority vote by combining their outputs. We also theoretically analyze its dynamic
√
regret and derives an 
O( T VT ) 1 bound, where VT is the
function variation which can capture the change intensity of
the underlying decision function. Although this bound has
the same order with the best known one (Besbes, Gur, and
Zeevi 2015), our method can signiﬁcantly relax the restrictive assumption that the complexity measure VT should be
given ahead of time, leading to better applicability in practical scenarios. For the special case when the underlying decision function only evolves several discrete changes rather
than varying continuously, i.e., they stay the same most of
time, we also derive an excess risk bound for the proposed
method. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real
data sets demonstrate the superiority of our method.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst
brieﬂy introduce some preliminaries, and then detail the proposed method. After that we discuss some theoretical analyses, followed by empirical studies. Finally we conclude the
paper with future work.

Abstract
Recently a promising research direction of statistical learning has been advocated, i.e., the optimal margin distribution
learning with the central idea that instead of the minimal
margin, the margin distribution is more crucial to the generalization performance. Although the superiority of this new
learning paradigm has been veriﬁed under batch learning settings, it remains open for online learning settings, in particular, the dynamic environments in which the underlying decision function varies over time. In this paper, we propose the
dynamic optimal margin distribution machine and theoretically analyze its regret. Although the obtained bound has the
same order with the best known one, our method can signiﬁcantly relax the restrictive assumption that the function variation should be given ahead of time, resulting in better applicability in practical scenarios. We also derive an excess risk
bound for the special case when the underlying decision function only evolves several discrete changes rather than varying
continuously. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and
real data sets demonstrate the superiority of our method.

Introduction
Support vector machines (SVMs) and Boosting have always been two mainstream learning approaches during the
past decades. The former (Cortes and Vapnik 1995) roots in
the statistical learning theory (Vapnik 1995) which aims to
search a large margin separator, while the latter also enjoys
a long history of being explained by margin theory (Freund
and Schapire 1995; Schapire et al. 1998), due to it is resistant to over-ﬁtting empirically (Reyzin and Schapire 2006;
Wang et al. 2011; Zhou 2012).
Recently the margin theory for Boosting has ﬁnally been
defended (Gao and Zhou 2013), and disclosed that instead of
optimizing a single margin, margin distribution is more crucial to the generalization performance. Similar conclusions
have also been obtained for SVM-style learning approaches.
Speciﬁcally, Zhang and Zhou (2014; 2017; 2019) proposed
the optimal margin distribution machines (ODMs) for binary and multi-class classiﬁcation problems respectively,
∗
This research was supported by the National Key Research &
Development Program of China (2018YFB1004002).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
 to suppress poly-logarithmic depenWe use the notation O(·)
dence on T .

6821

