The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Working Memory-Driven Neural Networks with a Novel
Knowledge Enhancement Paradigm for Implicit Discourse Relation Recognition
Fengyu Guo,1,2,∗ Ruifang He,1,2,3,∗† Jianwu Dang,1,2,4,† Jian Wang1,2
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application, Tianjin, China.
3
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, iFLYTEK, China.
4
School of Information Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Ishikawa, Japan.
{fengyuguo, rfhe, jian wang}@tju.edu.cn, jdang@jaist.ac.jp.
2

as machine translation, text summarization, information extraction and conversation system.
Previous studies mainly include 1) conventional discrete
feature-based and 2) neural network-based models. The former adopt the artiﬁcially designed linguistic features and
the complicated rules (Pitler, Louis, and Nenkova 2009;
Rutherford and Xue 2014). However, implicit discourse relations are rooted in the semantics, which are difﬁcult to
be recognized from the surface features. Although neural
network-based models obtain better argument representations and more precisely predict discourse relations (Zhang
et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016), they encode two discourse arguments without the interactive clues. The further approaches
adopt different complicated neural networks (Lei et al. 2017;
Guo et al. 2018) with attention mechanism (Liu and Li 2016;
Cai and Zhao 2017), gate mechanism (Chen et al. 2016) or
memory mechanism (Zhang, Xiong, and Su 2016) to mine
the interactive information of argument pairs. However, they
only focus on the intra-sentence textual information, neglecting the wider contexts beyond the discourse or relevant
implicit clues.
In addition, the researchers in cognitive psychology argue that the ability of humans to remember and understand
something depends not only on the different types of working memory (e.g., instant memory, long term memory), but
also on the interconnections between them (Baddeley 2003),
just as shown in Figure 1.

Abstract
Recognizing implicit discourse relation is a challenging task
in discourse analysis, which aims to understand and infer the latent relations between two discourse arguments,
such as temporal, comparison. Most of the present models
largely focus on learning-based methods that utilize only
intra-sentence textual information to identify discourse relations, ignoring the wider contexts beyond the discourse.
Moreover, people comprehend the meanings and the relations
of discourses, heavily relying on their interconnected working memories (e.g., instant memory, long-term memory). Inspired by this, we propose a Knowledge-Enhanced Attentive
Neural Network (KANN) framework to address these issues.
Speciﬁcally, it establishes a mutual attention matrix to capture
the reciprocal information between two arguments, as instant
memory. While implicitly stated knowledge in the arguments
is retrieved from external knowledge source and encoded as
inter-words semantic connection embeddings to further construct knowledge matrix, as long-term memory. We devise a
novel paradigm with two ways by the collaboration of the
memories to enrich the argument representation: 1) integrating the knowledge matrix into the mutual attention matrix,
which implicitly maps knowledge into the process of capturing asymmetric interactions between two discourse arguments; 2) directly concatenating the argument representations
and the semantic connection embeddings, which explicitly
supplements knowledge to help discourse understanding. The
experimental results on the PDTB also show that our KANN
model is effective.

Introduction

Working memory
( Intuition, Inference )
Duration:< 30 sec
A
tte
nt
io
n

Instant memory
( Multi-channel perception )
Duration:< 5 sec

n
io
ct
ra
te
In

Discourse relation describes how two adjacent text units
(e.g. clauses, sentences, and larger sentence groups), called
arguments, named Arg1 and Arg2, are connected semantically to one another. Implicit discourse relation recognition without explicit connectives (Pitler, Louis, and Nenkova
2009), which normally needs to be inferred from the speciﬁc context, is still a bottleneck of discourse analysis. It is
also beneﬁcial to many downstream NLP applications, such

Long-term memory
( Prior, knowledge, etc. )
Duration:< 1 sec - lifelong

Figure 1: Working memory.

∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

Intuitively, when annotating the meaning and the relations
of discourse, people usually tend to capture the focused in7822

