The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Abstract Interpretation of Decision Tree Ensemble Classiﬁers
Francesco Ranzato, Marco Zanella
Dipartimento di Matematica, University of Padova, Italy
{ranzato, mzanella}@math.unipd.it

neural networks may rely on a number of different techniques: linear approximation of functions (Weng et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018), semideﬁnite relaxations (Raghunathan,
Steinhardt, and Liang 2018), logical SMT solvers (Huang
et al. 2017; Katz et al. 2017), symbolic interval propagation
(Wang et al. 2018a), abstract interpretation (Gehr et al. 2018;
Singh et al. 2018; 2019) or hybrid synergistic approaches
(Anderson et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2018b). Abstract interpretation (Cousot and Cousot 1977) is a de facto standard technique used since forty years for designing static analysers
and veriﬁers of programming languages. Recently, abstract
interpretation has been successfully applied for designing
precise and scalable robustness veriﬁcation tools of (deep)
neural network models (Gehr et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2018;
2019). While all these veriﬁcation techniques consider neural networks as ML model, in this work we focus on decision
tree ensemble methods, such as random forests and gradient boosted decision tree models, which are widely applied
in different ﬁelds having sensible adversarial scenarios, notably image classiﬁcation, malware detection, intrusion detection and spam ﬁltering.

Abstract
We study the problem of formally and automatically verifying robustness properties of decision tree ensemble classiﬁers such as random forests and gradient boosted decision tree models. A recent stream of works showed how abstract interpretation, which is ubiquitously used in static program analysis, can be successfully deployed to formally verify (deep) neural networks. In this work we push forward
this line of research by designing a general and principled
abstract interpretation-based framework for the formal veriﬁcation of robustness and stability properties of decision tree
ensemble models. Our abstract interpretation-based method
may induce complete robustness checks of standard adversarial perturbations and output concrete adversarial attacks.
We implemented our abstract veriﬁcation technique in a tool
called silva, which leverages an abstract domain of not necessarily closed real hyperrectangles and is instantiated to verify
random forests and gradient boosted decision trees. Our experimental evaluation on the MNIST dataset shows that silva
provides a precise and efﬁcient tool which advances the current state of the art in tree ensembles veriﬁcation.

1

Introduction

Contributions. Following the aforementioned stream of
works applying abstract interpretation for certifying ML
models, we design a general abstract interpretation-based
framework for the formal veriﬁcation of stability properties
of decision tree ensemble models. Our veriﬁcation algorithm
of ensembles of decision trees: (1) is domain agnostic, since
it can be instantiated to any abstract domain which represents properties of real vectors, such as simple hyperrectangles of real intervals or more involved linear relations; (2) is
ﬁrmly based on the basic soundness principle of abstract
interpretation and correspondingly rely on sound approximations of split functions used in decision tree classiﬁers;
(3) under certain assumptions may induce complete robustness checks against adversarial perturbations; (4) is able to
output concrete adversarial samples. Our formal veriﬁcation
methodology has been implemented in C in a tool called
silva (Latin for forest and acronym of Silvarum Interpretatione Lator Valens Analysis) which leverages an abstract domain of possibly open real hyperrectangles and has been applied to random forests and gradient boosted decision trees.
Our experimental evaluation on the standard MNIST dataset

Adversarial machine learning (Goodfellow, McDaniel, and
Papernot 2018; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017) is a
hot topic studying vulnerabilities of machine learning (ML)
in adversarial scenarios. Adversarial examples have been
found in diverse application ﬁelds of ML such as image classiﬁcation, spam ﬁltering, malware detection, and the current
defense techniques include adversarial model training, input
validation, testing and automatic veriﬁcation of learning algorithms (Goodfellow, McDaniel, and Papernot 2018). Formal veriﬁcation of ML classiﬁers started to be an active ﬁeld
of investigation, in particular for robustness properties of
(deep) neural networks. A classiﬁer is stable for some (typically very small) perturbation of its input samples which
represents an adversarial attack when it assigns the same
class to all the samples within that perturbation, so that impercetible malicious alterations of input objects should not
deceive a stable classiﬁer. Formal veriﬁcation methods for
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5478

