The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Human Synthesis and Scene Compositing
Mihai Zanﬁr,3,1 Elisabeta Oneata,3,1 Alin-Ionut Popa,3,1 Andrei Zanﬁr,1,3 Cristian Sminchisescu1,2
1

Google Research 2 Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
3
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
{mihai.zanﬁr, elisabeta.oneata, alin.popa, andrei.zanﬁr}@imar.ro, sminchisescu@google.com

contrast, other approaches avoid the 3d modeling pipeline
altogether, aiming to achieve realism by directly manipulating images and by training using large-scale datasets. While
this is cheap and attractive, offering the advantage of producing outputs with close to real statistics, they are not nearly
as controllable as the 3d graphics ones, and results can be
geometrically inconsistent and often unpredictable.
In this work we attempt to combine the relatively accessible methodology in both domains and propose a framework
that is able to realistically synthesize a photograph of a person, in any given pose and shape, and blend it veridically
with a new scene, while obeying 3d geometry and appearance statistics. An overview is given in ﬁg. 1.
For the ﬁrst part of human synthesis, given a source image
of a person and a different target pose (or more generally, a
target 3d body mesh), we want to generate a realistic image
of the person synthesized into the new pose. We would like
that all the elements included in the person’s source layout
(either clothing, accessories or body parts) to be preserved
or plausibly extended in the synthesis. We propose to learn
a dense displacement ﬁeld, that leverages 3d geometry and
semantic segmentation (e.g. a blouse moves differently than
a hat; the leg moves differently than the head). This module
produces a correction to an initial body displacement ﬁeld
and is trained jointly with the synthesis model within a single end-to-end architecture.
Finally, given an image of a person (real or synthesized)
and of a background scene, we want to generate a good
quality composite of the two. We argue that a realistic synthesis should consider the physical properties of the scene
and of the human body, and also compensate for the different appearance statistics. With that in mind, we propose
to blend the foreground image with the background image,
at two levels: geometry and appearance. At the geometric
level, we want the foreground person, with its associated 3d
body model, to respect the 3d space and scale constraints
of the scene, be visible according to the scene depth ordering, and be placed on a plausible support surface (e.g. ﬂoor).
At the appearance level, we would like that the two sources
blend naturally together, without the undesirable cut-andpaste look. To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
(a) a realistic human appearance translation task, with state-

Abstract
Generating good quality and geometrically plausible synthetic images of humans with the ability to control appearance, pose and shape parameters, has become increasingly
important for a variety of tasks ranging from photo editing,
fashion virtual try-on, to special effects and image compression. In this paper, we propose a HUSC (HUman Synthesis
and Scene Compositing) framework for the realistic synthesis of humans with different appearance, in novel poses and
scenes. Central to our formulation is 3d reasoning for both
people and scenes, in order to produce realistic collages, by
correctly modeling perspective effects and occlusion, by taking into account scene semantics and by adequately handling
relative scales. Conceptually our framework consists of three
components: (1) a human image synthesis model with controllable pose and appearance, based on a parametric representation, (2) a person insertion procedure that leverages the
geometry and semantics of the 3d scene, and (3) an appearance compositing process to create a seamless blending between the colors of the scene and the generated human image,
and avoid visual artifacts. The performance of our framework
is supported by both qualitative and quantitative results, in
particular state-of-the art synthesis scores for the DeepFashion dataset.

Introduction
Generating photorealistic synthetic images of humans, with
the ability to control their shape and pose parameters, and
the scene background is of great importance for end-user
applications such as in photo-editing or fashion virtual tryon, and for a variety of data-hungry human sensing tasks,
where accurate ground truth would be very difﬁcult if not
impossible to obtain (e.g. the 3d pose and shape of a dressed
person photographed outdoors).
One way to approach the problem would be to design human models and 3d environments using computer graphics. While the degree of realism increased dramatically in
narrow domains like the movie industry, with results that
pass the visual Turing test, such synthetic graphics productions require considerable amount of highly qualiﬁed manual work, are expensive, and consequently do not scale. In
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12749

