The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Novel Model for Imbalanced Data Classiﬁcation
Jian Yin,1,4 Chunjing Gan,1,4 Kaiqi Zhao,2 Xuan Lin,3 Zhe Quan,3 Zhi-Jie Wang1,4,5,*
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Computer Science, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
3
College of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
5
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analysis and Applications, Beijing, China
*
Corresponding author: wangzhij5@mail.sysu.edu.cn
from the majority class at the risk of losing important samples. Oversampling methods replicate minority samples for
several times, and thus they often overﬁt the data (He and
Garcia 2008). (ii) For cost-sensitive learning methods, it is
hard to obtain misclassiﬁcation cost parameter for minority and majority classes (Dumpala, Chakraborty, and Kopparapu 2018). (iii) For ensemble learning methods, the majority voting is commonly adopted, which may result in biased results due to the existence of “unstable samples” (Wu
et al. 2017). Unstable samples have even chance of being
assigned to each class label by different classiﬁers. Apart
from the three categories, recent studies (Wang et al. 2018)
indicate that, for imbalanced datasets, the limited training
samples and their surrounding data space can improve the
classiﬁcation results.

Abstract
Recently, imbalanced data classiﬁcation has received much
attention due to its wide applications. In the literature, existing researches have attempted to improve the classiﬁcation performance by considering various factors such as the
imbalanced distribution, cost-sensitive learning, data space
improvement, and ensemble learning. Nevertheless, most of
the existing methods focus on only part of these main aspects/factors. In this work, we propose a novel imbalanced
data classiﬁcation model that considers all these main aspects. To evaluate the performance of our proposed model,
we have conducted experiments based on 14 public datasets.
The results show that our model outperforms the state-of-theart methods in terms of recall, G-mean, F-measure and AUC.

Introduction

In this paper, we propose a novel model to address the
above limitations for the imbalanced binary classiﬁcation
problem. Our model integrates sampling, data space construction, cost-sensitive learning, and ensemble learning in
a principle way. Speciﬁcally, it consists of four main components: (i) Data block construction component, which aims to
divide the datasets into balanced data blocks using both undersampling and oversampling. (ii) Data space improvement
component, which transforms the data space so that the data
samples can be close to its k nearest neighbors with the same
label, and separate the data samples from the other class
by a large margin. (iii) Adaptive weight adjustment component, which obtains the class-wise weight for the ensemble
learning component, so as to alleviate the trouble incurred
by the “unstable samples”. (iv) Ensemble learning components, which combines multiple base classiﬁers and obtains
the ﬁnal results by weighted voting. To sum up, we make
two main contributions:

In recent years, binary classiﬁcation for imbalanced data
has received much attention (Castro and Braga 2013; Lin
et al. ) due to its wide applications in various domains
such as mortality prediction, and so on (Zhao et al. 2014;
Bhattacharya, Rajan, and Shrivastava 2017; Liu et al. 2018;
Nie et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2019; Xu et al. ).
A main characteristic of this problem is that, most of data
samples belong to one class while the rest belong to the
other. Typically, the class with most of samples is known
as the majority class, while the other is known as the minority class, which is often of signiﬁcant value (Weiss 2004;
Alam et al. 2018; Quan et al. 2019).
Previous studies (Seiffert et al. 2010; Alam et al. 2018)
have shown that conventional machine learning methods
may fail to address the imbalanced data classiﬁcation problem. To alleviate this, a lot of methods have been proposed
(Barua et al. 2014; Castro and Braga 2013; Alam et al.
2018). Generally, the existing methods can be divided into
three categories: sampling methods (including undersampling and oversampling methods) (Chawla et al. 2002; Liu,
Wu, and Zhou 2009; Barua et al. 2014), cost-sensitive learning methods (Thai-Nghe, Gantner, and Schmidt-Thieme
2010; Castro and Braga 2013), and ensemble learning methods (Seiffert et al. 2010; Alam et al. 2018; Fang et al. 2019).
Yet, there remains several issues for each of these categories.
For example: (i) Undersampling methods remove samples

• We propose a novel model for imbalanced data classiﬁcation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt
to integrate the above four aspects together.
• We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the performance of our model. The results consistently show that
the proposed model achieves competitive performance
compared against several state-of-the-art models.

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Next, we review previous works most related to ours.
6680

