The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning with Unsure Responses
Kunihiro Takeoka

Yuyang Dong

Masafumi Oyamada

NEC Corporation
k takeoka@nec.com

NEC Corporation
dongyuyang@nec.com

NEC Corporation
oyamada@nec.com

Abstract
Many annotation systems provide to add an unsure option
in the labels, because the annotators have different expertise, and they may not have enough conﬁdence to choose a
label for some assigned instances. However, all the existing
approaches only learn the labels with a clear class name and
ignore the unsure responses. Due to the unsure response also
account for a proportion of the dataset (e.g., about 10-30%
in real datasets), existing approaches lead to high costs such
as paying more money or taking more time to collect enough
size of labeled data. Therefore, it is a signiﬁcant issue to make
use of these unsure.
In this paper, we make the unsure responses contribute to
training classiﬁers. We found a property that the instances
corresponding to the unsure responses always appear close
to the decision boundary of classiﬁcation. We design a loss
function called unsure loss based on this property. We extend
the conventional methods for classiﬁcation and learning from
crowds with this unsure loss. Experimental results on realworld and synthetic data demonstrate the performance of our
method and its superiority over baseline methods.

1

Figure 1: In our dog-wolf classiﬁcation task, instances corresponding to unsure responses from annotators (red triangles)
are located close to the ground-truth decision boundary.

In reality, however, a fair amount of instances are labeled as “unsure”. According to the real dataset (UDI Twitter Crawl-Aug2012) in the related work (Zhong, Tang, and
Zhou 2015), there are about 32% “unsure” in all responses.
Moreover, we also conduct a preliminary experiment on
classifying the images of dogs and wolfs, and the “unsure”
instances make up 15.6% of all responses. In these cases,
with the conventional “let’s ignore unsure instances” strategy, the size of the training dataset is decreased, which may
cause the issues such as (1) small training sets incur an overﬁtting problem, and (2) need an extra labeling process that
costs much and takes time.
Naturally, this comes up with an important research question: can we leverage “unsure” instances instead of ignoring them to train a high-quality model?
In this paper, we examine the behavior of the “unsure”
instances in real-world labeled datasets, we found that the
“unsure” instances tend to be located close to the ground
truth decision boundary (Section 2.1). Figure 1 shows the
concept of the relationship between “unsure” instances and
the decision boundary. It implies that “unsure” instances can
be a strong signal for determining the position of the decision boundary, that is, they can help training a high-quality
supervised model. Based on this observation, we ﬁrst deﬁne two learning problems with unsure responses (Section
2.2). Then, we design a novel loss function named unsure
loss (Section 3.1). The unsure loss works like a regulariza-

Introduction

Preparing a sufﬁcient amount of “appropriately labeled”
datasets is key to build a high-quality supervised machine
learning model. So far, such labeling process has relied
on expert annotators or wisdom of crowds (Dawid and
Skene 1979; Whitehill et al. 2009; Welinder et al. 2010;
Jin et al. 2017). However, those annotators are not always
being correct and the resulting datasets sometimes contain
incorrectly labeled instances in practice.
Conventional approaches try to avoid incorrect labeling by allowing annotators to give up a labeling task if
it is too difﬁcult for them (Zhong, Tang, and Zhou 2015;
Ding and Zhou 2018). In these approaches, annotators are
permitted to choose the third option called “unsure” instead
of ordinary “Yes” or “No” when they are not so conﬁdent for
the label of the instance. Thus, conventional approaches can
just discard the instances with “unsure”, and train a highquality machine learning model with the remained highconﬁdent labeled instances.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
230

