The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Discriminative and Robust Online Learning for Siamese Visual Tracking
Jinghao Zhou, Peng Wang, Haoyang Sun
School of Computer Science and School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean Big Data Application Technology, China
jensen.zhoujh@gmail.com, peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn, sunhaoyang@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
The problem of visual object tracking has traditionally been
handled by variant tracking paradigms, either learning a
model of the object’s appearance exclusively online or matching the object with the target in an ofﬂine-trained embedding
space. Despite the recent success, each method agonizes over
its intrinsic constraint. The online-only approaches suffer
from a lack of generalization of the model they learn thus are
inferior in target regression, while the ofﬂine-only approaches
(e.g., convolutional siamese trackers) lack the target-speciﬁc
context information thus are not discriminative enough to
handle distractors, and robust enough to deformation. Therefore, we propose an online module with an attention mechanism for ofﬂine siamese networks to extract target-speciﬁc
features under L2 error. We further propose a ﬁlter update
strategy adaptive to treacherous background noises for discriminative learning, and a template update strategy to handle
large target deformations for robust learning. Effectiveness
can be validated in the consistent improvement over three
siamese baselines: SiamFC, SiamRPN++, and SiamMask.
Beyond that, our model based on SiamRPN++ obtains the
best results over six popular tracking benchmarks and can operate beyond real-time.

1

GT

DROL-RPN

ATOM

SiamRPN++

Figure 1: Qualitative demonstration and comparison. While
accurate bounding box regression eludes ATOM and
SiamRPN++ struggles at situations like distractors and deformation, our method DROL outperforms ATOM with a
siamese matching subnet, and SiamRPN++ with our proposed discriminative and robust online module.

Introduction

Visual object tracking is a fundamental topic in various computer vision tasks, such as vehicle navigation, automatic
driving, visual surveillance, and video analytics. Brieﬂy
speaking, given the position of an arbitrary target of interest in the ﬁrst frame of a sequence, visual object tracking
aims to estimate its location in all subsequent frames.
In the context of visual object tracking, almost all the
state-of-the-art trackers can be categorized into two categories: discriminative and generative trackers. Discriminative trackers train a classiﬁer to distinguish the target from
the background, while generative trackers ﬁnd the object that
can best match the target through computing the joint probability density between targets and search candidates.
Recently, the siamese framework (Bertinetto et al. 2016a)
as a generative tracker has received surging attention in

that its performance has taken the lead in various benchmarks while running at real-time speed. Generally, these approaches obtain a similarity embedding space between subsequent frames and directly regress to the real state of the
target (Li et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019). Despite its recent
success, since the siamese paradigm is exclusively trained
ofﬂine, it suffers from severe limitations:
(I) Siamese approaches ignore the background information in the course of tracking, leading to inferior discriminative capability for target classiﬁcation in the
face of distractors.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

(II) Siamese approaches solely utilize the ﬁrst frame as
13017

