The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Improving Efﬁciency of Volunteer-Based Food Rescue Operations
∗

∗

Zheyuan Ryan Shi,1 Yiwen Yuan,1 Kimberly Lo,1 Leah Lizarondo,2 Fei Fang1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 412 Food Rescue
ryanshi@cmu.edu, {yiweny, kimberll}@andrew.cmu.edu, leah@412foodrescue.org, feif@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Food waste and food insecurity are two challenges that coexist in many communities. To mitigate the problem, food
rescue platforms match excess food with the communities in
need, and leverage external volunteers to transport the food.
However, the external volunteers bring signiﬁcant uncertainty
to the food rescue operation. We work with a large food rescue organization to predict the uncertainty and furthermore
to ﬁnd ways to reduce the human dispatcher’s workload and
the redundant notiﬁcations sent to volunteers. We make two
main contributions. (1) We train a stacking model which predicts whether a rescue will be claimed with high precision
and AUC. This model can help the dispatcher better plan for
backup options and alleviate their uncertainty. (2) We develop
a data-driven optimization algorithm to compute the optimal
intervention and notiﬁcation scheme. The algorithm uses a
novel counterfactual data generation approach and the branch
and bound framework. Our result reduces the number of notiﬁcations and interventions required in the food rescue operation. We are working with the organization to deploy our
results in the near future.

1

(a) Screenshot of a (b) Donation picked (c) App notiﬁcarescue task
up at a cafe
tion

Figure 1: 412 Food Rescue operations

the recipient, or stores the food at its own facility if necessary. This incurs cost and there are existing works on optimizing the matching process to minimize this cost (Nair
et al. 2018), and some attempt to create a market (Prendergast 2016). However, many of these organizations operate
under tight budget and human resource constraints. As a result, some outsource the transportation of food to local volunteers, which brings in a new dimension to the problem.
We collaborate with 412 Food Rescue (412FR), a food
rescue organization serving over 1000 donors and recipient
organizations in Pittsburgh, US. The dispatcher at 412FR
matches the food by calling each recipient till some recipient
accepts. The dispatcher determines the order of these calls
based on numerous factors such as the proximity between
the donor and recipient and the estimated recipient’s willingness to accept the food. This decision is not hard-coded
but depends on the dispatcher’s rich experience. After the
matching, they post the rescue on 412FR’s smartphone apps.
412FR’s over 7000 volunteers can see the rescue’s start and
end location as well as the weight and type of food (Fig. 1a).
A volunteer can claim the rescue on the app and then complete the rescue by picking up the food from the donor within
its pickup window (Fig. 1b) and delivering it to the recipient.
Relying on volunteers saves cost for the organization, but
there is a high degree of uncertainty in whether a rescue will
be claimed and completed. Over the years, 412FR has used
many methods to get more rescues claimed and completed.

Introduction

In the US, over 25% of the food is wasted, with an average
American wasting about one pound of food per day (Conrad et al. 2018). Meanwhile, 11.8% of American households
struggle to secure enough food at some point (ColemanJensen et al. 2018). Among the several responses to this
inefﬁcient food distribution, food rescue organizations are
emerging in many cities. They receive edible food from
restaurants and groceries (“donors”) and send it to organizations serving low-resource communities (“recipients”).
These food rescue organizations are an important force to
ﬁght against food waste and food insecurity, both included
in the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals.
A food rescue organization functions as a platform between the donors and the recipients. Upon receiving the notice from a donor, the organization matches the food to a
recipient. Typically, it transports the food from the donor to
∗

Z. R. Shi and Y. Yuan contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13369

