The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Capturing Greater Context for Question Generation
Luu Anh Tuan,∗ Darsh J Shah,∗ Regina Barzilay
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab, MIT
{tuanluu, darsh, regina}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Automatic question generation can beneﬁt many applications
ranging from dialogue systems to reading comprehension.
While questions are often asked with respect to long documents, there are many challenges with modeling such long
documents. Many existing techniques generate questions by
effectively looking at one sentence at a time, leading to questions that are easy and not reﬂective of the human process of
question generation. Our goal is to incorporate interactions
across multiple sentences to generate realistic questions for
long documents. In order to link a broad document context
to the target answer, we represent the relevant context via a
multi-stage attention mechanism, which forms the foundation of a sequence to sequence model. We outperform stateof-the-art methods on question generation on three questionanswering datasets - SQuAD, MS MARCO and NewsQA. 1

1

Introduction

The tremendous popularity of reading comprehension
through datasets like SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), MS
MARCO (Bajaj et al. 2016) and NewsQA (Trischler et al.
2016) has led to a surge in machine reading and reasoning
techniques. These datasets are typically constructed using
crowd sourcing which provides good questions but at a high
cost of manual labor. There is an urgent need for automated
methods to generate quality question-answer pairs from textual corpora.
Our goal is to generate a question for a target answer – a
span of text in a provided document. To this end, we must be
able to identify the relevant context for the question-answer
from the document. Modeling long documents, however, is
formidable, and our task involves understanding the relation
between the answer and encompassing paragraphs, before
asking the relevant question. Typically most existing methods have simpliﬁed the task by looking at just the answer
containing sentence. However, this does not represent the
human process of generating questions from a document.

Figure 1: Examples (lower-cased) where multi-sentence
context is required to ask the correct questions. Sentences
containing answers are in green, while answers are underlined. The red phrases indicate additional background used
by a human to generate the question. 1-stage and 2-stage attention QG are results generated by our model with different
numbers of attention stages.

∗

denotes equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our code and data are available at https://github.com/vivisimo/
QuestionGeneration
9065

