The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hearing Lips: Improving Lip Reading by Distilling Speech Recognizers
Ya Zhao,1 Rui Xu,1 Xinchao Wang,2 Peng Hou,3 Haihong Tang,3 Mingli Song1
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Stevens Institute of Technology, 3 Alibaba Group
{yazhao, ruixu, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, xinchao.wang@stevens.edu,
houpeng.hp@alibaba-inc.com, piaoxue@taobao.com

the performance discrepancy is as large as 10.4% vs. 39.5%
in terms of character error rate for speech recognition and
lip reading, respectively (Chung et al. 2017). This is due to
the intrinsically ambiguous nature of lip actuations: several
seemingly-identical lip movements may produce different
words, making it highly challenging to extract discriminant
features from the video of interest and to further dependably
predict the text output.
In this paper, we propose a novel scheme, Lip by
Speech (LIBS), that utilizes speech recognition, for which
the performances are in most cases gratifying, to facilitate
the training of the more challenging lip reading. We assume
a pre-trained speech recognizer is given, and attempt to distill knowledge concealed in the speech recognizer to the target lip reader to be trained.
The rationale for exploiting knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) for this task lies in that, acoustic speech signals embody information complementary to
that of the visual ones. For example, utterances with subtle movements, which are challenging to be distinguished
visually, are in most cases handy to be recognized acoustically (Wolff et al. 1994). By imitating the acoustic speech
features extracted by the speech recognizer, the lip reader is
expected to enhance its capability to extract discriminant visual features. To this end, LIBS is designed to distill knowledge at multiple temporal scales including sequence-level,
context-level, and frame-level, so as to encode the multigranularity semantics from the input sequence.
Nevertheless, distilling knowledge from a heterogeneous
modality, in this case the audio sequence, confronts two major challenges. The ﬁrst lies in the fact that, the two modalities may feature different sampling rates and are thus asynchronous, while the second concerns the imperfect speechrecognition predictions. To this end, we employ a crossmodal alignment strategy to synchronize the audio and video
data by ﬁnding the correspondence between them, so as to
conduct the ﬁne-grained knowledge distillation from audio
features to visual ones. To enhance the speech predictions,
on the other hand, we introduce a ﬁltering technique to reﬁne
the distilled features, so that useful features can be ﬁltered
for knowledge distillation.
Experimental results on two large-scale lip reading

Abstract
Lip reading has witnessed unparalleled development in recent
years thanks to deep learning and the availability of largescale datasets. Despite the encouraging results achieved, the
performance of lip reading, unfortunately, remains inferior to
the one of its counterpart speech recognition, due to the ambiguous nature of its actuations that makes it challenging to
extract discriminant features from the lip movement videos.
In this paper, we propose a new method, termed as Lip by
Speech (LIBS), of which the goal is to strengthen lip reading by learning from speech recognizers. The rationale behind
our approach is that the features extracted from speech recognizers may provide complementary and discriminant clues,
which are formidable to be obtained from the subtle movements of the lips, and consequently facilitate the training of
lip readers. This is achieved, speciﬁcally, by distilling multigranularity knowledge from speech recognizers to lip readers.
To conduct this cross-modal knowledge distillation, we utilize an efﬁcacious alignment scheme to handle the inconsistent lengths of the audios and videos, as well as an innovative
ﬁltering strategy to reﬁne the speech recognizer’s prediction.
The proposed method achieves the new state-of-the-art performance on the CMLR and LRS2 datasets, outperforming
the baseline by a margin of 7.66% and 2.75% in character
error rate, respectively.

Introduction
Lip reading, also known as visual speech recognition, aims
at predicting the sentence being spoken, given a muted video
of a talking face. Thanks to the recent development of deep
learning and the availability of big data for training, lip reading has made unprecedented progress with much performance enhancement (Assael et al. 2016; Chung et al. 2017;
Zhao, Xu, and Song 2019).
In spite of the promising accomplishments, the performance of the video-based lip reading remains considerably
lower than its counterpart, the audio-based speech recognition, for which the goal is also to decode the spoken text and
therefore can be treated as a heterogeneous modality sharing the same underlying distribution as lip reading. Given
the same amount of training data and model architecture,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6917

