The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Robust Market Equilibria with Uncertain Preferences
Riley Murray,1,3 Christian Kroer,1,4 Alex Peysakhovich,2 Parikshit Shah1
1

Facebook Core Data Science, 2 Facebook Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research
3
California Institute of Technology, 4 Columbia University
rmurray@caltech.edu, christian.kroer@columbia.edu, alex.peys@gmail.com, parikshit@fb.com

in the market equilibrium which matches supply of courses
to demand (Budish and Cantillon 2012). Here students may
not be fully aware of their own exact valuations for courses.
In online advertising advertisers report valuations for various impressions, enter budgets, and an auction mechanism
again sets supply equal to demand - ﬁnding an equilibrium of the market (Balseiro, Besbes, and Weintraub 2015;
Balseiro et al. 2017; Balseiro and Gur 2017). In practice advertisers’ bids in the auction (which are equivalent to a paced
version of their valuation in equilibrium (Borgs et al. 2007;
Conitzer et al. 2018; 2019)) come from a combination of
a per-interaction valuation and a machine learning model
which predicts the probability that a given user will interact with that ad. For example, an advertiser might say they
are willing to pay $1 per click and a model could predict
that a user will click a particular ad with probability .1– this
would lead to a bid of 10 cents on the ad when combined
with the valuations. Here, again, the valuation is imperfectly
known as both the advertiser’s willingness to pay and, more
so, the click prediction model, come with noise.
We begin with the simplest workhorse model in this literature: linear Fisher markets. In such markets there are buyers and items. Buyers have ﬁnite budgets. Items are scarce
and divisible. Buyers have utility for each item and value a
bundle as the utility-weighted sum of the items in the bundle. We consider both standard Fisher markets where buyer
budgets do not have any use outside the market, and quasiFisher markets where leftover money has a ﬁxed value for
each buyer. Equilibria in such markets include allocations to
individuals and prices for items, so that buyer demands sum
up to supply and allocations satisfy buyer demands.
In this article, we show how to extend market equilibrium
to the notion of robust market equilibrium (RME). Here buyers do not have point-valued utilities for each item, but rather
have ‘uncertainty sets’ of possible valuations. In this case a
buyer wants to purchase bundles that optimize their worst
case utility given prices. This can reﬂect risk aversion on the
part of the buyers (buyers are actually not perfectly aware
of item utility) or ignorance on the part of the market designer if the market equilibrium is simply used as an allocative mechanism (e.g. CEEI). RME can be partly be viewed
as a model of classical equilibrium with a particular class of
nonlinear utility functions. Indeed, the existence of an RME
is no different than the existence of a classical equilibrium

Abstract
The problem of allocating scarce items to individuals is an
important practical question in market design. An increasingly popular set of mechanisms for this task uses the concept
of market equilibrium: individuals report their preferences,
have a budget of real or fake currency, and a set of prices
for items and allocations is computed that sets demand equal
to supply. An important real world issue with such mechanisms is that individual valuations are often only imperfectly
known. In this paper, we show how concepts from classical
market equilibrium can be extended to reﬂect such uncertainty. We show that in linear, divisible Fisher markets a robust market equilibrium (RME) always exists; this also holds
in settings where buyers may retain unspent money. We provide theoretical analysis of the allocative properties of RME
in terms of envy and regret. Though RME are hard to compute for general uncertainty sets, we consider some natural
and tractable uncertainty sets which lead to well behaved formulations of the problem that can be solved via modern convex programming methods. Finally, we show that very mild
uncertainty about valuations can cause RME allocations to
outperform those which take estimates as having no underlying uncertainty.

1

Introduction

A key problem in market design is ‘who gets what’ (Roth
2015). An important mechanism for the allocation of scarce
items to multiple individuals is the use of market equilibrium. In these mechanisms individuals have preferences over
scarce items and budgets of money. Prices are set for items
such that demand of individuals equals the supply of items.
A major issue in practice with such mechanisms is that the
utility of an individual is often not known exactly (sometimes even to the individuals themselves). In this paper, we
take up the question of computing a robust market equilibrium which takes this imperfect information into account.
Market equilibrium-based allocations are increasingly
prevalent in real world mechanisms and robustness is an important issue in many of these applications.
In the allocation of courses to students at business schools
students report preferences over courses, are given a budget
of ‘fake’ currency, and are allocated the courses they receive
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2192

