The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

FedVision: An Online Visual Object
Detection Platform Powered by Federated Learning
Yang Liu,1* Anbu Huang,1 Yun Luo,2,3* He Huang,3 Youzhi Liu,1 Yuanyuan Chen,4,5
Lican Feng,3 Tianjian Chen,1 Han Yu,4,5* Qiang Yang1,2
1

2

Department of AI, WeBank, Shenzhen, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
3
Extreme Vision Ltd, Shenzhen, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
5
Joint NTU-WeBank Research Centre on FinTech, NTU, Singapore
*Corresponding Authors: yangliu@webank.com, lauren.luo@extremevision.mo, han.yu@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

Visual object detection is a computer vision-based artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) technique which has many practical applications (e.g., ﬁre hazard monitoring). However, due to privacy concerns and the high cost of transmitting video data,
it is highly challenging to build object detection models on
centrally stored large training datasets following the current
approach. Federated learning (FL) is a promising approach
to resolve this challenge. Nevertheless, there currently lacks
an easy to use tool to enable computer vision application developers who are not experts in federated learning to conveniently leverage this technology and apply it in their systems. In this paper, we report FedVision - a machine learning engineering platform to support the development of federated learning powered computer vision applications. The
platform has been deployed through a collaboration between
WeBank and Extreme Vision to help customers develop computer vision-based safety monitoring solutions in smart city
applications. Over four months of usage, it has achieved signiﬁcant efﬁciency improvement and cost reduction while removing the need to transmit sensitive data for three major
corporate customers. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst real application of FL in computer vision-based tasks.

Figure 1: A typical workﬂow for centralized training of an
object detector.
been trained, it can be used to perform inference tasks. In
this way, the users have no control over how the data would
be used once they are transmitted to the central database.
Besides, centralized model training has the following limitations:

Introduction
Object detection is one of the most important applications
of computer vision in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI).
It has been widely adopted by practical applications such as
safety monitoring. Over the past decade, visual object detection technologies have experienced signiﬁcant advancement
as deep learning techniques developed (Ren et al. 2017;
Redmon and Farhadi 2018; Zhao et al. 2018). The prevailing training approach requires centralized storage of training
data in order to obtain powerful object detection models. The
typical workﬂow of training an object detection algorithm
this way is shows in Figure 1. Under such an approach, each
data owner (i.e. user) annotates visual data from cameras
and uploads these labelled training data to a central database
(e.g., a cloud server) for model training. Once the model has

1. It is difﬁcult to share data across organizations due to
liability concerns. Increasingly strict data sharing regulations (e.g., the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) (Voigt and Bussche 2017)) restrict data sharing
across organizations;
2. The whole process takes a long time and depends on
when the next round of off-line training occurs. When
users accumulate new data, they must upload the data to
the central training server and wait for the next round of
training to happen, which they cannot control, in order to
receive an updated model. This also leads to the problem
of lagging feedbacks which delay the correction of any
errors in model inference ; and

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3. The amount of data required to train a useful object detector tends to be large, and uploading them to a central
13172

