The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Aggregated Learning: A Vector-Quantization
Approach to Learning Neural Network Classiﬁers
Masoumeh Soﬂaei,1 Hongyu Guo,2 Ali Al-Bashabsheh,3 Yongyi Mao,1 Richong Zhang3
3

1
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada, 2 National Research Council Canada,
Beijing Advanced Institution on Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
msoﬂ083@uottawa.ca, hongyu.guo@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca, entropyali@gmail.com,
yymao@eecs.uottawa.ca, zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn

the rate-distortion function in rate-distortion theory, i.e., the
theory for quantizing signals (Shannon 1959). A careful investigation along this direction indeed reveals that, conceptually, there is an unconventional quantization problem that
is closely related to IB learning. To that end, we formulate this problem, which we refer to as IB quantization. We
prove that the objective of IB quantization, namely, designing quantizers that achieve the rate-distortion limit, is equivalent to the objective of IB learning. This result establishes
an equivalence between the two problems.
In rate-distortion theory, it is well known that scalar quantizers, which quantize signals one at a time, are in general inferior to vector quantizers, which quantize multiple signals
at once. The discovered equivalence between IB learning
and IB quantization then suggests that IB learning may beneﬁt from a “vector quantization” approach, in which the representations of multiple inputs are learned jointly. Exploiting
variational techniques and the recently proposed mutual information neural estimation (MINE) method (Belghazi et al.
2018), we show that such a vector quantization approach to
IB learning naturally results in a novel framework for learning neural network classiﬁers. We call this framework Aggregated Learning (AgrLearn).
Brieﬂy, in AgrLearn, n random training objects are aggregated into a single amalgamated object and passed to the
model; the model predicts the soft labels for all n examples
jointly. The training of an AgrLearn model is carried out
by solving a min-max optimization problem, derived a variational relaxation of the IB learning problem and a MINE
approximation of mutual information.
We conducted extensive experiments, applying AgrLearn
to the current art of deep learning architectures for image
and text classiﬁcation. Our experimental results suggest that
AgrLearn brings signiﬁcant gain in classiﬁcation accuracy.
In practice, AgrLearn can be easily integrated into existing
neural network architectures 1 . The proofs of some theoretical results are omitted due to length constraints. They will
be included in an extended version of this paper.

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning a neural network classiﬁer. Under the information bottleneck (IB) principle, we associate with this classiﬁcation problem a representation learning problem, which we call “IB learning”. We show that IB
learning is, in fact, equivalent to a special class of the quantization problem. The classical results in rate-distortion theory then suggest that IB learning can beneﬁt from a “vector
quantization” approach, namely, simultaneously learning the
representations of multiple input objects. Such an approach
assisted with some variational techniques, result in a novel
learning framework, “Aggregated Learning”, for classiﬁcation with neural network models. In this framework, several
objects are jointly classiﬁed by a single neural network. The
effectiveness of this framework is veriﬁed through extensive
experiments on standard image recognition and text classiﬁcation tasks.

Introduction
The revival of neural networks in the paradigm of deep
learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015) has stimulated
intense interest in understanding the networking of deep
neural networks, e.g., (Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby 2017; Zhang
et al. 2017). Among various efforts, an information-theoretic
approach, information bottleneck (IB) (Tishby, Pereira, and
Bialek 1999) stands out as a fundamental tool to theorize the
learning of deep neural networks (Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby
2017; Saxe et al. 2018; Dai et al. 2018).
Under the IB principle, the core of learning a neural network classiﬁer is to ﬁnd a representation T of the input example X, that contains as much as possible the information
about X and as little as possible the information about the
label Y . The conﬂict between these two requirements can be
formulated as a constrained optimization problem in which
one requirement is implemented as the objective function
and another requirement as the constraint (Navot and Tishby
2003; Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 1999; Shamir, Sabato, and
Tishby 2010). In this paper, we call this problem IB learning.
A key observation that has inspired this work is that the
optimization formulation of IB learning resembles greatly
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Our implementation of AgrLearn
https://github.com/SITE5039/AgrLearn

5810

is

available

at

