The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Finding Action Tubes with a Sparse-to-Dense Framework
Yuxi Li,1 Weiyao Lin,1,2∗ Tao Wang,1 John See,3
Rui Qian,1 Ning Xu,4 Limin Wang,5 Shugong Xu2
1

School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science, Shanghai University, China
3
Faculty of Computing and Informatics, Multimedia University, Malaysia
4
Adobe Research, USA
5
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
Abstract

The task of spatial-temporal action detection has attracted
increasing attention among researchers. Existing dominant
methods solve this problem by relying on short-term information and dense serial-wise detection on each individual frames or clips. Despite their effectiveness, these methods showed inadequate use of long-term information and
are prone to inefﬁciency. In this paper, we propose for the
ﬁrst time, an efﬁcient framework that generates action tube
proposals from video streams with a single forward pass
in a sparse-to-dense manner. There are two key characteristics in this framework: (1) Both long-term and short-term
sampled information are explicitly utilized in our spatiotemporal network, (2) A new dynamic feature sampling module (DTS) is designed to effectively approximate the tube
output while keeping the system tractable. We evaluate the
efﬁcacy of our model on the UCF101-24, JHMDB-21 and
UCFSports benchmark datasets, achieving promising results
that are competitive to state-of-the-art methods. The proposed
sparse-to-dense strategy rendered our framework about 7.6
times more efﬁcient than the nearest competitor.

(a) Pipeline of previous works

Introduction

(b) Pipeline of our work

Spatial-temporal action detection is an essential technology
for video understanding applications. In contrast to action
recognition or temporal localization, where a video-level
class label or temporal proposals are to be assigned spatialtemporal localization involves three sub-tasks: determining
the interval of action occurrence, localizing the actors within
the interval and correctly categorizing the action. This makes
for an extremely complex task.
To the best of our knowledge, previous approaches (Peng
and Schmid 2016; Saha et al. 2016; Singh et al. 2017; Hou,
Chen, and Shah 2017; Yang, Gao, and Nevatia 2017) conform to a dense detection paradigm (Fig. 1(a)), which detects
dense bounding boxes with actor detectors (Liu et al. 2016;
Ren et al. 2017) ﬁrst on with short-term information from
frame or snippet level and then link the proposals together
via certain heuristic linking algorithms. Relying on powerful convolution neural networks, these methods achieved

Figure 1: Comparison between previous pipelines and our
pipeline

good performance in both localization and classiﬁcation.
However, there are several shortcomings of such pipelines.
Firstly, the input of most methods only contain brief temporal information, which makes it hard to identify actions
that are somewhat similar through most parts of the video,
e.g. both the action “Long Jump” and “Pole Vault” involve
actors running at the beginning and are only different at the
last part of these videos. Secondly, by simple but brute force
means, it is inefﬁcient to generate dense frame level proposals considering the computational complexity.
With these consideration, we propose an novel framework for spatial-temporal action detection in a sparse-todense manner. In contrast to the pipelines of previous works,
we ﬁrst generate box proposals at sparsely sampled frames
(Fig. 1(b)), then we get the dense tube by interpolating the

∗

Corresponding Author, Email: wylin@sjtu.edu.cn
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11466

