The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph Representations for
Higher-Order Logic and Theorem Proving
Aditya Paliwal∗

Sarah M. Loos

Markus N. Rabe

Google Research
adipal@google.com

Google Research
smloos@google.com

Google Research
mrabe@google.com

Kshitij Bansal

Christian Szegedy

Google Research
kbk@google.com

Google Research
szegedy@google.com
beat their best models with a bag-of-words model. The quest
for model architectures that show non-trivial understanding
of higher-order logic is thus wide-open.
In this work, we explore the use of the tree structure (e.g. the abstract syntax tree) of logic expressions for
learning representations. Most earlier works in this area
used TreeRNNs with the idea that the embedding of each
node needs to summarize the semantics of the subexpression. However, TreeRNNs (and likewise sequence models such as LSTMs) have not shown strong performance
gains over baselines on logical reasoning tasks. We believe
this is because TreeRNNs fail to consider the context of
subexpressions—when computing the embedding of an internal node in the syntax tree, TreeRNNs only consider the
embeddings of its child-nodes, but never the parent.
In this paper, we consider the syntax trees of formulas
as graphs and apply message-passing graph neural networks
(GNNs) (Scarselli et al. 2009; Li et al. 2015; Gilmer et al.
2017; Wu et al. 2019) instead of TreeRNNs. We focus on imitation learning, i.e. learning from human proofs. The proofs
we learn from in the HOList dataset were written by human
mathematicians interacting with a computer-based theorem
prover. To ensure that we make meaningful progress, we
evaluate all our models by measuring how many theorems
they manage to prove when integrated with the DeepHOL
neural theorem prover. In Section 5 we ﬁnd that GNNs signiﬁcantly improve performance, and achieve state-of-the-art
performance for higher-order logic proof search by a wide
margin. Our best model automatically proves nearly 50% of
theorems in the validation set.
We present and compare several graph representations
for higher-order logic (Section 3) and suggest a simple, message-passing, GNN architecture (Section 4.1). We
demonstrate that minor changes in graph representations
can have signiﬁcant effects on the performance of message
passing GNNs. We additionally conﬁrm our hypothesis that
the context of subexpressions is crucial, by ﬁrst restricting
GNNs to pass messages only upwards in the syntax tree
(similar to TreeRNNs), and, second, to pass messages only
downwards in the syntax tree. The experiment clearly shows
that the second approach, which emphasizes the context of
expressions, outperforms the ﬁrst.

Abstract
This paper presents the ﬁrst use of graph neural networks
(GNNs) for higher-order proof search and demonstrates that
GNNs can improve upon state-of-the-art results in this domain. Interactive, higher-order theorem provers allow for
the formalization of most mathematical theories and have
been shown to pose a signiﬁcant challenge for deep learning.
Higher-order logic is highly expressive and, even though it is
well-structured with a clearly deﬁned grammar and semantics, there still remains no well-established method to convert formulas into graph-based representations. In this paper,
we consider several graphical representations of higher-order
logic and evaluate them against the HOList benchmark for
higher-order theorem proving.

1

Introduction

Mathematics poses a particularly attractive learning challenge, as it can be seen as a test-bed for general-purpose reasoning. HOList (Bansal et al. 2019) is a recently published
learning environment for mathematics consisting of a stateless theorem proving API, a benchmark consisting of over
twenty thousand mathematical theorems and their proofs,
and a neural theorem prover called DeepHOL. It builds on
HOL Light (Harrison 1996), an interactive theorem prover
that has been used to formalize several mathematical theories, including topology, multivariate calculus, real and complex analysis, geometric algebra, measure theory, and the
Kepler conjecture (Hales et al. 2017). The HOList environment allows us to measure progress in automated mathematical reasoning, in particular for machine learning techniques.
The percentage of theorems that can be proven automatically by the neural theorem prover DeepHOL presented
by Bansal et al. (2019) appears to be comparable with stateof-the-art algorithms in higher-order reasoning, which typically build on advanced backtracking search algorithms and
special-purpose proof calculi (Kaliszyk and Urban 2014;
Bentkamp et al. 2018). While these results were very
promising, the reference models presented by (Bansal et al.
2019) are still relatively naive—in fact we show that we can
∗

Google AI Resident
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2967

