The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Online Planner Selection with Graph Neural Networks and Adaptive Scheduling
Tengfei Ma,1 Patrick Ferber,3,4 Siyu Huo,1 Jie Chen,1,2∗ Michael Katz1∗
1
IBM Research, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 3 University of Basel, 4 Saarland University
{Tengfei.Ma1, siyu.huo, Michael.Katz1}@ibm.com, patrick.ferber@unibas.ch, chenjie@us.ibm.com

tasks, online methods learn to choose the right planner for
each given task. Most online methods use handcrafted features for learning (Cenamor, de la Rosa, and Fernández
2016).
Recent advances in deep learning have stimulated increasing interest in the use of deep neural networks for online portfolio selection, alleviating the effort of handcrafting features. A deep neural network may be considered
a machinery for learning feature representations of an input object without the tedious effort of feature engineering. For example, convolutional neural networks (CNN) take
the raw pixels as input and learn the feature representation of an image through layers of convolutional transformations and abstractions, which result in a feature vector
that captures the most important characteristics of the image (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). A successful
example in the context of planning is Delﬁ (Katz et al. 2018;
Sievers et al. 2019a), which treats a planning task as an image and applies CNN to predict the probability that a certain
planner solves the task within the time limit. Delﬁ won the
ﬁrst place in the Optimal Track of the 2018 International
Planning Competition (IPC).
As planning tasks admit state transition graphs that are
often too big to ﬁt in any conceivable size memory, several other graphs were developed to encode the structural
information. Two prominent examples are the problem description graph (Pochter, Zohar, and Rosenschein 2011) for
a grounded task representation; and the abstract structure
graph (Sievers et al. 2017; 2019b) for a lifted representation.
Both graphs are used in classical planning for computing
structural symmetries (Sievers et al. 2019b; Domshlak, Katz,
and Shleyfman 2012). The most important use of structural
symmetries is search space pruning, considerably improving the state-of-the-art. The lifted structural symmetries are
also found useful for faster grounding and mutex generation
(Röger, Sievers, and Katz 2018).
Owing to the development of these structural graphs, we
propose a graph neural network (GNN) approach to learning
the feature representation of a planning task. A proliferation
of GNN architectures emerged recently (Bruna et al. 2014;
Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Li et al. 2016;
Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec

Abstract
Automated planning is one of the foundational areas of AI.
Since no single planner can work well for all tasks and domains, portfolio-based techniques have become increasingly
popular in recent years. In particular, deep learning emerges
as a promising methodology for online planner selection.
Owing to the recent development of structural graph representations of planning tasks, we propose a graph neural network (GNN) approach to selecting candidate planners. GNNs
are advantageous over a straightforward alternative, the convolutional neural networks, in that they are invariant to node
permutations and that they incorporate node labels for better
inference.
Additionally, for cost-optimal planning, we propose a twostage adaptive scheduling method to further improve the likelihood that a given task is solved in time. The scheduler may
switch at halftime to a different planner, conditioned on the
observed performance of the ﬁrst one. Experimental results
validate the effectiveness of the proposed method against
strong baselines, both deep learning and non-deep learning
based.
The code is available at https://github.com/matenure/GNN
planner.

Introduction
Automated planning is one of the foundational areas of Artiﬁcial Intelligence research (Russell and Norvig 1995). Planning is concerned with devising goal-oriented policies executed by agents in large-scale state models. Since planning
is intractable in general (Chapman 1987) and even classical planning is PSPACE-complete (Bylander 1994), a single algorithm unlikely works well for all problem domains.
Hence, surging interest exists in developing portfolio-based
approaches (Seipp et al. 2012; Vallati 2012; Howe et al.
1999; Seipp et al. 2015), which, for a set of planners, compute an ofﬂine schedule or an online decision regarding
which planner to invoke per planning task. While ofﬂine
portfolio approaches focus on ﬁnding a single invocation
schedule that is expected to work well across all planning
∗

Contact authors
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5077

