The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Modelling Diversity of Solutions
Linnea Ingmar,1 Maria Garcia de la Banda,2 Peter J. Stuckey,2 Guido Tack2
1

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
2
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
lingmar@kth.se, {maria.garciadelabanda, peter.stuckey, guido.tack}@monash.edu

the objective value). Instead, one should provide a reasonably small number of diverse solutions that are optimal or
close to optimal. This immediately raises the question: what
does it mean for solutions to be diverse?
A common case for diversity appears in multi-objective
optimization problems, where we are presented with several
objectives (rather than a single one) to maximize. This naturally gives rise to diversity issues since, while the ideal answer to a multi-objective problem is the entire Pareto frontier or efﬁcient set of solutions, in practice this set is often
extremely large. Instead, we aim to ﬁnd k solutions that are
diverse with respect to the different objectives.
Example 1. Consider the problem of designing the physical
layout of a complex chemical plant. The aim is to allocate
the position of all equipment and to route the connecting
pipes, while ensuring the solutions satisfy different safety
and operational constraints, and minimize three cost objectives: footprint, pipes and supports. While the problem relies on uniformly modelling these costs using present values,
they are estimations that depend on future unknowns, and
might vary independently of each other. If we present a single “optimal design” to the plant engineers, they are locked
into estimations that might be substantially different to what
is ﬁnally used. Hence, a better approach is to present them
with k diverse designs that are optimal (or near-optimal) in
terms of estimated cost, but are substantially different in how
those costs are spread among the three objectives. This gives
decisions makers the ability to choose a robust solution with
respect to their understanding of the relative costs of each
component.
While multi-objective problems give rise to a natural notion of diversity, the diversity of solutions may also depend
on factors not captured by the objective. Such a notion of diversity is important to all combinatorial problems, including
satisfaction and single-objective problems.
Example 2. Consider the plant layout problem introduced
in Example 1. It is common for plants to have a special piece
of equipment (the pipe rack) that traverses the entire plant.
The relative position of equipment to this rack is a decision
that is often not subject to operational constraints and is thus
not captured by any of the objectives. However, some relative positions may be more suitable than others, as they

Abstract
For many combinatorial problems, ﬁnding a single solution
is not enough. This is clearly the case for multi-objective optimization problems, as they have no single “best solution”
and, thus, it is useful to ﬁnd a representation of the nondominated solutions (the Pareto frontier). However, it also
applies to single objective optimization problems, where one
may be interested in ﬁnding several (close to) optimal solutions that illustrate some form of diversity. The same applies
to satisfaction problems. This is because models usually idealize the problem in some way, and a diverse pool of solutions
may provide a better choice with respect to considerations
that are omitted or simpliﬁed in the model. This paper describes a general framework for ﬁnding k diverse solutions to
a combinatorial problem (be it satisfaction, single-objective
or multi-objective), various approaches to solve problems in
the framework, their implementations, and an experimental
evaluation of their practicality.

Introduction
The vast majority of the literature on optimization focuses
on ﬁnding a single optimal solution to a given optimization
problem. However, many optimization models only approximate the complex real-word problem they are modelling,
and they cannot capture all of the problem details. Hence, the
single “best” solution presented to the problem owner may
be far from being the best alternative in practice. The same
applies to satisfaction problems, which can be seen as optimization problems with a single, constant optimization function. Ideally, the problem owner would be presented with a
set of optimal solutions, to either choose one based on preferences that were not modelled, or to at least get an overview
of the range of possible optimal solutions.
To overcome this issue one cannot simply provide the
problem owner with all optimal solutions to the problem,
since that would often be overwhelming and computationally impractical. Similarly, one cannot simply provide a
small number of arbitrary optimal solutions, since there is
nothing preventing them from being almost identical (e.g.,
identical except for a single decision that has no impact on
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1528

