The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Computing Equilibria in Binary Networked Public Goods Games
Sixie Yu,1 Kai Zhou,1 P. Jeffrey Brantingham,2 Yevgeniy Vorobeychik1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis
2
Department of Anthropology, University of California, Los Angeles
{sixie.yu,zhoukai, yvorobeychik}@wustl.edu, branting@ucla.edu

the binary decision whether or not to invest in a public good
(thus, reporting a crime and vaccinating are forms of such
investment).
A special case of binary public goods games (BNPGs),
commonly known as best-shot games, has received some
prior attention (Dallasta, Pin, and Ramezanpour 2011; Galeotti et al. 2010; Komarovsky et al. 2015; Levit et al. 2018).
However, best-shot games make a strong assumption about
the structure of the player utility functions. While Levit et
al. (Levit et al. 2018) recently showed that equilibria for
best-shot games can be computed in polynomial time by
best response dynamics, these may fail to ﬁnd social welfareoptimal equilibria, and nothing is known about BNPGs more
generally.
We study the problem of computing pure strategy Nash
equilibria in general binary public goods games on networks.
We provide examples to show that a pure strategy Nash equilibria is not guaranteed to exist for general BNPGs. Furthermore, we show that even determining if a pure strategy Nash
equilibrium exists is hard in general. However, while pure
strategy equilibria need not in general exist, and are hard to
compute, we exhibit a number of positive results for important special cases. One class of special cases pertains to binary public goods games for completely connected networks
(communities), in which case an equilibrium can be found
efﬁciently if it exists. Similarly, we can efﬁciently ﬁnd a pure
strategy equilibrium in general BNPGs when the graph is a
tree. If we further restrict the externalities to have an identical
impact on all players (we call this the homogeneous case), we
can characterize all pure strategy equilibria, and efﬁciently
compute a socially optimal equilibrium. Moreover, if both
investment costs and externalities are identical (termed the
fully homogeneous case), we can characterize all pure strategy equilibria for arbitrary networks. Finally, we present
a heuristic approach for ﬁnding approximate equilibria to
tackle general BNPGs, and experimentally demonstrate that
it is highly effective. Our algorithmic results are summarized
in Table 1.

Abstract
Public goods games study the incentives of individuals to contribute to a public good and their behaviors in equilibria. In this
paper, we examine a speciﬁc type of public goods game where
players are networked and each has binary actions, and focus
on the algorithmic aspects of such games. First, we show that
checking the existence of a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium
is NP-complete. We then identify tractable instances based
on restrictions of either utility functions or of the underlying
graphical structure. In certain cases, we also show that we
can efﬁciently compute a socially optimal Nash equilibrium.
Finally, we propose a heuristic approach for computing approximate equilibria in general binary networked public goods
games, and experimentally demonstrate its effectiveness. Due
to space limitation, some proofs are deferred to the extended
version1 .

1

Introduction

Public goods games have been a major subject of inquiry
as a natural way to model the tension between individual
interest and social good (Kollock 1998; Santos, Santos, and
Pacheco 2008). In a canonical version of such games, individuals choose the amount to invest in a public good, and
the subsequent value of the good, which is determined by
total investment of the community, is then shared equally by
all. A number of versions of this game have been studied,
including variants where players are situated on a network,
with individual payoffs determined solely by the actions of
their network neighbors (Bramoullé and Kranton 2007).
An important variation of networked public goods games
treats investment decisions as binary (Galeotti et al. 2010).
One motivating example is crime reporting, known to vary
widely, with the general observation that crime is considerably under-reported (Morgan and Truman 2017). In a game
theoretic abstraction of crime reporting, individuals choose
whether or not to report crimes, and beneﬁts accrue to the
broader community, for example, causing a reduction in overall crime rate. Another example of binary public goods games
is vaccination. In this example, parents decide whether to
vaccinate their children, with herd immunity becoming the
public good. To keep terminology general, we will refer to

Related Work Our work relates to the broad literature
on graphical games, a succinct representation of games
in which utilities exhibit local dependences captured by a
graph (Kearns, Littman, and Singh 2013). (Elkind, Goldberg,
and Goldberg 2006; Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadim-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Extended version available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.05788
2310

