The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Contiguous Cake Cutting: Hardness Results and Approximation Algorithms
Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, Warut Suksompong
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford

as a cornerstone of the cake cutting literature. Nevertheless, since the result focuses only on the existence of a contiguous envy-free allocation, it leaves open the question of
how to compute such an allocation. Almost 30 years later,
Stromquist himself addressed this question and showed that
under the Robertson-Webb model, where an algorithm is
allowed to discover the agents’ valuations through cut and
evaluate queries, no ﬁnite algorithm can compute a contiguous envy-free allocation when there are at least three agents
(Stromquist 2008).1
Although Stromquist’s later result rules out the possibility
of computing contiguous envy-free allocations in general,
several important questions still remain. For instance, can
we compute a contiguous allocation with low envy between
the agents, and if so, how efﬁciently? How does the answer
change if we know that the agents’ valuations belong to a
restricted class? What happens if we add extra requirements
on the allocation, such as ﬁxing a desired ordering of the
agents or constraining the positions of certain cuts? The goal
of this paper is to shed light on the complexity of contiguous
cake cutting by addressing these questions.

Abstract
We study the fair allocation of a cake, which serves as a
metaphor for a divisible resource, under the requirement that
each agent should receive a contiguous piece of the cake.
While it is known that no ﬁnite envy-free algorithm exists
in this setting, we exhibit efﬁcient algorithms that produce
allocations with low envy among the agents. We then establish NP-hardness results for various decision problems on the
existence of envy-free allocations, such as when we ﬁx the ordering of the agents or constrain the positions of certain cuts.
In addition, we consider a discretized setting where indivisible items lie on a line and show a number of hardness results
strengthening those from prior work.

1

Introduction

We consider the classical cake cutting problem, where we
wish to divide a cake among a set of agents with different
preferences over different parts of the cake. The cake serves
as a metaphor for any divisible resource such as time or land,
and our aim is to perform the division in a fair manner. This
problem has a long and storied history that dates back over
70 years and has received attention from mathematicians,
economists, and computer scientists alike (Brams and Taylor
1996; Robertson and Webb 1998; Procaccia 2016).
In order to reason about fairness, we need to specify when
a division is considered to be fair. One of the most commonly used deﬁnitions is envy-freeness, which means that
no agent envies another with respect to the division. In other
words, among the pieces in the division, every agent receives
their ﬁrst choice. An early result by Dubins and Spanier
(1961) shows that an envy-free allocation always exists for
arbitrary valuations of the agents. However, as Stromquist
(1980) noted, this result depends on a liberal deﬁnition of
what constitutes a piece of cake, and an agent “who hopes
only for a modest interval of cake may be presented instead
with a countable union of crumbs.”
In light of this concern, Stromquist (1980) strengthened
the result of Dubins and Spanier by showing that it is possible to guarantee an envy-free allocation in which every
agent receives a contiguous piece of the cake. Stromquist’s
result, together with its topological proof, is widely regarded

1.1

Our Contributions

First, in Section 3 we present two algorithms that compute
an allocation with low envy in polynomial time. As is standard in the cake-cutting literature, we represent the cake by
the interval [0, 1] and normalize the agents’ valuations so
that each agent has value 1 for the entire interval. Our ﬁrst
algorithm works for general valuations under the RobertsonWebb model and produces a contiguous allocation in which
any agent has envy no more than 1/3 towards any other
agent. On the other hand, our second algorithm is speciﬁc
to valuations where each agent only desires a single subinterval and has a uniform value over that interval—for such
valuations, the algorithm produces a contiguous allocation
with a lower envy of at most 1/4.
Next, in Section 4, we consider variants of the cakecutting problem where we impose constraints on the desired
allocation. We show that for several natural variants, the de1
For two agents, the well-known cut-and-choose protocol,
which lets the ﬁrst agent cut the cake into two equal pieces and
lets the second agent choose the piece that she prefers, computes a
contiguous envy-free allocation.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1990

