The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MA-DST: Multi-Attention-Based Scalable Dialog State Tracking
Adarsh Kumar,1∗ Peter Ku,2 Anuj Goyal,2 Angeliki Metallinou,2 Dilek Hakkani-Tur2
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2 Amazon Alexa AI, Sunnyvale, CA, USA
adarsh@cs.wisc.edu, {kupeter, anujgoya, ametalli, hakkanit}@amazon.com

Abstract
Task oriented dialog agents provide a natural language interface for users to complete their goal. Dialog State Tracking
(DST), which is often a core component of these systems,
tracks the system’s understanding of the user’s goal throughout the conversation. To enable accurate multi-domain DST,
the model needs to encode dependencies between past utterances and slot semantics and understand the dialog context,
including long-range cross-domain references. We introduce
a novel architecture for this task to encode the conversation
history and slot semantics more robustly by using attention
mechanisms at multiple granularities. In particular, we use
cross-attention to model relationships between the context
and slots at different semantic levels and self-attention to resolve cross-domain coreferences. In addition, our proposed
architecture does not rely on knowing the domain ontologies
beforehand and can also be used in a zero-shot setting for new
domains or unseen slot values. Our model improves the joint
goal accuracy by 5% (absolute) in the full-data setting and by
up to 2% (absolute) in the zero-shot setting over the present
state-of-the-art on the MultiWoZ 2.1 dataset.

1

Figure 1: Sample multi-domain dialog, spanning hotel and
taxi domains, along with its dialog state

Dialog state tracking requires understanding the semantics of the agent and user dialog so far, a challenging task
since a dialog may span multiple domains and may include
user or system references to slots happening earlier in the
dialog. Data scarcity is an additional challenge, because dialog data collection is a costly and time consuming (Kang et
al. 2018; Lasecki, Kamar, and Bohus 2013). As a result, it
is critical to be able to train DST systems for new domains
with zero or little data.
Previous work formulates DST as a classiﬁcation task
over all possible slot values for each slot, assuming all values are available in advance (e.g. through a pre-deﬁned
ontology) (Mrkšić et al. 2016; Gao et al. 2019; Liu and
Lane 2017). However, DST systems should be able to
track the values of even free-form slots such as “hotel −
name , which typically contain out-of-vocabulary words.
To overcome the limitations of ontology-based approaches
candidate-set generation based approaches have been proposed (Rastogi, Hakkani-Tur, and Heck 2017). TRADE (Wu
et al. 2019) extends this idea further and propose a decoderbased approach that uses both generation and a pointing
mechanism, taking a weighted sum of a distribution over

Introduction

Task-oriented dialog systems provide users with a natural
language interface to achieve a goal. Modern dialog systems
support complex goals that may span multiple domains. For
example, during the dialog the user may ask for a hotel reservation (hotel domain) and also a taxi ride to the hotel (taxi
domain), as illustrated in the example of Figure 1. Dialog
state tracking is one of the core components of task-oriented
dialog systems. The dialog state can be thought as the system’s belief of user’s goal given the conversation history. For
each user turn, the dialog state commonly includes the set of
slot-value pairs, for all the slots which are mentioned by the
user. An example is shown in Figure 1. Accurate DST is critical for task-oriented dialog as most dialog systems rely on
such a state to predict the optimal next system action, such
as a database query or a natural language generation (NLG)
response.
∗

Work done during internship at Amazon Alexa AI
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8107

