The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bridging Maximum Likelihood and Adversarial Learning via α-Divergence
Miaoyun Zhao,∗ Yulai Cong,* Shuyang Dai, Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University

ing neural networks within VI (Kingma and Welling 2014;
Dai and Wipf 2019).
Because of the properties of the forward KL, ML learning
tends to associate positive mass with each data sample, forming a zero-avoiding phenomenon (Minka and others 2005).
Accordingly, all data modes are “covered” by the model distribution; by contrast, adversarial learning is often characterized
by a mode-dropping phenomenon (Srivastava et al. 2017).
Another advantage of ML learning (forward KL) is that its
training procedure is typically much more stable than that of
adversarial learning. The instability of adversarial learning
is in part because the mode dropping may vary as a function
of learning iteration. On the other hand, the zero-avoiding
phenomenon of ML learning may loosely distribute probability mass among data modes. An example consequence
is that generative models trained with ML tend to generate
blurry images (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Larsen et al. 2015;
Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017). Adversarially-learned
models, by contrast, are capable of synthesizing highly realistic natural images (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Nowozin, Cseke,
and Tomioka 2016; Zhang et al. 2018; Gulrajani et al. 2017;
Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019).
The original generative adversarial network (GAN) minimizes the Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence between the model
distribution and that of the data (Goodfellow et al. 2014). In
(Nowozin, Cseke, and Tomioka 2016) it was shown that learning based on minimizing any f -divergence can be formulated
as an adversarial learning objective (with the JS divergence
as a special case). In this paper, we focus on the reverse
KL divergence as in (Li et al. 2019) because (i) it naturally
relates to ML learning (by reversing the KL); (ii) (Lucic
et al. 2018) showed that most GANs with the same budget
can reach similar performance with enough hyperparameter
optimization and random restarts; (iii) adversarial learning
with the f -divergence (Nowozin, Cseke, and Tomioka 2016)
reduces to estimating a log-likelihood ratio between the true
and model distributions, and the reverse-KL is as good as any
other f -divergence choice for this purpose (Li et al. 2019);
and (iv) forward and reverse KL divergences are two ends of
the α-Bridge developed in this paper.
It is interesting to note that ML learning (based on the
forward KL) and adversarial learning (with the reverse

Abstract
Maximum likelihood (ML) and adversarial learning are two
popular approaches for training generative models, and from
many perspectives these techniques are complementary. ML
learning encourages the capture of all data modes, and it is
typically characterized by stable training. However, ML learning tends to distribute probability mass diffusely over the
data space, e.g., yielding blurry synthetic images. Adversarial
learning is well known to synthesize highly realistic natural
images, despite practical challenges like mode dropping and
delicate training. We propose an α-Bridge to unify the advantages of ML and adversarial learning, enabling the smooth
transfer from one to the other via the α-divergence. We reveal that generalizations of the α-Bridge are closely related
to approaches developed recently to regularize adversarial
learning, providing insights into that prior work, and further
understanding of why the α-Bridge performs well in practice.

1

Introduction

Given observed data samples, a well-known task concerns
ﬁtting a generative model to the unknown underlying data distribution. Two popular approaches for that task are classical
maximum likelihood (ML) learning and recently-developed
adversarial learning. Both of these approaches are equivalent to minimizing a corresponding divergence between the
model distribution and the data distribution (Bishop 2006;
Goodfellow et al. 2014).
ML learning seeks to ﬁnd model parameters that maximize
the log-likelihood of the model over the observed data samples, which is equivalent to minimizing the forward KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence between the model distribution and
the data distribution (McLachlan and Krishnan 2007). When
considering models with latent variables, variational inference (VI) (Jordan et al. 1999; Blei and Jordan 2006) is an
important class of approximate ML learning, in which a
variational expression constitutes a lower bound on the loglikelihood, and learning proceeds by seeking to maximize
this bound. There has been signiﬁcant recent work on utiliz∗
Correspondence to: Miaoyun Zhao miaoyun9zhao@gmail.com
and Yulai Cong yulaicong@gmail.com.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6901

