The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Integrated Enhancement Solution for 24-Hour Colorful Imaging
Feifan Lv,1 Yinqiang Zheng,2 Yicheng Li,1 Feng Lu1,3,∗
1

State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan, 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{lvfeifan, liyicheng, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn, yqzheng@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
The current industry practice for 24-hour outdoor imaging
is to use a silicon camera supplemented with near-infrared
(NIR) illumination. This will result in color images with poor
contrast at daytime and absence of chrominance at nighttime.
For this dilemma, all existing solutions try to capture RGB
and NIR images separately. However, they need additional
hardware support and suffer from various drawbacks, including short service life, high price, speciﬁc usage scenario, etc.
In this paper, we propose a novel and integrated enhancement
solution that produces clear color images, whether at abundant sunlight daytime or extremely low-light nighttime. Our
key idea is to separate the VIS and NIR information from
mixed signals, and enhance the VIS signal adaptively with
the NIR signal as assistance. To this end, we build an optical
system to collect a new VIS-NIR-MIX dataset and present a
physically meaningful image processing algorithm based on
CNN. Extensive experiments show outstanding results, which
demonstrate the effectiveness of our solution.

G+N

B+N

G+N
R+N

Figure 1: The proposed 24-hour imaging solution using only
a Silicon sensor. VIS and NIR signals are automatically separated and processed to produce constantly clear and colorful images during both daytime and nighttime.

Introduction

For this dilemma, advanced solutions tend to capture NIR
and VIS signals separately. Three typical hardware-assisted
solutions include using steerable IR-Cut ﬁlters, using speciﬁc color ﬁlter arrays (CFAs) and using two different imaging sensors. In the ﬁrst case, an IR-Cut ﬁlter is automatically
or periodically equipped under adequate illumination and is
removed otherwise. However, this requires additional illumination intensity sensor and also reduces the service life.
In the second case, speciﬁc CFAs directly capture NIR and
VIS information, but the image resolution and quality are
highly limited. For the last option, involving two cameras
raises the cost and also faces difﬁculty in meticulous calibration. Overall, all existing solutions that try to capture both
NIR and VIS signals still show limitations.
Different from existing solutions, in this paper we propose
to separate VIS and NIR signals directly from the mixed
signals captured by a single sensor without any additional
hardware, as illustrated in Figure 1. The required hardware
is only a common Silicon sensor without IR-Cut ﬁlters. With
our proposed algorithm, our solution not only signiﬁcantly
reduces the cost, but also produces clear and colorful images
at both daytime and nighttime.
Our key idea lies in the proper use of the wide range, i.e.,
300-950nm, sensitivity of a Silicon senor, to capture the ad-

Many practical imaging systems, such as surveillance systems, require continuous and stable operation. High-quality
images are expected to be captured in 24 hours. As a result, ambient illumination change becomes a non-negligible
factor. Common cameras usually work well under abundant
daylight, but perform badly at low-light nighttime. Simply
using a ﬂash unit or increasing the exposure time are impractical as they will change the tone of imaging, exposure
coverage scope and cause image blur.
To overcome the limitation, the majority of existing solutions use additional near-infrared (NIR) illumination to light
up the object and capture it. However, NIR is a double-edged
sword for those systems. On one hand, it utilizes the sensitivity of Silicon sensors around 700nm-950nm, allowing visual information acquisition in the dark. On the other hand,
it affects the capture of visible spectrum (VIS) information
and results in degraded color images.
∗

Corresponding Author.
This work is partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 61972012 and
Grant 61732016.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11725

