The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cross-Modal Attention Network for
Temporal Inconsistent Audio-Visual Event Localization
Hanyu Xuan,1 Zhenyu Zhang,1 Shuo Chen,1 Jian Yang,1,2 Yan Yan* 1
1

PCA Lab, the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry
of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
{xuanhanyu, zhangjesse, shuochen, csjyang, yyan}@njust.edu.cn

6HOI$WWHQWLRQ

$XGLR6HTXHQFH

$GDSWLYH
FR$WWHQWLRQ

9LGHR6HTXHQFH

In human multi-modality perception systems, the beneﬁts of
integrating auditory and visual information are extensive as
they provide plenty supplementary cues for understanding the
events. Despite some recent methods proposed for such application, they cannot deal with practical conditions with temporal inconsistency. Inspired by human system which puts different focuses at speciﬁc locations, time segments and media while performing multi-modality perception, we provide
an attention-based method to simulate such process. Similar to human mechanism, our network can adaptively select
“where” to attend, “when” to attend and “which” to attend for audio-visual event localization. In this way, even
with large temporal inconsistent between vision and audio,
our network is able to adaptively trade information between
different modalities and successfully achieve event localization. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
AVE (Audio-Visual Event) dataset collected in the real life. In
addition, we also systemically investigate audio-visual event
localization tasks. The visualization results also help us better
understand how our model works.

6SDWLDO$WWHQWLRQ
6HOI$WWHQWLRQ

Abstract

Ž



Ž





Ž


Ž



Ž


Ž



Ž


Ž




Figure 1: The diagram of audio-visual sequence of temporal
inconsistency. At the last time segment, the event only occurs in audio but does not occur in the video. Our network
can cope with such challenge by automatically learning to
pay higher attention on speciﬁc visual regions, speciﬁc time
segments and speciﬁc modality where the event occurs.
Sound Synthesis (Owens et al. 2016a) and so on. The consistency assumption behind these works relies on the speciﬁc
audio-visual scene where sound-maker should exist in the
captured visual appearance simultaneously.
To this end, some works try to broaden the ﬁeld of
application to real-life videos. For example, (Owens and
Efros 2018; Parekh et al. 2018) attempted to learn joint
cross-modal representations considering sound and corresponding visual images as supervisory signal. Nevertheless, these works strongly depend on temporal consistency
of visual/audio information, thus may suffer degradation in
practical condition where such assumption cannot be satisﬁed. For audio-visual event localization, (Tian et al. 2018;
Lin, Li, and Wang 2019) attempted to locate the events
by multi-modal fusion. Since the simple fusion strategy assumes the features or prediction scores of a modality are explicitly complementary to one another, temporal inconsistency may mislead the results of event localization.
The temporal inconsistency is ubiquitous in the reallife videos. On the one hand, audio and video signals are
managed by independent workﬂow in a typical multimedia
presentation (Khosravan, Ardeshir, and Puri 2018), which

Introduction
As a proxy to the broader audio-visual scene understanding problem for real-life videos, audio-visual event localization task aims to match both audio and video components
for identifying the simultaneous event of interest. Similar to
the human’s Multi-modality Perception (Smith and Gasser
2005) process, the beneﬁts of integrating auditory and visual
information are extensive as they provide plenty supplementary cues for better perception.
Generally, auditory and visual events tend to occur together as they have consistency on time axis, not always but
often: lips moving when talking, the running cars accompany with engine noise and so on. In such cases, these events
are concurrent and interactive because there is a common
origin. Such temporal consistency between audition and vision allows us to perceive better. As a result, many works are
motivated to make machine obtain similar multi-modality
ability on perception, e.g., Lip Reading (Chung et al. 2017),
* Corresponding author: Yan Yan
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

279

