The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Exact and Efﬁcient Inference for Collective Flow
Diffusion Model via Minimum Convex Cost Flow Algorithm
Yasunori Akagi,1 Takuya Nishimura,1 Yusuke Tanaka,1 Takeshi Kurashima,1 Hiroyuki Toda1
1
NTT Service Evolution Laboratories, NTT Corporation,
1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka-Shi, Kanagawa, 239-0847, Japan
{yasunori.akagi.cu, takuya.nishimura.fk, yusuke.tanaka.rh, takeshi.kurashima.uf, hiroyuki.toda.xb}@hco.ntt.co.jp

(CGM)(Sheldon and Dietterich 2011), which enables us
to conduct learning and inference with aggregated count
data, was proposed. In particular, Collective Flow Diffusion
Model (CFDM) (Kumar, Sheldon, and Srivastava 2013),
which is a special case of CGM, has been proposed to infer people ﬂows between the areas by modeling individual
movements via a Markov chain approach; it has been applied
to the analysis of the hidden movements behind observed
count data in a trafﬁc network (Kumar, Sheldon, and Srivastava 2013), urban space (Iwata et al. 2017; Akagi et al. 2018;
Iwata and Shimizu 2019), amusement park (Du, Kumar,
and Varakantham 2014) and exhibition halls (Tanaka et al.
2018).

Abstract
Collective Flow Diffusion Model (CFDM) is a general framework to ﬁnd the hidden movements underlying aggregated
population data. The key procedure in CFDM analysis is
MAP inference of hidden variables. Unfortunately, existing
approaches fail to offer exact MAP inferences, only approximate versions, and take a lot of computation time when applied to large scale problems. In this paper, we propose an
exact and efﬁcient method for MAP inference in CFDM.
Our key idea is formulating the MAP inference problem as a
combinatorial optimization problem called Minimum Convex
Cost Flow Problem (C-MCFP) with no approximation or continuous relaxation. On the basis of this formulation, we propose an efﬁcient inference method that employs the C-MCFP
algorithm as a subroutine. Our experiments on synthetic and
real datasets show that the proposed method is effective both
in single MAP inference and people ﬂow estimation with EM
algorithm.

1.

An important function in CFDM analysis is MAP (maximum a posteriori) inference of the number of moving people
from observed population data and parameters of the probabilistic model. This process is mainly used in two ways: (i)
As a method for recovering people ﬂow given observed population data and a human mobility model. Even if we can
design a probabilistic model of human mobility using domain knowledge or estimate the model using another small
set of movement (trajectory) data, we have to conduct MAP
inference in order to know the number of people moving between areas. (ii) As a method for conducting E-step in the
EM (Expectation Maximization) algorithm to estimate people ﬂow and parameters of the probabilistic model simultaneously. Although E-step was implemented by the welldesigned MCMC (Sheldon and Dietterich 2011) in the original CFDM proposal, its scalability was problematic. In order to address this issue, a method that uses MAP inference as an alternative to the regular expectation operation
was widely used in subsequent research (Iwata et al. 2017;
Akagi et al. 2018; Tanaka et al. 2018).

Introduction

With recent advances in GPS, Wi-Fi, and various sensors,
the importance of location information has grown and is being utilized in various ﬁelds. However, it is often difﬁcult
to obtain data about individual movements because of privacy concerns or the difﬁculty of tracking individuals over
time. Instead, aggregated count data is relatively easy to obtain as it does not include individual movement information. For example, mobile spatial statistics (Terada, Nagata,
and Kobayashi 2013), which is the hourly population data
of ﬁxed size square grids calculated from mobile network
operational data, are available for purchase in Japan. As another example, trafﬁc data is often obtained not in the form
of tracking data of individual cars, but in the form of count
data acquired by cameras or sensors installed on road networks (Yang and Zhou 1998; Morimura, Osogami, and Idé
2013).
Although there are various uses for these aggregated
count data, their applicability is limited because they do
not contain explicit information about people movements.
In order to utilize such data, Collective Graphical Model

Although methods for realizing MAP inference for
CFDM are very important, previous proposals have several
crucial drawbacks. (i) They do not provide exact MAP inference because they use continuous relaxation and Stirling’s
approximation. (ii) Each optimum solution element is noninteger because of continuous relaxation. As a result, the optimum solutions are dense with many non-zero elements and
each solution occupies a lot of memory. (iii) When we deal
with large scale problems, a lot of computation time is still

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3163

