The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Computing Superior Counter-Examples for Conformant Planning
Xiaodi Zhang,1 Alban Grastien,1 Enrico Scala2
1

Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University, Canberra
2
Università degli Studi di Brescia
xiaodiz@outlook.com, alban.grastien@anu.edu.au, enricos83@gmail.com

examples are more informative than others. We argue that
selecting such counter-examples reduces the number of iterations required to ﬁnd a valid plan, which leads to improved
performance and more succinct explanations when the sample is used as a justiﬁcation for the conformant plan.
The goal of this work is to study why some counterexamples are better than other ones, and how such better
counter-examples can be generated. The paper deﬁnes superiority between counter-examples by exploiting the notion of tags, a well-known concept in conformant planning
that can be interpreted as a “contingency” that the planner
must address. A counter-example is considered superior to
another one if the former exhibits more new tags than the
latter (compared to the tags already covered by the current
sample). The paper provides a SAT-based procedure that targets the computation of optimal counter-examples under this
criterion, and, through an empirical evaluation, studies the
implications of using it in an extended version of gCPCES.
For problems that can be decomposed (those where a state
covers several tags at once) this technique improves performance greatly. This not only extends the applicability of
gCPCES to a larger class of problems, but also, and more
importantly, shows how to exploit problem structure in a
non-heuristic search framework. As we show in the experiments, this allows us to approach the performance of heuristic search planners that greatly exploit the problem structure,
and at the same time to leverage from the learning power of
a counter-example guided reﬁnement technique that proves
particularly beneﬁcial in highly constrained problems such
as conformant planning.
Section 2 provides the technical background necessary to
understand this work. Section 3 introduces the notion of superiority between counter-examples, ﬁrst with an example
and then formally. Section 4 shows how the procedure for
generating a counter-example can be adapted to guarantee
that that counter-example is optimal. Section 5 discusses related work. Section 6 presents an empirical evaluation.

Abstract
In a counter-example based approach to conformant planning, choosing the right counter-example can improve performance. We formalise this observation by introducing the notion of “superiority” of a counter-example over another one,
that holds whenever the superior counter-example exhibits
more tags than the latter. We provide a theoretical explanation
that supports the strategy of searching for maximally superior
counter-examples, and we show how this strategy can be implemented. The empirical experiments validate our approach.

1

Introduction

Conformant planning is the problem of ﬁnding a robust
plan despite uncertainty in the initial state (Smith and Weld
1998). This problem is E XP S PACE - COMPLETE (Haslum and
Jonsson 1999). One of the aspects that make it hard is the
fact that the number of possible initial states is exponential in
the number of state variables; this exponential burden makes
brute-force enumeration impractical.
We are interested in a recent approach proposed by
Grastien and Scala (2017; 2018) and dubbed gCPCES, that
addresses this speciﬁc issue. In gCPCES, a candidate plan is
computed based on a small number of initial states (the sample) that are assumed to be representative of the planning
problem. The validity of this plan for the complete problem is then tested. If the plan is found invalid, a counterexample (i.e., an initial state for which the plan is invalid)
is generated and added to the sample, since this counterexample is clearly representative of some relevant aspect
of the planning problem. This process is repeated until a
conformant plan is discovered or it is proved that the problem yields no solution. Notwithstanding its simplicity, this
counter-example guided search works well in practice since
it generates only relevant counter-examples.
In the general framework, a large freedom is left to
gCPCES for choosing the counter-example. This freedom
however can bring the planner to enrich the sample in a manifestly suboptimal way, as we illustrate in Section 3. There
are, instead, good choices that can make the planner converge much faster. In this paper we show how some counter-

2
2.1

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Background

Conformant Planning

We are interested in the problem of deterministic conformant
planning, which we present now. We reuse the notation from
10017

