The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Spherical Criteria for Fast and Accurate 360◦ Object Detection
Pengyu Zhao,∗ Ansheng You,* Yuanxing Zhang,* Jiaying Liu, Kaigui Bian, Yunhai Tong
School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China
{pengyuzhao, youansheng, longo, liujiaying, bkg, yhtong}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
With the advance of omnidirectional panoramic technology,
360◦ imagery has become increasingly popular in the past
few years. To better understand the 360◦ content, many
works resort to the 360◦ object detection and various criteria have been proposed to bound the objects and compute the
intersection-over-union (IoU) between bounding boxes based
on the common equirectangular projection (ERP) or perspective projection (PSP). However, the existing 360◦ criteria are
either inaccurate or inefﬁcient for real-world scenarios. In this
paper, we introduce a novel spherical criteria for fast and accurate 360◦ object detection, including both spherical bounding boxes and spherical IoU (SphIoU). Based on the spherical criteria, we propose a novel two-stage 360◦ detector, i.e.,
Reprojection R-CNN, by combining the advantages of both
ERP and PSP, yielding efﬁcient and accurate 360◦ object detection. To validate the design of spherical criteria and Reprojection R-CNN, we construct two unbiased synthetic datasets
for training and evaluation. Experimental results reveal that
compared with the existing criteria, the two-stage detector
with spherical criteria achieves the best mAP results under the
same inference speed, demonstrating that the spherical criteria can be more suitable for 360◦ object detection. Moreover,
Reprojection R-CNN outperforms the previous state-of-theart methods by over 30% on mAP with competitive speed,
which conﬁrms the efﬁciency and accuracy of the design.

1

   
  
   
  

  
  

  
  

Figure 1: Challenges in 360◦ object detection. Objects in
ERP suffer from distortion and discontinuity on the borders
while objects can hardly be recognized with only few PSPs.
Besides, spherical BB (red outline) bounds the object more
tightly than common rectangular BB (blue outline)

images is still challenging due to the following two reasons,
as listed below.
Lack of Appropriate Criteria. Unlike image classiﬁcation task, additional information is required in object detection to locate objects and compute metrics, i.e., bounding
boxes (BB) and intersection-over-union (IoU). Although existing works proposed various criteria for 360◦ object detection, they either introduce bias in BB and IoU (Yang et al.
2018; Lee et al. 2019; Yu and Ji 2019; Wang and Lai 2019),
or could not efﬁciently compute IoU (Coors, Paul Condurache, and Geiger 2018). Moreover, some criteria (Su and
Grauman 2017) could not even be applied in the actual scenarios. Thus, it is necessary to introduce an efﬁcient and accurate criteria for 360◦ object detection.
Dilemma between Distortion Reduction and Efﬁciency. 360◦ images are typically represented by equirectangular projection (ERP) (Snyder 1997) or multiple perspective projections (PSP). ERP is generated by polar transformation, and thus suffers from both distortion in the polar
regions and discontinuity on the boundary. PSP projects a
partial area of the sphere onto a focal plane with little distortion but a large number of candidate areas are required to
cover all the objects on sphere, which is time consuming.
To address the above challenges, we explore the unbiased criteria on sphere and introduce spherical criteria as

Introduction

In the past few years, virtual reality techniques have developed rapidly owing to the development of 360◦ cameras with
omnidirectional vision. The 360◦ images and videos allow
users to receive detailed information, thereby improving the
quality of experiences (Ardouin et al. 2012; Huang et al.
2017). 360◦ cameras also play important roles in scenarios
which require wide-range ﬁeld-of-view (FoV). Object detection is a signiﬁcant computer vision task that deals with
detecting semantic objects in images and videos. Recent advances with convolutional neural network (CNN) (Ren et al.
2015; Liu et al. 2016; He et al. 2017) achieve remarkable
improvements in 2D task. However, object detection in 360◦
∗

The ﬁrst three authors contribute equally to this paper.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12959

