The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Online Fair Division: A Survey
Martin Aleksandrov, Toby Walsh
Technical University Berlin and UNSW Sydney
Germany and Australia
martin.aleksandrov@tu-berlin.de, tw@cse.unsw.edu.au

The online nature of such fair division problems changes
the mechanisms available to allocate items. For example,
consider the well-known and widely used sequential allocation mechanism studied in (Bouveret and Lang 2011;
Kalinowski et al. 2013; Kalinowski, Narodytska, and Walsh
2013; Aziz, Walsh, and Xia 2015; Aziz et al. 2016; Walsh
2016). This mechanism has agents taking turns to pick their
most preferred remaining item. This is used in many ofﬂine
settings due to its simplicity and nice normative properties.
For instance, it can be used to return allocations where an
agent’s envy for the allocation of another agent is limited to
at most one item. However, this mechanism cannot be used
in an online setting as an agent’s most preferred item may
not be currently (or even ever) available. We, therefore, need
to develop new online mechanisms that account for the fact
that some items might never become available.
The online nature of such fair division problems also
changes the normative properties that we might look to demand. For example, suppose we are interested in strategyproof mechanisms that encourage agents to report their sincere preferences. In deciding if agents have any incentive to
misreport preferences in an online setting, we may take into
account the online nature of the problem, and thus consider
ﬁxed past decisions and unknown future. This leads to an
online and weaker form of strategy-proofness. It is weaker
because agents have committed to their past decisions and
uncertainty about the future reduces their strategic options.
On the plus side, this means that it may be easier to achieve
strategy-proofness in the online setting than in the ofﬂine
setting. On the minus side, this also means that it could be
harder in the online setting to achieve other properties. For
instance, items that arrive in the future may require us to
change the allocation of items made in the present to ensure
Pareto efﬁciency.

Abstract
We survey a burgeoning and promising new research area
that considers the online nature of many practical fair division problems. We identify wide variety of such online fair
division problems, as well as discuss new mechanisms and
normative properties that apply to this online setting. The online nature of such fair division problems provides both opportunities and challenges such as the possibility to develop
new online mechanisms as well as the difﬁculty of dealing
with an uncertain future.

Introduction
Fair division (Brams and Taylor 1996) is an important problem facing society today as increasing economical, environmental, and other pressures require us to try to do more with
limited resources. Much previous work in fair division assumes the problem is ofﬂine and ﬁxed. That is, we suppose
that the agents being allocated resources, and the resources
being allocated to these agents are all known and ﬁxed.
But practical reality is often quite different (Walsh 2014a;
2015). Fair division problems are often online, with either
the agents, or the resources to be allocated, or both not being ﬁxed and potentially changing over time. This presents
a number of technical challenges and opportunities.
Consider allocating deceased organs to patients, donated
food to charities, electric vehicles to charging stations, viewing slots to a telescope, etc. We often cannot wait till all resources are available, preferences known or agents present
before starting to allocate the resources. For example, when
a kidney is donated, it must be allocated to a patient within a
few hours. As a second example, when food items arrive at a
food bank, they must be allocated to charities promptly. As
a third example, when allocating charging slots to electric
cars, we may not know when or where cars will arrive for
charging in the future but must commit to providing charging slots to cars now. As a fourth example, when allocating landing slots at an airport for the next hour, there might
be considerable uncertainty about the demands in six hours
time. As a ﬁfth example, when scheduling viewing slots on
an expensive telescope, we might need to commit to the current period, before future viewing conditions and demands
are fully known.

Dimensions of online fair division
We can characterize models of problems concerning online
fair division along a number of orthogonal dimensions.

Resource types
We can classify online fair division problems according to
whether resources are divisible or indivisible. For instance,
(Walsh 2011) considers an online cake cutting problem in

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13557

