The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Video Frame Interpolation via Deformable Separable Convolution
Xianhang Cheng,1 Zhenzhong Chen1∗
1

School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, China
{xianhang, zzchen}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning to synthesize non-existing frames from the original consecutive video frames is a challenging task. Recent
kernel-based interpolation methods predict pixels with a single convolution process to replace the dependency of optical ﬂow. However, when scene motion is larger than the predeﬁned kernel size, these methods yield poor results even
though they take thousands of neighboring pixels into account. To solve this problem in this paper, we propose to use
deformable separable convolution (DSepConv) to adaptively
estimate kernels, offsets and masks to allow the network to
obtain information with much fewer but more relevant pixels. In addition, we show that the kernel-based methods and
conventional ﬂow-based methods are speciﬁc instances of the
proposed DSepConv. Experimental results demonstrate that
our method signiﬁcantly outperforms the other kernel-based
interpolation methods and shows strong performance on par
or even better than the state-of-the-art algorithms both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Introduction

Figure 1: An interpolated example. The third row provides
magniﬁed views of the effective sampling locations centered
at the pink point in the ﬁrst row. Greener color represents
higher weights. The second row shows corresponding convolution patches. Compared with Sepconv (Niklaus, Mai,
and Liu 2017b), our method considers more relevant pixels far away from local grid (black rectangle) with a much
smaller kernel size and performs better.

Video frame interpolation is the task of synthesizing middle
non-existent frames from two consecutive frames, which is
considered as one of the important problems in the ﬁeld of
video processing. The ability to generate in-between frames
could ﬁnd applications in various domains, ranging from
novel view interpolation (Flynn et al. 2016), slow motion
generation (Jiang et al. 2018; Bao et al. 2019) to frame rate
conversion (Bao et al. 2018b).
Traditional methods interpolate one frame with a twostep method which ﬁrst estimate motion information, typically optical ﬂow, and then perform the pixel synthesis operation guided by motion (Baker et al. 2011). However, a
well-known problem behind this method is that visual artifacts can be introduced in challenging conditions (e.g. occlusion, illumination or nonlinear structural changes), suggesting that the two-step interpolation process struggles to
reconstruct plausible results.
To better handle occlusion, recent approaches address the
problem aforementioned with more elaborated pipelines by

estimating ﬂow information together with occlusion masks
or visibility maps with deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) (Jiang et al. 2018; Bao et al. 2019; 2018a; Liu et al.
2017; van Amersfoort et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2019; Xue et al.
2019; Peleg et al. 2019; Yuan et al. 2019; Hannemose et al.
2019).
Instead of using optical ﬂow, another major trend in this
research is to replace the two-step interpolation operation
as a convolution process (Niklaus, Mai, and Liu 2017a;
2017b). For each output pixel, a pair of 2D kernels or four
1D kernels (two for horizontal and another two for vertical
direction) are learned with a neural network. Notably, large

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10607

