The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Options of Interest: Temporal Abstraction with Interest Functions
Khimya Khetarpal,1,2 Martin Klissarov,1,2 Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert,2,3
Pierre-Luc Bacon,4 Doina Precup1,2,5
McGill University, 2 Mila, 3 Universite de Montreal,
4
Stanford University, 5 Google DeepMind
{khimya.khetarpal, martin.klissarov}@mail.mcgill.ca
maxime.chevalier-boisvert@mila.quebec, plbacon@cs.stanford.edu, dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca
1

also be found in later work on macro-operators (Korf 1983)
or the Schema model (Drescher 1991). In RL, the framework of options (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999) uses a
similar concept, initiation sets, which limit the availability
of options (i.e. temporally extended actions) in order to deal
with the possibly high cost of choosing among many options. Moreover, initiation sets can also lead to options that
are more localized (Konidaris and Barto 2007), which can
be beneﬁcial in transfer learning. For example, in continual learning (1997), specialization is key to both scaling up
learning in large environments, as well as to “protecting”
knowledge that has already been learned from forgetting due
to new updates.
The option-critic architecture (Bacon, Harb, and Precup
2017) is a gradient-based approach for learning options in
order to optimize the usual long-term return obtained by
an RL agent from the environment. However, the notion of
initiation sets originally introduced in Sutton, Precup, and
Singh (1999) was omitted from Bacon, Harb, and Precup
(2017) due to the difﬁculty of learning sets with gradientbased methods. We propose a generalization of initiation
sets to interest functions (Sutton, Mahmood, and White
2016; White 2017). We build from the fact that a set can be
represented through its membership function. Interest functions are a generalization of membership functions which
allows smooth parameterization. Without this extension, determining suitable initiation sets would necessitate a nondifferentiable, search-based approach.
Key Contributions: We generalize initiation sets for options to interest functions, which are differentiable, and
hence easier to learn. We derive a gradient-based learning algorithm capable of learning all components of options endto-end. The resulting interest-option-critic architecture generates options that are specialized to different regions of
state space. We demonstrate through experiments in both
discrete and continuous problems that our approach generates options that are useful in a single task, interpretable and
reusable in multi-task learning.

Abstract
Temporal abstraction refers to the ability of an agent to use
behaviours of controllers which act for a limited, variable
amount of time. The options framework describes such behaviours as consisting of a subset of states in which they can
initiate, an internal policy and a stochastic termination condition. However, much of the subsequent work on option discovery has ignored the initiation set, because of difﬁculty in
learning it from data. We provide a generalization of initiation
sets suitable for general function approximation, by deﬁning
an interest function associated with an option. We derive a
gradient-based learning algorithm for interest functions, leading to a new interest-option-critic architecture. We investigate
how interest functions can be leveraged to learn interpretable
and reusable temporal abstractions. We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of the proposed approach through quantitative and qualitative results, in both discrete and continuous environments.

Introduction
Humans have a remarkable ability to acquire skills, and
knowing when to apply each skill plays an important role
in their ability to quickly solve new tasks. In this work, we
tackle the problem of learning such skills in reinforcement
learning (RL). AI agents which aim to achieve goals are
faced with two difﬁculties in large problems: the depth of the
lookahead needed to obtain a good solution, and the breadth
generated by having many choices. The ﬁrst problem is often solved by providing shortcuts that skip over multiple
time steps, for example, by using macro-actions (Hauskrecht
et al. 1998). The second problem is handled by restricting
the agent’s attention at each step to a reasonable number
of possible choices. Temporal abstraction methods aim to
solve the ﬁrst problem, and a lot of recent literature has
been devoted to this topic (2011; 2015; 2016; 2016; 2017;
2017). We focus speciﬁcally on the second problem: learning how to reduce the number of choices considered by an
RL agent.
In classical planning, the early work on STRIPS (Fikes,
Hart, and Nilsson 1972) used preconditions that had to be
satisﬁed before applying a certain action. Similar ideas can

Preliminaries

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). A ﬁnite, discretetime MDP (Puterman 1995; Sutton and Barto 1998) is a
4444

