The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Synch-Graph: Multisensory Emotion Recognition
Through Neural Synchrony via Graph Convolutional Networks
Esma Mansouri-Benssassi, Juan Ye
University of St Andrews
School of Computer Science
St Andrews, United Kingdom
{emb24, juan.ye}@st-andrews.ac.uk

using LSTM for temporal feature extraction from video,
and concatenate features that are fed to a SVM for emotion
recognition (Chao et al. 2016). Decision fusion techniques
introduce another layer on top of inferences from each
modality; e.g., applying Dynamic Bayesian Network on decisions from parallel models on audio and visual data (Felipe, Luis J, and Pedro 2015).
Recently deep learning techniques have also been applied
to fusion tasks, not only in feature extraction. For example, Zhang et al. have employed CNN and 3D-CNN to extract spatial and temporal features on audio and visual segments. The features are then fused into a deep belief network
(DBN) model to learn discriminating global feature representations (Zhang et al. 2017).
Although these techniques produce promising results,
most of them have not taken into account the constant crosstalk and temporal relationship between different modalities in multisensory emotion recognition tasks (Wagner and
André 2018). The recent study in cognitive neuroscience
on cross-modal modulation in emotion processing (GarridoVásquez et al. 2018) has shown that cross-modal interaction
is particularly important in emotion recognition, where signals from different modalities can complement each other in
learning and thus signals in one modality can used to predict the other. For example, dynamic facial expressions can
inﬂuence vocal emotion processing.
Driven by this research problem, we propose a novel multisensory emotion recognition approach based on temporal
neural synchrony and phase-coupling in the brain (Symons
and et al 2016; Keil and Senkowski 2018).
We hypothesise that modelling neural synchrony and constant cross-talk between modalities will enhance the accuracy of emotion recognition. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the ﬁrst to investigate the use of graph neural networks to model bio-inspired neural synchrony; that is, learning synchronous patterns of neuron connections cross multiple modalities acquired from a bio-inspired architecture –
spiking neural network (SNN).
SNN has demonstrated as a promising approach for capturing intrinsic features of visual and audio modalities
for emotion recognition in a unsupervised learning manner (Mansouri-Benssassi and Ye 2019), where features are

Abstract
Human emotions are essentially multisensory, where emotional states are conveyed through multiple modalities such
as facial expression, body language, and non-verbal and verbal signals. Therefore having multimodal or multisensory
learning is crucial for recognising emotions and interpreting social signals. Existing multisensory emotion recognition
approaches focus on extracting features on each modality,
while ignoring the importance of constant interaction and colearning between modalities. In this paper, we present a novel
bio-inspired approach based on neural synchrony in audiovisual multisensory integration in the brain, named SynchGraph. We model multisensory interaction using spiking neural networks (SNN) and explore the use of Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) to represent and learn neural synchrony patterns. We hypothesise that modelling interactions
between modalities will improve the accuracy of emotion
recognition. We have evaluated Synch-Graph on two stateof-the-art datasets and achieved an overall accuracy of 98.3%
and 96.82%, which are signiﬁcantly higher than the existing
techniques.

Introduction
Human perceives emotions in a multisensory manner, where
information from different sensory modalities such as facial expression, verbal and non-verbal signals, and body
languages expresses our emotional states. The multisensory
emotional precept is conveyed through a constant cross-talk
between various sensory modalities. Understanding emotions from various modalities is crucial for human computer interaction in a multitude of applications such as gaming, mental health or car driving. Therefore it is important
to translate the multisensory relationship between different
modalities in order to get a better meaning and more accurate interpretation of emotions.
Research in multimodal emotion recognition mainly focuses on feature extraction in individual modalities and integration by applying state-of-the-art data fusion techniques
previously derived from engineering (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja,
and Morency 2018). Early feature fusion often involves extracting features from visual and auditory modalities; e.g.,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1351

