The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Uncertainty-Aware Action Advising for Deep Reinforcement Learning Agents
Felipe Leno Da Silva,1∗ Pablo Hernandez-Leal,2 Bilal Kartal,2 Matthew E. Taylor2
1

University of São Paulo, Brazil
2
Borealis AI, Canada
f.leno@usp.br, {pablo.hernandez, bilal.kartal, matthew.taylor}@borealisai.com

a human can demonstrate how to perform the task (Argall
et al. 2009) or because other automated agents are available
to give suggestions based on their policies (Silva, Glatt, and
Costa 2017).
Many works from the Learning from Demonstration (Argall et al. 2009) and Action Advising (Torrey and Taylor
2013) subareas have successfully leveraged advice to reduce
the sample-complexity of challenging tasks.
However, the use of advice requires coping with some
open problems. For example, the amount of advice is often limited by human availability or communication costs,
hence the learning agent must make effective use of the
available samples, while taking into account the demonstrator availability. In the literature, advice is usually given at
a preﬁxed frequency or based on heuristics unrelated to the
agent epistemic uncertainty1 , such as based on the demonstrator’s knowledge (Taylor et al. 2014). This means that the
advice is not aimed to disambiguate situations in which the
agent has high uncertainty and the demonstrator is likely to
give advice when the agent does not need it.
We here propose Requesting Conﬁdence-Moderated Policy advice (RCMP), an algorithm to selectively give advice
to a learning agent in situations where its epistemic uncertainty is high. In contrast, when the agent has a low uncertainty (assuming that the uncertainty estimation is accurate),
this indicates that the value estimate for the current state is
close to convergence, and advice might be saved for more
useful situations. For picturing the situation in which this
would be useful, imagine a robot receiving a couple of minutes of advice in an episodic task from a human. Instead of
simply sequentially demonstrating the solution of the task
multiple times, the human might provide initial demonstrations and let the robot try to solve the task itself. The robot
then can ask for advice in states where it has not learned
what to do yet, or in new states encountered during the execution. This strategy can result in a better coverage of the
advised state space than repeating the demonstration of the

Abstract
Although Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been one of the
most successful approaches for learning in sequential decision making problems, the sample-complexity of RL techniques still represents a major challenge for practical applications. To combat this challenge, whenever a competent policy (e.g., either a legacy system or a human demonstrator)
is available, the agent could leverage samples from this policy (advice) to improve sample-efﬁciency. However, advice is
normally limited, hence it should ideally be directed to states
where the agent is uncertain on the best action to execute.
In this work, we propose Requesting Conﬁdence-Moderated
Policy advice (RCMP), an action-advising framework where
the agent asks for advice when its epistemic uncertainty is
high for a certain state. RCMP takes into account that the advice is limited and might be suboptimal. We also describe a
technique to estimate the agent uncertainty by performing minor modiﬁcations in standard value-function-based RL methods. Our empirical evaluations show that RCMP performs
better than Importance Advising, not receiving advice, and
receiving it at random states in Gridworld and Atari Pong
scenarios.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998) techniques have been applied to solve increasingly complex
problems, such as video game playing (Mnih and others
2015) and robotics tasks (Singh et al. 2019). Despite being
one of the most effective approaches to autonomously learn
in sequential decision making problems, RL requires exploring the environment for gathering samples, which makes the
learning process potentially costly or dangerous for many
real-world applications. For this reason, many of the recent
investigations in the area aim at reducing the amount of required samples during learning.
When a competent policy is available, the learning agent
might leverage samples of it (hereafter referred as advice) to
reduce the need of (potentially harmful) random exploration,
especially at the beginning of learning when the agent is acting randomly. This policy might be available either because

1

The uncertainty stemmed from lack of information about the
environment the agent is trying to model. On the other hand,
aleatoric uncertainty comes from the environment stochasticity.
The former is possible to reduce by collecting more samples, while
the latter is not.

∗

This work was completed while an intern at Borealis AI.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5792

