The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Visual Agreement Regularized Training for Multi-Modal Machine Translation
Pengcheng Yang,1,2 Boxing Chen,3 Pei Zhang,3 Xu Sun1,2
1

Center for Data Science , Peking University
MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
3
Alibaba DAMO Academy, Hangzhou, China
{yang pc, xusun}@pku.edu.cn, {boxing.cbx, xiaoyi.zp}@alibaba-inc.com

FR: footballeur court après le ballon

Abstract
Multi-modal machine translation aims at translating the
source sentence into a different language in the presence of
the paired image. Previous work suggests that additional visual information only provides dispensable help to translation, which is needed in several very special cases such as
translating ambiguous words. To make better use of visual
information, this work presents visual agreement regularized
training. The proposed approach jointly trains the source-totarget and target-to-source translation models and encourages
them to share the same focus on the visual information when
generating semantically equivalent visual words (e.g. “ball”
in English and “ballon” in French). Besides, a simple yet effective multi-head co-attention model is also introduced to
capture interactions between visual and textual features. The
results show that our approaches can outperform competitive
baselines by a large margin on the Multi30k dataset. Further
analysis demonstrates that the proposed regularized training
can effectively improve the agreement of attention on the image, leading to better use of visual information.

՜

EN՜FR ሺࣂሻ

EN: soccer player chases the ball

՜

2

FR՜EN ሺࣂሻ

Figure 1: A toy example of visual agreement regularized
→
−
training. θ denotes forward model translating English (EN)
←
−
→
−
into French (FR) and θ is the opposite. When θ generates
←
−
“ballon” and θ generates “ball”, they should all focus on
the region near the football in the image.

Introduction

ating gender-neutral target words). As a result, most existing approaches tend to ignore such visual information. To
remedy this, we present visual agreement regularized training for the MMT task in this work. The proposed training schema jointly trains both source-to-target (forward) and
target-to-source (backward) translation models, and encourages them to share the same focus on the image when generating semantic equivalent visual words (e.g. “ball” in English and “ballon” in French). Take Figure 1 as an example, whose translation direction is EN→FR. When generating the target word “ballon”, the forward model is likely to
focus on the red box region in the image, on which is also expected to be focused by the backward model when it generates the source word “ball”. By encouraging the agreement
of bidirectional (forward and backward) models’ attention
(red and blue boxes in Figure 1) to image, the visual information can be more fully utilized.
However, a tricky problem is that semantically equivalent word pairs tend to be unavailable in practice. To address this issue, we present two effective regularization approaches: hard regularization constructing pseudo-aligned

As real-scenarios integrating multiple modal information
have become commonplace, an increasing of endeavors
have been paid to multi-modal machine translation (MMT).
Different from tradition machine translation based solely
on textual information, the MMT task aims at translating
sentences paired with images into a different target language (Elliott, Frank, and Specia 2016). It not only has
plenty of practical applications, e.g., helping improve the
translation of ambiguous multi-sense words, but also serves
as an ideal testbed for cross-modal text generation (Calixto,
Liu, and Campbell 2017).
Despite its importance described above, previous work on
MMT typically suffers from two drawbacks. First of all, how
to effectively integrate visual information still remains an intractable challenge. Previous work has shown that additional
visual information only provides dispensable help, which
may be needed in the presence of some special cases (e.g.
translating incorrect or ambiguous source words or generc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9418

