The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Point2Node: Correlation Learning of
Dynamic-Node for Point Cloud Feature Modeling
Wenkai Han,1 Chenglu Wen,1∗ Cheng Wang,1 Xin Li,2 Qing Li1
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University
422 Siming South Road, Xiamen 361005, China
2
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
{hlxwk0525, hello.qingli}@gmail.com, {clwen, cwang}@xmu.edu.cn, xinli@cct.lsu.edu
information from each point’s neighbors. (2) Local correlation. PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017b) improves the PointNet by applying the PointNet recursively on partitioned
pointsets and encoding local features with max pooling.
PointNet++ essentially treats each point individually and
hence still neglects its correlation between neighbors. Later,
DGCNN (Wang et al. 2018c) employs shared MLPs to process edges linking the centroid point and its neighboring
points. But because the edges only connect to the centroid
point, the neighboring correlation is not fully exploited. The
more recent approach, PointWeb (Zhao et al. 2019), considers a point’s correlation by weighting all edges among its
neighbors. However, although PointWeb explores the complete correlation from a point’s neighbors, it stores redundant connections between two points of different labels. Furthermore, to our best knowledge, in all these existing approaches, most existing approaches do not consider nonlocal correlation among distant points that are not neighbors
but could potentially exhibit long-range dependencies.

Abstract
Fully exploring correlation among points in point clouds is
essential for their feature modeling. This paper presents a
novel end-to-end graph model, named Point2Node, to represent a given point cloud. Point2Node can dynamically explore correlation among all graph nodes from different levels,
and adaptively aggregate the learned features. Speciﬁcally,
ﬁrst, to fully explore the spatial correlation among points
for enhanced feature description, in a high-dimensional node
graph, we dynamically integrate the node’s correlation with
self, local, and non-local nodes. Second, to more effectively
integrate learned features, we design a data-aware gate mechanism to self-adaptively aggregate features at the channel
level. Extensive experiments on various point cloud benchmarks demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-ofthe-art.

Introduction
The recent advance of 3D technologies in autonomous driving, robotics, and reverse engineering has attracted greater
attention in understanding and analyzing 3D data. Often in
the form of point clouds, 3D data is a set of unordered 3D
points, sometimes with additional features (e.g., RGB, normal) deﬁned on each point. Due to the inherent unorderness and irregularity property of 3D data, it is difﬁcult to
extend traditional convolutional neural networks to 3D data,
because a permutation in the order of 3D points should not
affect their geometric structures.
Multiple approaches (Qi et al. 2017a; 2017b; Wang et al.
2018c; Zhao et al. 2019) have been developed recently to
process raw point clouds. These approaches can be grouped
into several categories according to the point correlation
they exploit for feature learning: (1) Self correlation. A seminal work on point cloud feature learning is the PointNet
(Qi et al. 2017a), which uses shared Multi-Layer Perceptions (MLPs) on each point individually, then gathers global
representation with pooling functions. Its description ability is limited by not being able to incorporate contextual

Representing point cloud with the graph structure is appropriate for correlation learning. There are some graphbased methods (Simonovsky and Komodakis 2017; Verma,
Boyer, and Verbeek 2017) that use graph convolutions to analyze point cloud on local regions; however, explicit correlations of the neighboring points are not well captured by
the predeﬁned convolution operations and this limits their
feature modeling capability.
To better leverage correlations of points from different
levels, we formulate a novel high-dimensional node graph
model, named Point2Node, to learn correlation among 3D
points. Point2Node proposes a Dynamic Node Correlation
module, which constructs a high-dimensional node graph to
sequentially explore correlations at different levels. Specifically, it explores self correlation between point’s different channels, local correlation between neighboring points,
and also, non-local correlation among distant points having
long-range dependency. Meanwhile, we dynamically update
nodes after each correlation learning to enhance node characteristics. Furthermore, for aggregating more discriminate
features, our Point2Node employs a data-aware gate embedding, named Adaptive Feature Aggregation, to pass or block
channels of high-dimensional nodes from different correla-

∗

Corresponding author: Chenglu Wen
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10925

