The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Coupled-View Deep Classiﬁer Learning from Multiple Noisy Annotators
Shikun Li,1,2 Shiming Ge,1∗ Yingying Hua,1,2 Chunhui Zhang,1,2
Hao Wen,3 Tengfei Liu,4 Weiqiang Wang4
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
CloudWalk Technology Co., Ltd, China 4 Ant Financial Services Group
{lishikun, geshiming, huayingying, zhangchunhui}@iie.ac.cn,
wenhao@cloudwalk.cn, {aaron.ltf, weiqiang.wwq}@antﬁn.com
Abstract

Typically, learning a deep classiﬁer from massive cleanly annotated instances is effective but impractical in many realworld scenarios. An alternative is collecting and aggregating multiple noisy annotations for each instance to train the
classiﬁer. Inspired by that, this paper proposes to learn deep
classiﬁer from multiple noisy annotators via a coupled-view
learning approach, where the learning view from data is represented by deep neural networks for data classiﬁcation and
the learning view from labels is described by a Naive Bayes
classiﬁer for label aggregation. Such coupled-view learning is
converted to a supervised learning problem under the mutual
supervision of the aggregated and predicted labels, and can be
solved via alternate optimization to update labels and reﬁne
the classiﬁers. To alleviate the propagation of incorrect labels,
small-loss metric is proposed to select reliable instances in
both views. A co-teaching strategy with class-weighted loss
is further leveraged in the deep classiﬁer learning, which uses
two networks with different learning abilities to teach each
other, and the diverse errors introduced by noisy labels can
be ﬁltered out by peer networks. By these strategies, our approach can ﬁnally learn a robust data classiﬁer which less
overﬁts to label noise. Experimental results on synthetic and
real data demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of the
proposed approach.

1

Figure 1: The coupled-view perspective of our learning approach. It alternately learns a data classiﬁer and a label aggregator under the mutual supervision of the aggregated and
predicted labels that are updated during training.
and medical data analysis (Amy 2018). Recently, the crowdsourcing approaches like Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT)
(Buhrmester, Kwang, and Gosling 2011) have been established as a cost-effective solution to annotate large collections of data. This manner provides a feasible way to create
massive data with single or multiple noisy labels.
For learning from single noisy labels, some approaches
(Salla et al. 2018; Liu and Tao 2016) tried to model noise
confusion matrix or select the clean labels. They generally
improve accuracy by learning from single noisy labels or
aggregated labels. Recently, the co-teaching approach proposed by (Han et al. 2018) has showed good ability in selecting clean labels by using two networks with the same
structure to update each other’s training instances, leading
to superior performance. Generally, these methods provide
some effective ways to reduce the overﬁtting to label noises.
Learning from multiple noisy labels provides an intuitive
way to lessen label noises. As noisy labels are relatively
easy to acquire from multiple annotators (e.g., different devices, persons or models), the common practice is to collect multiple weak labels for an instance and then aggregate them to get a more reliable label. Toward this end, it
is necessary to explore an effective solution that can address a key challenge: how to aggregate multiple noisy annotators to facilitate deep classiﬁer learning? A simple approach is regarding the results of majority voting (Cheru-

Introduction

With the availability of a cleanly annotated large-scale
dataset, recent deep learning has proven success in various
classiﬁcation tasks. For example, the ResNet model (He et
al. 2016) has achieved 6.43% error rate in CIFAR10 object classiﬁcation task (Krizhevsky 2009), while the ArcFace model (Deng et al. 2019) achieves a surpassing humanlevel accuracy of 99.82% in recognizing faces on the LFW
benchmark (Huang et al. 2007). Generally, such success
arises from deep networks’ powerful capacity in extracting
knowledge from massive labeled data in a supervised learning manner. However, the clean annotations for supervised
learning are very difﬁcult to collect in many real-world scenarios, e.g., video surveillance in the wild (Sun et al. 2018)
∗

Shiming Ge is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4667

