The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adaptive Double-Exploration Tradeoff for Outlier Detection
Xiaojin Zhang,1 Honglei Zhuang,2 Shengyu Zhang,3 Yuan Zhou2
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 3 Tencent
xjzhang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {hzhuang3, yuanz}@illinois.edu, shengyuzhang@gmail.com

imizing the probability of outputting the best action using a
ﬁxed number of samples.
In this paper, we focus on the outlier detection problem, a
practically important problem which was ﬁrstly investigated
in the framework of multi-armed bandit under the ﬁxed conﬁdence setting by Zhuang, Wang, and Wang (2017). They
regard the outliers as the arms with rewards above certain
threshold, which is deﬁned based on a generalized statistical technique called k-sigma rule of thumb (Coolidge 2012).
Speciﬁcally, an arm is referred to as an outlier, if and only if
the reward of which lies above k standard deviations of the
mean. The expected reward of each arm is unknown to the
learner. Moreover, the threshold is a function of the rewards
of all the arms and is also unknown, which is the distinguishing feature from the classical thresholding bandit problem
and top-k arm identiﬁcation problem. The learner could select an arm to pull at each step, and the reward drawn from
the distribution of pulled arm is observed as the feedback information. In this process, the rewards of the arms and the
threshold are gradually learned. The ﬁnal goal of the learner
is to output the correct outlier set with high probability, and
at the same time minimizing the number of samples used.
The outlier detection problem in the framework of multiarmed bandit raises two main challenges to the design of algorithms. On the one hand, the learning strategies for outlier
detection needs to address the double-exploration dilemma,
i.e. the search for a balance between exploring the arms and
exploring the threshold. If the learner plays exclusively on
the arms that are closer to the threshold, he might fail to estimate the threshold efﬁciently. If the learner is persistent in
sampling all the arms uniformly, he might spend too much
efforts on the arms that have already been identiﬁed. On the
other hand, the construction of the conﬁdence interval for
the threshold, which is related to the standard deviation of
the rewards of all the arms, is not an easy task. The tighter
the conﬁdence interval is, the smaller sample complexity the
resulting algorithm could obtain.
We note that the conﬁdence radius for the threshold constructed by Zhuang, Wang, and Wang (2017) increases with
the number of arms, which might make the learning strategy inefﬁcient in terms of the sample complexity. This issue becomes more severe when identifying outliers among a
larger set of arms. Our approach alleviates this problem by
constructing a conﬁdence radius for the threshold which is

Abstract
We study a variant of the thresholding bandit problem (TBP)
in the context of outlier detection, where the objective is to
identify the outliers whose rewards are above a threshold.
Distinct from the traditional TBP, the threshold is deﬁned as
a function of the rewards of all the arms, which is motivated
by the criterion for identifying outliers. The learner needs to
explore the rewards of the arms as well as the threshold. We
refer to this problem as ”double exploration for outlier detection”. We construct an adaptively updated conﬁdence interval for the threshold, based on the estimated value of the
threshold in the previous rounds. Furthermore, by automatically trading off exploring the individual arms and exploring the outlier threshold, we provide an efﬁcient algorithm in
terms of the sample complexity. Experimental results on both
synthetic datasets and real-world datasets demonstrate the efﬁciency of our algorithm.

Introduction
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems model the tradeoff
between exploration and exploitation inherent in a great
amount of sequential decision problems. In the canonical
multi-armed bandit problem, the learner is presented with
a set of arms. The learner needs to explore distinct arms to
discover the potential of various arms, and exploit the most
rewarding arms based on the information that has been collected. The goal of the learner is to maximize the cumulative reward (Robbins 1985; Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002). In terms of the pure exploration problem, the
learner is interested in optimizing the performance in some
decision-making task by making full use of the limited budget (Bubeck, Munos, and Stoltz 2011; Gabillon et al. 2011).
A ﬂurry of work focuses on identifying the set of K arms
with the largest expected rewards, called the top-k arm identiﬁcation problem (Mnih, Szepesvári, and Audibert 2008;
Kalyanakrishnan and Stone 2010; Kalyanakrishnan et al.
2012; Kaufmann and Kalyanakrishnan 2013; Zhou, Chen,
and Li 2014; Chen et al. 2014). This line of work could be
categorized into two distinct settings: ﬁxed conﬁdence and
ﬁxed budget. The former setting focuses on identifying the
best action satisfying a ﬁxed conﬁdence level using the minimum number of samples, while the latter one aims at maxc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6837

