The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fastened CROWN: Tightened Neural Network Robustness Certiﬁcates
Zhaoyang Lyu,1∗ Ching-Yun Ko,2∗ Zhifeng Kong,3 Ngai Wong,4 Dahua Lin,1 Luca Daniel2
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
3
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
4
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
lyuzhaoyang@link.cuhk.edu.hk, {cyko, luca}@mit.edu, z4kong@eng.ucsd.edu,
nwong@eee.hku.hk, dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
2

other hand, help industries build more robust intelligent systems.
Disparate ways of reasoning and quantifying vulnerability (or robustness) of neural networks have been exploited
to approach this dilemma, among which attack-based methods have long been in a dominating position. In these years,
a sequel of adversarial attack algorithms have been proposed to mislead networks’ predictions in tasks such as
object detection (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015;
Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016), visual question answering (Mudrakarta et al. 2018; Zeng et al. 2019;
Gao et al. 2019b; 2019a), text classiﬁcation (Papernot et al.
2016), speech recognition (Cisse et al. 2017; Gong and
Poellabauer 2017), and audio systems (Carlini and Wagner 2018), where the level of model vulnerability is quantiﬁed by the distortion between successful adversaries and
the original data points. Notably, the magnitudes of distortions suggested by attack-based methods are essentially upper bounds of the minimum adversarial distortion.
In contrast to attack-based approaches, attack-agnostic
veriﬁcation-based methods evaluate the level of network
vulnerability by either directly estimating (Szegedy et al.
2014; Weng et al. 2018b) or lower bounding (Hein and
Andriushchenko 2017; Raghunathan, Steinhardt, and Liang
2018; Dvijotham et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Singh et al.
2018; Weng et al. 2019) the minimum distortion networks
can bear for a speciﬁc input sample. As an iconic robustness
estimation, CLEVER (Weng et al. 2018a) converts the robustness evaluation task into the estimation of the local Lipschitz constant, which essentially associates with the maximum norm of the local gradients w.r.t. the original example. Extensions of CLEVER (Weng et al. 2018c) focuses on
twice differentiable classiﬁers and works on ﬁrst-order Taylor polynomial with Lagrange remainder.
A number of veriﬁcation-based methods have been proposed in literature to compute a lower bound of the safeguarded region around a given input, i.e. a region where
the network is guaranteed to make consistent predictions despite any input perturbations. A pioneering work in providing certiﬁable robustness veriﬁcation (Szegedy et al. 2014)
computes the product of weight matrix operator norms in
ReLU networks to give a lower-bounding metric of the

Abstract
The rapid growth of deep learning applications in real life
is accompanied by severe safety concerns. To mitigate this
uneasy phenomenon, much research has been done providing
reliable evaluations of the fragility level in different deep neural networks. Apart from devising adversarial attacks, quantiﬁers that certify safeguarded regions have also been designed
in the past ﬁve years. The summarizing work in (Salman et
al. 2019) uniﬁes a family of existing veriﬁers under a convex relaxation framework. We draw inspiration from such
work and further demonstrate the optimality of deterministic CROWN (Zhang et al. 2018) solutions in a given linear programming problem under mild constraints. Given this
theoretical result, the computationally expensive linear programming based method is shown to be unnecessary. We then
propose an optimization-based approach FROWN (Fastened
CROWN): a general algorithm to tighten robustness certiﬁcates for neural networks. Extensive experiments on various networks trained individually verify the effectiveness of
FROWN in safeguarding larger robust regions.

Introduction
The vulnerability of deep neural networks remains an unrevealed snare in the beginning years of the deep learning resurgence. In 2014, Szegedy et al. uncovered the discovery of hardly-perceptible adversarial perturbations that
could fool image classiﬁers. This discovery agonized the fast
development of accuracy-oriented deep learning and shifted
community’s attentions to the fragility of trained models. Especially with the increasing adoption of machine learning
and artiﬁcial intelligence in safety-critical applications, the
vulnerability of machine learning models to adversarial attacks has become a vital issue (Sharif et al. 2016; Kurakin,
Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017; Carlini and Wagner 2017;
Wong and Kolter 2018). Addressing this urging issue requires reliable ways to evaluate the robustness of a neural
network, namely by studying the safety region around a data
point where no adversarial example exists. This understanding of machine learning models’ vulnerability will, on the
∗
Equal contribution. Source code and the appendix is available
at https://github.com/ZhaoyangLyu/FROWN.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5037

