The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Robust Federated Learning via Collaborative Machine Teaching
Yufei Han

Xiangliang Zhang

Nortonlifelock Research Group
Campus SohpiaTech
Sophia Antipolis, 06410, France
yufei han@symantec.com

Machine Intelligence and Knowledge Engineering Laboratory
King Abudullah University of Science and Technology
Thuwal,23955,Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
xiangliang.zhang@kaust.edu.sa

pervasive data ﬂaws carries a threat to the accountability of
data analytic service.
Recent robustiﬁcation efforts improve resilience to
Byzantine failure (Chen et al. 2018a; Chen, Su, and Xu
2017; Yin et al. 2018; Xie, Koyejo, and Gupta 2018b;
2018a; Alistarh, Allen-Zhu, and Li 2018; Su and Xu 2019;
Blanchard et al. 2017; Ghosh et al. 2019; Li et al. 2018).
They assume that the majority of local agents behave normally and consider the Byzantine machines as statistical outliers. Robust estimation is then applied to suppress the negative impact of Byzantine machines in model/gradient averaging. Nevertheless, given the pervasive systematic data
ﬂaws, the proﬁles of the distributed training data set can be
drastically twisted. Furthermore, the robust estimation is applied based on the assumption over data distribution, such as
long-tailed distribution. However, due to the privacy regulation of federated learning, prior knowledge about the noise
distribution on local agents is barely available. The robust
estimation based approaches thus become less effective in
this challenging scenario.
We propose to mitigate the adverse impact of the pervasive systematic data corruption in federated training via
Collaborative Machine Teaching, thus named CoMT. At
the core of CoMT, the local agents act as distributed teachers, while the central parameter server is the learner cotaught by the distributed teachers. Besides the corrupted
training data, each teacher also hosts a few trusted data instances, e.g. veriﬁed by domain experts, to guide the teaching process. The teachers are organized to jointly tune the
corrupted training data set, such that the model learnt with
the tuned training set by the learner predicts consistent targets as the trusted instances. More speciﬁcally, we adopt two
types of training data tuning operations: crafting the training instances and subset-selecting the training set. The set
of the trusted data instances are small in size, e.g. 1/100
of the training data. They are thus insufﬁcient for learning
by themselves. The merits of the trusted instance-directed
training set tuning are three-fold. First, the training set tuning requires no assumption on noise distribution. Compared
to the robust-statistics based methods, the assumption-free
method reduces the risk of miss-estimating noise corruption
due to lack of prior knowledge of noise distribution. Second,
the trusted instances acts as weak supervision. The teaching
activity with a learning-performance directed objective en-

Abstract
For federated learning systems deployed in the wild, data
ﬂaws hosted on local agents are widely witnessed. On one
hand, given a large amount (e.g. over 60%) of training data
are corrupted by systematic sensor noise and environmental
perturbations, the performances of federated model training
can be degraded signiﬁcantly. On the other hand, it is prohibitively expensive for either clients or service providers to
set up manual sanitary checks to verify the quality of data
instances. In our study, we echo this challenge by proposing a collaborative and privacy-preserving machine teaching
method. Speciﬁcally, we use a few trusted instances provided
by teachers as benign examples in the teaching process. Our
collaborative teaching approach seeks jointly the optimal tuning on the distributed training set, such that the model learned
from the tuned training set predicts labels of the trusted items
correctly. The proposed method couples the process of teaching and learning and thus produces directly a robust prediction model despite the extremely pervasive systematic data
corruption. The experimental study on real benchmark data
sets demonstrates the validity of our method.

Introduction
Federated learning is well known for its vulnerability to abnormal behavior of individual computing agents (Yang et
al. 2019). The anomaly is caused by unreliable computing
devices, communication jams or ﬂaws existing in the local training data sets. Our study focuses on the impact of
pervasive training data ﬂaws, where a signiﬁcantly large
fraction of the local data sets (e.g. over 60%) are contaminated by systematic noise corruption, such as non-iid feature corruption and asymmetric label ﬂipping noise. In
real-world distributed data analytic applications, such training data ﬂaws are widely witnessed due to malfunction of
data collectors, crowd-sourcing and intentional adversarial
attacks from hacked / untrustworthy participating devices.
On one hand, the severe noise corruption can deeply deteriorate learning performances. On the other hand, manual inspection and veriﬁcation of each data instance is usually expensive thus unrealistic for both clients and service
providers to conduct pre-training data quality check. Deployment of the existing federated training method with the
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4075

