The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improved Visual-Semantic Alignment for Zero-Shot Object Detection
Shaﬁn Rahman,1,2 Salman Khan,3,1 Nick Barnes1,2
1

College of Engineering and Computer Science, Australian National University
2
Data61, Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research Organisation
3
Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
ﬁrstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Seen: boat, bicycle, airplane

Abstract

1

helicopter
flight jet
pilot
airplane

fishing
harborkayak canoe
dock yacht
boat
ship
beach

Zero-shot object detection is an emerging research topic that
aims to recognize and localize previously ‘unseen’ objects.
This setting gives rise to several unique challenges, e.g.,
highly imbalanced positive vs. negative instance ratio, proper
alignment between visual and semantic concepts and the ambiguity between background and unseen classes. Here, we
propose an end-to-end deep learning framework underpinned
by a novel loss function that handles class-imbalance and
seeks to properly align the visual and semantic cues for improved zero-shot learning. We call our objective the ‘Polarity
loss’ because it explicitly maximizes the gap between positive
and negative predictions. Such a margin maximizing formulation is not only important for visual-semantic alignment but it
also resolves the ambiguity between background and unseen
objects. Further, the semantic representations of objects are
noisy, thus complicating the alignment between visual and
semantic domains. To this end, we perform metric learning
using a ‘Semantic vocabulary’ of related concepts that reﬁnes
the noisy semantic embeddings and establishes a better synergy between visual and semantic domains. Our approach is
inspired by the embodiment theories in cognitive science, that
claim human semantic understanding to be grounded in past
experiences (seen objects), related linguistic concepts (word
vocabulary) and the visual perception (seen/unseen object images). Our extensive results on MS-COCO and Pascal VOC
datasets show signiﬁcant improvements over state of the art.1

Unseen: train

ship
canoe boat fishing
beach
harbor kayak
dock yacht

hangar

hangar
vehicle

vehicle
bicycle

paddle
rider
cycling
helmet jogging

station
train
wagon
locomotive
railway subway
van
stem
bridge

helicopter
flight
pilot
airplane
jet

paddle
cycling
rider
bicycle
jogging
helmet

wagon
locomotive
stem van station
train
subway
railway
bridge

Figure 1: (Top Left) Traditional ZSD approaches align visual
features (solid dots) to their corresponding semantics (e.g.,
boat, airplane) without considering the related semantic concepts (black text). It results in a fragile description of an unseen class (train) and causes confusion with background and
seen classes (bottom left). (Top Right) Our approach automatically attends to related semantics from an external vocabulary and reshapes the semantic embedding so that visual
features are well-aligned with related semantics. Moreover,
it maximizes the inter-class separation that avoids confusion
between unseen and background (bottom right).

Introduction

Zero shot learning (ZSL) is considered the ‘holy-grail’
among transfer learning problems. The goal is to reason
about objects that have never been seen before. Traditional
ZSL literature only focuses on ‘recognizing’ unseen objects.
Since real-world objects only appear as a part of a complete scene, the newly introduced zero shot object detection
(ZSD) task (Rahman, Khan, and Porikli 2018b) considers a
more practical setting where the goal is to simultaneously
‘locate and recognize’ unseen objects. A successful ZSD
system can help pave the way for lifelong learning machines

that intelligently discover new objects and incrementally enhance their knowledge.
Recently, the initial attempts on ZSD have been reported
(Bansal et al. 2018; Demirel, Cinbis, and Ikizler-Cinbis
2018; Rahman, Khan, and Porikli 2018b; Zhu et al. 2018; Li
et al. 2019). We note that these efforts suffer from limitations
that lead to poor visual-semantic alignment, e.g, (a) lack
of an end-to-end trainable pipeline (Bansal et al. 2018), (b)
confusion between background and unseen classes (Bansal
et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2018), (c) inability to update semantic
embeddings based on visual-semantic relationships (Bansal
et al. 2018; Demirel, Cinbis, and Ikizler-Cinbis 2018), (d)
object localization is not directly inﬂuenced by the seman-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code and evaluation protocols available at: https://github.com/
salman-h-khan/PL-ZSD Release
11932

