The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

End-to-End Trainable Non-Collaborative Dialog System
Yu Li, Kun Qian, Weiyan Shi, Zhou Yu
University of California, Davis
{yooli, kunqian, wyshi, joyu}@ucdavis.edu

tents. In order to reach a common state, the user and the
system need to build rapport and trust which naturally involves off-task content. Previous work did not model offtask content (He et al. 2018), which may have led to less
optimal results. For example, in the persuasion task (Wang
et al. 2019), users would ask the system “How do you feel
about war?” An example of an on-task system response that
the system could have made is “Do you want to make a donation?”, which sticks to the task but neglects users’ question. However, a better response to such an off-task question is “War is destructive and pitiless, but you can donate
to help child victims of war.” This response is better, as it
has been found that users are more likely to end the conversation if the system neglects their questions (Yu, Black, and
Rudnicky 2017). Therefore, we need to design a system that
handles both on-task and off-task information appropriately
and in a way that leads back to the system’s goal.

Abstract
End-to-end task-oriented dialog models have achieved
promising performance on collaborative tasks where users
willingly coordinate with the system to complete a given
task. While in non-collaborative settings, for example, negotiation and persuasion, users and systems do not share a
common goal. As a result, compared to collaborate tasks,
people use social content to build rapport and trust in these
non-collaborative settings in order to advance their goals.
To handle social content, we introduce a hierarchical intent annotation scheme, which can be generalized to different non-collaborative dialog tasks. Building upon TransferTransfo (Wolf et al. 2019), we propose an end-to-end neural network model to generate diverse coherent responses.
Our model utilizes intent and semantic slots as the intermediate sentence representation to guide the generation process. In addition, we design a ﬁlter to select appropriate responses based on whether these intermediate representations
ﬁt the designed task and conversation constraints. Our noncollaborative dialog model guides users to complete the task
while simultaneously keeps them engaged. We test our approach on our newly proposed A NTI S CAM dataset and an existing P ERSUASION F OR G OOD dataset. Both automatic and
human evaluations suggest that our model outperforms multiple baselines in these two non-collaborative tasks.

To tackle the issue of incoherent system responses to offtask content, previous studies have built hybrid systems to
interleave off-task and on-task content. Yu, Black, and Rudnicky used a rule-based dialog manager for on-task content
and a neural model for off-task content, and trained a reinforcement learning model to select between these two models based on the dialog context. However, such a method
is difﬁcult to train and struggles to generalize beyond the
movie promotion task they considered. To tackle these problems, we propose a hierarchical intent annotation scheme
that separates on-task and off-task information in order to
provide detailed supervision. For on-task information, we
directly use task-related intents for representation. Off-task
information, on the other hand, is too general to categorize
into speciﬁc intents, so we choose dialog acts that convey
syntax information. These acts, such as “open question” are
general to all tasks.

Introduction
Considerable progress has been made building end-to-end
dialog systems for collaborative tasks in which users cooperate with the system to achieve a common goal. Examples
of collaborative tasks include making restaurant reservations
and retrieving bus time-table information. Since users typically have clear and explicit intentions in collaborative tasks,
existing systems commonly classify user utterances into predeﬁned intents. In contrast, non-collaborative tasks are those
where the users and the system do not strive to achieve
the same goal. Examples of such tasks include deceiving
attackers, persuading users to donate to a cause (Wang et
al. 2019), and negotiating a product price (He et al. 2018;
Cao et al. 2018). In these tasks, users often perform complex actions that are beyond a simple set of pre-deﬁned in-

Previous studies use template-based methods to maintain
sentence coherence. However, rigid templates lead to limited diversity, causing the user losing engagement. On the
other hand, language generation models can generate diverse responses but are bad at being coherent. We propose
Multiple Intents and Semantic Slots Annotation Neural Network (MISSA) to combine the advantages of both template
and generation models and takes advantage from the hier-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8293

