The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Privacy-Preserving Gradient Boosting Decision Trees
Qinbin Li,1 Zhaomin Wu,1 Zeyi Wen,2 Bingsheng He1
1

National University of Singapore
The University of Western Australia
{qinbin, zhaomin, hebs}@comp.nus.edu.sg, zeyi.wen@uwa.edu.au
2

Privacy issues have been a hot research topic recently (Shokri et al. 2017; Truex et al. 2018; Fredrikson,
Jha, and Ristenpart 2015; Li et al. 2019a; Li, Wen, and He
2019). Due to the popularity and wide adoptions of GBDTs,
a privacy-preserving GBDT algorithm is particularly timely
and necessary. Differential privacy (Dwork 2011) was proposed to protect the individuals of a dataset. In short, a computation is differentially private if the probability of producing a given output does not depend much on whether
a particular record is included in the input dataset. Differential privacy has been widely used in many machine
learning models such as logistic regression (Chaudhuri and
Monteleoni 2009) and neural networks (Abadi et al. 2016;
Acs et al. 2018). Sensitivity and privacy budget are two key
design aspects for the effectiveness of differential private
models. Many practical differentially private models achieve
good model utility by deriving tight sensitivity bounds and
allocating privacy budget effectively. In this paper, we study
how to improve model accuracy of GBDTs while preserving
the strong guarantee of differential privacy.
There have been some potential solutions for improving the effectiveness of differentially private GBDTs
(e.g., (Zhao et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018; Xiang et al. 2018)).
However, they can suffer from the signiﬁcant accuracy loss
due to too loose sensitivity bounds and ineffective privacy
budget allocations (especially across different trees in the
GBDT model).
Sensitivity bounds: The previous studies on individual decision trees (Friedman and Schuster 2010; Mohammed et
al. 2011; Liu et al. 2018) bound the sensitivities by estimating the range of the function output. However, this method
leads to very loose sensitivity bounds in GBDTs, because
the range of the gain function output (G in Equation (3) introduced Section 2) is related to the number of instances and
the range can be potentially very huge for large data sets.
Loose sensitivity bounds lead to more noise to obtain a ﬁxed
privacy level, and cause huge accuracy loss.
Privacy budget allocations: There have been some previous studies on privacy budget allocations among different
trees (Liu et al. 2018; Xiang et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2018).
We can basically divide them into two kinds. 1) The ﬁrst
kind is to allocate the budget equally to each tree using the

Abstract
The Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT) is a popular
machine learning model for various tasks in recent years.
In this paper, we study how to improve model accuracy of
GBDT while preserving the strong guarantee of differential
privacy. Sensitivity and privacy budget are two key design
aspects for the effectiveness of differential private models.
Existing solutions for GBDT with differential privacy suffer from the signiﬁcant accuracy loss due to too loose sensitivity bounds and ineffective privacy budget allocations (especially across different trees in the GBDT model). Loose
sensitivity bounds lead to more noise to obtain a ﬁxed privacy level. Ineffective privacy budget allocations worsen the
accuracy loss especially when the number of trees is large.
Therefore, we propose a new GBDT training algorithm that
achieves tighter sensitivity bounds and more effective noise
allocations. Speciﬁcally, by investigating the property of gradient and the contribution of each tree in GBDTs, we propose
to adaptively control the gradients of training data for each iteration and leaf node clipping in order to tighten the sensitivity bounds. Furthermore, we design a novel boosting framework to allocate the privacy budget between trees so that the
accuracy loss can be further reduced. Our experiments show
that our approach can achieve much better model accuracy
than other baselines.

1

Introduction

Gradient Boosting Decision Trees (GBDTs) have achieved
state-of-the-art results on many challenging machine learning tasks such as click prediction (Richardson, Dominowska, and Ragno 2007), learning to rank (Burges 2010),
and web page classiﬁcation (Pennacchiotti and Popescu
2011). The algorithm builds a number of decision trees
one by one, where each tree tries to ﬁt the residual
of the previous trees. With the development of efﬁcient
GBDT libraries (Chen and Guestrin 2016; Ke et al. 2017;
Prokhorenkova et al. 2018; Wen et al. 2019), the GBDT
model has won many awards in recent machine learning
competitions and has been widely used both in the academics and in the industry (He et al. 2014; Zhou et al. 2017;
Ke et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2018; Feng, Yu, and Zhou 2018).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
784

