The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Distributed Machine Learning through Heterogeneous Edge Systems
Hanpeng Hu,1 Dan Wang,2 Chuan Wu1
1

The University of Hong Kong, 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{hphu, cwu}@cs.hku.hk, csdwang@comp.polyu.edu.hk.

et al. 2016), MXNet (Chen et al. 2015) and Caffe2 (Hazelwood et al. 2018)). Such a ‘data aggregation → training’
approach may well incur large network bandwidth cost, due
to large data transmission volumes and continuous generation nature of the data ﬂow, as well as data security and
privacy concerns. To alleviate these issues, collaborative,
distributed training among edge systems has been advocated (Tao and Li 2018), where each edge system locally
trains the dataset it collects, and exchanges model parameter updates (i.e., gradients) with each other through parameter servers (Wang et al. 2018; Konečnỳ et al. 2016;
Park et al. 2018) (a.k.a., geo-distributed data parallel training).

Abstract
Many emerging AI applications request distributed machine
learning (ML) among edge systems (e.g., IoT devices and
PCs at the edge of the Internet), where data cannot be uploaded to a central venue for model training, due to their
large volumes and/or security/privacy concerns. Edge devices
are intrinsically heterogeneous in computing capacity, posing
signiﬁcant challenges to parameter synchronization for parallel training with the parameter server (PS) architecture. This
paper proposes ADSP, a parameter synchronization model
for distributed machine learning (ML) with heterogeneous
edge systems. Eliminating the signiﬁcant waiting time occurring with existing parameter synchronization models, the
core idea of ADSP is to let faster edge devices continue training, while committing their model updates at strategically decided intervals. We design algorithms that decide time points
for each worker to commit its model update, and ensure not
only global model convergence but also faster convergence.
Our testbed implementation and experiments show that ADSP
outperforms existing parameter synchronization models signiﬁcantly in terms of ML model convergence time, scalability
and adaptability to large heterogeneity.

1

Edge systems are intrinsically heterogeneous: their hardware conﬁgurations can be vastly different, leading to different computation and communication capacities. This brings
signiﬁcant new issues on parameter synchronization among
the edge workers. In a data center environment, synchronous
training (i.e., Bulk Synchronous Parallel (BSP) (Ho et al.
2013; Li et al. 2013; Low et al. 2012)) is adopted by the
majority of production ML jobs (based on our exchanges
with large AI cloud operators), given the largely homogeneous worker conﬁguration: each worker trains a mini-batch
of input data and commits computed gradients to the PS;
the PS updates global model after receiving commits from
all workers, and then dispatches updated model parameters
to all workers, before each worker can continue training its
next mini-batch. In the edge environment, the vastly different training speeds among edge devices call for a more asynchronous parameter synchronization model, to expedite ML
model convergence.

Introduction

Many edge-based AI applications have emerged in recent
years, where various edge systems (e.g., PCs, smart phones,
IoT devices) collect local data, collaboratively train a ML
model, and use the model for AI-driven services. For example, smart cameras are deployed in surveillance systems (Ved 2019; Park et al. 2018), which capture local images/videos and train a global face recognition model aggregately. In Industry AI Operations (AIOps) (Qu and Ha
2017), chillers in a building or an area collect temperature
and electricity consumption data in the households, and derive a global COP (Coefﬁcient of Performance) prediction
model (Chen et al. 2019).
A straightforward way of training a global model with
data collected from multiple edge systems is to send all data
to a central venue, e.g., a cloud data center, and train the
datasets using a ML framework, such as TensorFlow (Abadi

Stale Synchronous Parallel (SSP) (Ho et al. 2013) and Totally Asynchronous Parallel (TAP) (Hsieh et al. 2017) are
representative asynchronous synchronization models. With
TAP, the PS updates the global model upon commit from
each individual worker, and dispatches updated model immediately to the respective worker; it has been proven that
such complete asynchrony cannot ensure model convergence (Hsieh et al. 2017). SSP enforces bounded asynchronization: fast workers wait for slow workers for a bounded
difference in their training progress, in order to ensure model
convergence. A few recent approaches have been proposed

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7179

