The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SADA: Semantic Adversarial Diagnostic Attacks for Autonomous Applications
Abdullah Hamdi, Matthias Müller, Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{abdullah.hamdi, matthias.mueller.2, Bernard.Ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
camera

One major factor impeding more widespread adoption of
deep neural networks (DNNs) is their lack of robustness,
which is essential for safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving. This has motivated much recent work on
adversarial attacks for DNNs, which mostly focus on pixellevel perturbations void of semantic meaning. In contrast, we
present a general framework for adversarial attacks on trained
agents, which covers semantic perturbations to the environment of the agent performing the task as well as pixel-level
attacks. To do this, we re-frame the adversarial attack problem as learning a distribution of parameters that always fools
the agent. In the semantic case, our proposed adversary (denoted as BBGAN) is trained to sample parameters that describe the environment with which the black-box agent interacts, such that the agent performs its dedicated task poorly
in this environment. We apply BBGAN on three different
tasks, primarily targeting aspects of autonomous navigation:
object detection, self-driving, and autonomous UAV racing.
On these tasks, BBGAN can generate failure cases that consistently fool a trained agent.

geometry

weather

Figure 1: Semantic Adversarial Diagnostic Attacks. Neural networks can perform very well on average for a host
of tasks; however, they do perform poorly or downright fail
when encountering some environments. To diagnose why
they fail and how they can be improved, we seek to learn
the underlying distribution of semantic parameters, which
generate environments that pose difﬁculty to these networks
when applied to three safety critical tasks: object detection,
self-driving cars, and autonomous UAV racing.

Introduction

enforce a speciﬁc behavior (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Carlini and Wagner 2017;
Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016).

As a result of recent advances in machine learning and computer vision, deep neural networks (DNNs) are now interleaved with many aspects of our daily lives. DNNs suggest
news articles to read and movies to watch, automatically
edit our photos and videos, and translate between hundreds
of languages. They are also bound to disrupt transportation
with autonomous driving slowly becoming a reality. While
there are already impressive demos and some successful deployments, safety concerns for boundary conditions persist.
While current models work very well on average, they struggle with robustness in certain cases. Recent work in the adversarial attack literature shows how sensitive DNNs are to
input noise. These attacks usually utilize the information
about the network structure to perform gradient updates in
order to derive targeted perturbations (coined white-box attacks). These perturbations are injected into the input image at the pixel-level, so as to either confuse the network or

In practice, such pixel attacks are less likely to naturally
occur than semantic attacks which include changes in camera viewpoint, lighting conditions, street layouts, etc. The
literature on semantic attacks is much sparser, since they
are much more subtle and difﬁcult to analyze (Alcorn et
al. 2019; Zeng et al. 2019). Yet, this type of attack is critical to understand/diagnose failure cases that might occur
in the real-world. While it is very difﬁcult to investigate semantic attacks on real data, we can leverage simulation as
a proxy that can unearth useful insights transferable to the
real-world. Figure 1 shows an example of an object misclassiﬁed by the YOLOV3 detector (Redmon and Farhadi 2018)
applied to a rendered image from a virtual environment, an
autonomous UAV racing (Müller et al. 2017) failure case
in a recently developed general purpose simulator (Sim4CV
(Müller et al. 2018b)), and an autonomous driving failure
case in a popular driving simulator (CARLA (Dosovitskiy

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10901

