The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On the Anatomy of MCMC-Based
Maximum Likelihood Learning of Energy-Based Models
Erik Nijkamp,* Mitch Hill,* Tian Han, Song-Chun Zhu, Ying Nian Wu
UCLA Department of Statistics
8117 Math Sciences Bldg.
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1554
(*equal contributions)

Abstract

 (QHUJ\'LIIHUHQFH

This study investigates the effects of Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) sampling in unsupervised Maximum Likelihood (ML) learning. Our attention is restricted to the family
of unnormalized probability densities for which the negative
log density (or energy function) is a ConvNet. We ﬁnd that
many of the techniques used to stabilize training in previous
studies are not necessary. ML learning with a ConvNet potential requires only a few hyper-parameters and no regularization. Using this minimal framework, we identify a variety of
ML learning outcomes that depend solely on the implementation of MCMC sampling.
On one hand, we show that it is easy to train an energy-based
model which can sample realistic images with short-run
Langevin. ML can be effective and stable even when MCMC
samples have much higher energy than true steady-state samples throughout training. Based on this insight, we introduce
an ML method with purely noise-initialized MCMC, highquality short-run synthesis, and the same budget as ML with
informative MCMC initialization such as CD or PCD. Unlike previous models, our energy model can obtain realistic
high-diversity samples from a noise signal after training.
On the other hand, ConvNet potentials learned with nonconvergent MCMC do not have a valid steady-state and cannot be considered approximate unnormalized densities of the
training data because long-run MCMC samples differ greatly
from observed images. We show that it is much harder to train
a ConvNet potential to learn a steady-state over realistic images. To our knowledge, long-run MCMC samples of all previous models lose the realism of short-run samples. With correct tuning of Langevin noise, we train the ﬁrst ConvNet potentials for which long-run and steady-state MCMC samples
are realistic images.

1
1.1

&RQYHUJHQW1RQ&RQYHUJHQW

 0&0&&RQYHUJHQFH

&RQWUDFWLRQ2VFLOODWLRQ([SDQVLRQ
5HDOLVWLF
VKRUWUXQ
VDPSOHV

9DQLVKLQJ
JUDGLHQWV

,QIRUPDWLYH
,QLWLDOL]DWLRQ
3ULRU$UW

1RLVH
,QLWLDOL]DWLRQ
2XUV

([SORGLQJ
JUDGLHQWV

5HDOLVWLF
ORQJUXQ
VDPSOHV
,QIRUPDWLYH
,QLWLDOL]DWLRQ
2XUV

Figure 1: Two axes characterize ML learning of ConvNet
potential energy functions: 1) energy difference between
data samples and synthesized samples, and 2) MCMC convergence towards steady-state. Learning a sampler with realistic short-run MCMC synthesis is surprisingly simple
whereas learning an energy with realistic long-run samples requires proper MCMC implementation. We propose:
a) short-run training with noise initialization of the Markov
chains, and b) an explanation and implementation of correct
tuning for training models with realistic long-run samples.
unsupervised techniques must be used instead. This work
focuses on the unsupervised paradigm of the energy-based
model (1) with a ConvNet potential function (2).
Previous works studying Maximum Likelihood (ML)
training of ConvNet potentials, such as (Xie et al. 2016;
2018a; Gao et al. 2018), use Langevin MCMC samples to
approximate the gradient of the unknown and intractable log
partition function during learning. The authors universally
ﬁnd that after enough model updates, MCMC samples generated by short-run Langevin from informative initialization
(see Section 2.3) are realistic images that resemble the data.
However, we ﬁnd that energy functions learned by prior
works have a major defect regardless of MCMC initialization, network structure, and auxiliary training parameters.

Introduction

Diagnosing Energy-Based Models

Statistical modeling of high-dimensional signals is a challenging task encountered in many academic disciplines and
practical applications. We study image signals in this work.
When images come without annotations or labels, the effective tools of deep supervised learning cannot be applied and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5272

