The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Lightweight and Robust Representation
of Economic Scales from Satellite Imagery
Sungwon Han,∗1,3 Donghyun Ahn,∗1,3 Hyunji Cha,∗1,3
Jeasurk Yang,2,3 Sungwon Park,1,3 Meeyoung Cha3,1
1

School of Computing, KAIST, South Korea
The Institute for Korean Regional Studies, SNU, South Korea
3
Data Science Group, IBS, South Korea
{lion4151, segaukwa, hyunji3190, psw0416, meeyoungcha}@kaist.ac.kr, hatomi91@snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract
Satellite imagery has long been an attractive data source providing a wealth of information regarding human-inhabited
areas. While high-resolution satellite images are rapidly becoming available, limited studies have focused on how to extract meaningful information regarding human habitation patterns and economic scales from such data. We present READ,
a new approach for obtaining essential spatial representation
for any given district from high-resolution satellite imagery
based on deep neural networks. Our method combines transfer learning and embedded statistics to efﬁciently learn the
critical spatial characteristics of arbitrary size areas and represent such characteristics in a ﬁxed-length vector with minimal information loss. Even with a small set of labels, READ
can distinguish subtle differences between rural and urban areas and infer the degree of urbanization. An extensive evaluation demonstrates that the model outperforms state-of-the-art
models in predicting economic scales, such as the population density in South Korea (R2 =0.9617), and shows a high
use potential in developing countries where district-level economic scales are unknown.

Figure 1: Methods for selecting satellite imagery of target
districts. Unlike the previous methods (Jean et al. 2016), our
neural network model can utilize all image tiles belonging to
the target. At least three points should belong to the district.
The mixed area is a mixed landscape composed of urban and
rural interaction.
1997). Although nighttime images are subject to noise, such
as saturation effects, they have shown to yield a meaningful
linear relationship between brightness and various economic
scales.
More recently, high-resolution daytime satellite imagery
has emerged as an attractive data source that could reveal
ﬁne-grained information at an unprecedented scale. For example, transfer learning has been used to extract socioeconomic indicators to create an accurate poverty map of
Uganda (Xie et al. 2016). Such research has considerable
implications for sustainable development growth in developing countries. A convolutional neural network (CNN)
has been used to predict grid cell estimates of county-level
population counts (Robinson, Hohman, and Dilkina 2017).
This work produced a high-resolution grid-shaped population map from satellite images at a 30 arc-second resolution
(≈ 1km2 ). However, this method is not applicable outside
of the United States because conventional statistics are produced based on districts that can be of any polygon shape
rather than at the grid-level, which leads to a mismatch when
attempting to use satellite images.
The method proposed in this paper is inspired by the
mean-teacher model in semi-supervised learning (Tarvainen
and Valpola 2017) and the full-convolution CNN model with

Introduction
Satellite images captured through remote sensing technology provide useful information regarding human activities
and land covers without having to visit the region. Analyzing satellite images provides new insights for establishing
policies and for understanding population-level behaviors in
districts and broader areas. Another advantage of satellite
imagery is its ability to search historical data, which can
reveal the temporal dynamics of speciﬁc locations. Several
techniques have been proposed to analyze satellite images.
Many studies measure the critical factors of socioeconomic scales from satellite images, and the demand has been
rapidly increasing. For example, demographic research represents a popular application area in which scholars have
leveraged the light intensity of nighttime satellite images to
extract economic activities (Ghosh et al. 2013; Chaturvedi,
Ghosh, and Bhandari 2011; Letu et al. 2011). Nighttime
satellite images have also been used to predict the population density of counties in the United States (Sutton et al.
∗

Three authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
428

