The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Context-Transformer: Tackling Object Confusion for Few-Shot Detection
Ze Yang,1∗ Yali Wang,1∗ Xianyu Chen,1 Jianzhuang Liu,2 Yu Qiao1,3†
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
{ze.yang, yali.wang, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn, xianyuchen1992@outlook.com, liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com

portant phenomenon. For few-shot object detection, a transferred detector often performs well on localization while
encounters difﬁculty in classiﬁcation, e.g., a horse is welllocalized but misclassiﬁed as a dog in Fig. 1.
The main reason is that, an object detector uses bounding box regressor (BBOX) for localization while object+background classiﬁer (OBJ+BG) for classiﬁcation.
BBOX is often category-irrelevant. Hence, we can use
source-domain BBOX as a reliable initialization of targetdomain BBOX. In this case, the detector can effectively
localize new objects after ﬁne-tuning with a few training
samples in the target domain. On the contrary, OBJ+BG is
category-speciﬁc. In other words, it has to be randomly initialized for new categories in the target domain. However,
only a few training images are available in this domain. Such
low data diversity signiﬁcantly enlarges the training difﬁculty of classiﬁer, which leads to the key problem above,
i.e., object confusion caused by annotation scarcity.
To address this problem, we propose a novel ContextTransformer. It can automatically exploit contexts from only
a few images on hand, and attentively integrate such distinct clues to generalize detection. Our design is inspired by
(Oliva and Torralba 2007) that, at an early age with little
object knowledge, humans can build the contextual associations for visual recognition. In other words, under little supervision scenarios, we will try to explore distinct clues in
the surroundings (which we refer to as contextual ﬁelds in
this paper), to clarify object confusion. For example, a few
images may be discriminative enough to distinguish horse
from dog, when we ﬁnd that these images contain important
contents such as a person sits on this animal, the scene is
about wild grassland, etc.
To mimic this capacity, we design Context-Transformer
in a concise transfer framework. Speciﬁcally, it consists of
two simple but effective submodules, i.e., afﬁnity discovery
and context aggregation. For a target-domain image, afﬁnity discovery ﬁrst constructs a set of contextual ﬁelds, according to default prior boxes (also called as anchor boxes)
in the detector. Then, it adaptively exploits relations between prior boxes and contextual ﬁelds. Finally, context
aggregation leverages such relations as guidance, and integrates key contexts attentively into each prior box. As a

Abstract
Few-shot object detection is a challenging but realistic scenario, where only a few annotated training images are available for training detectors. A popular approach to handle
this problem is transfer learning, i.e., ﬁne-tuning a detector pretrained on a source-domain benchmark. However,
such transferred detector often fails to recognize new objects in the target domain, due to low data diversity of
training samples. To tackle this problem, we propose a
novel Context-Transformer within a concise deep transfer
framework. Speciﬁcally, Context-Transformer can effectively
leverage source-domain object knowledge as guidance, and
automatically exploit contexts from only a few training images in the target domain. Subsequently, it can adaptively
integrate these relational clues to enhance the discriminative
power of detector, in order to reduce object confusion in fewshot scenarios. Moreover, Context-Transformer is ﬂexibly
embedded in the popular SSD-style detectors, which makes
it a plug-and-play module for end-to-end few-shot learning.
Finally, we evaluate Context-Transformer on the challenging
settings of few-shot detection and incremental few-shot detection. The experimental results show that, our framework
outperforms the recent state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Object detection has been mainly promoted by deep learning
frameworks (Ren et al. 2015; He et al. 2017; Redmon et al.
2016; Liu et al. 2016). However, the impressive performance
of these detectors heavily relies on large-scale benchmarks
with bounding box annotations, which are time-consuming
or infeasible to obtain in practice. As a result, we often face
a real-world scenario, i.e., few-shot object detection, where
there are only a few annotated training images. In this case,
deep learning will deteriorate due to severe overﬁtting.
A popular strategy is transfer learning, i.e., one can train
an object detector with a large-scale benchmark in the source
domain, and then ﬁne-tune it with a few samples in the target domain. By doing so, we observe an interesting and im∗

Ze Yang and Yali Wang contribute equally
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12653

