The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Tensorized LSTM with Adaptive Shared
Memory for Learning Trends in Multivariate Time Series
Dongkuan Xu,1∗ Wei Cheng,2∗ Bo Zong,2 Dongjing Song,2 Jingchao Ni,2
Wenchao Yu,2 Yanchi Liu,2 Haifeng Chen,2 Xiang Zhang1

2

1
The Pennsylvania State University, {dux19, xzz89}@psu.edu
NEC Laboratories America, Inc., {weicheng, bzong, dsong, jni, wyu, yanchi, haifeng}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
The problem of learning and forecasting underlying trends
in time series data arises in a variety of applications, such
as trafﬁc management, energy optimization, etc. In literature,
a trend in time series is characterized by the slope and duration, and its prediction is then to forecast the two values of the
subsequent trend given historical data of the time series. For
this problem, existing approaches mainly deal with the case
in univariate time series. However, in many real-world applications, there are multiple variables at play, and handling all
of them at the same time is crucial for an accurate prediction. A natural way is to employ multi-task learning (MTL)
techniques in which the trend learning of each time series is
treated as a task. The key point of MTL is to learn task relatedness to achieve better parameter sharing, which however
is challenging in trend prediction task. First, effectively modeling the complex temporal patterns in different tasks is hard
as the temporal and spatial dimensions are entangled. Second,
the relatedness among tasks may change over time. In this paper, we propose a neural network, DeepTrends, for multivariate time series trend prediction. The core module of DeepTrends is a tensorized LSTM with adaptive shared memory
(TLASM). TLASM employs the tensorized LSTM to model
the temporal patterns of long-term trend sequences in an MTL
setting. With an adaptive shared memory, TLASM is able
to learn the relatedness among tasks adaptively, based upon
which it can dynamically vary degrees of parameter sharing
among tasks. To further consider short-term patterns, DeepTrends utilizes a multi-task 1dCNN to learn the local time
series features, and employs a task-speciﬁc sub-network to
learn a mixture of long-term and short-term patterns for trend
prediction. Extensive experiments on real datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model.

(l1, S1)

(l2, S2)

(l3, S3)

(l4, S4)

TS-1

(l5’, S5’)
MLP

Task 1

MLP

Task 2

MLP

Task 3

Feature
Fusion

TS-3

TLASM

TLASM

TLASM

TLASM

TS-2

Multi-Task
1dCNN

Feature
Fusion

Feature
Fusion

Long
Dependency

Local
Dependency

Figure 1: The overview of the proposed deep architecture
for learning trends in multivariate time series.
which however could deliver very little information about
the semantics and dynamics of the underlying process generating the time series (Lin, Guo, and Aberer 2017). In many
applications, it is arguably even more crucial to learn and
forecast the evolving trend which measures the intermediate
behaviour, i.e., upward or downward pattern of time series.
For example, the trend prediction has been popularly used
in capacity planning, energy optimization, etc. Besides, in
some applications, such as algorithmic trading, it is more
achievable to predict the trend of stock price rather than forecast the market absolute values (Xu and Cohen 2018).
In literature, there have been few efforts to learn and predict trends in time series data. In (Lin, Guo, and Aberer
2017), Lin et al. proposed a hybrid neural network to predict trend in univariate time series. In their work, a trend in
time series is characterized by the slope and duration of the
up/down movement of time series. The task is then to predict the slope and duration of the next coming trend given
the historical data of time series over a period of time. Note
that the existing approaches on time series prediction cannot
be directly applied to the trend prediction as the task needs
to predict both the duration and the slope of the subsequent
trend, that are entangled.
However, in many real-world applications, there are multiple variables at play, and handling all of them at the same
time is crucial for an accurate prediction, because the trend
pattern of one time series may inﬂuence others. For this

Introduction
A large amount of time series data has been generated from
various domains, such as trafﬁc management (Lai et al.
2018), energy optimization (Rangapuram et al. 2018) and
algorithmic trading (Wang et al. 2019a). Great efforts had
previously been made for prediction on speciﬁc data points,
∗
This work was done when the ﬁrst author was a summer intern
at NEC Labs America. Wei Cheng is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1395

