The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Spherical Convolution Approach for Learning Long
Term Viewport Prediction in 360 Immersive Video
Chenglei Wu,1 Rui-Xiao Zhang,1, 2 Zhi Wang,3∗† Lifeng Sun1, 4∗
1

Beijing Key Lab of Networked Multimedia, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
2
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University,
4
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing (Tsinghua University), Ministry of Education, China
{wucl18@mails., zrx17@mails., wangzhi@sz., sunlf@}tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Previous studies often extract visual features from 360
videos with the conventional planar CNN, such as the
VGG16 network (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) used by
(Nguyen, Yan, and Nahrstedt 2018) or C3D network (Tran
et al. 2015). However due to the image distortion and split
caused by the sphere-to-plane projection of 360 video, these
planar CNN networks are not capable of extracting visual
features effectively, thus sabotaging the accuracy of the later
viewport prediction process. This problem imposes an urgent requirement for a dedicated 360 feature extraction network. However, as the planar feature extraction networks
are trained on planar image classification datasets (e.g., ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009)) or video classification datasets
(e.g., UCF101 (Soomro, Zamir, and Shah 2012)), there also
lacks a 360 image or video classification dataset for pretraining 360 feature extraction network.
On the other hand, previous work (Xu et al. 2018; Fan
et al. 2017) bases their predictions on the saliency or optical flow information of 360 videos. However, a user’s future
viewport doesn’t always correlate with this visual information. For example, Hu et al 2017 found that in a sightseeing video1 where the visually salient foreground is the video
shooter, human viewers tend to watch the visually un-salient
background view. Furthermore, these kinds of information
describe more of the pixel information of 360 video frames,
rather than the semantic content information, but human
viewers tend to have their personal preferences of certain
objects or video contents. A content and preference aware
viewport prediction network is called for these problems.
In this paper, we start by proposing and training a dedicated spherical CNN (S2CNN) based 360 feature extraction
network. We design a convolutional RNN based visual feature extraction network to distill spatial-temporal information from sequential 360 video data. We provide a two-step
training process and a method for converting planar video
classification dataset to sphere domain, which allows us to
pre-train the rotational invariant feature extraction network.
We conduct a series of video classification experiments with
our 360 video dataset to study the effects of different kernel
shape, network depth, etc.
We then propose a preference-aware viewport prediction

Viewport prediction for 360 video forecasts a viewer’s viewport when he/she watches a 360 video with a head-mounted
display, which benefits many VR/AR applications such as
360 video streaming and mobile cloud VR.
Existing studies based on planar convolutional neural network (CNN) suffer from the image distortion and split caused
by the sphere-to-plane projection. In this paper, we start by
proposing a spherical convolution based feature extraction
network to distill spatial-temporal 360 information. We provide a solution for training such a network without a dedicated 360 image or video classification dataset.
We differ with previous methods, which base their predictions on image pixel-level information, and propose a semantic content and preference based viewport prediction scheme.
In this paper, we adopt a recurrent neural network (RNN)
network to extract a user’s personal preference of 360 video
content from minutes of embedded viewing histories. We utilize this semantic preference as spatial attention to help network find the “interested” regions on a future video. We further design a tailored mixture density network (MDN) based
viewport prediction scheme, including viewport modeling,
tailored loss function, etc, to improve efficiency and accuracy.
Our extensive experiments demonstrate the rationality and
performance of our method, which outperforms state-of-theart methods, especially in long-term prediction.

Introduction
Viewport prediction is one of the most challenging tasks
in 360 video, which forecasts a viewer’s viewport when
he/she watches a 360 video with a head-mounted display
(HMD). Many virtual reality (VR) applications, e.g., 360
video streaming (Xiao et al. 2017) or mobile cloud VR (Hou
et al. 2018) benefit from such technique. Because a user’s
future viewport is related to the 360 video contents, researchers have proposed to incorporate multi-modal information to predict future viewport, e.g., dedicated saliency
detection network (Nguyen, Yan, and Nahrstedt 2018) for
360 video and temporary head movement.
∗

Corresponding author.
Zhi is also with the Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen.
Copyright c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1

14003

https://aliensunmin.github.io/project/360video/

