The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Intrinsically-Motivated Approach for
Learning Highly Exploring and Fast Mixing Policies
Mirco Mutti

Marcello Restelli

Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy
mirco.mutti@polimi.it

Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

errors (Stadie, Levine, and Abbeel 2015; Pathak et al. 2017;
Burda et al. 2019a; 2019b). On a similar ﬂavor, other works
propose to relate an intrinsic reward to some sort of learning progress (Lopes et al. 2012) or information gain (Mohamed and Rezende 2015; Houthooft et al. 2016), stimulating the agent’s empowerment over the environment. Countbased approaches (Bellemare et al. 2016; Tang et al. 2017;
Ostrovski et al. 2017) consider exploration bonuses proportional to the state visitation frequencies, assigning high rewards to rarely visited states. Athough the mentioned approaches have been relatively effective in solving sparserewards, hard-exploration tasks (Pathak et al. 2017; Burda
et al. 2019b), they have some common limitations that may
affect their ability to methodically explore an environment
in the absence of external rewards, as pointed out in (Ecoffet et al. 2019). Especially, due to the consumable nature of
their intrinsic bonuses, the learning agent could prematurely
lose interest in a frontier of high rewards (detachment). Furthermore, the agent may suffer from derailment by trying
to return to a promising state, previously discovered, if a
naı̈ve exploratory mechanism, such as -greedy, is combined
to the intrinsic motivation mechanism (which is often the
case). To overcome these limitations, recent works suggest
alternative approaches to motivate the agent towards a more
systematic exploration of the environment (Hazan et al. 2019;
Ecoffet et al. 2019). Especially, in (Hazan et al. 2019) the
authors consider an intrinsic objective which is directed to
the maximization of an entropic measure over the state distribution induced by a policy. Then, they provide a provably
efﬁcient algorithm to learn a mixture of deterministic policies that is overall optimal w.r.t. the maximum-entropy exploration objective. To the best of our knowledge, none of the
mentioned approaches explicitly address the related aspect
of the mixing time of an exploratory policy, which represents
the time it takes for the policy to reach its full capacity in
terms of exploration. Nonetheless, in many cases we would
like to maximize the probability of reaching any potential
target state having a fairly limited number of interactions at
hand for exploring the environment. Notably, this context
presents some analogies to the problem of maximizing the
efﬁciency of a random walk (Hassibi et al. 2014).

Abstract
What is a good exploration strategy for an agent that interacts
with an environment in the absence of external rewards? Ideally, we would like to get a policy driving towards a uniform
state-action visitation (highly exploring) in a minimum number of steps (fast mixing), in order to ease efﬁcient learning
of any goal-conditioned policy later on. Unfortunately, it is
remarkably arduous to directly learn an optimal policy of this
nature. In this paper, we propose a novel surrogate objective
for learning highly exploring and fast mixing policies, which
focuses on maximizing a lower bound to the entropy of the
steady-state distribution induced by the policy. In particular,
we introduce three novel lower bounds, that lead to as many
optimization problems, that tradeoff the theoretical guarantees
with computational complexity. Then, we present a modelbased reinforcement learning algorithm, IDE3 AL, to learn an
optimal policy according to the introduced objective. Finally,
we provide an empirical evaluation of this algorithm on a set
of hard-exploration tasks.

1

Introduction

In general, the Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework (Sutton and Barto 2018) assumes the presence of a reward
signal coming from a, potentially unknown, environment
to a learning agent. When this signal is sufﬁciently informative about the utility of the agent’s decisions, RL
has proved to be rather successful in solving challenging tasks, even at a super-human level (Mnih et al. 2015;
Silver et al. 2017). However, in most real-world scenarios,
we cannot rely on a well-shaped, complete reward signal.
This may prevent the agent from learning anything until,
while performing random actions, it eventually stumbles into
some sort of external reward. Thus, what is a good objective
for a learning agent to pursue, in the absence of an external
reward signal, to prepare itself to learn efﬁciently, eventually,
a goal-conditioned policy?
Intrinsic motivation (Chentanez, Barto, and Singh 2005;
Oudeyer and Kaplan 2009) traditionally tries to answer this
pressing question by designing self-motivated goals that favor exploration. In a curiosity-driven approach, ﬁrst proposed
in (Schmidhuber 1991), the intrinsic objective encourages
the agent to explore novel states by rewarding prediction

In this paper, we present a novel approach to learn exploratory policies that are, at the same time, highly exploring
and fast mixing. In Section 3, we propose a surrogate objec-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5232

