The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bursting the Filter Bubble: Fairness-Aware Network Link Prediction
Farzan Masrour, Tyler Wilson, Heng Yan, Pang-Ning Tan, Abdol-Hossein Esfahanian
Michigan State University
{masrours, wils1270, yanheng, ptan, esfahanian}@msu.edu

exposed to online users. If left unchecked, the ﬁlter bubble
may introduce systematic biases in the network data and its
subsequent analysis. For instance, Hofstra et al. (Hofstra et
al. 2017) examined the ethnic and gender diversity of social
relationships on Facebook and showed that those who have
ample opportunities to befriend other similar users often ﬁnd
themselves in highly segregated networks. This is due to the
homophily principle (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook
2001), which is the tendency of individuals to form social
ties with other similar individuals in a network. As current
algorithms are designed to promote links between similar
users, their suggested links may exacerbate the user segregation problem.
In addition to online social networks, the ﬁlter bubble
problem is also prevalent in recommender systems, which
can be viewed as a link prediction task applied to a bipartite network of users and items. A recent study by Nguyen
et al. (Nguyen et al. 2014) concluded that recommender systems tend to expose users to “slightly narrowing set of items
over time.” For example, in movie recommendation, movies
from a certain genre may only be recommended to users
from a speciﬁc gender. By addressing the ﬁlter bubble problem in network link prediction, the proposed method can
potentially be used to alleviate the ﬁlter bubble problem in
other types of recommender systems.
This paper examines the ﬁlter bubble problem for network
link prediction from algorithm fairness perspective. Specifically, we consider a link prediction algorithm to be unfair
if it is biased towards promoting certain types of links (e.g.,
those between users with similar gender or other protected
attributes). As a motivating example, consider the link prediction task on professional networking sites. Certain professions, such as software engineering, tend to be dominated
by men, a fact that is likely to be reﬂected in the link structure of the professional network. As a result, the links recommended by the site may reinforce this gender-based segregation and primarily recommend links between individuals from the same gender while recommending comparatively fewer inter-gender links. Though such a system may
be able to achieve high link prediction accuracy, it may unfairly disadvantage some users. For example, a female software engineer may be treated unfairly as they are seldom
recommended to other male software engineers.
Unfair practices due to the decisions generated by auto-

Abstract
Link prediction is an important task in online social networking as it can be used to infer new or previously unknown relationships of a network. However, due to the homophily principle, current algorithms are susceptible to promoting links
that may lead to increase segregation of the network—an effect known as ﬁlter bubble. In this study, we examine the ﬁlter bubble problem from the perspective of algorithm fairness
and introduce a dyadic-level fairness criterion based on network modularity measure. We show how the criterion can be
utilized as a postprocessing step to generate more heterogeneous links in order to overcome the ﬁlter bubble problem.
In addition, we also present a novel framework that combines adversarial network representation learning with supervised link prediction to alleviate the ﬁlter bubble problem.
Experimental results conducted on several real-world datasets
showed the effectiveness of the proposed methods compared
to other baseline approaches, which include conventional link
prediction and fairness-aware methods for i.i.d data.

Introduction
Online social networking sites have transformed the way individuals interact and share information with each other. The
wealth of social network data available also provide opportunities to mine them for a variety of business applications.
For example, businesses can learn about the users’ interests,
sentiment, and online behavior by analyzing the social network data. The insights gained from such analysis will help
businesses to increase engagement with their existing customers or connect with new customers. Despite its importance, recent studies have raised concerns about the potential biases and unintended consequences that may arise from
such automated analysis.
For example, link prediction methods (Liben-Nowell and
Kleinberg 2007; Al Hasan et al. 2006; Masrour et al. 2015;
2018) are commonly employed by social networking sites
to encourage users to expand their social circles. “Suggested
for you” on Instagram and “People you may know” on
LinkedIn are two example applications of such methods.
However, the rise of link prediction systems have led to an
effect known as ﬁlter bubble (Pariser 2012), which is the reinforced segregation and narrowing diversity of information
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
841

