The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AVG O UT: A Simple Output-Probability Measure to Eliminate Dull Responses
Tong Niu, Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{tongn, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

works to have low corpus-level diversity (Li et al. 2016a;
Serban et al. 2016; Sordoni et al. 2015; Vinyals and Le
2015), as it tends to generate safe, terse, and uninformative
responses, such as “I don’t know.”. These responses unnecessarily make a dialogue system much less interactive than
it should be.
To increase the diversity of dialogue responses, the ﬁrst
step is to faithfully evaluate how diverse a response is. There
are metrics used by previous work that are correlated to diversity, but not strongly, such as ratio of distinct tokens (Li
et al. 2016a) and response length (Baheti et al. 2018). However, a response can be long but extremely boring in meaning, such as “I am sure that I don’t know about it.”, or short
but interesting (i.e., contains a lot of information), such as
“Dad was mean.”. Only investigating discrete token output
by the model is also not ideal, because these tokens are only
a single realization of the model’s output probability distribution at each time step, which unavoidably loses valuable information indicated by the whole distribution. Li et
al. (2016b) manually collect a shortlist of dull responses,
and during training discourage the model from producing
such utterances. However, an important drawback of handcrafted rules is that the set of dull tokens or utterances is
static, while in fact it usually evolves during training: when
the current dull tokens are eliminated, another set of them
might reveal themselves.
In our work,1 we begin with a simple yet effective approach to measure how diverse a response is. This metric, which we name “Average Output Probability Distribution”, or AVG O UT, draws information directly from the
training-in-session model itself. We calculate it by keeping track of the exponential average of all output probability distributions on the decoder side during training. This
metric dynamically measures which tokens the model is biased toward without any hand-crafted rules, thus making it
a faithful evaluation of the model diversity (i.e., for diverse
models, the token probabilities should be more evenly distributed rather than peaked at a few dull tokens). In addition, since AVG O UT is a one-dimensional categorical distribution rather than a dimensionless numerical value like
entropy, it naturally carries and conveys more information

Abstract
Many sequence-to-sequence dialogue models tend to generate safe, uninformative responses. There have been various
useful efforts on trying to eliminate them. However, these
approaches either improve decoding algorithms during inference, rely on hand-crafted features, or employ complex models. In our work, we build dialogue models that are dynamically aware of what utterances or tokens are dull without any
feature-engineering. Speciﬁcally, we start with a simple yet
effective automatic metric, AVG O UT, which calculates the
average output probability distribution of all time steps on the
decoder side during training. This metric directly estimates
which tokens are more likely to be generated, thus making it
a faithful evaluation of the model diversity (i.e., for diverse
models, the token probabilities should be more evenly distributed rather than peaked at a few dull tokens). We then
leverage this novel metric to propose three models that promote diversity without losing relevance. The ﬁrst model, M I NAVG O UT, directly maximizes the diversity score through
the output distributions of each batch; the second model, Label Fine-Tuning (LFT), prepends to the source sequence a
label continuously scaled by the diversity score to control the
diversity level; the third model, RL, adopts Reinforcement
Learning and treats the diversity score as a reward signal.
Moreover, we experiment with a hybrid model by combining
the loss terms of M INAVG O UT and RL. All four models outperform their base LSTM-RNN model on both diversity and
relevance by a large margin, and are comparable to or better
than competitive baselines (also veriﬁed via human evaluation). Moreover, our approaches are orthogonal to the base
model, making them applicable as an add-on to other emerging better dialogue models in the future.

1

Introduction

Many modern dialogue generation models use a sequenceto-sequence architecture as their backbone (Sordoni et al.
2015), following its success when applied to Machine Translation (MT) (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015). However,
dialogue tasks also have a requirement different from that
of MT: the response not only has to be “correct” (coherent and relevant), but also needs to be diverse and informative. However, seq2seq has been reported by many previous
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8560

We will release all our code and model outputs.

