The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MuMod: A Micro-Unit Connection
Approach for Hybrid-Order Community Detection
Ling Huang,1,2 Hong-Yang Chao,1,2 Guangqiang Xie3
2

1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Computer, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
huanglinghl@hotmail.com, isschhy@mail.sysu.edu.cn, xiegq@gdut.edu.cn

only the lower-order connectivity pattern is utilized (Shi
and Malik 2000; Newman 2006; Frey and Dueck 2007;
Schaeffer 2007; Chakraborty et al. 2014), which can be captured at the level of individual nodes and edges. By ignoring
the higher-order connectivity pattern, the community structure discovered by the lower-order approaches fails to capture the building blocks of complex network (Benson, Gleich, and Leskovec 2016).

Abstract
In the past few years, higher-order community detection has
drawn an increasing amount of attention. Compared with the
lower-order approaches that rely on the connectivity pattern
of individual nodes and edges, the higher-order approaches
discover communities by leveraging the higher-order connectivity pattern via constructing a motif-based hypergraph.
Despite success in capturing the building blocks of complex
networks, recent study has shown that the higher-order approaches unavoidably suffer from the hypergraph fragmentation issue. Although an edge enhancement strategy has been
designed previously to address this issue, adding additional
edges may corrupt the original lower-order connectivity pattern. To this end, this paper deﬁnes a new problem of community detection, namely hybrid-order community detection,
which aims to discover communities by simultaneously leveraging the lower-order connectivity pattern and the higherorder connectivity pattern. For addressing this new problem, a
new Micro-unit Modularity (MuMod) approach is designed.
The basic idea lies in constructing a micro-unit connection
network, where both of the lower-order connectivity pattern
and the higher-order connectivity pattern are utilized. And
then a new micro-unit modularity model is proposed for generating the micro-unit groups, from which the overlapping
community structure of the original network can be derived.
Extensive experiments are conducted on ﬁve real-world networks. Comparison results with twelve existing approaches
conﬁrm the effectiveness of the proposed method.

On the other hand, the existing higher-order community
detection approaches mainly rely on the higher-order connectivity pattern at the level of small subnetworks (Arenas
et al. 2008; Zhao 2015; Benson, Gleich, and Leskovec 2016;
Tsourakakis, Pachocki, and Mitzenmacher 2017; Zhou et
al. 2017; Yin et al. 2017; Huang, Wang, and Chao 2018a;
Li et al. 2019a; 2018b; Huang, Wang, and Chao 2019). In the
higher-order approaches, a motif-based hypergraph is constructed by utilizing only the co-occurrence information of
the motif instances. However, as shown in (Li et al. 2019b),
it may encounter the hypergraph fragmentation issue, in
which the original connected network may be fragmented
into a large number of connected components with various
sizes and isolated nodes due to the lack of higher-order connection among them. Although an edge enhancement approach has been developed for addressing this issue (Li et al.
2019b), our study shows that adding additional edges may
corrupt the original lower-order connectivity pattern. To our
best knowledge, there is still a lack of approaches designed
for effectively leveraging both of the lower-order connectivity pattern and the higher-order connectivity pattern.

Introduction
Community detection is a hot research topic in network
mining. Many community detection approaches have been
developed from different perspectives (Wang, Lai, and Yu
2013; 2014; Shao et al. 2015; He et al. 2016; Blondel et al.
2008; He et al. 2017; 2018; Jin et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2018; Li
et al. 2018a; Ganji, Bailey, and Stuckey 2018; Jin et al. 2019;
Laishram, Wendt, and Soundarajan 2019; Wang and Zhu
2019; Zhang et al. 2019). According to the adopted connectivity pattern, the existing community detection approaches
can be roughly categorized into two classes, namely lowerorder community detection and higher-order community detection. In the lower-order community detection approaches,

In this paper, a new problem of community detection is
deﬁned, namely hybrid-order community detection, which
aims to discover communities by simultaneously leveraging the lower-order connectivity pattern and the higher-order
connectivity pattern. For addressing this new problem, a
new Micro-unit Modularity (MuMod) approach is designed.
Firstly, a new concept called micro-unit is deﬁned, which
is either a motif instance or an edge that is not contained in
any motif instance. The micro-unit connection of two microunits is deﬁned to be the Jaccard similarity between their
node sets. Then, a micro-unit connection network is constructed, where the micro-units are regarded as nodes and
the micro-unit connections are regarded as weighted edges.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
107

