The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Stochastic Approximate Gradient Descent via the Langevin Algorithm
Yixuan Qiu,1 Xiao Wang2
1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University, yixuanq@andrew.cmu.edu
2
Department of Statistics, Purdue University University, wangxiao@purdue.edu

However, there are a much broader class of problems
where ξ follows a general probability distribution π(ξ). Unlike the previous simple scenario, in many cases an unbiased stochastic gradient cannot be easily obtained due to the
complexity of π(ξ). If π(ξ) is beyond the scope of standard
distribution families, then some general-purpose sampling
techniques such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC,
Gilks, Richardson, and Spiegelhalter 1995; Metropolis et
al. 1953; Hastings 1970; Geman and Geman 1984; Brooks
et al. 2011) have to be adopted, which can be quite slow in
practice.
In this article, we propose a novel and efﬁcient algorithm called the stochastic approximate gradient descent
(SAGD), as an alternative to SGD for cases where unbiased stochastic gradients cannot be trivially computed. The
key idea of SAGD is to construct the stochastic gradient
using the Langevin algorithm (Roberts and Tweedie 1996;
Roberts and Stramer 2002; Cheng et al. 2018b), a sampling
method whose statistical error can be rigorously quantiﬁed.
In addition, we use an adaptive sampling scheme that allows
larger errors in the early stage of the optimization, and gradually improves the precision as the procedure goes on.
These heuristics are formalized in the SAGD algorithm,
and various theoretical results are developed to guarantee its
convergence. Moreover, our analysis gives clear rates of the
relevant hyperparameters, which provide useful guidelines
for practical implementations of SAGD. The highlights and
main contributions of this article are as follows:
• We develop a new computational framework for SGD
problems in which a stochastic gradient cannot be trivially obtained. The proposed SAGD algorithm is fully automated with a solid convergence guarantee.
• New theoretical contributions are made to the underdamped Langevin algorithm for sampling from sophisticated distributions, which are of interest by their own.
• We discuss the application of the proposed SAGD framework in some important statistical and machine learning
problems, including the expectation-maximization algorithm (EM algorithm), and the variational autoencoders
(VAE). We show that SAGD is able to automate the EM
algorithm for complex models and effectively remove the
bias of VAE.

Abstract
We introduce a novel and efﬁcient algorithm called the
stochastic approximate gradient descent (SAGD), as an alternative to the stochastic gradient descent for cases where unbiased stochastic gradients cannot be trivially obtained. Traditional methods for such problems rely on general-purpose
sampling techniques such as Markov chain Monte Carlo,
which typically requires manual intervention for tuning parameters and does not work efﬁciently in practice. Instead,
SAGD makes use of the Langevin algorithm to construct
stochastic gradients that are biased in ﬁnite steps but accurate asymptotically, enabling us to theoretically establish the
convergence guarantee for SAGD. Inspired by our theoretical analysis, we also provide useful guidelines for its practical implementation. Finally, we show that SAGD performs
well experimentally in popular statistical and machine learning problems such as the expectation-maximization algorithm
and the variational autoencoders.

Introduction
The stochastic gradient descent method (SGD, Bottou 2010;
Bottou, Curtis, and Nocedal 2018) is one of the most popular
and widely-used optimization techniques in large-scale machine learning problems. In many cases, the objective function one needs to optimize can be written as an expectation,
F (θ) = E[f (θ; ξ)], over some random variable ξ ∈ Rr
whose distribution is independent of the parameter vector
θ ∈ Θ ⊂ Rp . Under very mild regularity conditions, the
true gradient of F (θ) is also an expectation, obtained as
g(θ) := ∇F (θ) = E[∇f (θ; ξ)]. When the computational
cost of g(θ) is massive, SGD makes use of the stochastic
gradient, denoted by g̃(θ), to update the parameter vector.
It has been well studied that by appropriately choosing the
step sizes, SGD has good convergence properties (Robbins
and Monro 1951). As an important special case, SGD is
frequently used in the scenario where
nF (θ) is an average
over the data points, F (θ) = n−1 i=1 f (θ; Xi ). If data
X1 , . . . , Xn are assumed to be independent and identically
distributed, then an unbiased stochastic gradient can be trivially obtained as g̃(θ) = ∇f (θ; XI ), where I follows a uniform distribution on {1, 2, . . . , n}.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5428

