The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MALA: Cross-Domain Dialogue Generation with Action Learning
Xinting Huang,1 Jianzhong Qi,1 Yu Sun,2 Rui Zhang1∗
1
The University of Melbourne, 2 Twitter Inc.
xintingh@student.unimelb.edu.au, {jianzhong.qi, rui.zhang}@unimelb.edu.au, ysun@twitter.com

Abstract

Table 1: System Utterance Action Example

Response generation for task-oriented dialogues involves two
basic components: dialogue planning and surface realization.
These two components, however, have a discrepancy in their
objectives, i.e., task completion and language quality. To deal
with such discrepancy, conditioned response generation has
been introduced where the generation process is factorized
into action decision and language generation via explicit action representations. To obtain action representations, recent
studies learn latent actions in an unsupervised manner based
on the utterance lexical similarity. Such an action learning
approach is prone to diversities of language surfaces, which
may impinge task completion and language quality. To address this issue, we propose multi-stage adaptive latent action learning (MALA) that learns semantic latent actions by
distinguishing the effects of utterances on dialogue progress.
We model the utterance effect using the transition of dialogue
states caused by the utterance and develop a semantic similarity measurement that estimates whether utterances have similar effects. For learning semantic actions on domains without dialogue states, MALA extends the semantic similarity
measurement across domains progressively, i.e., from aligning shared actions to learning domain-speciﬁc actions. Experiments using multi-domain datasets, SMD and MultiWOZ,
show that our proposed model achieves consistent improvements over the baselines models in terms of both task completion and language quality.

System utterances

1

Domain: Hotel
(a). Was there a particular
section of town you were
looking for?
(b). Which area could you
like the hotel to be located
at?

Domain: Attaction
(c). Did you have a
particular type of attraction
you were looking for?
(d). great , what are you
interested in doing or
seeing?

System intention (ground truth action)
Request(Area)

Request(Type)

Latent action (auto-encoding approach)
(a): [0,0,0,1,0]; (b):
[0,1,0,0,0]

(c): [0,0,0,1,0]; (d):
[0,0,0,0,1]

Semantic latent action (proposed)
(a) & (b): [0,0,0,1,0]

(c) & (d): [0,0,0,0,1]

user, or provide a restaurant recommendation to the user),
and surface realization means transforming the chosen action into natural language responses. Studies show that not
distinguishing these two components can be problematic
since they have a discrepancy in objectives, and optimizing decision making on choosing actions might adversely affect the generated language quality (Yarats and Lewis 2018;
Zhao, Xie, and Eskenazi 2019).

Introduction

Task-oriented dialogue systems complete tasks for users,
such as making a restaurant reservation or scheduling a
meeting, in a multi-turn conversation (Gao, Galley, and
Li 2018; Sun et al. 2016; 2017). Recently, end-to-end approaches based on neural encoder-decoder structure have
shown promising results (Wen et al. 2017b; Madotto, Wu,
and Fung 2018). However, such approaches directly map
plain text dialogue context to responses (i.e., utterances),
and do not distinguish two basic components for response
generation: dialogue planning and surface realization. Here,
dialogue planning means choosing an action (e.g., to request information such as the preferred cuisine from the

To address this problem, conditioned response generation that relies on action representations has been introduced
(Wen et al. 2015; Chen et al. 2019). Speciﬁcally, each system
utterance is coupled with an explicit action representation,
and responses with the same action representation convey
similar meaning and represent the same action. In this way,
the response generation is decoupled into two consecutive
steps, and each component for conditioned response generation (i.e., dialogue planning or surface realization) can optimize for different objectives without impinging the other.
Obtaining action representations is critical to conditioned response generation. Recent studies adopt variational autoencoder (VAE) to obtain low-dimensional latent variables that

∗

Rui Zhang is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7977

