The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Span-Based Neural Buffer: Towards Efﬁcient and Effective
Utilization of Long-Distance Context for Neural Sequence Models
Yangming Li,1,3 Kaisheng Yao,1 Libo Qin,3 Shuang Peng,1 Yijia Liu,2 Xiaolong Li1
1
Ant Financial, 2 Alibaba,
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval,
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{yangmingli, lbqin}@ir.hit.edu.cn, {kaisheng.yao, jianfeng.ps, xll}@antﬁn.com, yanshan.lyj@alibaba-inc.com
3

  

Abstract
Neural sequence model, though widely used for modeling sequential data such as the language model, has sequential recency bias (Kuncoro et al. 2018) to the local context, limiting
its full potential to capture long-distance context. To address
this problem, this paper proposes augmenting sequence models with a span-based neural buffer that efﬁciently represents
long-distance context, allowing a gate policy network to make
interpolated predictions from both the neural buffer and the
underlying sequence model. Training this policy network to
utilize long-distance context is however challenging due to
the simple sentence dominance problem (Marvin and Linzen
2018). To alleviate this problem, we propose a novel training
algorithm that combines an annealed maximum likelihood estimation with an intrinsic reward-driven reinforcement learning. Sequence models with the proposed span-based neural
buffer signiﬁcantly improve the state-of-the-art perplexities
on the benchmark Penn Treebank and WikiText-2 datasets to
43.9 and 35.2 respectively. We conduct extensive analysis and
conﬁrm that the proposed architecture and the training algorithm both contribute to the improvements.



…

…

I



do







…

like

eating

fruits

…

Figure 1: Illustration of a span. A context with consecutive
words marked in red box is represented by the difference
f13 − f11 marked in red arc, where fij s are the hidden states
from a sequential neural network.

To better capture the long-distance context for neural sequence model like language modeling, we have witnessed
three approaches in recent years. The ﬁrst focuses on using supervised syntactic parser (Wu et al. 2017), the second approach relies on latent tree learning (Shen et al. 2017;
2018), and the third approach augments sequential models
with the memory of context (Tran, Bisazza, and Monz 2016;
Daniluk et al. 2017). However, the ﬁrst approach requires
extra treebank data that can be domain-speciﬁc and expensive to annotate. The second approach of learning latent
trees faces challenges of mitigating gaps of the structures
to be discovered a posteriori from the data and those can be
annotated and interpreted a priori, making it hard to train
and unwieldy in practice (Williams, Drozdov, and Bowman 2018). Moreover, performance of the latent tree models is still behind the sequential network (Shen et al. 2018;
Wang, Gong, and Liu 2019).
In the third approach, (Tran, Bisazza, and Monz 2016)
introduces a memory block to help LSTM retain past hidden states. (Daniluk et al. 2017) uses attention mechanism
on the extra memory. However, this type of memory is not
memory efﬁcient as it is word-level, requiring large memory
to store. It is also not computationally efﬁcient, as it needs
much computation to retrieve information from it. Moreover,
it is also observed in (Daniluk et al. 2017) that augmenting
LSTM with this type of memory doesn’t necessarily lead to
effective utilization of long-distance context.

Introduction
The ability to make accurate prediction for sequence elements given their history is extremely important in analyzing, modeling, and utilizing time sequential data including
speech and natural language. In language modeling, a wordlevel language model is trained to predict the next word
given its previous words. It is an essential component in various natural language processing tasks.
Recent works of using neural sequence model (Mikolov
et al. 2010; Merity, Keskar, and Socher 2017; Krause et
al. 2017), in particular long short-term memory networks
(LSTM) and other recurrent neural network (RNN) variants,
have shown that they are very effective. However, sequential
networks have structural sequential recency bias (Kuncoro
et al. 2018) that causes difﬁculty of the models in utilizing
long-distance context. Moreover, (Khandelwal et al. 2018)
also conﬁrms this issue by comprehensive experiments on
LSTM-based language model.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8277

