The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

From Few to More: Large-Scale Dynamic Multiagent Curriculum Learning
Weixun Wang,1∗ Tianpei Yang,1∗ Yong Liu,2∗ Jianye Hao,1,3†
Xiaotian Hao,1 Yujing Hu,4 Yingfeng Chen,4 Changjie Fan,4 Yang Gao2

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, {wxwang, tpyang, jianye.hao, xiaotianhao}@tju.edu.cn
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, lucasliunju@gmail.com, gaoy@nju.edu.cn
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
4
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab, {huyujing, chenyingfeng1, fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com
1

2

Abstract
A lot of efforts have been devoted to investigating how agents
can learn effectively and achieve coordination in multiagent
systems. However, it is still challenging in large-scale multiagent settings due to the complex dynamics between the environment and agents and the explosion of state-action space. In
this paper, we design a novel Dynamic Multiagent Curriculum
Learning (DyMA-CL) to solve large-scale problems by starting from learning on a multiagent scenario with a small size
and progressively increasing the number of agents. We propose three transfer mechanisms across curricula to accelerate
the learning process. Moreover, due to the fact that the state
dimension varies across curricula, and existing network structures cannot be applied in such a transfer setting since their
network input sizes are ﬁxed. Therefore, we design a novel
network structure called Dynamic Agent-number Network
(DyAN) to handle the dynamic size of the network input. Experimental results show that DyMA-CL using DyAN greatly
improves the performance of large-scale multiagent learning
compared with state-of-the-art deep reinforcement learning
approaches. We also investigate the inﬂuence of three transfer
mechanisms across curricula through extensive simulations.

  

 

 

 




  

 









 

 

  





 

  

  

 









 
   

 



 

 

  

 







  

  



 

 

   

 
 

Figure 1: An example of DyMA-CL in StarCraft II.

past few years, especially regarding its application to RL.
The Curriculum Learning, consists of deﬁning a set of source
tasks and training the agent on each of them individually
before progressing to learning on the full task.
One major direction of applying CL to RL focuses on how
to deal with increasingly complicated tasks. Andreas et al.
(2017) used curriculum learning to make their model scale up
smoothly from simple tasks to difﬁcult ones, the difﬁculty of
each task is associated with sketches of different length. Later,
Wu and Tian (2017) integrated RL with CL for the complex
video game Doom, and developed an adaptive curriculum
training that samples from a varying distribution of tasks to
train the model, which achieves higher scores than learning
the target task directly. However, these methods simply manually design the curricula which requires piror knowledge.
Another direction of CL is to automatically design the curriculum. Narvekar et al. (2017a) proposed formulating the
selection of tasks using a Curriculum Markov Decision Process (CMDP). However, whether the curriculum policy could
actually be learned is not demonstrated. Later, they (2019)
addressed this problem by exploring various representations
to learn the curriculum policy.
However, all the above approaches focus on designing the
curricula manually or automatically in single-agent learning
tasks. Although some existing works consider CL in multiagent settings, the way they utilize CL is quite simple, which
is not the focus of these works (Agarwal, Kumar, and Sycara
2019). To address the growing challenges as the increase of
agent-number in large-scale MASs, in this paper, we ﬁrstly
propose a novel multiagent CL, named Dynamic Multiagent Curriculum Learning (DyMA-CL) as shown in Figure

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018) has
achieved great success in achieving human-level control in
complex tasks (Mnih et al. 2015). However, there also exist
a lot of challenges in multiagent systems (MASs) where a
group of autonomous agents in a shared environment from
which they learn what to do according to the reward signals received while interacting with each other. (Claus and
Boutilier 1998; Busoniu, Babuska, and Schutter 2008). Furthermore, in large-scale multiagent systems, the dynamics
and stochasticity of the environment become more complex, which makes it more challenging to achieve coordination among agents (Singh, Jain, and Sukhbaatar 2019;
Yang et al. 2018a; Jiang and Lu 2018).
One efﬁcient way to address large-scale multiagent learning problems is to leverage the concept of Curriculum Learning (CL), which has been an active ﬁeld of research in the
∗
Equal contribution, † corresponding author. This work is partially done when Weixun Wang and Tianpei Yang were interns in
Netease Fuxi AI Lab.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7293

