The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Efﬁcient Explorative Sampling Considering the
Generative Boundaries of Deep Generative Neural Networks
Jaesik Choi†

Giyoung Jeon,∗ Haedong Jeong∗

Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
291 Daehak-ro, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
50, UNIST-gil, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea
jaesik.choi@kaist.ac.kr
{giyoung, haedong}@unist.ac.kr

When we select an internal layer and a latent vector in
the DGNNs, there exists the corresponding region which is
established by a set of boundaries. Samples in this region have
the same activation pattern and deliver similar generation
information to the next layer. The details of the delivered
information can be identiﬁed indirectly by comparing the
generated outputs from these samples. Given a DGNN trained
to generate human faces, for example, if we identify the
region in which samples share a certain hair color but vary in
others characteristics (eye, mouth, etc.), such a region would
be related to the generation of the same hair color.
However, it is non-trivial to obtain samples from the region
with desired properties of DGNNs because (1) thousands of
generative boundaries are involved in the generation mechanism and (2) a linear modiﬁcation in the input dimension may
cause a highly non-linear change in the internal units and the
output. Visiting the previous example again, there may exist
regions with different hair colors, distinct attributes, or their
combinations. Furthermore, a small linear modiﬁcation of
the vector in the latent space may change the entire output
(Szegedy et al. 2013). To overcome this difﬁculty, an efﬁcient
algorithm to identify the appropriate region and explore the
space are necessary.
In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient, explorative sampling
algorithm to reveal the characteristics of the internal layer of
DGNNs. Our algorithm consists of two steps: (1) to handle a
large number of boundaries in DGNNs, our algorithm approximates the set of critical boundaries of the query which is the
given latent vector using Bernoulli dropout approach (Chang
et al. 2018); (2) then our algorithm efﬁciently obtains samples
which share same attributions as the query in a perspective
of the trained DGNNs by expanding the tree-like exploring
structure (LaValle 1998) until it reaches the boundaries of the
region.
The advantages of our algorithm are twofold: (1) it can
guarantee sample acceptance in high dimensional space
where the rejection sampling based on the Monte Calro
method easily fails when the region area is unknown; (2)
it can handle sampling strategy in a perspective of the
model where the commonly used -based sampling (Erhan,
Courville, and Bengio 2010) is not precise to obtain samples
considering complex non-spherical generative boundaries

Abstract
Deep generative neural networks (DGNNs) have achieved
realistic and high-quality data generation. In particular, the
adversarial training scheme has been applied to many DGNNs
and has exhibited powerful performance. Despite of recent
advances in generative networks, identifying the image generation mechanism still remains challenging. In this paper, we
present an explorative sampling algorithm to analyze generation mechanism of DGNNs. Our method efﬁciently obtains
samples with identical attributes from a query image in a
perspective of the trained model. We deﬁne generative boundaries which determine the activation of nodes in the internal
layer and probe inside the model with this information. To
handle a large number of boundaries, we obtain the essential
set of boundaries using optimization. By gathering samples
within the region surrounded by generative boundaries, we
can empirically reveal the characteristics of the internal layers
of DGNNs. We also demonstrate that our algorithm can ﬁnd
more homogeneous, the model speciﬁc samples compared to
the variations of -based sampling method.

1

Introduction

The primary objective of a generative model is to generate realistic data. Recently proposed adversarial training schemes,
such as generative adversarial networks (GANs), have exhibited remarkable performance not only in terms of the quality
of each instance but also the diversity of the generated data.
Despite those improvements, the generation mechanism inside the generative models is not well-studied.
In general, a generative model maps a point in the latent
space to a sample in the data space. In other words, data
instances are embedded as latent vectors in a perspective of
the trained generative model. A latent space is divided by
boundaries derived from the structure of the model, where
the vectors in the space represent the generation information according to which side of boundaries they are placed.
We utilize these characteristics to examine the generation
mechanism of the model.
∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4288

