The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Scalable Methods for Computing State
Similarity in Deterministic Markov Decision Processes
Pablo Samuel Castro
Google Brain
psc@google.com

Abstract

Copy

We present new algorithms for computing and approximating
bisimulation metrics in Markov Decision Processes (MDPs).
Bisimulation metrics are an elegant formalism that capture
behavioral equivalence between states and provide strong theoretical guarantees on differences in optimal behaviour. Unfortunately, their computation is expensive and requires a tabular
representation of the states, which has thus far rendered them
impractical for large problems. In this paper we present a new
version of the metric that is tied to a behavior policy in an
MDP, along with an analysis of its theoretical properties. We
then present two new algorithms for approximating bisimulation metrics in large, deterministic MDPs. The ﬁrst does so
via sampling and is guaranteed to converge to the true metric.
The second is a differentiable loss which allows us to learn an
approximation even for continuous state MDPs, which prior
to this work had not been possible.

Original
Figure 1: A grid MDP (bottom) with a copy of itself (top).
The goal of an agent is to ﬁnd the shortest path to the green
cells. At each iteration, the agent has a 50% chance of jumping to the other level.

A ﬁnite Markov Decision Process (MDP) is deﬁned as a
5-tuple M = S, A, P, R, γ, where S is a ﬁnite set of
states, A is a ﬁnite set of actions, P : S × A → Δ(S) is the
next state transition function (where Δ(X) is the probability
simplex over the set X), R : S × A → R is the reward
function (assumed to be bounded by Rmax ), and γ ∈ [0, 1)
is a discount factor. An MDP is the standard formalism for
expressing sequential decision problems, typically in the context of planning or reinforcement learning (RL). The set of
states S is one of the central components of this formalism,
where each state s ∈ S is meant to encode sufﬁcient information about the environment such that an agent can learn
how to behave in a consistent manner. Figure 1 illustrates a
simple MDP where each cell represents a state.
There is no canonical way of deﬁning the set of states for a
problem. Indeed, improperly designed state spaces can have
drastic effects on the algorithm used. Consider the grid MDP
in the bottom of Figure 1, where an agent must learn how to
navigate to the green cells, and imagine we create an exact
replica of the MDP such that the agent randomly transitions
between the two layers for each move. By doing so we have

doubled the number of states and the complexity of the problem. However, from a planning perspective the two copies of
each state should be indistinguishable. A stronger notion of
state identity is needed that goes beyond the labeling of states
and which is able to capture behavioral indistinguishability.
In this paper we explore notions of behavioral similarity
via state pseudometrics1 d : S × S → R, and in particular
those which assign a distance of 0 to states that are behaviorally indistinguishable. Pseudometrics further allow us to
reason about states based on what we may know about other
similar states. This is a common use-case in ﬁelds such as formal veriﬁcation, concurrency theory, and in safe RL, where
one may want to provide (non-)reachability guarantees. In
the context of planning and reinforcement learning, these can
be useful for state aggregation and abstraction.
Our work builds on bisimulation metrics (Ferns, Panangaden, and Precup 2004) which provide us with theoretical
guarantees such as states that are close to each other (with
respect to the metric) will have similar optimal value functions. These theoretical properties render them appealing for
planning and learning, and they have previously been used
for state aggregation (Ferns, Panangaden, and Precup 2004;
Ferns et al. 2006), policy transfer (Castro and Precup 2010),
representation discovery (Ruan et al. 2015), and exploration
(Santara et al. 2019).
Unfortunately, these metrics are expensive to compute
(Chen, van Breugel, and Worrell 2012) and require fully enu-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A pseudometric is a metric d where ∀s, t ∈ S.
d(s, t) = 0, but not the converse.

Introduction

10069

s = t =⇒

