The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Novel Is Not Always Better:
On the Relation between Novelty and Dominance Pruning
Joschka Groß

Álvaro Torralba

Maximilian Fickert

Saarland University
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
s8jagros@stud.uni-saarland.de

CISPA Heimholz Center
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
torralba@cs.uni-saarland.de

Saarland University
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
ﬁckert@cs.uni-saarland.de

available, even though this is clearly not progressing towards
the goal. Intuitively, it would be better to focus on states that
change the position of the truck and/or packages, but this requires analyzing the action model to distinguish which facts
are most relevant to achieve the goal.
To shed light on the effectiveness of novelty-based methods, we consider their relation to dominance pruning methods. Dominance pruning techniques eliminate states that are
provably “worse” than other previously seen states (Torralba
and Hoffmann 2015; Torralba 2017; 2018). In the example
above, states where the truck and packages are in the same
position with lower fuel are dominated and can be pruned.
We deﬁne a family of unsafe dominance pruning methods
that generalizes previous methods for both dominance and
novelty pruning. We explore different members of this family, including variants that consider different sets of projections, as well as label-dominance (LD) novelty. LD novelty
combines both approaches, only considering a fact novel if
no better fact, in terms of the outgoing plans that it enables,
has been seen before. The results of the evaluation of our
new variants on IPC benchmarks conﬁrm that using different
projections leads to an improvement in many domains. LD
novelty can also lead to more effective pruning without being less safe than standard novelty pruning, though novelty
heuristic methods do not beneﬁt from a direct integration.
Characterizing novelty as an unsafe dominance pruning
method leads to a new interpretation about why exploring
novel states is preferable. What really matters is whether the
state has a path to the goal that was not possible from any
state seen before. We argue that this view is consistent with
previous approaches such as novelty heuristics, but putting
the emphasis on directly comparing the set of plans, rather
than facts, can lead to a better understanding of when novelty
works and how to improve it. We suggest a new method to
prioritize the expansion of non-novel states that aims to estimate the probability of not being dominated, consistently
improving current state-of-the-art novelty techniques.

Abstract
Novelty pruning is a planning technique that focuses on exploring states that are novel, i.e., those containing facts that
have not been seen before. This seemingly simple idea has
had a huge impact on the state of the art in planning though
its effectiveness is not entirely understood yet.
We relate novelty to dominance pruning, which compares
states to previously seen states to eliminate those that are
provably worse in terms of goal distance. Novelty can be interpreted as an unsafe approximation of dominance, where
states containing novel facts are relevant because they enable
new paths to the goal and, therefore, they are less likely to
be dominated by others. This provides a framework to understand the success of novelty, resulting in new variants that
combine both techniques.

Introduction
Novelty pruning is a technique that fosters the exploration
of novel states (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2012). Novelty is
measured as the size of the smallest tuple of facts that was
not contained in any previously seen state, so the most novel
states are those in which a fact is true for the ﬁrst time.
This seemingly simple idea has had a huge impact on the
landscape of satisﬁcing planning algorithms, leading to various combinations of novelty and heuristic search (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2017a; 2017b; Katz et al. 2017; Fickert
2018). Also, since novelty does not directly depend on the
actions, it can be used even if a full action model is not available (Lipovetzky, Ramı́rez, and Geffner 2015; Shleyfman,
Tuisov, and Domshlak 2016; Francès et al. 2017).
However, the effectiveness of novelty is not entirely understood. The success of novelty is commonly explained as a
matter of balancing exploration and exploitation, where following the heuristic corresponds to exploitation and expanding novel states corresponds to exploration. But there are
also common situations where exploring novel facts is not
necessarily a good strategy. Consider a task where a truck
must deliver several packages spending at most 100 units of
fuel. In that case, driving back and forth between any two locations will lead to novel states because they have less fuel

Background
We consider classical planning in the ﬁnite-domain representation (FDR) (Bäckström and Nebel 1995). A classical
planning task is a 4-tuple V, A, sI , G, where V is a set of

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9875

