The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

S ENS E M BERT: Context-Enhanced Sense
Embeddings for Multilingual Word Sense Disambiguation
Bianca Scarlini, Tommaso Pasini, Roberto Navigli
Sapienza University of Rome
Department of Computer Science
{scarlini, pasini, navigli}@di.uniroma1.it

they have difﬁculty scaling to different languages due to the
paucity of multilingual sense-annotated data. Knowledgebased approaches, instead, are more ﬂexible and can be applied to different languages, however at the cost of achieving
lower performance than their supervised counterpart.

Abstract
Contextual representations of words derived by neural language models have proven to effectively encode the subtle
distinctions that might occur between different meanings of
the same word. However, these representations are not tied to
a semantic network, hence they leave the word meanings implicit and thereby neglect the information that can be derived
from the knowledge base itself. In this paper, we propose
S ENS E M BERT, a knowledge-based approach that brings together the expressive power of language modelling and the
vast amount of knowledge contained in a semantic network to
produce high-quality latent semantic representations of word
meanings in multiple languages. Our vectors lie in a space
comparable with that of contextualized word embeddings,
thus allowing a word occurrence to be easily linked to its
meaning by applying a simple nearest neighbour approach.
We show that, whilst not relying on manual semantic annotations, S ENS E M BERT is able to either achieve or surpass
state-of-the-art results attained by most of the supervised neural approaches on the English Word Sense Disambiguation
task. When scaling to other languages, our representations
prove to be equally effective as their English counterpart and
outperform the existing state of the art on all the Word Sense
Disambiguation multilingual datasets. The embeddings are
released in ﬁve different languages at http://sensembert.org.

1

Recently, language models in different sauces, i.e., ELMo
(Peters et al. 2018), BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), XLNET
(Yang et al. 2019), etc., have attracted much interest as they
have proved to be beneﬁcial to several downstream tasks in
NLP (Wang et al. 2018; 2019). In fact, the word representations provided by these models encode several pieces of linguistic information and, differently from static word embeddings (Mikolov et al. 2013; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014), they depend directly on the context a word is
surrounded by. This has made these vectors especially interesting for the task of WSD, where effective contextual representations can be highly beneﬁcial for solving lexical ambiguity. In fact, thanks to contextual embeddings, simple nearest neighbor algorithms have proved to be more effective and
precise than complex supervised and knowledge-based approaches (Loureiro and Jorge 2019). These representations
allowed sense-annotated corpora to be exploited in a more
efﬁcient way, as demonstrated by Loureiro and Jorge (2019).
In fact, they closed the gap between the meanings in a semantic network and their occurrences in a text by producing
concept embeddings that lie in a space that is comparable
with that of contextual word embeddings. Nevertheless, this
approach is still hampered by the need for manual semantic
annotations in order to construct the concept vectors, which
limits its range of action to texts in English only, as almost
no manually-annotated data are available in other languages.

Introduction

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is the task of associating the occurrence of a word in a text with its correct meaning from a predeﬁned inventory of senses (Navigli 2009).
Over the years, two distinct lines of research have been developed to tackle this problem: supervised and knowledgebased WSD. On the one hand, supervised models rely on
semantically-annotated corpora for training (Raganato, Delli
Bovi, and Navigli 2017; Kumar et al. 2019; Bevilacqua
and Navigli 2019), while, on the other hand, knowledgebased systems employ graph-based algorithms on semantic networks to ﬁnd the set of meanings that better disambiguate the input words (Moro, Raganato, and Navigli 2014;
Agirre, de Lacalle, and Soroa 2014). Even though supervised approaches have proved to achieve better performance,

In this paper we present S ENS E M BERT, a knowledgebased approach for producing sense embeddings in multiple
languages. We leverage the lexical-semantic information in
a knowledge base, i.e., BabelNet, and an encyclopedic resource like Wikipedia, to relieve the burden of producing
manually-tagged corpora. S ENS E M BERT, whilst not relying on annotated data, achieves state-of-the-art results on the
multilingual WSD tasks and remains competitive with the
best supervised models on English. Moreover, when providing supervision to our approach, our embeddings set a new
state of the art on all the English WSD test sets for nouns.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8758

