The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Tracking Disaster Footprints with Social Streaming Data
Lu Cheng,1 Jundong Li,2,3 K. Selçuk Candan,1 Huan Liu1
1

Computer Science and Engineering, Arizona State University, USA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Virginia, USA
3
Department of Computer Science & School of Data Science, University of Virginia, USA
{lcheng35, candan, huanliu}@asu.edu, jundong@virginia.edu
2

Social media reveals dynamic changes of discussions with
topics evolving over time. Take the Asia tsunami disaster as
an example, major topics of the reports evolved from “ﬁnancial aids” to “debt” and “reconstruct” over different stages
(Cao et al. 2007). Online topic tracking can beneﬁt disaster
responders in the following ways: (1) For emergency managers and people affected by the natural calamities, it is often
of particular interest to identify topics that prevail over time,
i.e., common topics, such as “disaster rescue”, as well as to
be alerted to any new emerging themes of disaster-related
discussions that are fast gathering in social media streams
(Saha and Sindhwani 2012), i.e., distinct topics such as “the
latest tsunami destruction”. (2) For global participants, a
quick update of the disaster status-quo, i.e., the commonness
and distinctiveness between previous and current topics, is
necessary for them to provide immediate and effective assistance. A major obstacle to disaster-related topic tracking,
however, is that social media generates massive amount of
data each day and it is notorious for a sea of unwanted and
noisy content such as spam and daily chatter. For example,
during Hurricane Harvey, Twitter reported there have been
21.2 million hurricane-related tweets within the ﬁrst six days
and a large portion was generated in a short period of time to
spread rumors (Nazer et al. 2017). Consequently, a new way
of effective online topics discoveries using social media data
during disaster response is urgent.

Abstract
Social media has become an indispensable tool in the face of
natural disasters due to its broad appeal and ability to quickly
disseminate information. For instance, Twitter is an important source for disaster responders to search for (1) topics that
have been identiﬁed as being of particular interest over time,
i.e., common topics such as “disaster rescue”; (2) new emerging themes of disaster-related discussions that are fast gathering in social media streams (Saha and Sindhwani 2012),
i.e., distinct topics such as “the latest tsunami destruction”.
To understand the status quo and allocate limited resources
to most urgent areas, emergency managers need to quickly
sift through relevant topics generated over time and investigate their commonness and distinctiveness. A major obstacle
to the effective usage of social media, however, is its massive
amount of noisy and undesired data. Hence, a naive method,
such as set intersection/difference to ﬁnd common/distinct
topics, is often not practical. To address this challenge, this
paper studies a new topic tracking problem that seeks to effectively identify the common and distinct topics with social
streaming data. The problem is important as it presents a
promising new way to efﬁciently search for accurate information during emergency response. This is achieved by an
online Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) scheme that
conducts a faster update of latent factors, and a joint NMF
technique that seeks the balance between the reconstruction
error of topic identiﬁcation and the losses induced by discovering common and distinct topics. Extensive experimental results on real-world datasets collected during Hurricane Harvey and Florence reveal the effectiveness of our framework.

In this paper, we study a novel topic tracking problem
that seeks to identify common and distinct topics using social streaming data related to disasters. Discovering the commonness and differences between topics in an online fashion
provides an effective and efﬁcient way for information seekers to search for both prevailing and emerging topics. For
instance, emergency managers can make informed decisions
about how to effectively allocate funds and other resources
to areas that need most assistance by comparing the commonness and distinctiveness of topics generated from these
areas over time. We illustrate the problem in Fig. 1. The goal
is to discover topics from the historical and incoming data,
and identify their commonness and distinctiveness.

Introduction
Social media has become a critical platform for real-time
information seeking for disaster relief, ranging from predisaster, warning, threat to rescue and recovery (Nazer et
al. 2017; Houston et al. 2015; Gao, Barbier, and Goolsby
2011). As a new way of communication in the course of a
disaster, the major difference between social media and traditional sources is its real-time nature. Disasters and emergencies often speed up and amplify the quantity of information in social media, as a result, understanding social media
streams is crucial for disaster relief and management.

However, the proposed problem presents several challenges: (1) Acquiring insights via social media needs to process enormous amounts of noisy data in a timely fashion

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
370

