The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Software Testing for Machine Learning
Dusica Marijan, Arnaud Gotlieb
Simula Research Laboratory, Norway
{dusica, arnaud}@simula.no

This means that for constant test inputs and preconditions,
an ML-trained software component can produce different
outputs in consecutive runs. Researchers have tried using
testing techniques from traditional software development
(Hutchison et al. 2018), to deal with some of these challenges. However, it has been observed that traditional testing approaches in general fail to adequately address fundamental challenges of testing ML (Helle and Schamai 2016),
and that these traditional approaches require adaptation to
the new context of ML. The better we understand current
research challenges of testing ML, the more successful we
can be in developing novel techniques that effectively address these challenges and advance this scientiﬁc ﬁeld.
In this paper, we: i) identify and discuss the most challenging areas in software testing for ML, ii) synthesize the
most promising approaches to these challenges, iii) spotlight
their limitations, and iv) make recommendations of further
research efforts on software testing of ML. We note that
the aim of the paper is not to exhaustively list all published
work, but distill the most representative work.

Abstract
Machine learning has become prevalent across a wide variety of applications. Unfortunately, machine learning has also
shown to be susceptible to deception, leading to errors, and
even fatal failures. This circumstance calls into question the
widespread use of machine learning, especially in safetycritical applications, unless we are able to assure its correctness and trustworthiness properties. Software veriﬁcation and
testing are established technique for assuring such properties, for example by detecting errors. However, software testing challenges for machine learning are vast and profuse yet critical to address. This summary talk discusses the current state-of-the-art of software testing for machine learning.
More speciﬁcally, it discusses six key challenge areas for software testing of machine learning systems, examines current
approaches to these challenges and highlights their limitations. The paper provides a research agenda with elaborated
directions for making progress toward advancing the state-ofthe-art on testing of machine learning.

1

Introduction

2

Applications of machine learning (ML) technology have become vital in many innovative domains. At the same time,
the vulnerability of ML has become evident, sometimes
leading to catastrophic failures1 . This entails that comprehensive testing of ML needs to be performed, to ensure the
correctness and trustworthiness of ML-enabled systems.
Software testing of ML systems is susceptible to a number of challenges compared to testing of traditional software systems. In this paper, by traditional systems we mean
software systems not integrating ML, and by ML systems
we mean software systems containing ML-trained components (e.g self-driving cars, autonomous ships, or space exploration robots). As an example, one such challenge of
testing ML systems stems from non-determinism intrinsic
to ML. Traditional systems are typically pre-programmed
and execute a set of rules, while ML systems reason in a
probabilistic manner and exhibit non-deterministic behavior.

Testing ML

As ML technologies become more pervasive enabling autonomous system functionality, it is more and more important to assure the quality of autonomous reasoning supported
by ML. Testing is such a quality assurance activity that aims
(in a broad sense) to determine the correctness of the systemunder-test, for example, by checking whether the system responds correctly to inputs, and to identify faults which may
lead to failures.
Interpreting ”Testing ML”: Two distinct communities
have been studying the concept of testing ML, the ML scientiﬁc community (MLC) and the software testing community
(STC). However, as the two communities study ML algorithms from different perspectives, they interpret the term
testing ML differently, and we think it is worth noting the
distinction. In MLC, testing an ML model is performed to
estimate its prediction accuracy and improve its prediction
performance. Testing happens during model creation, using
validation and test datasets, to evaluate the model ﬁt on the
training dataset. In STC, testing an ML system has a more
general scope aiming to evaluate the system behavior for

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Tesla failure, www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/01/
tesla-driver-killed-autopilot-self-driving-car
13576

