The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GaSPing for Utility
†

Mengyang Gu,† Debarun Bhattacharjya,§ Dharmashankar Subramanian§
Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
§
Research AI, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
mengyang@pstat.ucsb.edu, {debarunb, dharmash}@us.ibm.com

estimating the functional form that best represents the decision maker’s preferences often go hand in hand.
The elicitation phase could of course be conducted in various ways. We distinguish between direct and indirect approaches. In the former, elicitation directly results in outcomes with their utilities, whereas in the latter, utilities are
typically inferred through choices – the most popular approach across domains (including AI) is to use pairwise
comparisons between alternatives. Both these approaches
have their respective drawbacks. The behavioral literature
demonstrates that people are plagued with cognitive biases
while responding to questions that aim to assess their preferences, and that they construct their preferences according to the situational context, including the method of elicitation, and often in an inconsistent manner (Lichtenstein
and Slovic 2006). Systematic biases from choice inconsistencies arising from indirect elicitation approaches are
well known in this literature (Fischer, Jia, and Luce 2000;
Bleichrodt, Pinto, and Wakker 2001).
In this paper, we contribute to the literature on estimation by introducing a Bayesian nonparametric approach for
modeling utility functions from direct elicitation. Speciﬁcally, we demonstrate the advantages of using a Gaussian
stochastic process (henceforth GaSP) over the state-of-theart in this space, where parametric methods and the nonparametric method of linear interpolation are most popular.
We show that linear interpolation corresponds to a subclass
of our GaSP model using a speciﬁc covariance function in
which the process turns out to be a Wiener process (Mörters
and Peres 2010); moreover, parametric methods can be incorporated into the GaSP model through the mean function.
The GaSP model is popular in domains such as nonlinear regression and classiﬁcation in machine learning (Rasmussen and Williams 2006), spatial statistics (Gelfand et al.
2010), computer model emulation and calibration (Sacks et
al. 1989). It has also been applied to preference modeling.
For instance, Chu and Ghahramani (2005), Birlutiu, Groot,
and Heskes (2009) and Bonilla, Guo, and Sanner (2010) use
GaSP models for preference learning in the indirect elicitation case involving pairwise comparisons.
There is substantial AI literature on Bayesian models
for preference elicitation in general, where uncertainty in
utilities is typically exploited for the purpose of adaptive elicitation for speciﬁc decisions (Jimison et al. 1992;

Abstract
High-consequence decisions often require a detailed investigation of a decision maker’s preferences, as represented by a
utility function. Inferring a decision maker’s utility function
through assessments typically involves an elicitation phase
where the decision maker responds to a series of elicitation
queries, followed by an estimation phase where the state-ofthe-art for direct elicitation approaches in practice is to either ﬁt responses to a parametric form or perform linear interpolation. We introduce a Bayesian nonparametric method
involving Gaussian stochastic processes for estimating a utility function from direct elicitation responses. Advantages include the ﬂexibility to ﬁt a large class of functions, favorable
theoretical properties, and a fully probabilistic view of the decision maker’s preference properties including risk attitude.
Through extensive simulation experiments as well as two real
datasets from management science, we demonstrate that the
proposed approach results in better function ﬁtting.

Introduction & Related Work
Making decisions under uncertainty using decision theory
requires that beliefs about uncertainties be represented by
probabilities and preferences over outcomes be summarized
by utilities. It is often easier in practice to justify learning
probabilities from historical data, which is reasonable when
the decision maker believes that the future will resemble the
past, than it is to learn preferences using other decision makers’ choices. This is particularly true for high-consequence
decisions such as a potentially life-changing medical decision, a new product launch, a government policy decision
involving numerous stakeholders, etc. In these situations, a
decision maker’s preferences should be represented through
their utility function either over a single attribute (such as
monetary units) or over multiple attributes, depending on the
decision situation under consideration.
The vast literature on assessing utility functions describes
schemes where the decision maker responds to elicitation
queries; these responses are then subsequently used to estimate the decision maker’s utility function. We distinguish
between these phases and refer to them as elicitation and estimation respectively. Posing elicitation questions and then
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2637

