The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

H AL: Improved Text-Image Matching by Mitigating Visual Semantic Hubs
Fangyu Liu,1∗† Rongtian Ye,2∗ Xun Wang,3∗ Shuaipeng Li4
1

University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
2
Aalto University, Espoo, Finland
3
Malong Technologies, Shenzhen, China
4
SenseTime Research, Beijing, China

Abstract
The hubness problem widely exists in high-dimensional embedding space and is a fundamental source of error for crossmodal matching tasks. In this work, we study the emergence
of hubs in Visual Semantic Embeddings (VSE) with application to text-image matching. We analyze the pros and cons of
two widely adopted optimization objectives for training VSE
and propose a novel hubness-aware loss function (H AL) that
addresses previous methods’ defects. Unlike (Faghri et al.
2018) which simply takes the hardest sample within a minibatch, H AL takes all samples into account, using both local
and global statistics to scale up the weights of “hubs”. We
experiment our method with various conﬁgurations of model
architectures and datasets. The method exhibits exceptionally
good robustness and brings consistent improvement on the
task of text-image matching across all settings. Speciﬁcally,
under the same model architectures as (Faghri et al. 2018) and
(Lee et al. 2018), by switching only the learning objective, we
report a maximum R@1 improvement of 7.4% on MS-COCO
and 8.3% on Flickr30k.1

anchor
negative (local)
negative (global)

Figure 1: Visualization of our proposed objective, which is
to leverage both local and global negative samples to identify hubs in high-dimensional embeddings and learn to avoid
them. Local negatives are the ones within mini-batch while
global ones are sampled from the whole training set.

Introduction
The hubness problem is a general phenomenon in highdimensional space where a small set of source vectors,
dubbed hubs, appear too frequently in the neighborhood
of target vectors (Radovanović, Nanopoulos, and Ivanović
2010). As embedding learning goes deeper, it has been
a concern in various contexts including object classiﬁcation (Tomašev et al. 2011), image feature matching (Jegou et al. 2008) in Computer Vision and word embedding evaluation (Schnabel et al. 2015; Faruqui et al. 2016),
word translation (Dinu, Lazaridou, and Baroni 2015; Lazaridou, Dinu, and Baroni 2015) in NLP. It is described as “a
new aspect of the dimensionality curse” (Bellman 1961;
Schnitzer et al. 2012).
In this work, we study the hubness problem in the task
of text-image matching. In recent years, deep neural models
have gained a signiﬁcant edge over non-neural methods in

cross-modal matching tasks (Wang et al. 2016). Text-image
matching has been one of the most popular ones among
them. Most deep methods involve two phases: 1) training:
two neural encoders (one for image and one for text) are
learned end-to-end, mapping texts and images into a joint
space, where items (either texts or images) with similar
meanings are close to each other; 2) inference: for a query
vector in modality A, a nearest neighbor search is performed
to match the query vector against all item vectors in modality
B. As the embedding space is learned through jointly modeling vision and language, it is often referred as Visual Semantic Embeddings (VSE). Recent work on VSE has shown
a clear trend of growing dimensions in order to obtain better embedding quality (Wehrmann 2018). With deeper embeddings, visual semantic hubs increase dramatically. Such
property is undesired as the data is structured in the form
of text-image pairs and a one-to-one mapping ﬁrmly exists
among all text and image points.
However, the hubness problem is neither well noticed
nor well addressed by current methods of training VSE.
Since the start of this line of work (Frome et al. 2013;

∗

Equal contributions.
Correspondence to F. Liu <fl399@cam.ac.uk>.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our code is released at: https://github.com/hardyqr/HAL.
†

11563

