The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Gradient-Aware Model-Based Policy Search
Pierluca D’Oro,∗ Alberto Maria Metelli,∗
Andrea Tirinzoni, Matteo Papini, Marcello Restelli
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, 20133, Milano, Italy
pierluca.doro@mail.polimi.it, {albertomaria.metelli, andrea.tirinzoni, matteo.papini, marcello.restelli}@polimi.it

their limited capacity on the most relevant parts of the environment. These parts could present a local dynamics that is
inherently simpler than the global one, or at least easier to
model using prior knowledge.

Abstract
Traditional model-based reinforcement learning approaches
learn a model of the environment dynamics without explicitly considering how it will be used by the agent. In the presence of misspeciﬁed model classes, this can lead to poor estimates, as some relevant available information is ignored. In
this paper, we introduce a novel model-based policy search
approach that exploits the knowledge of the current agent policy to learn an approximate transition model, focusing on the
portions of the environment that are most relevant for policy
improvement. We leverage a weighting scheme, derived from
the minimization of the error on the model-based policy gradient estimator, in order to deﬁne a suitable objective function that is optimized for learning the approximate transition
model. Then, we integrate this procedure into a batch policy improvement algorithm, named Gradient-Aware Modelbased Policy Search (GAMPS), which iteratively learns a
transition model and uses it, together with the collected trajectories, to compute the new policy parameters. Finally, we
empirically validate GAMPS on benchmark domains analyzing and discussing its properties.

1

The vast majority of MBRL methods employs a
maximum-likelihood estimation process for learning the
model (Deisenroth et al. 2013). Nonetheless, the relative importance of the different aspects of the dynamics greatly
depends on the underlying decision problem, on the control approach, and, importantly, on the policy played by
the agent. Recent work (Farahmand, Barreto, and Nikovski
2017; Farahmand 2018) shows that, in the context of valuebased reinforcement learning methods, it is possible to derive a decision-aware loss function for model learning that
compares favorably against maximum likelihood. However,
there exists no equivalent for policy-based methods, that are
often preferred in the case of continuous observation/action
spaces. Moreover, previous work fails at incorporating the
inﬂuence of the current agent’s behavior for evaluating the
relative importance of the different aspects of the world dynamics. For instance, suppose a learning agent acts deterministically in a certain region of the environment, possibly thanks to some prior knowledge, and has no interest in
changing its behavior in that area; or that some regions of the
state space are extremely unlikely to be reached by an agent
following the current policy. There would be no beneﬁt in
approximating the corresponding aspects of the dynamics
since that knowledge cannot contribute to the agent’s learning process. Therefore, with a limited model expressiveness,
an approach for model learning that explicitly accounts for
the current policy and for how it will be improved can outperform traditional maximum likelihood estimation.

Introduction

Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL, Sutton and
Barto 2018; Nguyen-Tuong and Peters 2011) approaches
use the interaction data collected in the environment to estimate its dynamics, with the main goal of improving the
sample efﬁciency of Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton
and Barto 2018) algorithms. However, modeling the dynamics of the environment in a thorough way can be extremely
complex and, thus, require the use of very powerful model
classes and considerable amounts of data, betraying the original goal of MBRL. Fortunately, in many interesting application domains (e.g., robotics), perfectly capturing the dynamics across the whole state-action space is not necessary for
a model to be effectively used by a learning agent (Abbeel,
Quigley, and Ng 2006; Nguyen-Tuong, Seeger, and Peters
2009; Levine and Abbeel 2014). Indeed, a wiser approach
consists in using simpler model classes, whose estimation
requires few interactions with the environment, and focus

In this paper, motivated by these observations, we propose a model-based policy search (Deisenroth et al. 2013;
Sutton et al. 2000) method that leverages awareness of the
current agent’s policy in the estimation of a forward model,
used to perform policy optimization. Unlike existing approaches, which typically ignore all the knowledge available
on the running policy during model estimation, we incorporate it into a weighting scheme for the objective function
used in model learning. We choose to focus our discussion
on the batch setting (Lange, Gabel, and Riedmiller 2012),

∗

Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3801

