The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Resilient Logic Programs: Answer Set Programs Challenged by Ontologies
Sanja Lukumbuzya, Magdalena Ortiz, Mantas Šimkus
Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria
{lukumbuzya, ortiz}@kr.tuwien.ac.at, simkus@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

and Hitzler 2011). Such hybrid languages can be divided
into two classes: the world-centric and the entailmentcentric approaches. The languages in (Rosati 2005; 2006;
Bajraktari, Ortiz, and Šimkus 2018) are world-centric because an intended structure (i.e., an answer set) of a HKB is
a single ﬁrst-oder structure that is “acceptable” both to the
rule and to the DL component of that HKB. Intuitively, in
such HKBs the rules base their inferences on a given model
of the DL component, rather than accessing the knowledge
that is entailed. In other words, this means that inferences via
rules must only be consistent with the DL component, which
is a rather weak way of using the knowledge stored there.
The entailment-centric approaches like (Eiter et al. 2008;
Motik and Rosati 2010) are the other extreme: when ontological reasoning is considered, rules can base their inferences only on the logical consequences of the DL component, which means that rules have very limited access to
individual models of the DL component.
There are many KR problems where both extremes are inadequate, since solutions must be resilient to a range of possible scenarios. For a simple (synthetic) example, assume we
are given a set of nodes and we want to generate a directed
graph G such that removing any single node from G will always result in a strongly connected graph. In this example,
an ontology can model the possible choices of nodes to be
removed. Intuitively, in order to validate our choice of edges
for G, we have to make sure that every possible induced
subgraph G , obtained by removing a single node from G, is
strongly connected. However, the reachability relation in G
will be different for different choices of G . This and similar
examples reveal the need for a new approach that blurs the
lines between the world-centric and the entailment-centric
approaches. We thus study HKBs that may process different models of the input ontology in different ways, in the
spirit of world-centric approaches, but the intended answer
sets, which must be resilient to the different scenarios, are
deﬁned via a universal quantiﬁcation over the models of the
ontology, in the spirit of entailment-centric approaches.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

Abstract
We introduce resilient logic programs (RLPs) that couple a
non-monotonic logic program and a ﬁrst-order (FO) theory or
description logic (DL) ontology. Unlike previous hybrid languages, where the interaction between the program and the
theory is limited to consistency or query entailment tests, in
RLPs answer sets must be ‘resilient’ to the models of the theory, allowing non-output predicates of the program to respond
differently to different models. RLPs can elegantly express
∃∀∃-QBFs, disjunctive ASP, and conﬁguration problems under incompleteness of information. RLPs are decidable when
a couple of natural assumptions are made: (i) satisﬁability of
FO theories in the presence of closed predicates is decidable, and (ii) rules are safe in the style of the well-known
DL-safeness. We further show that a large fragment of such
RLPs can be translated into standard (disjunctive) ASP, for
which efﬁcient implementations exist. For RLPs with theories expressed in DLs, we use a novel relaxation of safeness
that safeguards rules via predicates whose extensions can be
inferred to have a ﬁnite bound. We present several complexity results for the case where ontologies are written in some
standard DLs.

Introduction
Rule-based languages—especially those supporting nonmonotonic negation—and ontology languages like Description Logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2017) offer complementary
modeling and reasoning capabilities. Indeed, rule-based languages like Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Brewka, Eiter,
and Truszczyński 2011) are tailored to provide powerful
closed-world reasoning about known objects, and features
like the default negation are important when modeling dynamic domains, e.g., in reasoning about actions and change.
In contrast, DLs are in general syntactic variants of ﬁrstorder logic and are suitable for open-world reasoning, especially for reasoning about anonymous objects, i.e., objects
whose identity is unknown but whose existence is implied.
Motivated by this contrast, combining rule-based languages and DLs into Hybrid Knowledge Bases (HKBs) is
a well-established research topic in KR&R (Rosati 2005;
Eiter et al. 2008; Motik and Rosati 2010; Knorr, Alferes,

• We introduce resilient logic programs (RLPs), a formalism in which a standard ASP program P is paired with
a ﬁrst-oder theory (or a DL ontology) T and the predi-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2917

