The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

End-to-End Game-Focused Learning of Adversary Behavior in Security Games
Andrew Perrault,1 Bryan Wilder,1 Eric Ewing,2 Aditya Mate,1 Bistra Dilkina,2 Milind Tambe1
1

Center for Research on Computation and Society, Harvard
Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Society, University of Southern California
{aperrault, bwilder, aditya mate}@g.harvard.edu, {ericewin, dilkina}@usc.edu, milind tambe@harvard.edu
2

features such as animal counts, distance to the edge of the
park, weather and time of year may affect how attractive a
particular target is to the adversary. The training data consists of adversary behavior in the context of particular sets
of targets, and our objective is to achieve a high defender
utility when we are playing against the same adversary and
new sets of targets. For the problem of poaching prevention,
Gholami et al. (2018) use around 20 features per target and
observe tens of thousands of distinct targets (i.e., combinations of feature values). Rangers patrol a small portion of the
park each day and aim to predict poacher behavior across a
large park consisting of targets with novel feature values.
The standard approach to the problem breaks it into two
stages. In the ﬁrst, the adversary model is ﬁt to the historical data to minimize an accuracy-based loss function, and
in the second, the defender covers the targets (via a mixed
strategy) to maximize utility against the learned model. It is
true that, in a worst-case analysis, a model that is more accurate in a global sense induces a better coverage (see Sinha
et al. (2016) and Haghtalab et al. (2016)), but a model that
accurately predicts the relative values of “important” targets
may achieve high defender utility with weak global accuracy. For example, in a game with many low-value targets,
the estimates of the values of the low-value targets can be
wildly inaccurate and still yield a high defender utility (see
Sec. 3 for an example).
In our game-focused approach, in contrast to a two-stage
approach, we focus on learning a model that yields a high
defender expected utility from the start. We train a predictive model end-to-end (i.e., considering the effects of the optimization problem) using an estimate of defender expected
utility as our loss function. This approach has the advantage
of focusing learning on “important” targets that have a large
impact on the defender expected utility, and not being distracted by irrelevant targets (e.g., those with low value for
both the attacker and defender). For example, in our human
subject data experiments, two-stage achieves 2–20% lower
cross entropy, but worse defender expected utility. Performing game-focused training requires us to overcome several
technical challenges, including forming counterfactual estimates of the defender’s expected utility and differentiating
through the solution of a nonconvex optimization problem.
In summary, our contributions are: First, we provide a theoretical justiﬁcation for why our game-focused approach can

Abstract
Stackelberg security games are a critical tool for maximizing
the utility of limited defense resources to protect important
targets from an intelligent adversary. Motivated by green security, where the defender may only observe an adversary’s
response to defense on a limited set of targets, we study the
problem of learning a defense that generalizes well to a new
set of targets with novel feature values and combinations. Traditionally, this problem has been addressed via a two-stage
approach where an adversary model is trained to maximize
predictive accuracy without considering the defender’s optimization problem. We develop an end-to-end game-focused
approach, where the adversary model is trained to maximize
a surrogate for the defender’s expected utility. We show both
in theory and experimental results that our game-focused
approach achieves higher defender expected utility than the
two-stage alternative when there is limited data.

1

Introduction

Many real-world settings call for allocating limited defender resources against a strategic adversary, such as
protecting public infrastructure (Gan, An, and Vorobeychik 2015), transportation networks (Okamoto, Hazon, and
Sycara 2012), large public events (Yin, An, and Jain 2014),
urban crime (Zhang, Sinha, and Tambe 2015), and green
security (Fang, Stone, and Tambe 2015). Stackelberg security games (SSGs) are a critical framework for computing
defender strategies that maximize expected defender utility to protect important targets from an intelligent adversary
(Tambe 2011).
In many SSG settings, the adversary’s preferences over
targets are not known a priori. In early work, the adversary’s
preferences were estimated via the judgments of human experts (Tambe 2011). In domains where there are many interactions with the adversary, we can leverage this history
using machine learning instead. This line of work, started
by Letchford et al. (2009), has received extensive attention
in recent years (see related work).
We use protecting wildlife from poaching (Fang, Stone,
and Tambe 2015) as a motivating example. The adversary’s
(poacher’s) behavior is observable because snares are left
behind, which rangers aim to remove (see Fig. 1a). Various
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1378

