The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Every Frame Counts: Joint Learning of Video Segmentation and Optical Flow
Mingyu Ding,1,3 Zhe Wang,5 Bolei Zhou,4 Jianping Shi,5 Zhiwu Lu,1,2∗ Ping Luo3
1

2

Gaoling School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing 100872, China
3
The University of Hong Kong, 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 5 SenseTime Research
dingmyu@gmail.com, luzhiwu@ruc.edu.cn, pluo@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
A major challenge for video semantic segmentation is the
lack of labeled data. In most benchmark datasets, only one
frame of a video clip is annotated, which makes most supervised methods fail to utilize information from the rest
of the frames. To exploit the spatio-temporal information in
videos, many previous works use pre-computed optical ﬂows,
which encode the temporal consistency to improve the video
segmentation. However, the video segmentation and optical
ﬂow estimation are still considered as two separate tasks. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework for joint video semantic segmentation and optical ﬂow estimation. Semantic
segmentation brings semantic information to handle occlusion for more robust optical ﬂow estimation, while the nonoccluded optical ﬂow provides accurate pixel-level temporal
correspondences to guarantee the temporal consistency of the
segmentation. Moreover, our framework is able to utilize both
labeled and unlabeled frames in the video through joint training, while no additional calculation is required in inference.
Extensive experiments show that the proposed model makes
the video semantic segmentation and optical ﬂow estimation
beneﬁt from each other and outperforms existing methods under the same settings in both tasks.

Figure 1: Illustration of a video snippet that contains 30
frames with only one annotated frame t. Unlike previous
models that only utilize those frames close to the frame with
ground-truth by feature aggregation (solid lines), our model
makes full use of all frames in the video with temporal consistent constraints (dashed lines).

tation. For examples, the methods (Li, Shi, and Lin 2018;
Zhu et al. 2017; Shelhamer et al. 2016) reuse the features
in previous frames to accelerate computation. However, doing so will result in a decrease in the accuracy of the segmentation, and such methods are not considered in this paper. On the other hand, the methods (Fayyaz et al. 2016;
Jin et al. 2017; Gadde, Jampani, and Gehler 2017; Nilsson and Sminchisescu 2018; Hur and Roth 2016) model
multiple frames by ﬂow-guided feature aggregation or a sequence module for better segmentation performance, which
increases computational cost. Our motivation is to use optical ﬂow to exploit temporal consistency in the semantic
feature space for training better models, with no cost in inference time.
Current video segmentation datasets such as (Cordts et al.
2016) only annotate a small fraction of frames in videos.
Existing methods focus on combining features of consecutive frames to achieve better segmentation performance.
These methods can only use a small portion of frames in the
video. Moreover, additional data is needed for training the
feature aggregation module (FlowNet) in ﬂow-guided methods (Nilsson and Sminchisescu 2018).
To address the two challenges of video semantic segmen-

Introduction
Video semantic segmentation, as an important research topic
for applications such as robotics and autonomous driving,
still remains largely unsolved. Current video segmentation
methods mainly face two aspects of challenges: inefﬁciency
and lack of labeled data. On the one hand, since frame-byframe labeling of the video is time consuming, the existing
data set contains only one annotated frame in each snippet,
thus making the problem more challenging. On the other
hand, to incorporate temporal information of the video, existing methods deploy feature aggregation modules to improve the segmentation accuracy, which leads to inefﬁciency
during the inference phase.
Optical ﬂow, which encodes the temporal consistency
across frames in video, has been used to improve the segmentation accuracy or speed up the segmentation compu∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10713

