The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Motion-Based Generator Model: Unsupervised Disentanglement of
Appearance, Trackable and Intrackable Motions in Dynamic Patterns
Jianwen Xie,1∗ Ruiqi Gao,2∗ Zilong Zheng,2 Song-Chun Zhu,2 Ying Nian Wu2
1

Hikvision Research Institute, Santa Clara, USA 2 University of California, Los Angeles, USA

understanding dynamic patterns is learning disentangled representations to separate the underlying factorial components
of the observations without supervision (Bengio, Courville,
and Vincent 2013; Mathieu et al. 2016). For example, given
a video dataset of human facial expressions, a disentangled
representation can include the face’s appearance attributes
(such as color, identity, and gender), the trackable motion
attributes (such as movements of eyes, lip, and noise), and the
intrackable motion attributes (such as illumination change).
A disentangled representation of dynamic patterns is useful in
manipulable video generation and calculating video statistics.
The goal of this paper is not only to provide a representational
model for video generation, but more importantly, for video
understanding by disentangling appearance, trackable and
intrackable motions in an unsupervised manner.

Abstract
Dynamic patterns are characterized by complex spatial and
motion patterns. Understanding dynamic patterns requires a
disentangled representational model that separates the factorial
components. A commonly used model for dynamic patterns
is the state space model, where the state evolves over time
according to a transition model and the state generates the
observed image frames according to an emission model. To
model the motions explicitly, it is natural for the model to be
based on the motions or the displacement ﬁelds of the pixels.
Thus in the emission model, we let the hidden state generate
the displacement ﬁeld, which warps the trackable component
in the previous image frame to generate the next frame while
adding a simultaneously emitted residual image to account for
the change that cannot be explained by the deformation. The
warping of the previous image is about the trackable part of
the change of image frame, while the residual image is about
the intrackable part of the image. We use a maximum likelihood algorithm to learn the model parameters that iterates
between inferring latent noise vectors that drive the transition
model and updating the parameters given the inferred latent
vectors. Meanwhile we adopt a regularization term to penalize the norms of the residual images to encourage the model
to explain the change of image frames by trackable motion.
Unlike existing methods on dynamic patterns, we learn our
model in unsupervised setting without ground truth displacement ﬁelds or optical ﬂows. In addition, our model deﬁnes a
notion of intrackability by the separation of warped component and residual component in each image frame. We show
that our method can synthesize realistic dynamic pattern, and
disentangling appearance, trackable and intrackable motions.
The learned models can be useful for motion transfer, and it
is natural to adopt it to deﬁne and measure intrackability of a
dynamic pattern.

1

Studying video complexity is key to understanding motion
perception, and also useful for designing metrics to characterize the video statistics. Researchers in the ﬁeld of psychophysics, e.g., (Pylyshyn and Annan 2006), have studied
the human perception of motion uncertainty, and found that
human vision fails to track the objects when the number of
moving objects increases or their motions are too random.
In the ﬁeld of computer vision, (Li et al. 2007) proposes the
intrackability concept in the context of surveillance tracking.
(Gong and Zhu 2012) deﬁnes intrackability quantitatively to
measure the uncertainty of tracking an image patch using the
entropy of posterior probability on velocities. In this paper,
we are also interested in providing a new method to deﬁne
and measure the intrackability of videos, by disentangling
the trackable and intrackable components in the videos, in
the context of the proposed model.
A widely used representational model for dynamic patterns is the state space model, where the hidden state evolves
through time according to a transition model, and the state
generates the image frames according to an emission model.
The original dynamic texture model of (Doretto et al. 2003)
is such a model where the hidden state is a low-dimensional
vector, and both the transition model and the emission model
are linear. The model can be generalized to non-linear versions where the non-linear mappings in the transition and
emission models can be parametrized by neural nets (Xie et
al. 2019).

Introduction

Dynamic patterns are spatiotemporal processes that exhibit
complex spatial and motion patterns, such as dynamic texture
(e.g., falling waters, burning ﬁres), as well as human facial
expressions and movements. A fundamental challenge in
∗

Equal contributions
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12442

