The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Did That Lost Ballot Box Cost Me a Seat?
Computing Manipulations of STV Elections
Michelle Blom,1 Andrew Conway,2 Peter J. Stuckey,3 Vanessa J. Teague1
1

University of Melbourne, Australia
2
Silicon Econometrics Pty. Ltd.
3
Monash University, Australia

• Can we ﬁnd N ballots that, when added or removed
to/from those cast, realises a change in outcome?

Abstract
Mistakes made by humans, or machines, commonly arise
when managing ballots cast in an election. In the 2013 Australian Federal Election, for example, 1,370 West Australian
Senate ballots were lost, eventually leading to a costly rerun of the election. Other mistakes include ballots that are
misrecorded by electronic voting systems, voters that cast invalid ballots, or vote multiple times at different polling locations. We present a method for assessing whether such problems could have made a difference to the outcome of a Single Transferable Vote (STV) election – a complex system of
preferential voting for multi-seat elections. It is used widely
in Australia, in Ireland, and in a range of local government
elections in the United Kingdom and United States.

1

• Can we ﬁnd N ballots that, when replaced with ballots expressing alternate rankings, realises a change in outcome?
The outcome of an STV election is changed if at least one
candidate in W is replaced with a candidate in L. Our methods attempt to answer these questions by ﬁnding manipulations of an STV election proﬁle (the collection of electronic
ballot records) that bring about a change in outcome.
We consider the following types of manipulations on an
election proﬁle: adding a ballot, with a given preference ordering over the available candidates; removing a ballot; or
replacing the preference ordering on a ballot with a different
candidate order. To answer the ﬁrst of the above questions,
we must determine if we can ﬁnd (up to) N ballots that if
added (or removed) from the current proﬁle results in at least
one current loser replacing a current winner. To answer the
second question, we must determine if we can ﬁnd (up to)
N ballots that, if swapped with N different ballots, results
in at least one current loser replacing a current winner.
The methods presented in this paper attempt to ﬁnd
the smallest possible outcome-changing manipulation of an
election proﬁle in three settings (addition-only; deletiononly; and shift- or replace-only). If the size of the discovered manipulation is ≤ N ballots, we can prove that certain
errors or problems could have changed an election outcome.
If we can add less than, or equal to, 1,370 ballots to the
proﬁle in the 2013 West Australian Senate election, and
change the result, we can prove that the loss of 1,370 ballots could have been outcome-changing. If we know that N
voters cast invalid ballots in an election,1 and can ﬁnd an
outcome-changing manipulation that adds M ≤ N ballots
to the proﬁle, we know that these ballots could have made
a difference. If there were N voters who cast more than
one ballot in an election, ﬁnding an outcome-changing manipulation in which M ≤ N ballots are removed indicates
that multiple-voting could have inﬂuenced the outcome. If

Introduction

The Single Transferable Vote (STV) is a system of preferential voting for multi-seat elections. In an STV election, each
ballot cast is a (potentially partial) ranking over a set of candidates. It is used in Australia to elect candidates to the upper
houses of Parliament at federal and state levels, in upper and
lower house elections in Ireland, and a range of local government elections in the United Kingdom and United States.
The STV counting process is complex, with each ballot assigned a fractional weight (its value) that changes over time.
Australian STV elections often involve over a hundred candidates, and many ‘rounds’ of counting in which candidates
are elected or eliminated from consideration.
The complexity of STV has led to the development of
software for running the count in Australian elections. Ballot
scanning and digitisation methods are used to create electronic records of cast ballots. These electronic records are
often made publicly available after the outcome of the election has been determined. An election outcome is the subset of candidates C who were awarded a seat (the winners
W ⊂ C); the rest have missed out (the losers L = C \ W).
We present, in this paper, methods that will allow any interested individual, or electoral commission, to answer the
following questions about an STV election result.

1
Invalid or informal ballots are excluded from consideration in
Australian STV elections – they are not included in the counting
process. An example of an informal ballot is one in which less than
a required minimum number of candidates have been ranked.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13235

