The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Attention-Informed Mixed-Language Training for
Zero-Shot Cross-Lingual Task-Oriented Dialogue Systems
Zihan Liu,∗ Genta Indra Winata,∗ Zhaojiang Lin, Peng Xu, Pascale Fung
Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (CAiRE)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{zliucr, giwinata, zlinao, pxuab}@connect.ust.hk, pascale@ece.ust.hk

Zero-shot adaptation is an effective approach to circumvent the data collection process when there is no training
data available by transferring the learned knowledge from
a high-resource source language to low-resource target languages. Currently, a few studies have been performed on the
zero-shot learning in task-oriented dialogue systems (Chen
et al. 2018; Schuster et al. 2019). However, there are two
problems that exist in this research: (1) the existing methods
require a sufﬁcient parallel corpus, which is not ideal for
training models on rare languages where bilingual resources
are minimal, and (2) the imperfect alignments of crosslingual embeddings such as MUSE (Conneau et al. 2018)
as well as the enormous cross-lingual models XLM (Lample and Conneau 2019), and Multilingual BERT (Devlin et
al. 2019) limit the cross-lingual zero-shot transferability.
To address these problems, we propose the attentioninformed mixed-language training (MLT), a new framework that leverages extremely small number of bilingual
word pairs to build zero-shot cross-lingual task-oriented dialogue systems. The word pairs are created by choosing
words from the English training data using attention scores
from a trained English model. Then we pair these English
words with target words using existing bilingual dictionaries, and use the target words to replace keywords in the training data and build code-switching sentences.1 The intuition
behind training with code-switching sentences is to help the
model to identify selected important keywords as well as
their semantically similar keywords in the target language.
In addition, we incorporate the MUSE, RCSLS (Joulin et al.
2018), and cross-lingual language models XLM and Multilingual BERT for generating cross-lingual embeddings.
During the training phase, our model learns to capture important keywords in code-switching sentences mixed with
source and target language words. We conjuncture that
learning with task-related keywords of the target language
helps the model to capture other task-related words that have
similar semantics, for example, synonyms or words in the
same category such as days of the week “Domingo” (Sunday) and “Lunes” (Monday). During the zero-shot testing
phase, the inter-lingual understanding learned by the model
alleviates the main issue of the imperfect alignment of cross-

Abstract
Recently, data-driven task-oriented dialogue systems have
achieved promising performance in English. However, developing dialogue systems that support low-resource languages
remains a long-standing challenge due to the absence of highquality data. In order to circumvent the expensive and timeconsuming data collection, we introduce Attention-Informed
Mixed-Language Training (MLT), a novel zero-shot adaptation method for cross-lingual task-oriented dialogue systems. It leverages very few task-related parallel word pairs
to generate code-switching sentences for learning the interlingual semantics across languages. Instead of manually selecting the word pairs, we propose to extract source words
based on the scores computed by the attention layer of a
trained English task-related model and then generate word
pairs using existing bilingual dictionaries. Furthermore, intensive experiments with different cross-lingual embeddings
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Finally, with
very few word pairs, our model achieves signiﬁcant zero-shot
adaptation performance improvements in both cross-lingual
dialogue state tracking and natural language understanding (i.e., intent detection and slot ﬁlling) tasks compared to
the current state-of-the-art approaches, which utilize a much
larger amount of bilingual data.

Introduction
Over the past few years, the demand of task-oriented dialogue systems has increased rapidly across the world,
following their promising performance on English systems (Zhong, Xiong, and Socher 2018; Wu et al. 2019).
However, most dialogue systems are unable to support numerous low-resource languages due to the scarcity of highquality data, which will eventually create a massive gap between the performance of low-resource language systems
(e.g., Thai) and high-resource systems (e.g., English). A
common straightforward strategy to address this problem is
to collect more data and train each monolingual dialogue
system separately, but it is costly and resource-intensive to
collect new data on every single language.
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8433

“code-switching” is interchangeable with “mixed-language”.

