The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TemPEST: Soft Template-Based Personalized EDM
Subject Generation through Collaborative Summarization
Yu-Hsiu Chen, Pin-Yu Chen, Hong-Han Shuai, Wen-Chih Peng
National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
{yhchen.cm06g, pinyu.eed04, hhshuai}@nctu.edu.tw, wcpeng@g2.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract

Table 1: Example of the article subject generation. Personalized subject summarization is motivated by the fact that different users are inclined to click in different subjects from
the same articles, according to their preference on different
styles.

We address personalized Electronic Direct Mail (EDM) subject generation, which generates an attractive subject line for
a product description according to user’s preference on different contents or writing styles. Generating personalized EDM
subjects has a few notable differences from generating text
summaries. The subject has to be not only faithful to the description itself but also attractive to increase the click-through
rate. Moreover, different users may have different preferences
over the styles of topics. We propose a novel personalized
EDM subject generation model named Soft Template-based
Personalized EDM Subject Generator (TemPEST) to consider the aforementioned users’ characteristics when generating subjects, which contains a soft template-based selective
encoder network, a user rating encoder network, a summary
decoder network and a rating decoder. Experimental results
indicate that TemPEST is able to generate personalized topics and also effectively perform recommending rating reconstruction.

eling package, all subject lines shown in the table can be
used as the subject of EDM since they can all represent the
meaning in the article. User 1 clicks into the one with an exaggerating subject line, whereas user 3 likes a more general
one. Therefore, in this paper, we argue that different styles of
EDM subjects can be personalized to attract different users.
However, current personalized EDM subjects require either human editors or are based on predeﬁned rules. With the
advance of deep learning, it is promising to use a data-driven
approach for personalizing the EDM subjects. One of the
possible solutions is to use article summarization (Cao et al.
2018b; Gao et al. 2019), which aims to summarize the content with a few sentences. Alternatively, personalized review
generation (Ni and McAuley 2018; Li, Li, and Zong 2019)
is another method that seeks to help users in their choices or
the understanding of the recommendation. Nonetheless, article summarization does not take the attractiveness of EDM
subject lines into consideration. Furthermore, personalized
review generation cannot be applied to generate EDM subject lines since the review generation is conditioned on a predeﬁned aspect representation words list which is unavailable
for EDM subject generation.
Therefore, this paper addresses the personalized subject
generation task which has not been discussed in previous research. Given the article content, personalized subject generation task aims to summarize the main idea and to
make the style match with the users’ preference simultane-

Introduction
With the rapid growth of e-commerce, a variety of advertising strategies have been implemented to convert prospects
into paying customers. One of the effective advertising
ways is Electronic Direct Mail (EDM). According to the
e-commerce conversion rate benchmark with more than
10,000 online stores conducted by Compass, EDM is the
highest converting channel for almost every product type.1
Nevertheless, the conversion rate of EDM is still low, i.e.,
5.32% median conversion rate in 2018, which still leaves a
lot of rooms for improvement. To boost the conversion rate,
personalized subject lines have been proved to be effective
for increasing open/conversion rates. The report from Experian Marketing Services indicates that emails with personalized subject lines create a boost of 37% open rates for emails
compared to emails sent during the same period with nonpersonalized subject lines.2
Table 1 illustrates the motivation with three EDM subject
lines. Given the product description of a Hong-Kong travc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://bit.ly/2lsVEpI
2
http://bit.ly/2kc7OD7
7538

