The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CatGAN: Category-Aware Generative Adversarial Networks
with Hierarchical Evolutionary Learning for Category Text Generation
Zhiyue Liu, Jiahai Wang,∗ Zhiwei Liang
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
{liuzhy93, liangzhw25}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wangjiah@mail.sysu.edu.cn

ﬁt the task-speciﬁc applications. However, the category information of sentences can not be easily controlled, and it
is also difﬁcult to design an appropriate training objective
for different categories. Thus, category text generation is a
more challenging task. There are a few works (Wang and
Wan 2018; Li et al. 2018) which try to extend the general text
generation models for category text generation. They mostly
employ a long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) as the generator and combine the auxiliary components (e.g., classiﬁers) with the RL algorithms on
GANs to generate category text. The auxiliary components
can help the model to focus on the category information.

Abstract
Generating multiple categories of texts is a challenging task
and draws more and more attention. Since generative adversarial nets (GANs) have shown competitive results on general text generation, they are extended for category text generation in some previous works. However, the complicated
model structures and learning strategies limit their performance and exacerbate the training instability. This paper proposes a category-aware GAN (CatGAN) which consists of an
efﬁcient category-aware model for category text generation
and a hierarchical evolutionary learning algorithm for training our model. The category-aware model directly measures
the gap between real samples and generated samples on each
category, then reducing this gap will guide the model to generate high-quality category samples. The Gumbel-Softmax
relaxation further frees our model from complicated learning
strategies for updating CatGAN on discrete data. Moreover,
only focusing on the sample quality normally leads the mode
collapse problem, thus a hierarchical evolutionary learning algorithm is introduced to stabilize the training procedure and
obtain the trade-off between quality and diversity while training CatGAN. Experimental results demonstrate that CatGAN
outperforms most of the existing state-of-the-art methods.

The existing category text generation models have shown
some positive results, but RL algorithms and auxiliary components complicate the learning strategy and the model, respectively, which may exacerbate some fundamental problems of GANs, including training instability and mode collapse. Firstly, most of the existing models (Wang and Wan
2018; Li et al. 2018) heavily rely on RL algorithms, and
some strategies, such as Monte Carlo search, are adopted to
guide the discriminator for providing reward signals. These
complicated strategies further increase the training difﬁculty
of GANs. The auxiliary components may carry more burden to the adversarial training, which also makes the training
procedure more unstable. Secondly, the mode collapse problem is serious in the existing models. Because the LSTM
based generator (Li et al. 2018) may lack enough expressive
power, and category text generation, as a sequential decision
process, also easily leads the generator to focus on some limited samples in the target distribution. For generating diversiﬁed samples, the temperature variable (Caccia et al. 2018;
Guo et al. 2018) is employed to make GANs focus on either
the quality or the diversity, but an improvement of diversity
always leads to signiﬁcant degradation of quality.

Introduction
Nowadays, category text generation has received more and
more attention. Generating coherent and meaningful text
with different categories will bring great beneﬁts to many
natural language processing applications, such as sentiment
analysis (Li et al. 2018) and dialogue generation (Li et al.
2017). Recently, generative adversarial net (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), which adopts the discriminator to guide
the generator, is combined with the reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms (Williams 1992) to generate discrete text
data for general text generation, and some competitive results have been reported in the previous works (Yu et al.
2017; Guo et al. 2018; Caccia et al. 2018). Compared with
general text generation which only focuses on obtaining
high-quality text, category text generation aims at automatically generating a variety of controllable category text to

In this paper, a new category text generation framework,
category-aware GAN (CatGAN), is proposed to deal with
the above problems. CatGAN provides a category-aware
model for category text generation and a hierarchical evolutionary learning algorithm for training the model and obtaining the balance between the sample quality and diversity.
Firstly, a novel category-aware model is proposed, which
includes the category-wise relativistic objective to estimate

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8425

