The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Mega-Reward: Achieving Human-Level Play without Extrinsic Rewards
Yuhang Song,1 Jianyi Wang,3 Thomas Lukasiewicz,1 Zhenghua Xu,1,2∗ Shangtong Zhang,1
Andrzej Wojcicki,4 Mai Xu3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
State Key Laboratory of Reliability and Intelligence of Electrical Equipment, Hebei University of Technology, China
3
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, China
4
Lighthouse
{yuhang.song, thomas.lukasiewicz, shangtong.zhang}@cs.ox.ac.uk, {iceclearwjy, maixu}@buaa.edu.cn
zhenghua.xu@hebut.edu.cn, andrzej@wojcicki.xyz
Abstract

6FRUHLVPDVNHG

6FRUHLVPDVNHG

%X
OOH
W
*

XQ

%D
OO

(Q
HP
\

Intrinsic rewards were introduced to simulate how human intelligence works; they are usually evaluated by intrinsicallymotivated play, i.e., playing games without extrinsic rewards
but evaluated with extrinsic rewards. However, none of the
existing intrinsic reward approaches can achieve humanlevel performance under this very challenging setting of
intrinsically-motivated play. In this work, we propose a novel
megalomania-driven intrinsic reward (called mega-reward),
which, to our knowledge, is the ﬁrst approach that achieves
human-level performance in intrinsically-motivated play. Intuitively, mega-reward comes from the observation that infants’ intelligence develops when they try to gain more control on entities in an environment; therefore, mega-reward
aims to maximize the control capabilities of agents on given
entities in a given environment. To formalize mega-reward, a
relational transition model is proposed to bridge the gaps between direct and latent control. Experimental studies show
that mega-reward (i) can greatly outperform all state-ofthe-art intrinsic reward approaches, (ii) generally achieves
the same level of performance as Ex-PPO and professional
human-level scores, and (iii) has also a superior performance
when it is incorporated with extrinsic rewards.

%D
U

2

Figure 1: Latent control in Breakout (left) and DemonAttack
(right).
proposed approaches are used to play games without extrinsic rewards but evaluated with extrinsic rewards. However,
though proved to be able to learn some useful knowledge
(Florensa, Duan, and Abbeel 2017; Song et al. 2019a) or to
conduct a better exploration (Burda et al. 2018; 2019), none
of the state-of-the-art intrinsic reward approaches achieves
a performance that is comparable to human professional
players under this very challenging setting of intrinsicallymotivated play.
In this work, we propose a novel megalomania-driven intrinsic reward (called mega-reward), which, to our knowledge, is the ﬁrst approach that achieves human-level performance in intrinsically-motivated play. The idea of megareward originates from early psychology studies on contingency awareness (Watson 1966; Baeyens, Eelen, and
van den Bergh 1990; Bellemare, Veness, and Bowling 2012),
where infants are found to have awareness of how entities in
their observation are potentially under their control. We notice that the way in which contingency awareness helps infants to develop their intelligence is to motivate them to have
more control over the entities in the environment; therefore,
we believe that having more control over the entities in the
environment should be a very good intrinsic reward. Megareward follows this intuition, aiming to maximize the control
capabilities of agents on given entities in a given environment.
Speciﬁcally, taking the game Breakout (shown in Fig. 1

Introduction
Since humans can handle real-world problems without explicit extrinsic reward signals (Friston 2010), intrinsic rewards (Oudeyer and Kaplan 2009) are introduced to simulate how human intelligence works. Notable recent advances
on intrinsic rewards include empowerment-driven (Klyubin,
Polani, and Nehaniv 2005; 2008; Mohamed and Rezende
2015; Montúfar, Ghazi-Zahedi, and Ay 2016), count-based
novelty-driven (Bellemare et al. 2016; Martin et al. 2017;
Ostrovski et al. 2017; Tang et al. 2017), prediction-errorbased novelty-driven (Achiam and Sastry 2017; Pathak et
al. 2017; Burda et al. 2018; 2019), stochasticity-driven (Florensa, Duan, and Abbeel 2017), and diversity-driven (Song
et al. 2019a) approaches. Intrinsic reward approaches are
usually evaluated by intrinsically-motivated play, where
∗

Corresponding author: Zhenghua Xu.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5826

