The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Attentive Ranking Networks for Learning to Order Sentences
Pawan Kumar,∗ Dhanajit Brahma,∗ Harish Karnick, Piyush Rai
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, India
{kpawan, dhanajit, hk, piyush}@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract

Unordered Paragraph
3
2
4
1

We present an attention-based ranking framework for learning to order sentences given a paragraph. Our framework is
built on a bidirectional sentence encoder and a self-attention
based transformer network to obtain an input order invariant representation of paragraphs. Moreover, it allows seamless training using a variety of ranking based loss functions,
such as pointwise, pairwise, and listwise ranking. We apply
our framework on two tasks: Sentence Ordering and Order
Discrimination. Our framework outperforms various state-ofthe-art methods on these tasks on a variety of evaluation metrics. We also show that it achieves better results when using
pairwise and listwise ranking losses, rather than the pointwise
ranking loss, which suggests that incorporating relative positions of two or more sentences in the loss function contributes
to better learning.

Then a nice thing happened.
He sent a mail to Lost & Found.
Somebody found his watch.
Mario had lost his watch.

Ordered Paragraph
1
2
3
4

Mario had lost his watch.
He sent a mail to Lost & Found.
Then a nice thing happened.
Somebody found his watch.

Table 1: Example of unordered sentences in a paragraph
(left) and ordered sentences in the same paragraph (right).

summarization (Barzilay and Elhadad 2002; Nallapati, Zhai,
and Zhou 2017).
Existing state-of-the-art for sentence ordering methods,
such as (Wang and Wan 2019), rely on sentence encoding
with Transformer and Long Short-Term Memory (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) (LSTM) with pre-trained GloVe
(Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) word vectors.
These methods usually require sentence-by-sentence decoding to producing the reordered sentences.
We propose a novel architecture for sentence ordering and
reframe the problem in a ranking framework. Our framework has several appealing properties. Firstly, while most
existing works (Li and Hovy 2014; Gong et al. 2016; Chen,
Qiu, and Huang 2016; Logeswaran, Lee, and Radev 2018;
Cui et al. 2018; Wang and Wan 2019) use pre-trained word
representations, we leverage Transformer based BERT sentence representations, allowing our model to use improved
sentence encoding. The sentence encoder uses only Transformer (no LSTMs used). Following previous works we use
order invariant Transformer based paragraph encoder for
paragraph encoding. Secondly, while many recent works use
a Pointer Network based decoder for decoding the sentence
order from the encoded sentences, one sentence at a time,
we propose a simple and efﬁcient feed-forward neural network decoder. It computes a relevance score for each sentence, in parallel. These scores can be simply sorted to predict the correct sentence ordering (without expensive beam
search). Thirdly, predicting scores for every sentence in this
fashion allows us to reframe the sentence ordering problem as a ranking problem. Our sentence ordering model can,
thus, leverage extensive prior work on the Learning to Rank
framework (Burges et al. 2005).
We conduct an extensive evaluation of our model on six

Introduction
Coherence is a fundamental aspect of natural language discourse and text. In a coherent discourse, normally, sentences
should respect the chronological order of events. Correct
logical ordering of parts of the discourse can facilitate understanding. Ordering of sentences in a discourse determines local coherence, so it is an essential aspect of natural language
processing. The sentence ordering task tries to organize randomly shufﬂed sentences of a paragraph into a coherent text.
Table 1 shows an Example of this task. (Barzilay and Lapata
2008) proposed the sentence ordering problem on the Accidents and Earthquakes datasets.
Two of the most successful recent sentence representation
models, Quick Thought (Logeswaran and Lee 2018) and
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) (Devlin et al. 2018) use next sentence classiﬁcation for learning the sentence representation. Next sentence
classiﬁcation is a special case of the sentence ordering task,
which shows how vital the sentence ordering task is. Recently sentence ordering has been used in many applications
like concept-to-text (Konstas and Lapata 2012), question answering (Yu et al. 2018; Verberne 2011), multi-document
∗

Equal contributions from both authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8115

