The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Sequential Mode Estimation with Oracle Queries
Dhruti Shah,1 Tuhinangshu Choudhury,1 Nikhil Karamchandani,1∗ Aditya Gopalan2
1

Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
2
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
{dhruti96shah, choudhurytuhinangshu}@gmail.com,
nikhilk@ee.iitb.ac.in, aditya@iisc.ac.in

ﬁnd the largest cluster (i.e., equivalence class) of elements
as opposed to learning the entire cluster grouping (Mazumdar and Saha 2017a; 2017b; 2017c; 2016). We are given a
set of elements with an unknown clustering or partition, and
would like to ﬁnd the elements comprising the largest cluster or partition. Suppose a stream of elements is sampled
uniformly and independently from the set, and at each time
one can ask a comparison oracle questions of the form: “Do
two sampled elements u and v belong to the same cluster or
not?” Under this uniformly sampled distribution for the element stream, the probability of an element belonging to a
certain cluster is simply proportional to the cluster’s size, so
learning the heaviest cluster is akin to identifying the mode
of the distribution of a sampled element’s cluster label.

Abstract
We consider the problem of adaptively PAC-learning a probability distribution P’s mode by querying an oracle for information about a sequence of i.i.d. samples X1 , X2 , . . . generated from P. We consider two different query models: (a)
each query is an index i for which the oracle reveals the value
of the sample Xi , (b) each query is comprised of two indices
i and j for which the oracle reveals if the samples Xi and Xj
are the same or not. For these query models, we give sequential mode-estimation algorithms which, at each time t, either
make a query to the corresponding oracle based on past observations, or decide to stop and output an estimate for the distribution’s mode, required to be correct with a speciﬁed conﬁdence. We analyze the query complexity of these algorithms
for any underlying distribution P, and derive corresponding
lower bounds on the optimal query complexity under the two
querying models.

1

We make the following contributions towards understanding the sequential query complexity for estimating the mode
of a distribution using a stream of samples. (a) For both
the individual-label and pairwise similarity query models,
we give sequential PAC query algorithms which provably
output a mode of the sample-generating distribution with
large probability, together with guarantees on the number
of queries they issue. These query complexity upper bounds
explicitly depend on parameters of the unknown discrete
probability distribution, in that they scale inversely with the
gap between the probability masses at the mode and at the
other elements in the distribution’s support. The proposed algorithms exploit the probabilistic i.i.d. structure of the data
stream to resolve uncertainty about the mode in a queryefﬁcient fashion, and are based on the upper and lower conﬁdence bounds (UCB, LCB) principle from online learning
to guide adaptive exploration across time; in fact, we employ
more reﬁned empirical Bernstein bounds (Maurer and Pontil 2009) to take better advantage of the exact structure of
the unknown sample distribution. (b) We derive fundamental limits on the query complexity of any sequential modeﬁnding algorithm for both query models, whose constituents
resemble those of the query complexity upper bounds for
our speciﬁc query algorithms above. This indicates that the
algorithms proposed make good use of their queries and the
associated information in converging upon a mode estimate.
(c) We report numerical simulation results that support our
theoretical query complexity performance bounds.

Introduction

Estimating the most likely outcome of a probability distribution is a useful primitive in many computing applications
such as counting, natural language processing, clustering,
etc. We study the probably approximately correct (PAC) sequential version of this problem in which the learner faces
a stream of elements sampled independently and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) from an unknown probability distribution,
wishing to learn an element with the highest probability
mass on it (a mode) with conﬁdence. At any time, the learner
can issue queries to obtain information about the identities
of samples in the stream, and aims to use as few queries
as possible to learn the distribution’s mode with high conﬁdence. Speciﬁcally, we consider two natural models for sample identity queries – (a) each query, for a single sample of
the stream so far, unambiguously reveals the identity (label)
of the sample, (b) each query, for a pair of samples in the
stream, reveals whether they are the same element or not.
A concrete application of mode estimation (and one of
the main reasons that led to this formulation) is the problem of adaptive, partial clustering, where the objective is to
∗

N. Karamchandani’s research was supported in part by IndoFrench grant No. IFC/DST-Inria-2016-01/448 “Machine Learning
for Network Analytics”
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5644

