The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fair Division Through Information Withholding
Hadi Hosseini,1 Sujoy Sikdar,2 Rohit Vaish,3 Hejun Wang,3 Lirong Xia3
1

Rochester Institute of Technology, 2 Washington University St. Louis, 3 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
hho@cs.rit.edu, sujoy@wustl.edu, {vaishr2, wangj38}@rpi.edu, xial@cs.rpi.edu

stance with six goods g1 , . . . , g6 and three agents a1 , a2 , a3
whose (additive) valuations are as follows:

Abstract
Envy-freeness up to one good (EF1) is a well-studied fairness notion for indivisible goods that addresses pairwise envy
by the removal of at most one good. In the worst case, each
pair of agents might require the (hypothetical) removal of
a different good, resulting in a weak aggregate guarantee.
We study allocations that are nearly envy-free in aggregate,
and deﬁne a novel fairness notion based on information withholding. Under this notion, an agent can withhold (or hide)
some of the goods in its bundle and reveal the remaining
goods to the other agents. We observe that in practice, envyfreeness can be achieved by withholding only a small number of goods overall. We show that ﬁnding allocations that
withhold an optimal number of goods is computationally hard
even for highly restricted classes of valuations. In contrast to
the worst-case results, our experiments on synthetic and realworld preference data show that existing algorithms for ﬁnding EF1 allocations withhold a close-to-optimal amount of
information.

1

a1
a2
a3

g1
1
1
4

g2
1
4
1

g3
4
1
1

g4
1
1
4

g5
1
4
1

g6
4
1
1

Observe that the allocation shown via circled goods is
EF1, since any pairwise envy can be addressed by removing
an underlined good. However, each pair of agents requires
the removal of a different good (e.g., a1 ’s envy towards a2
is addressed by removing g3 whereas a3 ’s envy towards a2
is addressed by removing g4 , and so on), resulting in a weak
approximation overall (since all goods need to be removed
over all pairs of agents).
The above example shows that EF1, on its own, is too
coarse to distinguish between allocations that remove a
large number of goods (such as the one with circled entries) and those that remove only a few (such as the one with
underlined entries, which, in fact, is envy-free). This limitation highlights the need for a fairness notion that (a) can
distinguish between allocations in terms of their aggregate
approximation, and (b) retains the “up to one good” style
approximation of EF1 that has proven to be practically useful (Goldman and Procaccia 2014). Our work aims to ﬁll this
important gap.
We propose a new fairness notion called envy-freeness up
to k hidden goods (HEF-k), deﬁned as follows: Say there are
n agents, m goods, and an allocation A = (A1 , . . . , An ).
Suppose there is a set S of k goods (called the hidden set)
such that each agent i withholds the goods in Ai ∩ S (i.e.,
the hidden goods owned by i) and only discloses the goods
in Ai \ S to the other agents. Any other agent h = i only
observes the goods disclosed by i (i.e., those in Ai \ S),
and its valuation for i’s bundle is therefore vh (Ai \ S) instead of vh (Ai ). Additionally, agent h’s valuation for its own
bundle is vh (Ah ) (and not vh (Ah \ S)) because it can observe its own hidden goods. If, under the disclosed allocation, no agent prefers the bundle of any other agent (i.e., if
vh (Ah ) ≥ vh (Ai \ S) for every pair of agents i, h), then
we say that A is envy-free up to k hidden goods (HEF-k). In

Introduction

When dividing discrete objects, one often strives for a fairness notion called envy-freeness (Foley 1967), under which
no agent prefers the allocation of another agent to its own.
Such outcomes might not exist in general (even with only
two agents and a single indivisible good), motivating the
need for approximations. Among the many approximations
of envy-freeness proposed in the literature (Lipton et al.
2004; Budish 2011; Nguyen and Rothe 2014; Caragiannis et
al. 2016), the one that has found impressive practical appeal
is envy-freeness up to one good (EF1). In an EF1 allocation,
agent a can envy agent b as long as there is some good in b’s
bundle whose removal makes the envy go away. It is known
that an EF1 allocation always exists and can be computed in
polynomial time (Markakis 2017).
On closer scrutiny, however, we ﬁnd that EF1 is not as
strong as one might think: In the worst case, an EF1 allocation could entail the (hypothetical) removal of every good,
because the elimination of each agent’s envy may require
the removal of a different good. To see this, consider an inc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2014

