The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Interactive Scene Generation via Scene Graphs with Attributes
Oron Ashual,1 Lior Wolf1,2
1

Tel Aviv University
Facebook AI Research
oron.ashual@gmail.com
wolf@cs.tau.ac.il, wolf@fb.com
2

Each object in the image is encoded inside the neural network by a dual representation. The ﬁrst part encodes the object’s placement and captures a relative position and other
global image features, as they relate to the speciﬁc object.
It is generated based on the scene graph, by employing a
graph convolution network, followed by the concatenation
of a random vector z. The second encoding vector captures
the appearance of the object and can be copied from the
same object as it appears in another image, without directly
changing the other objects in the image.
The method is implemented within a convenient user interface, which supports a dynamic placement of objects. The
object locations in the user interface are interpreted as an approximated placement on a coarse grid and not as an exact
location or a hard constraint. The edge relations in the scene
graph are inferred automatically, given the relative position
of the objects, which eliminates the need for mostly unnecessary user intervention. Rendering is done in real-time, supporting the creation of novel scenes in an interactive way.
The neural network that we employ has multiple subparts, as can be seen in Fig. 2: (i) A graph convolutional
network that converts the input scene graph to a per-object
embedding to their location. (ii) A CNN that converts the
location embedding of each object to an object’s mask.
(iii) A parallel network that converts the location embedding to a bounding box location, where the object mask is
placed. (iv) An appearance embedding CNN that converts
image information into an embedding vector. This process
is done off-line and when creating a new image, the vectors
can be imported from other images, or selected from a set
of archetypes. (v) A multiplexer that combines the object
masks and the appearance embedding information, to create a one multidimensional tensor, where different groups
of layers denote different objects. (vi) An encoder-decoder
residual network that creates the output image.
Most related to our method is the one by (Johnson, Gupta,
and Fei-Fei 2018). In comparison to this method, our method
separates the layout embedding from the appearance embedding, in order to allow for much more control and freedom
to the object selection mechanism. In addition, the architecture we employ enables better quality and higher resolution
outputs and adds stochasticity before the masks are created,

Abstract
We introduce a simple yet expressive image generation
method. On the one hand, it does not require the user to paint
the masks or deﬁne a bounding box of the various objects,
since the model does it by itself. On the other hand, it supports
deﬁning a coarse location and size of each object. Based on
this, we offer a simple, interactive GUI, that allows a layman
user to generate diverse images effortlessly.
From a technical perspective, we introduce a dual embedding of layout and appearance. In this scheme, the location,
size, and appearance of an object can change independently
of each other. This way, the model is able to generate innumerable images per scene graph, to better express the intention of the user.
In comparison to previous work, we also offer better quality
and higher resolution outputs. This is due to a superior architecture, which is based on a novel set of discriminators.
Those discriminators better constrain the shape of the generated mask, as well as capturing the appearance encoding in a
counterfactual way.
Our code is publicly available at https://www.github.com/
ashual/scene generation.

Introduction
In a recent work published at the sister conference
ICCV (Ashual and Wolf 2019), we introduce an interactive method for generating realistically looking images. Our
method employs scene graphs with per-object location and
appearance attributes as an easy-to-manipulate way for users
to express their intentions, see Fig. 1. The image speciﬁcations consist of various objects, which are deﬁned as belonging to a certain class (horse, tree, boat, etc.) and as having certain appearance attributes. The attributes are either
archetypal, and obtained by clustering previously seen attributes, or directly imported from a sample image. The relative locations of the objects are speciﬁed by a scene graph,
which is a graph where the scene objects are denoted as
nodes, and their relative position, such as “above” or “left
of”, are represented as edge types.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13651

