The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Envelope-Based Approaches to Real-Time Heuristic Search
Kevin C. Gall, Bence Cserna, Wheeler Ruml
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire, USA
kcg245@gmail.com, {bence, ruml}@cs.unh.edu

However for any lookahead size achieved with ﬁnite resources, one can always imagine a domain with local minima larger than the achieved lookahead.

Abstract
In real-time heuristic search, the planner must return the next
action for the agent within a pre-speciﬁed time bound. Many
algorithms for this setting are ‘agent-centered’ in that, at every iteration, they only expand states near the agent’s current
state, discarding the search frontier afterwards. In this paper,
we investigate the alternative paradigm in which the search
expands a single ever-growing envelope of states. Previous
work on envelope-based methods restricts the agent to move
along the generated search tree. We propose a more ﬂexible
approach in which an auxiliary search is performed within
the envelope to guide the agent toward a promising frontier
node. Experimental results indicate that intra-envelope search
is beneﬁcial in state spaces that are highly interconnected,
such as those for grid pathﬁnding.

Time-Bounded A* (TBA*) (Björnsson, Bulitko, and
Sturtevant 2009) represents an alternative to agent-centered
methods and is the ﬁrst example of what we call Envelopebased Search (ES) for real-time search problems. TBA* iteratively expands a single A* search tree throughout the life of
the algorithm and periodically commits the agent toward the
best node on the A* frontier by tracing and following the
pointers of the tree. Because A* with a consistent heuristic will expand a state at most once, scrubbing is eliminated.
TBA* is able to escape heuristic depressions by directing the
agent toward a more promising branch of the tree without
spending computation time updating heuristic values. However, the algorithm also has drawbacks stemming from the
fact that its search is rooted at the agent’s start state, an increasingly irrelevant state with respect to the agent as it transitions away. In the worst case, when a new target node is
selected the agent will backtrack all the way to the start state
before reaching the new branch.

Introduction
Interactive systems, such as robots or user interfaces, often
must be controlled in real time. In this paper, we address
real-time planning, where the planner must return the next
action for the system to take within a speciﬁed wall-clock
time bound (Korf 1990). The traditional approach to realtime planning is agent-centered, meaning a portion of the
state space immediately surrounding the agent — the Local Search Space (LSS) — is expanded to some bounded
lookahead (Koenig 2001). For example, in the popular LSSLRTA* algorithm (Koenig and Sun 2009), the agent generates the LSS using A* and then moves toward the frontier
node of lowest f . This paradigm has a signiﬁcant drawback:
the agent can easily fall into local minima, also known as
heuristic depressions, in which the h values are misleadingly low, distracting the agent from paths leading toward
a goal. To guarantee completeness in domains with local
minima larger than the lookahead, the heuristic values of
nodes within the LSS are raised (Koenig and Likhachev
2006). However, multiple visits to the same state may be required before the values are high enough, a process known
as ‘scrubbing’ (Sturtevant and Bulitko 2016). Many attempts
have been made at improving the ability of LSS-style algorithms to escape heuristic depressions including analysis of heuristic error and dynamically changing lookahead
(Hernández and Baier 2012; Kiesel, Burns, and Ruml 2015).

Variants of TBA* that use Weighted A* and Greedy Best
First Search to expand the search graph (Hernández, Baier,
and Ası́n 2016) alleviate this problem by biasing toward
nodes with low h, discouraging the search from ﬁnding
new paths that deviate from the tree near the root (reminiscent of the ‘low h bias’ described by Richter, Thayer,
and Ruml (2010)). However, even with this enhancement,
the agent’s path through the constructed search graph is still
inﬂexible since the graph is not typically rewired to exploit
shortcuts between the agent’s current branch and a new target branch.
We propose a new ES algorithm called Intra-Envelope
Search (I-ES) that seeks to address the ﬂaws in TBA* by
splitting time between expanding nodes on the envelope
frontier and searching through the expanded envelope to
connect the agent with a target node. This target is chosen
periodically as the current best node on the envelope frontier. We show that I-ES is complete in undirected and directed domains under reasonable assumptions. Experimental results suggest that the new method has superior performance in domains in which it is easy to ﬁnd alternative paths
between states, such as grid pathﬁnding.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2351

