The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Time-Stream Framework for
Click-through Rate Prediction by Tracking Interest Evolution
Shu-Ting Shi,1,2 Wenhao Zheng,2 Jun Tang,2 Qing-Guo Chen,2 Yao Hu,2 Jianke Zhu,3 Ming Li1∗
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
YouKu Cognitive and Intelligent Lab, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
shist@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {zwh149850, donald.tj, qingguo.cqg, yaoohu}@alibaba-inc.com,
jkzhu@zju.edu.cn, lim@nju.edu.cn
Mike’s playlog

Abstract

ܲሺTrumpሻ ൐ ܲሺTaylorሻ

?

Click-through rate (CTR) prediction is an essential task in
industrial applications such as video recommendation. Recently, deep learning models have been proposed to learn the
representation of users’ overall interests, while ignoring the
fact that interests may dynamically change over time. We argue that it is necessary to consider the continuous-time information in CTR models to track user interest trend from rich
historical behaviors. In this paper, we propose a novel Deep
Time-Stream framework (DTS) which introduces the time information by an ordinary differential equations (ODE). DTS
continuously models the evolution of interests using a neural
network, and thus is able to tackle the challenge of dynamically representing users’ interests based on their historical behaviors. In addition, our framework can be seamlessly applied
to any existing deep CTR models by leveraging the additional
Time-Stream Module, while no changes are made to the original CTR models. Experiments on public dataset as well as
real industry dataset with billions of samples demonstrate the
effectiveness of proposed approaches, which achieve superior
performance compared with existing methods.

ሺܰ ൅ ͳሻth click
st

1 click

nd

2 click

th

th

Interest intensity

݅ click

ሺܰ െ ͳሻ click

Taylor Swift

Trump

Trump

th

ܰ click

Prediction w/o
time interval
Ground truth

Time
User behaviors

Inference phase

Figure 1: The user interests evolve on the time-stream. Only
when considering intervals among user behaviors could the
sequential pattern be captured.

users’ preferences. To pursue a more precise result, RNNbased methods (Wu et al. 2017; Hidasi and Tikk 2016;
Zhou et al. 2019) have been proposed to capture the dependencies in user-item interaction sequences. However, these
methods only consider the order of users’ behaviors and ignore the time interval between behaviors which is the important information on predicting users’ behaviors. As an
example, in Figure 1, Mike usually watches videos about
Donald Trump during the day while enjoys music videos
of Taylor Swift at night, according to his behaviors’ timestamps. Thus, regarding Mike’s playlog only as a sequence of
clicked videos would neglect changes of his latent interests
over time. Unfortunately, existing CTR models do not have
the capability to model the pattern on the continuous-time,
since most of them are unaware to the time interval.
Besides, at the inference phase, it is problematic that only
predicting the next click without considering when the action will be performed. Incorporating the time of users’ behaviors, i.e. modeling the effects of elapsed time interval between behaviors, is important in accurately modeling users’
interest. For example, in Figure 1, if Mike watches a video
of Taylor at 9 p.m., it more likely that he will watch another
video of Taylor than Donald in a few hours, while the probability of watching videos of Donald should be signiﬁcantly
higher after half a day. However, traditional methods always

Introduction
Click-through rate (CTR) prediction aims to estimate the
probability of a user clicking on a given item, which has
drawn increasing attention in the communities of academia
and industry. In the example of a video website, a CTR algorithm is deployed to provide users with videos from thousands of different categories, and thus it is crucial to precisely capture users’ interests so that they will keep using
the website longer and bring more revenue to the website.
To accomplish this goal, the key problem is how to model
user interest based on user historical clicks which reﬂects
user preference. To extract representation of user’s interests,
many models have been proposed from traditional methodologies (Friedman 2001; Rendle 2010) to deep CTR models
(Guo et al. 2017; Qu et al. 2016; Lian et al. 2018). Although
these models achieve great success in modeling users’ overall interests, they are ignorant of the dynamic changes in
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5726

