The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Semi-Supervised Text Simpliﬁcation with
Back-Translation and Asymmetric Denoising Autoencoders
Yanbin Zhao, Lu Chen, Zhi Chen, Kai Yu∗
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
SpeechLab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{zhaoyb, chenlusz, zhenchi713, kai.yu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Most of the prior works regard this task as a monolingual machine translation problem and utilize sequenceto-sequence architecture to model this process (Nisioi et
al. 2017; Zhang and Lapata 2017). These systems rely on
large corpus containing pairs of complex and simpliﬁed sentences, which severely restrict their usage in different languages and the adaptation to downstream tasks in different
domains. So, it is essential to explore unsupervised or semisupervised learning paradigm which can effectively work
with unpaired data.

Abstract
Text simpliﬁcation (TS) rephrases long sentences into simpliﬁed variants while preserving inherent semantics. Traditional sequence-to-sequence models heavily rely on the quantity and quality of parallel sentences, which limits their applicability in different languages and domains. This work investigates how to leverage large amounts of unpaired corpora in TS task. We adopt the back-translation architecture
in unsupervised machine translation (NMT), including denoising autoencoders for language modeling and automatic
generation of parallel data by iterative back-translation. However, it is non-trivial to generate appropriate complex-simple
pair if we directly treat the set of simple and complex corpora as two different languages, since the two types of sentences are quite similar and it is hard for the model to capture the characteristics in different types of sentences. To
tackle this problem, we propose asymmetric denoising methods for sentences with separate complexity. When modeling
simple and complex sentences with autoencoders, we introduce different types of noise into the training process. Such
a method can signiﬁcantly improve the simpliﬁcation performance. Our model can be trained in both unsupervised and
semi-supervised manner. Automatic and human evaluations
show that our unsupervised model outperforms the previous
systems, and with limited supervision, our model can perform competitively with multiple state-of-the-art simpliﬁcation systems.

In this work, we adopt back-translation (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016a) framework to perform unsupervised
and semi-supervised text simpliﬁcation. Back-translation
converts the unsupervised task into a supervised one by onthe-ﬂy sentence pair generation. It has been successfully
used in unsupervised neural machine translation (Artetxe et
al. 2018; Lample et al. 2018b), semantic parsing (Cao et
al. 2019) and natural language understanding (Zhao, Zhu,
and Yu 2019). Denoising autoencoder (DAE) (Vincent et
al. 2008) plays an essential part in back-translation model.
It performs language modeling and helps the system learn
useful structures and features from the monolingual data.
In NMT task, the translations between different languages
are equal, and the denoising autoencoders have a symmetric structure, which means different languages use the same
types of noise (mainly word dropout and shufﬂe). However,
if we treat the set of simple and complex sentences as two
different languages, the translation processes are asymmetric: Translation from simple to complex is an extension process requires extra generations, while information distillation is needed during the inverse translation. Moreover, text
simpliﬁcation is a monolingual translation task. The inputs
and outputs are quite similar, which makes it more difﬁcult
to capture the different features in complex and simple sentences. As a result, symmetric denoising autoencoders may
not very helpful in modeling sentences with diverse complexity and make it non-trivial to generate appropriate parallel data.

Introduction
Text simpliﬁcation reduces the complexity of a sentence in
both lexical and structural aspects in order to increase its
intelligibility. It brings beneﬁts to individuals with low language skills and has abundant usage scenarios in education
and journalism ﬁelds (De Belder and Moens 2010). Also, a
simpliﬁed version of a text is easier to process for downstream tasks, such as parsing (Chandrasekar, Doran, and
Srinivas 1996), semantic role labeling (Woodsend and Lapata 2011), and information extraction (Jonnalagadda and
Gonzalez 2010).

To tackle this problem, we propose asymmetric denoising
autoencoders for sentences with different complexity. We
analyze the effects of denoising type on the simpliﬁcation
performance and show that separate denoising methods is

∗

Kai Yu is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9668

