The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Regularized Training and Tight Certiﬁcation for
Randomized Smoothed Classiﬁer with Provable Robustness
Huijie Feng,1 Chunpeng Wu,2 Guoyang Chen,2 Weifeng Zhang,2 Yang Ning1
1

Cornell University, 2 Alibaba Group Inc.

Recently, randomized smoothing is shown to be able to
provide instance-speciﬁc 2 robustness guarantees (Lécuyer
et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018; Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter
2019). Speciﬁcally, given a base classiﬁer, the prediction of
the smoothed classiﬁer, deﬁned as the most probable prediction over random isotropic Gaussian perturbations, will not
change within an 2 ball whose radius may vary among different inputs. This guarantee does not require assumptions
on the base classiﬁer, and is shown to be one of few methods
to provide non-trivial robustness guarantee for large scale
classiﬁcation task like ImageNet.

Abstract
Recently smoothing deep neural network based classiﬁers via
isotropic Gaussian perturbation is shown to be an effective
and scalable way to provide state-of-the-art probabilistic robustness guarantee against 2 norm bounded adversarial perturbations. However, how to train a good base classiﬁer that
is accurate and robust when smoothed has not been fully investigated. In this work, we derive a new regularized risk, in
which the regularizer can adaptively encourage the accuracy
and robustness of the smoothed counterpart when training the
base classiﬁer. It is computationally efﬁcient and can be implemented in parallel with other empirical defense methods.
We discuss how to implement it under both standard (nonadversarial) and adversarial training scheme. At the same
time, we also design a new certiﬁcation algorithm, which can
leverage the regularization effect to provide tighter robustness lower bound that holds with high probability. Our extensive experimentation demonstrates the effectiveness of the
proposed training and certiﬁcation approaches on CIFAR-10
and ImageNet datasets.

Despite recent advances on the theoretical properties of
randomized smoothed classiﬁer, how to train a good base
classiﬁer that can achieve both good accuracy and robustness
when smoothed under this framework has not been fully investigated. The training procedures employed in most previous works did not fully take into account the ultimate goal
of achieving high accuracy and robustness when the trained
classiﬁer is smoothed. On the other hand, since smoothed
classiﬁers based on neural networks cannot be evaluated exactly (we will discuss the technical details later), in order to
provide robustness guarantee under this framework, a certiﬁcation algorithm is required to give a lower bound of the
certiﬁed radius for each instance that will hold with high
probability. Nevertheless, how to certify the robustness of
smoothed classiﬁers is under-explored as well.

Introduction
Modern machine learning models such as deep neural networks have achieved a great success in a wide range of
tasks, but are shown to be brittle against adversarial attacks. For instance, in image classiﬁcation small perturbations imperceptible to human eyes may largely deteriorate
the performance (Szegedy et al. 2013). Various heuristic
approaches are proposed to either attack the classiﬁer or
defend adversarial attacks by making the classiﬁer robust.
However, defenses that are empirically observed to be robust to speciﬁc types of attacks are later found vulnerable
to stronger or adaptive attacks (Carlini and Wagner 2017;
Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018; Uesato et al. 2018).
Therefore, achieving provable/certiﬁable robustness starts to
draw attention, in which the goal is to guarantee, deterministically or probabilistically, that no attacks within a certain
region will alter the prediction of a classiﬁer.

In this paper, we ﬁll the aforementioned gaps and study
how to train and provide robustness certiﬁcation for randomized smoothed classiﬁer. For training, we derive a regularized risk and discuss how to implement it for training
a good base classiﬁer. Speciﬁcally, we propose ADRE, an
ADaptive Radius Enhancing regularizer, which penalizes
examples misclassiﬁed by the smoothed classiﬁer while encourages the certiﬁed radius of correctly classiﬁed examples. This regularizer can be implemented efﬁciently and
applied in parallel with other adversarial defense methods. In particular, we discuss how ADRE regularization can
be extended to adversarial training scheme that has been
widely employed to improve adversarial robustness (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016; Madry et al. 2017;
Salman et al. 2019). At the same time, we introduce TCERTIFY, a new certiﬁcation algorithm to provide a tighter

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
This work was done when Huijie Feng and Chunpeng Wu were
interns at Alibaba
3858

