The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarial Dynamic Shapelet Networks
Qianli Ma,1 Wanqing Zhuang,1 Sen Li,1 Desen Huang,1 Garrison W. Cottrell2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA
qianlima@scut.edu.cn, scutzwq@gmail.com

from different categories are often distinguished by their
local pattern rather than by global structure, shapelets are
an effective approach to this problem. Moreover, shapeletbased methods can provide interpretable decisions (Ye and
Keogh 2009) since the important local patterns found from
original subsequences are used to identify the category of
time series.

Abstract
Shapelets are discriminative subsequences for time series
classiﬁcation. Recently, learning time-series shapelets (LTS)
was proposed to learn shapelets by gradient descent directly.
Although learning-based shapelet methods achieve better results than previous methods, they still have two shortcomings.
First, the learned shapelets are ﬁxed after training and cannot
adapt to time series with deformations at the testing phase.
Second, the shapelets learned by back-propagation may not
be similar to any real subsequences, which is contrary to
the original intention of shapelets and reduces model interpretability. In this paper, we propose a novel shapelet learning
model called Adversarial Dynamic Shapelet Networks (ADSNs). An adversarial training strategy is employed to prevent the generated shapelets from diverging from the actual
subsequences of a time series. During inference, a shapelet
generator produces sample-speciﬁc shapelets, and a dynamic
shapelet transformation uses the generated shapelets to extract discriminative features. Thus, ADSN can dynamically
generate shapelets that are similar to the real subsequences
rather than having arbitrary shapes. The proposed model has
high modeling ﬂexibility while retaining the interpretability
of shapelet-based methods. Experiments conducted on extensive time series data sets show that ADSN is state-of-the-art
compared to existing shapelet-based methods. The visualization analysis also shows the effectiveness of dynamic shapelet
generation and adversarial training.

The original shapelet-based algorithm constructs a decision tree classiﬁer by recursively searching the best shapelet
data split (Ye and Keogh 2009). The candidate subsequences
are assessed by information gain, and the best shapelet is
found at each node of the tree through enumerating all candidates. Lines et al. (Lines et al. 2012) proposed an algorithm
called shapelet transformation that ﬁnds the top k shapelets
in a single pass and then uses the shapelets to transform the
original time series, where each attribute of the new representation is the distance between the original series and one
of the shapelets. The transformed data can be used in conjunction with any sort of classiﬁer. Thus it can achieve better
performance while simultaneously reducing the run time.
Recently, Grabocka et al. (Grabocka et al. 2014) proposed
a novel shapelet discovery approach called learning timeseries shapelets (LTS), which uses gradient descent to learn
shapelets directly rather than searching over a large number of candidates. Since LTS learns the shapelets jointly
with the classiﬁer, it further improves the classiﬁcation accuracy. Motivated by LTS, other learning-based shapelet
methods (Shah et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2016) have been
proposed. However, although these learning-based methods achieve better performance than previous methods, they
still have two main shortcomings. First, since the shapelets
learned with these methods are ﬁxed after training, they cannot deal with novel deformations of local patterns, which
will result in the failure to recognize important patterns
at test time. Second, the original shapelet-based methods
provide interpretability because the shapelets are based on
discriminative subsequences. However, there is no constraint for existing learning-based shapelet methods that
the shapelets should resemble subsequences, which reduces
their interpretability. Learning-based methods can have arbitrary shapes and even diverge from the real subsequences,
contrary to the original intent of shapelet methods.

Introduction
Time series classiﬁcation is a problem where a set of time
series from different categories are given to an algorithm
that learns to map them to their corresponding categories.
Such problems are ubiquitous in daily life, including categorizing ﬁnancial records, weather data, electronic health
records, and so on. In recent years, a novel approach called
shapelets (Ye and Keogh 2009) has attracted a great deal of
attention in this domain. Shapelets are discriminative subsequences of time series, and have been successfully applied to
time series classiﬁcation tasks. The category of a time series
is distinguished by the presence or absence of one or more
shapelets somewhere in the whole series. Since time series
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5069

