The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Distance-IoU Loss: Faster and Better Learning for Bounding Box Regression
Zhaohui Zheng,1 Ping Wang,1 Wei Liu,2 Jinze Li,3 Rongguang Ye,1 Dongwei Ren*2
1

School of Mathematics, Tianjin University, China
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
3
School of Information Technology and Cyber Security, People’s Public Security University of China
2

*Corresponding author: rendongweihit@gmail.com

Abstract
Bounding box regression is the crucial step in object detection. In existing methods, while n -norm loss is widely
adopted for bounding box regression, it is not tailored to the
evaluation metric, i.e., Intersection over Union (IoU). Recently, IoU loss and generalized IoU (GIoU) loss have been
proposed to beneﬁt the IoU metric, but still suffer from the
problems of slow convergence and inaccurate regression. In
this paper, we propose a Distance-IoU (DIoU) loss by incorporating the normalized distance between the predicted box
and the target box, which converges much faster in training
than IoU and GIoU losses. Furthermore, this paper summarizes three geometric factors in bounding box regression, i.e.,
overlap area, central point distance and aspect ratio, based
on which a Complete IoU (CIoU) loss is proposed, thereby
leading to faster convergence and better performance. By incorporating DIoU and CIoU losses into state-of-the-art object detection algorithms, e.g., YOLO v3, SSD and Faster RCNN, we achieve notable performance gains in terms of not
only IoU metric but also GIoU metric. Moreover, DIoU can
be easily adopted into non-maximum suppression (NMS) to
act as the criterion, further boosting performance improvement. The source code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/Zzh-tju/DIoU.

Figure 1: Bounding box regression steps by GIoU loss (ﬁrst
row) and DIoU loss (second row). Green and black denote
target box and anchor box, respectively. Blue and red denote
predicted boxes for GIoU loss and DIoU loss, respectively.
GIoU loss generally increases the size of predicted box to
overlap with target box, while DIoU loss directly minimizes
normalized distance of central points.

Intersection over Union (IoU) is the most popular metric,
IoU =

Object detection is one of the key issues in computer
vision tasks, and has received considerable research attention for decades (Redmon et al. 2016; Redmon and Farhadi
2018; Ren et al. 2015; He et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2019; 2018). Generally, existing object detection methods can be categorized as: one-stage detection, such as YOLO series (Redmon et al. 2016; Redmon and Farhadi 2017; 2018) and SSD (Liu et al. 2016;
Fu et al. 2017), two-stage detection, such as R-CNN series (Girshick et al. 2014; Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015;
He et al. 2017), and even multi-stage detection, such as Cascade R-CNN (Cai and Vasconcelos 2018). Despite of these
different detection frameworks, bounding box regression is
the crucial step to predict a rectangular box to locate the target object.
In terms of evaluation metric for bounding box regression,

|B ∩ B gt |
,
|B ∪ B gt |

(1)

where B gt = (xgt , y gt , wgt , hgt ) is the ground-truth, and
B = (x, y, w, h) is the predicted box. Conventionally, n norm (e.g., n = 1 or 2) loss is adopted on the coordinates of
B and B gt to measure the distance between bounding boxes
(Redmon et al. 2016; Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015; He
et al. 2017; Bae 2019). However, as suggested in (Yu et al.
2016; Rezatoﬁghi et al. 2019), n -norm loss is not a suitable
choice to obtain the optimal IoU metric. In (Rezatoﬁghi et
al. 2019), IoU loss is suggested to be adopted for improving
the IoU metric,
LIoU = 1 −

|B ∩ B gt |
.
|B ∪ B gt |

(2)

However, IoU loss only works when the bounding boxes
have overlap, and would not provide any moving gradient
for non-overlapping cases. And then generalized IoU loss
(GIoU) (Rezatoﬁghi et al. 2019) is proposed by adding a

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12993

