The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Divide-and-Conquer Learning with
Nyström: Optimal Rate and Algorithm
∗

Rong Yin,1,2 Yong Liu,1,2 Lijing Lu,1,2 Weiping Wang,1 Dan Meng1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China1
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China2
{yinrong, liuyong, lulijing, wangweiping, mengdan}@iie.ac.cn
multiplication. Classical examples include Nyström (Rudi,
Carratino, and Rosasco 2017; Tu et al. 2016) and random
features (Rudi, Camoriano, and Rosasco 2016; Rahimi and
Recht 2007); (3) Distributed learning (Guo, Lin, and Shi
2017). It computes KRLS in parallel by dividing into some
subsets and then merge the result from each subset to get
the ﬁnal approximation. Recently, combinations of those
accelerated algorithms have also captured a lot of attention, of which learning properties have been explored including the combination of divide-and-conquer and SGD
(Lin and Cevher 2018) and the combination of divide-andconquer and random features (Li, Liu, and Wang 2019).
Even though the state-of-the-art KRLS estimates can preserve the same optimal statistical accuracy of exact KRLS,
the computational requirements of them are still prohibitive
faced with large-scale datasets, namely, there are no corresponding computational lower bounds.

Abstract
Kernel Regularized Least Squares (KRLS) is a fundamental
learner in machine learning. However, due to the high time
and space requirements, it has no capability to large scale
scenarios. Therefore, we propose DC-NY, a novel algorithm
that combines divide-and-conquer method, Nyström, conjugate gradient, and preconditioning to scale up KRLS, has the
same accuracy of exact KRLS and the minimum time and
space complexity compared to the state-of-the-art approximate KRLS estimates. We present a theoretical analysis of
DC-NY, including a novel error decomposition with the optimal statistical accuracy guarantees. Extensive experimental
results on several real-world large-scale datasets containing
up to 1M data points show that DC-NY signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art approximate KRLS estimates.

Introduction
In nonparametric statistical learning, kernel methods (Liu et
al. 2018; Li et al. 2018; Liu and Liao 2014; Ding et al. 2018;
Liu et al. 2019) have made remarkable achievements for
kernel regularized least squares (KRLS) (Liu et al. 2017;
Taylor and Cristianini 2004; Yin et al. 2019; Liu and Liao
2015; Liu, Jiang, and Liao 2014) by projecting data into
high-dimensional space. Unfortunately, due to high time
and memory consumption, typically at least quadratic in the
number of examples, KRLS is unfeasible to deal with largescale learning despite excellent theoretical guarantee.
To address the problems, a variety of practical approximate approaches have been designed to avoid the costly
expense of ﬁnding an exact minimizer: (1) Iterative optimization (Lo et al. 2008). It provides regularization against
over-ﬁtting and improves computational efﬁciency by limited and small iterations. The representative include gradient descent (Carratino, Rudi, and Rosasco 2018; Lin and
Cevher 2018), preconditioned conjugate gradient (Fasshauer
and Mccourt 2012; Yang, Pilanci, and Wainwright 2015;
Gonen, Orabona, and Shalev-Shwartz 2016; Ma and Belkin
2017), and accelerated extensions (Raskutti, Wainwright,
and Yu 2014; Cutajar et al. 2016; Bo et al. 2014); (2) Random projections (Williams and Seeger 2001; Smola 2000).
It reduces dimensions of data to reduce the cost of matrix

In this paper, we investigate the algorithm of combining divide-and-conquer, Nyström, conjugate gradient and
preconditioning to deal with extremely large-scale applications, which achieves the same accuracy of exact kernel
regularized least squares with only a fraction of computations. Complexity analysis shows that the proposed algorithm solve KRLS with max( Npm , m3 ) time and Npm space,
where N is the number of data points, m is the sampling
scale, and p is the number of partitions. Our theoretical analysis derives optimal statistical rates in a basic setting. Under
√
benign conditions, the regularization parameter λ  1/ N ,
the proposed algorithm can reach the optimal convergence
rate 1/N . Most importantly, extensive experimental results
on large-scale datasets containing up to 1M data points show
that the proposed algorithm can process millions of data
points in just several seconds and has absolute advantage
over the state-of-the-art approximate KRLS in terms of efﬁciency and accuracy. To the best of our knowledge, it is the
ﬁrst time utilizing these approximate methods and achieving
fruitful results.
The reminder of the paper is organized as below: Section 2 introduces the related work. Section 3 states the background and the proposed approximate KRLS estimator. The
corresponding theoretical assessments follows in section 4.
Finally, we present the experiments and conclusions.

∗

Corresponding author: Yong Liu
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6696

