The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Can Embeddings Adequately Represent Medical Terminology?
New Large-Scale Medical Term Similarity Datasets Have the Answer!
Claudia Schulz, Damir Juric
Babylon Health
London, SW3 3DD, UK
{ﬁrstname.lastname}@babylonhealth.com

the largest consisting of more than 600,000 term pairs. Semantically similar medical terms are extracted from the
SNOMED ontology (Donnelly 2006) and we propose a
novel strategy for creating pairs of dissimilar terms, resulting in datasets that are highly challenging for embeddings.
To ensure the correctness and reliability of the completely
automatically created datasets, we perform a manual evaluation with doctors, conﬁrming the datasets’ high quality
and correctness in representing medical term similarity. We
make our code for dataset construction freely available1 , allowing the easy recreation for future research.2
We evaluate publicly available medical word and contextual embeddings on both our new and existing datasets to
compare what conclusions can be drawn from either. We
also compare and analyse the effects of using different similarity metrics, including the commonly used cosine similarity as well as recently suggested rank-based measures
(Zhelezniak et al. 2019a). We ﬁnd that existing datasets are
too small to realistically reﬂect the complexity of medical terminology and that they do not reveal signiﬁcant performance differences between embeddings. In contrast, our
new benchmark datasets highlight signiﬁcant differences between embeddings as well as their inability to adequately
represent medical terminology.
As a second evaluation of embeddings’ ability to represent medical terminology, we propose a category separation
task and a new error metric. A good medical terminology
representation should identify terms in similar categories as
being closer than terms in dissimilar categories.
Importantly, our large-scale datasets are not only of interest for testing embeddings on the term similarity task, but
also less obvious tasks, such as reducing the time to manually create and verify medical ontologies.
Our contributions are: 1) we introduce highly challenging large-scale medical term similarity benchmarks, 2) we
reveal that existing datasets are too small to discover signiﬁcant performance differences between embeddings, whereas
our datasets do, and 3) we ﬁnd that current embeddings cannot adequately represent medical terminology.

Abstract
A large number of embeddings trained on medical data have
emerged, but it remains unclear how well they represent medical terminology, in particular whether the close relationship
of semantically similar medical terms is encoded in these embeddings. To date, only small datasets for testing medical
term similarity are available, not allowing to draw conclusions about the generalisability of embeddings to the enormous amount of medical terms used by doctors. We present
multiple automatically created large-scale medical term similarity datasets and conﬁrm their high quality in an annotation study with doctors. We evaluate state-of-the-art word and
contextual embeddings on our new datasets, comparing multiple vector similarity metrics and word vector aggregation
techniques. Our results show that current embeddings are limited in their ability to adequately encode medical terms. The
novel datasets thus form a challenging new benchmark for
the development of medical embeddings able to accurately
represent the whole medical terminology.

1

Introduction

AI has recently enabled major breakthroughs in health-care
(Ardila et al. 2019; Liu, Zhang, and Razavian 2018), but it
often requires to develop and adapt AI algorithms speciﬁcally to the domain (Neumann et al. 2019). Especially medical terminology differs largely from commonly used language, so a crucial step towards the successful use of AI
in health-care is to ensure that medical terminology is adequately encoded. Doctors know a vast amount of medical
terms, including which of them are similar (e.g. synonyms
of a disease), but it is so far unclear whether embeddings
share this deep understanding of medical terminology.
To investigate this, small datasets of a few hundred medical concept pairs with a similarity score have been created (Pedersen et al. 2007; Pakhomov et al. 2010; Chiu et
al. 2018). However, testing medical language representation
models on such restricted datasets does not allow to draw
any reliable conclusions about the generalisability of these
models to the whole medical terminology.
In this paper, we aim to overcome the generalisation problem by creating large-scale medical term similarity datasets,

1

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

8775

https://github.com/babylonhealth/medisim
IHTSDO prohibits to publish data derived from SNOMED CT.

