The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Effective Decoding in Graph Auto-Encoder Using Triadic Closure
Han Shi,1 Haozheng Fan,1,2 James T. Kwok1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
2
Amazon
{hshiac, jamesk}@cse.ust.hk, fanhaozh@amazon.com

link recommendation has attracted signiﬁcant attention in
social networks, and also in predicting associations between
molecules in biology, and the discovery of relationships in
a terrorist network. Other popular graph analytics tasks include the clustering of nodes (Wang et al. 2017), and automatic graph generation (Bojchevski et al. 2018). Node clustering aims to partition graph nodes into a set of clusters
such that the intra-cluster nodes are much related (densely
connected) with each other as compared to the inter-cluster
nodes. These cluster structures occur frequently in many domains such as computer networks, sociology, and physics.
Graph generation refers to the task of generating similar output graphs given an input graph. It can be used in the discovery of molecule structures and dynamic network prediction.

Abstract
The (variational) graph auto-encoder and its variants have
been popularly used for representation learning on graphstructured data. While the encoder is often a powerful graph
convolutional network, the decoder reconstructs the graph
structure by only considering two nodes at a time, thus ignoring possible interactions among edges. On the other hand,
structured prediction, which considers the whole graph simultaneously, is computationally expensive. In this paper, we utilize the well-known triadic closure property which is exhibited in many real-world networks. We propose the triad decoder, which considers and predicts the three edges involved
in a local triad together. The triad decoder can be readily used
in any graph-based auto-encoder. In particular, we incorporate this to the (variational) graph auto-encoder. Experiments
on link prediction, node clustering and graph generation show
that the use of triads leads to more accurate prediction, clustering and better preservation of the graph characteristics.

However, graphs are typically difﬁcult to analyze because
they are large and highly sparse. Recently, there is a surge
of interest in learning better graph representations (Goyal
and Ferrara 2018; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017). Different approaches are proposed to embed the structural and
attribute information in a graph to a low-dimensional vector space, such that both the neighborhood similarity and
community membership are preserved (Zhang et al. 2018).
A particularly successful unsupervised representation learning model on graphs is the variational auto-encoder (VAE)
(Kingma and Welling 2014), and its variants such as the
variational graph auto-encoder (VGAE), graph auto-encoder
(GAE) (Kipf and Welling 2016b), adversarially regularized
graph auto-encoder (ARGA), and adversarially regularized
variational graph auto-encoder (ARVGA) (Pan et al. 2018).
All these auto-encoder models consist of an encoder, which
learns the latent representation, and a decoder, which reconstructs the graph-structured data based on the learned representation. The encoder is often based on the powerful graph
convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2016a).
However, the decoder is relatively primitive, and prediction
of a link is based simply on the inner product between the
latent representations of the nodes involved.

Introduction
With the proliferation of online social networks, an enormous number of people are now connected digitally. Besides
people, almost everything is also increasingly connected either physically or by all sorts of relationships, leading to the
recent popularity of the internet of things and knowledge
graphs. In today’s big data era, it is thus important for organizations to derive the most value and insight out of this
colossal amount of data entities and inter-relationships.
In general, nodes in the graph represent data entities,
while edges represent all sorts of ﬁne-grained relationships. For example, in a social network, the nodes are
users that are connected by edges denoting pairwise friendships. In an author collaboration network, the edges denote co-authorship relationships. Besides social networks
and knowledge graphs, data in domains such as chemistry
and natural language semantics are often naturally represented as graphs.
There are a number of important tasks in graph analytics.
A prominent example is link prediction (Wang, Chen, and
Li 2017), which predicts whether an edge should exist between two given nodes. Since its early success at LinkedIn,

As nodes in a graph are interrelated, instead of predicting each link separately, all the candidate links in the whole
graph should be considered together, leading to a structured
prediction problem. However, learning of structured prediction models is often NP-hard (Globerson et al. 2015). A re-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
906

