The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Runtime Analysis of Somatic Contiguous
Hypermutation Operators in MOEA/D Framework
Zhengxin Huang,1,3 Yuren Zhou1,2,∗
1
2

School of Data and Computer Scinece, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, Youjiang Medical
University for Nationalities, Baise 533000, China
Email: thenewyi@gmail.com, zhouyuren@mail.sysu.edu.cn
optimization behavior of hypermutation operators is underdeveloped, particularly on optimizing multi-objective optimization problems (MOPs). Somatic contiguous hypermutation (CHM) operators are important variation operators in
AISs. Runtime analysis is an essential and powerful theoretical tool to understand the working principles of EAs (Doerr
and Doerr 2018; Qian et al. 2019). A few theoretical studies
have presented runtime analyses of EAs with CHM operators on solving single-objective optimization problems.
Jansen and Zarges (2011) analyzed the expected runtimes
of a simple algorithm framework using three CHM operators
on pseudo-Boolean functions. The results show that all considered CHM operators perform much better than SBM on
the CLOBb,k problem. Jansen, Oliveto, and Zarges (2011)
showed that the expected runtimes of a simple AIS with
CHM operator are lower than that of SBM-based EAs on
vertex cover instances that are known to be hard for randomized search heuristics. Corus et al. (2017) analyzed the expected runtimes of CHM and SBM on their easiest function
classes, i.e., MINBLOCKS and ONEMAX. The results show
that MINBLOCKS is exponentially hard for SBM, while
CHM is only worse than SBM a factor of n on ONEMAX.
Xia and Zhou (2018) presented runtime analyses of a simple
algorithm with CHM, SBM or local mutation (LM) on some
discrete optimization problems. The results show that CHM
operators can solve all considered problems efﬁciently while
SBM and LM need exponential expected runtime.
These studies indicate that CHM operators are very competitive operators for solving single-objective optimization
problems, especially on instances that are hard for EAs with
SBM or LM. In addition, analyses in (Jansen, Oliveto, and
Zarges 2011) show that CHM operators can be an alternative to crossover without having to control population size
and diversity. However, to the best of our knowledge, the
optimization behavior of CHM operators on solving MOPs
has not yet been studied from theoretical analysis aspect.
Multi-objective EAs (MOEAs) are popular methods for
solving MOPs. MOEA based on decomposition (MOEA/D)
framework (Zhang and Li 2007) is one of the most popular
strategies in MOEAs. The decomposition idea has been used
in (Ishibuchi and Murata 1998), and it becomes popular after
Zhang and Li presented the MOEA/D framework in (2007).

Abstract
Somatic contiguous hypermutation (CHM) operators are important variation operators in artiﬁcial immune systems. The
few existing theoretical studies are only concerned with
understanding the optimization behavior of CHM operators on solving single-objective optimization problems. The
MOEA/D framework is one of the most popular strategies for
solving multi-objective optimization problems (MOPs). In
this paper, we present a runtime analysis of using two CHM
operators in MOEA/D framework for solving ﬁve benchmark
MOPs, including four bi-objective and one many-objective
problems. Our analyses show that the expected runtimes of
CHM operators on the four bi-objective problems are better
than or as good as that of the well-studied standard bit mutation operator. Moreover, using CHM operators in MOEA/D
framework can improve the best known upper bound on the
many-objective problem by a factor of n. This paper provides
insight into understanding the optimization behavior of CHM
operators in the well-known MOEA/D framework, and indicates that using the CHM operator in MOEA/D framework is
a promising method for handling MOPs.

Introduction
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are a class of randomized
search heuristics inspired by natural evolution. Among EAs,
artiﬁcial immune systems (AISs) are inspired by the principles of immune systems of vertebrates (Corus, Oliveto,
and Yazdani 2019). A main distinguishing feature of AISs
to other EAs is that AISs use hypermutation operators. Different from the standard bit mutation (SBM, only ﬂipping
one bit in expectation) operator in classical EAs, hypermutation operators usually ﬂip multiple bits in a mutation step.
AISs with hypermutation operators have achieved great
success in solving complex optimization problems, including single-objective and multi-objective optimization, for
example, (Shang et al. 2011; Yao et al. 2016; Alizadeh, Meskin, and Khorasani 2017; Dudek 2017; Lin et al. 2018;
Xu et al. 2018; Geng et al. 2019). Compared to successes
in application, the theoretical analysis on understanding the
∗

Corresponding author: Yuren Zhou.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2359

