The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

A System for Medical Information
Extraction and Veriﬁcation from Unstructured Text
Damir Juric,1 Giorgos Stoilos,2 Andre Melo,2 Jonathan Moore,1 Mohammad Khodadadi1∗
1

2

Babylon Health, London, SW3 3DD, UK
Huawei Technologies, Research & Development, Edinburgh, UK

To extract relations between medical entities (for either
enriching existing KBs or creating new ones from scratch)
many automatic approaches for medical Information (triple)
Extraction (IE) have been proposed (Ernst, Siu, and Weikum
2015; Ruan et al. 2017; Shi et al. 2017). Most of them follow a supervised learning approach—that is, given a sentence like “Fever is a common symptom of Malaria” they
ﬁrst identify the medically relevant terms using a dictionary
like UMLS and then train a classiﬁer that associates the pattern that lies between these entities with the desired relation. Such approaches work well for small sentences which
follow a kind of “deﬁnitional character”, however, in practice medical sentences can be much more complex like “The
initial symptoms of Malaria are ﬂu-like and include a high
temperature”. In that case there is no pattern between the entities that implies the “symptom of” relation (the verb “include” is vague and can be associated with many different
relations). In addition, most of these techniques require signiﬁcant human intervention, ﬁne-tuning, and lots of training
data in order to learn good patterns that are able to differentiate between the relations. Moreover, new classiﬁers need
to be trained whenever we want to extract triples involving a
new relation.

Abstract
A wealth of medical knowledge has been encoded in terminologies like SNOMED CT, NCI, FMA, and more. However,
these resources are usually lacking information like relations
between diseases, symptoms, and risk factors preventing their
use in diagnostic or other decision making applications. In
this paper we present a pipeline for extracting such information from unstructured text and enriching medical knowledge bases. Our approach uses Semantic Role Labelling and
is unsupervised. We show how we dealt with several deﬁciencies of SRL-based extraction, like copula verbs, relations
expressed through nouns, and assigning scores to extracted
triples. The system have so far extracted about 120K relations
and in-house doctors veriﬁed about 5k relationships. We compared the output of the system with a manually constructed
network of diseases, symptoms and risk factors build by doctors in the course of a year. Our results show that our pipeline
extracts good quality and precise relations and speeds up the
knowledge acquisition process considerably.

1

Introduction

Signiﬁcant effort and resources have been spent the last
decade to encode medical knowledge using some semantically rich format like RDF and OWL leading to the creation
of formal terminologies (Knowledge Based) like SNOMED
CT, NCI, FMA, and many more. Despite these signiﬁcant results, most of these KBs capture quite general medical knowledge while they contain few connections (relations) between their entities. For example, there is currently no comprehensive KB containing disease-symptom
relations with only some preliminary and ad hoc manual efforts (Oberkampf et al. 2015; Mhadhbi and Akaichi 2017),
not to mention other types of relations like risk factors, disease interactions, and more. Consequently, besides their use
as vocabularies for text annotation and/or standardisation
purposes such sources have not so far formed the basis for
supporting diagnostic tasks for which purposes they need to
be extended or specialised (Rubin et al. 2006).

In the current paper we present our system for extraction of relations between medical entities. This system acts
as an enabler for other downstream systems in AI-enabled
medicine that are supporting real-world use cases like
symptom-checking, treatments, etc. Our approach is based
on Semantic Role Labelling (SRL) (He et al. 2017) which
has been used in the past with promising results (Christensen
et al. 2011) and unlike pure ML approaches is fully explainable. Explainability of the system outputs is very important
because users of the system are medical doctors. However,
SRL is a general purpose method, hence several modiﬁcations and adaptations are required in order to improve its
effectiveness. First, it is often the case that the relevant relation between two entities is “masked” by the presence of
copula verbs (i.e., “is”, “are”)(Miwa et al. 2010). To address
this issue we propose a method that is based on dependency
parsing which adapts and extends the approach in (Miwa et
al. 2010). Second, SRL-parsing is verb-centric while several relations in text are expressed through nouns (Yahya

∗
Work done while all authors were working for Babylon Health,
London.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13314

