The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Coarse-to-Fine Hyper-Prior Modeling for Learned Image Compression
Yueyu Hu, Wenhan Yang, Jiaying Liu∗
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
{huyy, yangwenhan, liujiaying}@pku.edu.cn

now achieve better performance than hybrid codecs (i.e.
BPG).
Transform coding methods exploit manually designed
transforms, e.g. Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) (Wallace 1992) to make energy compact and decorrelate pixels.
The most important portion of the information in the tobe-encoded image is aggregated on lower frequencies after
the transform. Those lower-frequency components are quantized with less information loss to maximally keep the quality. Besides, the coefﬁcient of each frequency component is
expected to be independently distributed after the transform,
namely the redundancies have been fully squeezed out. After
that, the coefﬁcients can be efﬁciently encoded with entropy
coding.
In recent years, end-to-end optimized image compression
methods with neural networks are proposed to exploit the
powerful modeling capacities of deep learning to facilitate
the development of image compression methods. The methods usually utilize an end-to-end trainable model to jointly
optimize the rate and distortion. The state-of-the-art networks for image compression (Minnen, Ballé, and Toderici
2018; Lee, Cho, and Beack 2018) include the Generalized
Divisive Normalization (GDN) (Ballé 2018) or design nonlocal models (Liu et al. 2019) in the analysis and synthesis
transform to reduce spatial redundancy in images. A conditional entropy model with hyper-prior and context model
is included for entropy coding. The implemented learned
image compression methods out-perform existing hybrid
frameworks like BPG (Bellard. 2014) in both PSNR-bit-rate
and MS-SSIM-bit-rate metrics.
In summary, lossy image compression methods are improved mainly along two routes.

Abstract
Approaches to image compression with machine learning now achieve superior performance on the compression rate compared to existing hybrid codecs. The conventional learning-based methods for image compression exploits hyper-prior and spatial context model to facilitate probability estimations. Such models have limitations in modeling
long-term dependency and do not fully squeeze out the spatial redundancy in images. In this paper, we propose a coarseto-ﬁne framework with hierarchical layers of hyper-priors to
conduct comprehensive analysis of the image and more effectively reduce spatial redundancy, which improves the ratedistortion performance of image compression signiﬁcantly.
Signal Preserving Hyper Transforms are designed to achieve
an in-depth analysis of the latent representation and the Information Aggregation Reconstruction sub-network is proposed to maximally utilize side-information for reconstruction. Experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed network to efﬁciently reduce the redundancies in images and improve the rate-distortion performance, especially
for high-resolution images. Our project is publicly available
at https://huzi96.github.io/coarse-to-ﬁne-compression.html.

Introduction
Image compression is one of the most fundamental technology in media sharing and storage. With the booming of highresolution visual applications like 8K streaming and Virtual
Reality (VR), it is a critical issue to obtain superior efﬁciently compressed and high-quality image/video adapted
to the limited hardware resources. Current image compression standards, e.g. JPEG (Wallace 1992) and BPG (Bellard.
2014) based on HEVC (Sullivan et al. 2012), still follow the
transform hybrid coding framework, which is composed of
the transform, quantization and entropy coding. Recent advances in machine learning methods accelerate the development of high efﬁcient image compression methods. The
state-of-the-art learning-based image compression methods

• To reduce bit-rates with less quality loss, the information
neglected by the encoder thus not stored in the bit-stream
should contribute least to the reconstruction quality. Thus,
the compressor needs to select the most important portion
of information during encoding.
• The quantized representation of the image is encoded by
its entropy model to reduce the actual number of bits to
be used. This requirement is usually approached with an
accurate estimation of the joint distribution of the to-beencoded representation of the images.

∗

Corresponding Author. This work is supported by National
Natural Science Foundation of China under contract No.61772043,
Beijing Natural Science Foundation under contract No.L182002.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11013

