The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Iteratively Questioning and Answering
for Interpretable Legal Judgment Prediction
Haoxi Zhong,∗1 Yuzhong Wang,∗1 Cunchao Tu,1 Tianyang Zhang,2 Zhiyuan Liu,†1 Maosong Sun1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
2
Beijing Powerlaw Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd., China
zhonghaoxi@yeah.net, {wyzthu, tucunchao}@gmail.com, zty@powerlaw.ai, {lzy, sms}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Fact Description: After drinking alcohol, Bob was arrested by the police when driving a small car to the entrance of the expressway. After examination, the blood
alcohol content of Bob was 173mg/100ml.

Legal Judgment Prediction (LJP) aims to predict judgment
results according to the facts of cases. In recent years, LJP
has drawn increasing attention rapidly from both academia
and the legal industry, as it can provide references for legal practitioners and is expected to promote judicial justice.
However, the research to date usually suffers from the lack
of interpretability, which may lead to ethical issues like inconsistent judgments or gender bias. In this paper, we present
QAjudge, a model based on reinforcement learning to visualize the prediction process and give interpretable judgments.
QAjudge follows two essential principles in legal systems
across the world: Presumption of Innocence and Elemental
Trial. During inference, a Question Net will select questions
from the given set and an Answer Net will answer the question according to the fact description. Finally, a Predict Net
will produce judgment results based on the answers. Reward
functions are designed to minimize the number of questions
asked. We conduct extensive experiments on several realworld datasets. Experimental results show that QAjudge can
provide interpretable judgments while maintaining comparable performance with other state-of-the-art LJP models. The
codes can be found from https://github.com/thunlp/QAjudge.

1. Is the case related to trafﬁc?



2. Did an accident occur?

×

3. Did the party drink alcohol?



Judgment Results: Reckless Driving, Article 133.

Table 1: A judging process of a real case following the principle of Element Trial. All shown examples are translated
from Chinese for illustration.
Liu, Chang, and Ho 2004; Liu and Hsieh 2006). With the
recent development of deep learning, many researchers began to formalize LJP as a text classiﬁcation task in Natural
Language Processing (NLP). They employed complex deep
learning models or utilized inherent properties of the LJP
task (Liu, Chen, and Ho 2015; Katz, Bommarito II, and
Blackman 2017; Luo et al. 2017; Ye et al. 2018; Hu et
al. 2018b; Zhong et al. 2018). Existing work can already
achieve a macro F1 value over 90 on charge prediction or
relevant articles prediction, which is similar to that of professional judges.
However, there are several critical shortcomings of existing methods. (1) Noninterpretability. Although existing
LJP models has promising performance, the judging process
of models is hard to interpret, which renders the judgment
results unreliable. As a result, those who are unfamiliar with
legal provisions cannot trust the results, while professionals will feel confused if the models give unexpected results.
This makes it hard to determine whether the model has made
a mistake. (2) Ethical issues. One of the most important issues in the judicial system is fairness, but in the real world
there has always been cases unfairly judged due to discrimination based on gender or race during the trial. It is worrying that deep learning methods may learn such bias from
historical judgment results and bring unfairness to the legal
system (Grgic-Hlaca et al. 2018).
As a result, we focus on how a cases be interpretably

Introduction
Legal Judgement Prediction (LJP) focuses on predicting
judgment results (including crimes, relevant articles, and
length of sentence) from the fact description of a speciﬁc
case. LJP plays a crucial role in the legal system. As most
people are not familiar with legal provisions, LJP can serve
as legal aid by providing predicted judgment results. Besides, an LJP model with reasonable performance can provide references to professionals to save their time.
Due to its importance, many researchers pay attention
to improving the performance of LJP. Early work mostly
focused on extracting patterns from the fact descriptions
and predict judgment results based on such patterns (Ulmer
1963; Keown 1980; Segal 1984; Lauderdale and Clark 2012;
∗
Indicates equal contribution. The order is determined by dice
rolling.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1250

