The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bivariate Beta-LSTM
Kyungwoo Song, JoonHo Jang, Seung jae Shin, Il-Chul Moon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea
{gtshs2, adkto8093, tmdwo0910, icmoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) infers the long term dependency through a cell state maintained by the input and the
forget gate structures, which models a gate output as a value
in [0,1] through a sigmoid function. However, due to the graduality of the sigmoid function, the sigmoid gate is not ﬂexible
in representing multi-modality or skewness. Besides, the previous models lack modeling on the correlation between the
gates, which would be a new method to adopt inductive bias
for a relationship between previous and current input. This
paper proposes a new gate structure with the bivariate Beta
distribution. The proposed gate structure enables probabilistic modeling on the gates within the LSTM cell so that the
modelers can customize the cell state ﬂow with priors and
distributions. Moreover, we theoretically show the higher upper bound of the gradient compared to the sigmoid function,
and we empirically observed that the bivariate Beta distribution gate structure provides higher gradient values in training.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the bivariate Beta gate
structure on the sentence classiﬁcation, image classiﬁcation,
polyphonic music modeling, and image caption generation.

Figure 1: An illustrative example of the input gate, the forget
gate, and their correlation for part of a given sentence in sentiment classiﬁcation datasets. Blue and Red bars denote the
positive and negative correlations, respectively. (Left) The
new context starts from the word ”but”, so the negative correlation imposes the large input gate value and the small forget gate value to focus on the current context. (Right) To infer the semantic meaning between the word ”not” and ”overpriced”, the positive correlation occurs at ”over-priced”, so
the positive correlation makes the input gate and the forget
gate have large values. The high forget gate value denotes
the importance of the previous context in our model.

Introduction

to use additional hyper-parameters to sharpen the sigmoid
function, i.e., the sigmoid function with temperature parameter (Li et al. 2018), but these would be limited to the support for the sigmoid function without fundamental innovations. From this perspective, there are few works to probabilistically model the ﬂexibility of the gate structure, i.e.,
G2 -LSTM (Li et al. 2018) with the Bernoulli distribution,
but the current probabilistic model missed the graduality of
the gate value change. Moreover, it has been known that the
gates could be correlated (Greff et al. 2017), and the performance can be improved by exploiting this covariance structure. One common conjecture is the correlation between the
input and the forget gate values in LSTM. However, the
structure of LSTM does not explicitly model such correlation, so its enforcing structure was handled at the technical
implementation level. For instance, CIFG-LSTM (Greff et
al. 2017) enforces the negative correlation between the input
and the forget gate values. CIFG-LSTM shows competitive
performance with reduced parameters because of the correlation modeling. However, CIFG-LSTM enforces the strict
negative correlation, -1 only; and it needs to be generalized

One of the most commonly used Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) variants is Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), which introduces additional gate structures for controlling cell states. LSTM controls the information ﬂow from a sequence with an input,
a forget, and an output gate. The input and the forget gates
decide the ratio of mixture between the current and the previous information at each time step. The sigmoid function
is deﬁned to be bounded and monotonically increasing, so
the sigmoid has been a popular choice for such gate mechanisms.
In spite of the prevalence of sigmoid functions, there has
been a question on the utility and the efﬁciency of the sigmoid function used for the gates in LSTM. For instance, the
conﬁned gate value range, which is narrower than the 0-1
bound, means that the majority of gate values may fall into
the narrower range, and this makes that the gate values lose
potential discrimination power (Li et al. 2018). Some tried
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5818

