The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning on the Job: Online Lifelong and Continual Learning
Bing Liu
Peking University and University of Illinois at Chicago
liub@uic.edu

Abstract
One of the hallmarks of the human intelligence is the ability
to learn continuously, accumulate the knowledge learned in
the past and use the knowledge to help learn more and learn
better. It is hard to imagine a truly intelligent system without this capability. This type of learning differs significantly
than the classic machine learning (ML) paradigm of isolated
single-task learning. Although there is already research on
learning a sequence of tasks incrementally under the names
of lifelong learning or continual learning, they still follow
the traditional two-phase separate training and testing paradigm in learning each task. The tasks are also given by the
user. This paper adds on-the-job learning to the mix to emphasize the need to learn during application (thus online) after the model has been deployed, which traditional ML cannot do. It aims to leverage the learned knowledge to discover new tasks, interact with humans and the environment,
make inferences, and incrementally learn the new tasks on
the fly during applications in a self-supervised and interactive manner. This is analogous to human on-the-job learning
after formal training. We use chatbots and self-driving cars
as examples to discuss the need, some initial work, and key
challenges and opportunities in building this capability.

Introduction
The classic machine learning (ML) paradigm works by
running an ML algorithm on a given training dataset to
learn a model. The model is then deployed and used in an
application. This paradigm has at least two major issues.
1. The learning process does not retain and use the previously learned knowledge. This paradigm is called isolated single-task learning (Chen and Liu, 2016). We
humans never learn in isolation or from scratch. We
learn continually, retain the learned knowledge, and use
it to help future learning. Over time we become more
and more knowledgeable and better and better at learning. Without accumulating the past knowledge and leveraging it in new task learning, an ML algorithm needs
a huge amount of labeled data. We humans can learn
very well with only a few examples. Labeling of data is
often done manually, which is very time-consuming. As
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13544

the world is too complex with too many tasks, which
also change constantly, it is impossible to label a large
amount of data constantly for every possible task.
2. There is no learning after the model is deployed in an
application. Human learning is different as we continue
to learn on the job after formal training. Studies have
shown that about 70% of human knowledge is learned
while working on a task or on the job. Only about 10%
is learned through formal training and the rest 20% is
learned through imitation of others. An AI system
should also learn on the job during model applications.
Lifelong (or continual) learning (LL) attempted to imitate
the human continuous learning process by learning a sequence of tasks incrementally, accumulate the learned
knowledge, and adapt/use it to help future learning (Chen
and Liu, 2016). However, the current LL methods still
work in an offline mode and cannot do on-the-job learning
after model deployment. Their tasks and training data are
also provided by human users. This paper focuses on onthe-job learning, which may be regarded as online LL.
Definition: On-the-job learning studies (1) how to continuously discover new tasks by the agent itself, (2) gather
training data also through the agent’s own active effort,
and (3) incrementally learn the new tasks during model
application without interrupting the application.
Some works has been done on (1) and (3) under openworld learning and continual learning, respectively. However, little work has been done on (2). We propose interactive self-supervision (ISS) for labeled training data gathering via the agent’s own inference, imitation, and natural
interactions with humans and the environment. We should
note that ISS is not a kind of unsupervised methods.
We use chatbots and self-driving cars as examples to
discuss the necessity for on-the-job learning, some initial
work, and major challenges. These systems all have to face
the real world that is full of unknowns and they have to
learn on the job (during actual conversation or driving) in
order to function well because it is impossible to know
what a person may say or what a car may see on the road in
order to train the systems completely offline or beforehand.
It is hard to imagine a truly intelligent system without
the lifelong learning and on-the-job learning capabilities.

