The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Suspicion-Free Adversarial Attacks on Clustering Algorithms
Anshuman Chhabra,∗† Abhishek Roy,∗‡ Prasant Mohapatra†
†

‡

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis
{chhabra, abroy, pmohapatra}@ucdavis.edu

in stark contrast to the signiﬁcant role these algorithms play
in modern data science, malware detection, and computer
security (Perdisci, Ariu, and Giacinto 2013) (Pouget et al.
2006). In a lot of cases, labels for data are hard or even impossible to obtain, rendering classiﬁcation algorithms unﬁt
for a large variety of learning problems.
Designing adversarial examples for clustering algorithms
is challenging because most clustering algorithms are inherently ad-hoc unlike their supervised learning counterparts.
Even deﬁning what constitutes an adversarial sample is not
trivial since the labels are absent. It is even more challenging to design a black-box attack where the adversary has no
knowledge of the clustering algorithm used.
In this paper, we seek to answer these questions by ﬁrst
deﬁning an adversarial sample for clustering, and then presenting a powerful black-box adversarial attack algorithm
against clustering algorithms for linearly separable clusters.
Our attack algorithm is especially powerful because it generates an adversarially perturbed sample while ensuring that
it is not detected as an outlier, and this leads to spill-over
adversarial points. These are unperturbed samples that are
misclustered. Intuitively, the adversarial sample changes the
decision boundary so that some other points get misclustered. Note it is important that the perturbed sample is not
an outlier, otherwise the defender may simply discard it. In
this way, our algorithm helps the attacker generate adversarial samples without arousing the suspicion of the defender.
Spill-over adversarial attacks on clustering have a number of motivating cases in the real world. Similar to (Crussell and Kegelmeyer 2015), where the authors present an attack algorithm against DBSCAN clustering (Sander et al.
1998), consider the AnDarwin tool (Crussell, Gibler, and
Chen 2013) that clusters Android apps into plagiarized and
non-plagiarized clusters. If an adversary perturbs one plagiarized app such that it along with some other unperturbed
apps, gets misclustered, that could lead to a loss of conﬁdence in the tool as the defender is unaware of the reason
for this decreased performance.
In summary, we make the following contributions:

Abstract
Clustering algorithms are used in a large number of applications and play an important role in modern machine learning–
yet, adversarial attacks on clustering algorithms seem to be
broadly overlooked unlike supervised learning. In this paper,
we seek to bridge this gap by proposing a black-box adversarial attack for clustering models for linearly separable clusters.
Our attack works by perturbing a single sample close to the
decision boundary, which leads to the misclustering of multiple unperturbed samples, named spill-over adversarial samples. We theoretically show the existence of such adversarial
samples for the K-Means clustering. Our attack is especially
strong as (1) we ensure the perturbed sample is not an outlier,
hence not detectable, and (2) the exact metric used for clustering is not known to the attacker. We theoretically justify
that the attack can indeed be successful without the knowledge of the true metric. We conclude by providing empirical
results on a number of datasets, and clustering algorithms. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that generates spill-over adversarial samples without the knowledge of
the true metric ensuring that the perturbed sample is not an
outlier, and theoretically proves the above.

1

Introduction

While machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) algorithms have been extremely successful at a number of
learning tasks, (Papernot, McDaniel, and Goodfellow 2016)
(Szegedy et al. 2013) showed that supervised classiﬁcation
algorithms can be easily fooled by adversarially generated
samples. An adversarial sample is generally indistinguishable from the original sample by a human observer. However, it is still misclassifed by the classiﬁcation algorithm.
Since then, there has been a lot of research undertaken to
make supervised models resilient to adversarial samples,
and to expose vulnerabilities in existing ML/DL algorithms
(Carlini and Wagner 2017).
However, unsupervised learning algorithms, in particular
clustering algorithms, have seen little to no work that analyzes them from the adversarial attack perspective. This is
∗
Equal contribution and the names are in alphabetical order of
second names.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We give a concise deﬁnition for the adversary’s objective
in the clustering setting (Section 3).
• We propose a black-box attack algorithm (Section 3) that
3625

