The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fair Division of Mixed Divisible and Indivisible Goods
Xiaohui Bei,1 Zihao Li,2 Jinyan Liu,3 Shengxin Liu,1∗ Xinhang Lu1
1

School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University
2
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
{xhbei, sxliu}@ntu.edu.sg, xinhang001@e.ntu.edu.sg, zh-li16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jyliu@cs.hku.hk

indivisible goods setting.1 To circumvent this problem, relaxations of envy-freeness have been studied. One of the
commonly considered relaxations is envy-freeness up to one
good (EF1) (Lipton et al. 2004; Budish 2011). An allocation
is said to satisfy EF1 if no agent prefers the bundle of another agent following the removal of some good in the latter
bundle. An EF1 allocation with indivisible goods always exists and can be found in polynomial time (Lipton et al. 2004;
Caragiannis et al. 2019).
The vast majority of the fair division literature assumed
that the resources either are completely divisible, or consist
of only indivisible goods. However, this is not always the
case in many real-world scenarios. In heritage division, for
example, the inheritances to be divided among the heirs may
contain divisible goods such as land and money, as well as
indivisible goods such as houses, cars, and artworks. What
fairness notion should one adopt when dividing such mixed
type of resources? While EF and EF1 both work well in their
respective settings, neither of them can be directly applied to
this more general scenario.2 Another tempting solution is to
divide the divisible and indivisible resources using EF and
EF1 protocols separately and independently, and then combine the two allocations together. This approach, however,
also has problems. Consider a simple example where two
agents need to divide a cake and an indivisible item. EF1 requires to allocate the indivisible item to one of the agent, say
agent 1 for example. However, if we then divide the cake using an arbitrary EF allocation, the overall allocation might be
unfair to agent 2 who does not receive the indivisible item. In
fact, if the whole cake is valued less than the item, it would
make more sense to allocate the cake entirely to agent 2.
When the cake is valued more than the item, it is still a fairer
solution to allocate more cake to agent 2 in order to compensate her disadvantage in the indivisible resource allocation.

Abstract
We study the problem of fair division when the resources contain both divisible and indivisible goods. Classic fairness notions such as envy-freeness (EF) and envy-freeness up to one
good (EF1) cannot be directly applied to the mixed goods
setting. In this work, we propose a new fairness notion envyfreeness for mixed goods (EFM), which is a direct generalization of both EF and EF1 to the mixed goods setting. We
prove that an EFM allocation always exists for any number
of agents. We also propose efﬁcient algorithms to compute an
EFM allocation for two agents and for n agents with piecewise linear valuations over the divisible goods. Finally, we
relax the envy-free requirement, instead asking for -envyfreeness for mixed goods (-EFM), and present an algorithm
that ﬁnds an -EFM allocation in time polynomial in the number of agents, the number of indivisible goods, and 1/.

1

Introduction

Fair division studies the allocation of scarce resources
among interested agents, with the objective of ﬁnding an
allocation that is fair to all participants involved. Initiated
by (Steinhaus 1948), the study of fair division has since been
attracting interests from various disciplines for decades, including among others, mathematics, economics, and computer science (Brams and Taylor 1996; Robertson and Webb
1998; Moulin 2003; Thomson 2016; Moulin 2019).
The literature of fair division can be divided into two
classes, categorized by the type of the resources to be allocated. The ﬁrst class assumes the resource to be heterogeneous and inﬁnitely divisible. The corresponding problem is
commonly known as cake cutting. One of the most prominent fairness notions in this setting is envy-freeness (EF). An
allocation is said to be envy-free if each agent prefers her
own bundle to any other bundle in the allocation. An envyfree allocation with divisible resources always exists (Alon
1987; Su 1999) and can be found via a discrete and bounded
protocol (Aziz and Mackenzie 2016a).
The second class considers the fair allocation of indivisible goods. Note that envy-freeness may fail to exist in the

1

Consider the case where there are two agents but only a single
valuable good to be allocated.
2
On the one hand, an EF allocation may not exist, when, for
example, all goods are indivisible. On the other hand, an EF1 allocation may result in extreme unfairness when most resources are
divisible. Consider the example where there is only one divisible
good to be allocated. Giving the whole good to a single agent is
EF1 but is obviously very unfair.

∗

corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1814

