The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

D2D-LSTM: LSTM-Based Path Prediction of
Content Diffusion Tree in Device-to-Device Social Networks∗
Heng Zhang,1 Xiaofei Wang,1† Jiawen Chen,1 Chenyang Wang,1 Jianxin Li2
1

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Advanced Networking, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
2
Deakin University
841636@gmail.com, {xiaofeiwang, chenyangwang}@tju.edu.cn,
cjw602001243@163.com, jianxin.li@deakin.edu.au
et al. 2007; Cha et al. 2009) conﬁrmed that 10% of popular videos account for 80% of views in YouTube, and
caching a small number of contents can effectively solve
the problem of repeated resources downloading. Deviceto-Device(D2D) technology can effectively cache these resources. As for caching, Hao(Hao, Zhang, and Tao 2018),
Gregori(Gregori et al. 2016) and Ramy(Amer et al. 2018)
proposed some strategies on content caching, but their mathematical hypotheses show much deviation in real application. Furthermore, Anderson (Anderson 1998) conﬁrmed
that customer satisfaction is related to word of mouth, while
Chevalier(Chevalier and Mayzlin 2006) proved that a book’s
good reviews can lead to a increase in relative sales at that
Amazon due to word-of-mouth effect. These two facts prove
the great inﬂuence of people meeting and sharing like D2D
communication on content diffusion. The principle of D2D
communication is shown in Fig1.

Abstract
With the proliferation of mobile device users, the Device-toDevice (D2D) communication has ascended to the spotlight
in social network for users to share and exchange enormous
data. Different from classic online social network (OSN) like
Twitter and Facebook, each single data ﬁle to be shared in
the D2D social network is often very large in data size, e.g.,
video, image or document. Sometimes, a small number of interesting data ﬁles may dominate the network trafﬁc, and lead
to heavy network congestion. To reduce the trafﬁc congestion
and design effective caching strategy, it is highly desirable to
investigate how the data ﬁles are propagated in ofﬂine D2D
social network and derive the diffusion model that ﬁts to the
new form of social network. However, existing works mainly
concern about link prediction, which cannot predict the overall diffusion path when network topology is unknown. In this
article, we propose D2D-LSTM based on Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM), which aims to predict complete content
propagation paths in D2D social network. Taking the current
user’s time, geography and category preference into account,
historical features of the previous path can be captured as
well. It utilizes prototype users for prediction so as to achieve
a better generalization ability. To the best of our knowledge, it
is the ﬁrst attempt to use real world large-scale dataset of mobile social network (MSN) to predict propagation path trees
in a top-down order. Experimental results corroborate that the
proposed algorithm can achieve superior prediction performance than state-of-the-art approaches. Furthermore, D2DLSTM can achieve 95% average precision for terminal class
and 17% accuracy for tree path hit.

3RVW&RQWHQW
WH[WLPDJHYLGHRILOHVJDPH
'RZQORDG)LOHV
WH[WLPDJHYLGHR
ILOHVJDPH

&LQG\

&LQG\

%RE

%RE
&LQG\

&LQG\

5HSRVW

5HSRVW

/LO\

5HSRVW
7RP

$OLFH

%RE

$OLFH

%RE

5HSRVW

6KDUH

6KDUH

6KDUH
/LO\

6KDUH
7RP

Figure 1: Working principle of D2D sharing

Introduction

In this paper, we concentrate on how representative APPs1
are propagated in ofﬂine D2D social network. Speciﬁcally,
every APP belongs to one category, while one’s preference
for APPs reﬂects his interest, personality, social habit and so
on. We can learn that a ﬁle’s spread potential is not only limited to the content type itself but the ﬁle’s owner’s preference
for time, geographical location and so on. Therefore, we designed our D2D-LSTM to capture the current user’s properties with the history of users who previously shared the APP
to predict this ﬁle’s future propagation path. To further adapt

With the increasing popularity of smart devices, people
prefer to download various ﬁles from network, and duplicated resource downloading leads to the explosion of cellular network trafﬁc and huge waste of resources. Cha (Cha
∗

This work is partially supported by the National Key R&D
Program of China (2018YFC0809803, 2019YFB2101901), China
NSFC (Youth) through grant 61702364, China NSFC GD Joint
fund U1701263, ARC Linkage Project LP180100750.
†
Xiaofei Wang is corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
APP refers to application software designed to run on smartphones and other mobile devices.

295

