The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Mining Unfollow Behavior in Large-Scale
Online Social Networks via Spatial-Temporal Interaction
∗

∗

†

Haozhe Wu,1 Zhiyuan Hu,1 Jia Jia,1 Yaohua Bu,2 Xiangnan He,3 Tat-Seng Chua4
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
The Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Tsinghua University
2
Academy of Arts & Design, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
4
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
{wuhz19, zy-hu16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jjia@.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Online Social Networks (OSNs) evolve through two pervasive behaviors: follow and unfollow, which respectively signify relationship creation and relationship dissolution. Researches on social network evolution mainly focus on the
follow behavior, while the unfollow behavior has largely
been ignored. Mining unfollow behavior is challenging because user’s decision on unfollow is not only affected by the
simple combination of user’s attributes like informativeness
and reciprocity, but also affected by the complex interaction
among them. Meanwhile, prior datasets seldom contain sufﬁcient records for inferring such complex interaction. To address these issues, we ﬁrst construct a large-scale real-world
Weibo1 dataset, which records detailed post content and relationship dynamics of 1.8 million Chinese users. Next, we deﬁne user’s attributes as two categories: spatial attributes (e.g.,
social role of user) and temporal attributes (e.g., post content
of user). Leveraging the constructed dataset, we systematically study how the interaction effects between user’s spatial
and temporal attributes contribute to the unfollow behavior.
Afterwards, we propose a novel uniﬁed model with heterogeneous information (UMHI) for unfollow prediction. Speciﬁcally, our UMHI model: 1) captures user’s spatial attributes
through social network structure; 2) infers user’s temporal
attributes through user-posted content and unfollow history;
and 3) models the interaction between spatial and temporal
attributes by the nonlinear MLP layers. Comprehensive evaluations on the constructed dataset demonstrate that the proposed UMHI model outperforms baseline methods by 16.44
on average in terms of precision. In addition, factor analyses
verify that both spatial attributes and temporal attributes are
essential for mining unfollow behavior.

1

User1

User1 posted too
much spam messages

User1

Figure 1: An example of unfollow behavior in online social
network: User1 posted too much spam messages, resulting
the unfollow behaviors of his/her followers.

use OSNs each month. The fast development of OSNs is
tightly coupled with the evolution of online social relationships. There are two basic actions for users to manage their
social relationships: follow (relationship creation) and unfollow (relationship dissolution), of which an example is shown
in Figure 1. Previous research efforts paid much attention
to the follow behavior (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2007;
Bliss et al. 2014; Quercia, Askham, and Crowcroft 2012),
while unfollow behavior mining has largely been ignored.
Statistics in a real-world Weibo dataset show that almost
40% of users unfollow others at least once a month. The
frequent occurrence of unfollow behavior leads to an interesting question: why people unfollow others? Taking a step
forward, can we predict the unfollow behavior in OSNs?
Previous research efforts have shown the rationality of analyzing and predicting unfollow behavior. They mainly focus on mining unfollow behavior through user-posted content and social network structures, and have revealed several attributes that are closely related to the unfollow behavior, such as the informativeness of the followee and
the reciprocity of relationships. Leveraging the found attributes, these methods predict unfollow behavior by deﬁning handcrafted features (Maity, Gajula, and Mukherjee
2018; Kwak, Moon, and Lee 2012; Xu et al. 2013). However, merely deﬁning handcrafted features from unfollowrelated attributes cannot generalize well to large-scale setting, because user’s decision on unfollow is not only affected
by the simple combination of user’s attributes, but also by
the complex interaction effects among them. Take the community and post content of users as an example, user’s per-

Introduction

The popularization of the Internet greatly facilitates the development of Online Social Networks (OSNs). Statistics2
show that more than 3 billion people around the world now
∗

Authors contributed equally to this work
Corresponding author: J. Jia (jjia@tsinghua.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.weibo.com/
2
https://digitalreport.wearesocial.com/
†

254

