The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

OVL: One-View Learning for Human Retrieval
Wenjing Li,1,2 Zhongcheng Wu1,2∗
High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract

1

Labeled view

This paper considers a novel problem, named One-View
Learning (OVL), in human retrieval a.k.a. person reidentiﬁcation (re-ID). Unlike fully-supervised learning, OVL
only requires pretty cheap annotation cost: labeled training
images are only provided from one camera view (source
view/domain), while the annotations of training images from
other camera views (target views/domains) are not available.
OVL is a problem of multi-target open set domain adaptation that is difﬁcult for existing domain adaptation methods
to handle. This is because 1) unlabeled samples are drawn
from multiple target views in different distributions, and 2)
the target views may contain samples of “unknown identity”
that are not shared by the source view. To address this problem, this work introduces a novel one-view learning framework for person re-ID. This is achieved by adversarial multiview learning (AMVL) and adversarial unknown rejection
learning (AURL). The former learns a multi-view discriminator by adversarial learning to align the feature distributions
between all views. The later is designed to reject unknown
samples from target views through adversarial learning with
two unknown identity classiﬁers. Extensive experiments on
three large-scale datasets demonstrate the advantage of the
proposed method over state-of-the-art domain adaptation and
semi-supervised methods.

…

ID 1

ID 2

…

Unknown

…

…

ID 1

ID 2

ID 3

ID 1

ID 3

Unknown

Unlabeled view 1 Unlabeled view c

Cam deployment

1

Figure 1: Examples of one-view learning (OVL). Labeled
samples are only available from one camera view (source
view), while samples of other camera views (target views)
are unlabeled. Besides samples of known identities shared
by the source view, the target views may contain samples of
unknown identity that are absent from the source view.

of labeled auxiliary samples and the utilization of knowledge
from the target domain is limited.
In the actual labeling process of person re-ID, the main
difﬁculty is matching persons across disjoint camera views.
By contrast, it is more easily to label persons under one camera view. This is because: 1) labeling process can be proﬁted
from automatic person detection and tracking in raw video
of the same camera, and 2) we could avoid the huge effort of
ﬁnding samples of the same identity across camera views. In
light of these advantages, this work considers a novel setting,
called one-view learning (OVL), to make trade-off between
labeling cost and accuracy for person re-ID. OVL is ﬁrst introduced by Zhong et al. (Zhong et al. 2019), where labeled
training samples from one camera view and unlabeled training samples from other camera views are available (Fig. 1).
The goal of VOL is to learn a discriminative model that can
perform well on testing samples from all views.
OVL can be regarded as a problem of multi-target open
set domain adaptation. It has two unique properties that are
different from traditional domain adaptation: 1) The unlabeled samples are obtained from multiple unlabeled views
(target views/domains) with different distributions. 2) The
target views may include samples of identities that are not
shared by the labeled view (source view/domain). We call
such identities as “unknown identity”. These two properties

Introduction

Person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) aims to look for the matched
person images of the database when given an interested
query person. The modern re-ID methods (Li, Zhu, and
Gong 2018b; Sun et al. 2018) have achieved impressive improvement in accuracy, relying on rich-labeled data. However, it is time-consuming and difﬁcult to label the identities
of persons across disjoint camera views, especially in scenes
with a large number of cameras. To mitigate the heavy cost
of annotation, many methods for unsupervised domain adaptation (Deng et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018) are proposed recently. These methods aim at transferring knowledge from
a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. Despite their success, these methods still require a large number
∗

Corresponding author (zcwu@iim.ac.cn).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11410

