The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SK-Net: Deep Learning on Point Cloud
via End-to-End Discovery of Spatial Keypoints
Weikun Wu,1∗ Yan Zhang,1,2∗ David Wang,3 Yunqi Lei1†
1
Computer Science Department, Xiamen University, China
School of Mathematics Science, Guizhou Normal University, China
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University, USA
wuweikun@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zy@gznu.edu.cn, Wang.8552@buckeyemail.osu.edu, yqlei@xmu.edu.cn
2

the permutation invariance. (2) Capturing the local structure
through explicit or other local feature extraction approaches,
and/or modeling the spatial pattern of a point cloud by discovering a set of keypoint-like points. (3) Aggregating features to deal with a speciﬁc point cloud task.

Abstract
Since the PointNet was proposed, deep learning on point
cloud has been the concentration of intense 3D research.
However, existing point-based methods usually are not adequate to extract the local features and the spatial pattern
of a point cloud for further shape understanding. This paper
presents an end-to-end framework, SK-Net, to jointly optimize the inference of spatial keypoint with the learning of
feature representation of a point cloud for a speciﬁc point
cloud task. One key process of SK-Net is the generation of
spatial keypoints (Skeypoints). It is jointly conducted by two
proposed regulating losses and a task objective function without knowledge of Skeypoint location annotations and proposals. Speciﬁcally, our Skeypoints are not sensitive to the location consistency but are acutely aware of shape. Another
key process of SK-Net is the extraction of the local structure
of Skeypoints (detail feature) and the local spatial pattern of
normalized Skeypoints (pattern feature). This process generates a comprehensive representation, pattern-detail (PD) feature, which comprises the local detail information of a point
cloud and reveals its spatial pattern through the part district
reconstruction on normalized Skeypoints. Consequently, our
network is prompted to effectively understand the correlation
between different regions of a point cloud and integrate contextual information of the point cloud. In point cloud tasks,
such as classiﬁcation and segmentation, our proposed method
performs better than or comparable with the state-of-the-art
approaches. We also present an ablation study to demonstrate
the advantages of SK-Net.

1

Despite being a pioneer in this area, PointNet(Qi et al.
2017a) only extracts the point features to acquire the global
representation of a point cloud. For boosting point-based
performance, the study advancing on above (2) has recently
fostered the proposal of many techniques. One of these proposals is downsampling a point cloud to choose a set of
spatial locations of a point cloud as local feature extraction regions(Qi et al. 2017b; Jiang et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2019a). However, in this method, those locations are mostly
obtained by artiﬁcial deﬁnition, e.g., FPS algorithm(Eldar et
al. 1997), and do not reckon with the spatial pattern and the
correlation between different regions of a point cloud. Similarly, (Xie et al. 2018; Hua, Tran, and Yeung 2018) achieve
pointwise local feature extraction by corresponding each
point to a region with respect to modeling the local structure
of a point cloud. A special way is that (Le and Duan 2018;
Li et al. 2018) combine the regular grids of 3D space with
points, leveraging spatially-local correlation of regular grids
to represent local information. However, performing pointwise local feature extraction and incorporating regular grids
often require high computational costs, which is infeasible
with large point injections and higher grid resolutions. Furthermore, SO-Net(Li, Chen, and Hee Lee 2018) introduces
the Self-Organizing Map (SOM)(Kakuda et al. 1998) to produce a set of keypoint-like points for modeling the spatial
pattern of a point cloud. Even though SO-Net takes the regional correlation of a point cloud into account, it trains
SOM separately. This leaves the spatial modeling of SOM
and a speciﬁc point cloud task disconnected.

Introduction

Rapid development in stereo sensing technology has made
3D data ubiquitous. The naive structure of most 3D data
obtained by the stereo sensor is a point cloud. It makes
those methods directly consuming points the most straightforward approach to handle the 3D tasks. Most of the existing point-based methods work on the following aspects:
(1) Utilizing the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to extract the
point features and using the symmetry function to guarantee

To address these issues, this paper explores a method that
can beneﬁt from an end-to-end framework while the inference of Skeypoints is jointly optimized with the learning
of the local details and the spatial pattern of a point cloud.
By this means, those end-to-end learned Skeypoints are in
strong connection with the local feature extraction and the
spatial modeling of a point cloud. It is worth mentioning
that related approaches of end-to-end learning of 3D key-

∗

Contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6422

