The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Detecting Semantic Anomalies
Faruk Ahmed,1 Aaron Courville1,2
1

Mila, Université de Montréal
2
CIFAR Fellow
{faruk.ahmed, aaron.courville}@umontreal.ca

OOD after training on a particular in-distribution dataset.
This area of research has been steadily developing, with
some additions of new OOD datasets to the evaluation
setup (Liang, Li, and Srikant, 2018), and improved results.

Abstract
We critically appraise the recent interest in out-of-distribution
(OOD) detection and question the practical relevance of existing benchmarks. While the currently prevalent trend is
to consider different datasets as OOD, we argue that outdistributions of practical interest are ones where the distinction is semantic in nature for a speciﬁed context, and that
evaluative tasks should reﬂect this more closely. Assuming a
context of object recognition, we recommend a set of benchmarks, motivated by practical applications. We make progress
on these benchmarks by exploring a multi-task learning based
approach, showing that auxiliary objectives for improved semantic awareness result in improved semantic anomaly detection, with accompanying generalization beneﬁts.

1

Current benchmarks are ill-motivated Despite such
tasks rapidly becoming the standard benchmark for OOD
detection in the community, we suggest that, taken as a
whole, they are not very well-motivated. For example,
the object recognition dataset CIFAR-10 (consisting of
images of objects placed in the foreground), is typically
trained and tested against noise, or different datasets
such as downsampled LSUN (a dataset of scenes), or
SVHN (a dataset of house numbers), or TINY-I MAGENET
(a different dataset of objects). For the simpler cases of
noise, or datasets with scenes or numbers, low-level image
statistics are sufﬁcient to tell them apart. While choices like
TINY-I MAGENET might seem more reasonable, it has been
noted that particular datasets have particular biases related
to speciﬁc data collection and curation quirks (Torralba
and Efros; Tommasi et al., 2011; 2017), which renders the
problem of treating different datasets for OOD detection
questionable. It is possible we are only getting better at
distinguishing such idiosyncrasies. As an empirical illustration, we show in Appendix C that very trivial baselines can
perform reasonably well at existing benchmarks.

Introduction

In recent years, concerns have been raised about modern
neural network based classiﬁcation systems providing
incorrect predictions with high conﬁdence (Guo et al.,
2017). A possibly-related ﬁnding is that classiﬁcationtrained CNNs ﬁnd it much easier to “overﬁt” to low-level
properties such as texture (Geirhos et al., 2019), canonical
pose (Alcorn et al., 2019), or contextual cues (Beery, Horn,
and Perona, 2018) rather than learning globally coherent
characteristics of objects. A subsequent worry is that
such classiﬁers, trained on data sampled from a particular
distribution, are likely to be misleading when encountering
novel situations in deployment. For example, silent failure
might occur due to equally conﬁdent categorization of
unknown objects into known categories (due to shared
texture, for example). This last concern is one of the
primary motivating reasons for wanting to be able to detect
when test data comes from a different distribution than
that of the training data. This problem has been recently
dubbed out-of-distribution (OOD) detection (Amodei et
al.; Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2016; 2017), but is also referred
to as anomaly/novelty/outlier detection in the contemporary
machine learning context. Evaluation is typically carried
out with benchmarks of the style proposed in Hendrycks
and Gimpel (2017), where different datasets are treated as

Semantic distributional shift is relevant We call into
question the practical relevance of these evaluative tasks
which are currently treated as standard by the community.
While they might have some value as very preliminary
reliability certiﬁcation or as a testbed for diagnosing
peculiar pathologies (for example, undesired behaviours
of unsupervised density models, as in Nalisnick et al.
(2019)), their signiﬁcance as benchmarks for practical OOD
detection is less clear. The implicit goal for the current
style of benchmarks is that of detecting one or more of a
wide variety of distributional shifts, which mostly consist
of irrelevant factors when high-dimensional data has lowdimensional semantics. We argue that this is misguided; in
a realistic setting, distributional shift across non-semantic
factors (for example, camera and image-compression

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3154

