The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Relationships between Text, Audio, and
Video via Deep Canonical Correlation for Multimodal Language Analysis
Zhongkai Sun,1 Prathusha K Sarma,2∗ William A Sethares,1 Yingyu Liang1
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2 Curai
{zsun227, sethares}@wisc.edu, prathyushaks.21@gmail.com, yliang@cs.wisc.edu

modes. This is plausible for at least three reasons: 1) Text itself contains considerable sentiment-related information. 2)
Visual or acoustic information may sometimes confuse the
sentiment or emotion analysis task. For instance: “angry”
and “excited” may have similar acoustic performances (high
volume and high pitch) even though they belong to opposite sentiments. Similarly, “sad” and “disgusted” may have
different visual features though they both belong to the negative sentiment. 3) Algorithms for text analysis have a richer
history and are well studied.
Based on this observation, learning the hidden relationship between verbal information and non-verbal information
is a key point in multi-modal language analysis. This can be
approached by looking at different ways of combining multimodal features.
The simplest way to combine text (T), audio (A) and
video (V) for feature extraction and classiﬁcation is to
concatenate the A, V, and T vectors. An alternative is to
use the outer product (Liu et al. 2018; Zadeh et al. 2017)
which can represent the interaction between pairs of features, resulting in 2D or 3D arrays that can be processed
using advanced methods such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Lawrence et al. 1997). Other approaches
(Zadeh et al. 2018a; Liang et al. 2018; Zadeh et al. 2018c;
Wang et al. 2018) study multi-modal interactions and intraactions by using either graph or temporal memory networks
with a sequential neural network LSTM (Gers, Schmidhuber, and Cummins 1999). While all these have contributed
towards learning multi-modal features, they typically ignore the hidden correlation between text-based audio and
text-based video. Individual modalities are either combined
via neural networks or passed directly to the ﬁnal classiﬁer
stage. However, it is obvious that attaching both audio and
video features to the same textual information may enable
non-text information to be better understood, and in turn the
non-text information may impart greater meaning to the text.
Thus, it is reasonable to study the deeper correlations between text-based audio and text-based video features.
This paper proposes a novel model which uses the outerproduct of feature pairs along with Deep Canonical Correlation Analysis (DCCA) (Andrew et al. 2013) to study useful
multi-modal embedding features. The effectiveness of us-

Abstract
Multimodal language analysis often considers relationships
between features based on text and those based on acoustical and visual properties. Text features typically outperform
non-text features in sentiment analysis or emotion recognition
tasks in part because the text features are derived from advanced language models or word embeddings trained on massive data sources while audio and video features are humanengineered and comparatively underdeveloped. Given that the
text, audio, and video are describing the same utterance in different ways, we hypothesize that the multimodal sentiment
analysis and emotion recognition can be improved by learning (hidden) correlations between features extracted from the
outer product of text and audio (we call this text-based audio) and analogous text-based video. This paper proposes a
novel model, the Interaction Canonical Correlation Network
(ICCN), to learn such multimodal embeddings. ICCN learns
correlations between all three modes via deep canonical correlation analysis (DCCA) and the proposed embeddings are
then tested on several benchmark datasets and against other
state-of-the-art multimodal embedding algorithms. Empirical
results and ablation studies conﬁrm the effectiveness of ICCN
in capturing useful information from all three views.

1

Introduction

Human language communication occurs in several modalities: via words that are spoken, by tone of voice, and
by facial and bodily expressions. Understanding the content of a message thus requires understanding all three
modes. With the explosive growth in availability of data,
several machine learning algorithms have been successfully
applied towards multimodal tasks such as sentiment analysis (Morency, Mihalcea, and Doshi 2011; Soleymani et
al. 2017), emotion recognition (Haq and Jackson 2011),
image-text retrieval (Wang, Li, and Lazebnik 2016), and
aiding medical diagnose (Liu et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2014)
etc. Among multimodal language sentiment or emotion experiments involving unimodal features (Zadeh et al. 2016;
2018c; Tsai et al. 2018; 2019), it is commonly observed that
text based features perform better than visual or auditory
∗

Work done while at UW-Madison
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8992

