The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SGAP-Net: Semantic-Guided Attentive Prototypes
Network for Few-Shot Human-Object Interaction Recognition
Zhong Ji,1 Xiyao Liu,1 Yanwei Pang,1∗ Xuelong Li2
1

Tianjin University, 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University
{jizhong, xiyaoliu, pyw}@tju.edu.cn, xuelong li@ieee.org

Abstract
Extreme instance imbalance among categories and combinatorial explosion make the recognition of Human-Object Interaction (HOI) a challenging task. Few studies have addressed
both challenges directly. Motivated by the success of few-shot
learning that learns a robust model from a few instances, we
formulate HOI as a few-shot task in a meta-learning framework to alleviate the above challenges. Due to the fact that
the intrinsic characteristic of HOI is diverse and interactive,
we propose a Semantic-Guided Attentive Prototypes Network
(SGAP-Net) to learn a semantic-guided metric space where
HOI recognition can be performed by computing distances
to attentive prototypes of each class. Speciﬁcally, the model
generates attentive prototypes guided by the category names
of actions and objects, which highlight the commonalities of
images from the same class in HOI. In addition, we design
a novel decision method to alleviate the biases produced by
different patterns of the same action in HOI. Finally, in order
to realize the task of few-shot HOI, we reorganize two HOI
benchmark datasets, i.e., HICO-FS and TUHOI-FS, to realize the task of few-shot HOI. Extensive experimental results
on both datasets have demonstrated the effectiveness of our
proposed SGAP-Net approach.

Figure 1: Extreme imbalance and ubiquitous similarities
among categories on one HOI dataset: HICO (Chao et al.
2015). Despite of the same object category, the number of
samples produced by different actions varies greatly. On the
other side, objects with similar attributes (e.g., horse and zebra) are likely to interact with the same action.

Girdhar and Ramanan 2017), the study of HOI is still in its
infancy. This is due to: (1) The instance imbalance among
categories increases the difﬁculty of training and is prone to
cause over-ﬁtting (Chao et al. 2015). Some common interactions have abundant samples, while some unusual HOI combinations have quite few samples. For example, samples of
“Hold-Horse” are much more than those of “Feed-Horse”, as
shown in Fig. 1. (2) Multiple labels in HOI make the number
of classes increase exponentially, which results in the various information being entangled with each other, or aggregating the similarity of all possible pairs of actions and objects exhaustively, and bringing about huge burden for computing resources. Current approaches apply data augmentation with weakly labeled data (Zhuang et al. 2018) or valid
geometric conﬁguration regularization (Lin et al. 2016) to
improve performance for HOI recognition. However, they
neglect the above challenges in HOI.
Recently, the task of few-shot learning has been proved
to alleviate the instance imbalance problem effectively. It
learns a network that maps an unlabeled example to its label from a small labeled support set (Vinyals et al. 2016),

Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) is to recognize the relationship between human actions and surrounding environment, which is a challenging computer vision task. Unlike
object recognition, the key to understanding visual scene is
not only to recognize the existence of instances, but also
to understand the visual relationship among instances. Instead of “Where is what” (i.e., object detection and recognition in images), the goal of HOI recognition is to answer
“What does the person do with something”. That is to say,
given an input image, this task aims at recognizing the triple
< human, verb, object >.
Despite signiﬁcant advances in the ﬁeld of computer vision, such as image classiﬁcation (He et al. 2016; Wang et
al. 2017), object detection (Ren et al. 2017; He et al. 2017)
and action recognition (Gkioxari, Girshick, and Malik 2015;
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11085

