The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Ordinal Data Clustering Algorithm with Automated Distance Learning
Yiqun Zhang, Yiu-ming Cheung∗
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University,
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong SAR, China,
{yqzhang, ymc}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

rectly used to deﬁne the distances for ordinal data. Hamming
Distance Metric (HDM) is the most popular one. However,
its distance is simply binary (i.e., 0 for identical categories
and 1 for different categories), which is too simple to suitable for ordinal data. By contrast, Entropy-Based Measure
(EBM) (Barbará, Li, and Couto 2002; Li, Ma, and Ogihara
2004), Association-Based Distance Metric (ABDM) (Le and
Ho 2005), Ahmad’s Distance Metric (ADM) (Ahmad and
Dey 2007), Context-Based Distance Metric (CBDM) (Ienco,
Pensa, and Meo 2012), Object-Cluster Similarity Measure
(OCSM) (Cheung and Jia 2013), and Jia’s Distance Metric
(JDM) (Jia, Cheung, and Liu 2016) attempt to more reasonably deﬁne the distances by exploiting statistic information
of categories, including frequency probabilities, conditional
probability distributions, and so on. However, they are originally designed for nominal data only, and the distances deﬁned by them may violate the order relationship among ordinal categories. Most recently, Entropy-Based Distance Metric (EBDM) (Zhang and Cheung 2018) has been proposed,
which adopts cumulative entropy as a measure to simultaneously take into account the statistic information and order
relationship for ordinal data distance measurement. Unfortunately, it assumes that all the attributes are equally important and independent of each other, which may not always be true from the practical viewpoint. By adopting the
above-mentioned metrics and measures, existing categorical data clustering algorithms, including the conventional
K-Modes (KMD), the representative Weighted K-Modes
(WKMD) (Chan et al. 2004), the state-of-the-art Weighted
OCIL (WOCIL) (Jia and Cheung 2018), etc., will produce
unsatisfactory ordinal data clustering results due to the unreasonably deﬁned distances.

Abstract
Clustering ordinal data is a common task in data mining and
machine learning ﬁelds. As a major type of categorical data,
ordinal data is composed of attributes with naturally ordered
possible values (also called categories interchangeably in this
paper). However, due to the lack of dedicated distance metric, ordinal categories are usually treated as nominal ones, or
coded as consecutive integers and treated as numerical ones.
Both these two common ways will roughly deﬁne the distances between ordinal categories because the former way
ignores the order relationship and the latter way simply assigns identical distances to different pairs of adjacent categories that may have intrinsically unequal distances. As a result, they may produce unsatisfactory ordinal data clustering
results. This paper, therefore, proposes a novel ordinal data
clustering algorithm, which iteratively learns: 1) The partition of ordinal dataset, and 2) the inter-category distances.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt to dynamically adjust inter-category distances during the clustering process to search for a better partition of ordinal data. The
proposed algorithm features superior clustering accuracy, low
time complexity, fast convergence, and is parameter-free. Extensive experiments show its efﬁcacy.

Introduction
Ordinal data is usually collected from questionnaires, evaluation systems, etc. As a major type of categorical data,
possible values of an ordinal attribute are a limited number of naturally ordered categories (Agresti 1996; Allen and
Seaman 2007), e.g., {accept, neutral, reject}. In many data
mining and machine learning tasks, it is common to analyze
ordinal data by clustering, in which distance measurement
plays a main role (Ng et al. 2007). Since the values of ordinal data are not quantitative, the distances of ordinal data are
not well-deﬁned. Therefore, ordinal data is usually treated in
either of the following two ways: 1) Directly deﬁne the distances between ordinal categories, and treat ordinal data as
nominal one in the clustering; 2) Code ordinal categories as
consecutive integers, and treat the coded data as numerical
one in the clustering.
In the former way, all the existing distance metrics and
measures that are designed for categorical data can be di-

In the latter way, categories within the same attribute
are usually coded as consecutive integers according to their
ranking, for example, ordinal categories {accept, neutral,
reject} are coded as {3, 2, 1}. In this way, ordinal data
is converted into numerical one, and the existing numerical data clustering algorithms, including the conventional
K-Means (KMS), the representative Weighted K-Means
(WKMS) (Huang et al. 2005), the state-of-the-art WOCIL
(Jia and Cheung 2018), etc., are applicable for the clustering of coded ordinal data. Although the coding effectively
preserves the order information of ordinal data, it unreasonably assigns identical distances to different pairs of ad-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6869

