The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Federated Patient Hashing
Jie Xu,1 Zhenxing Xu,1 Peter Walker,2 Fei Wang1
1

Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, USA
U.S. Department of Defense Joint Artiﬁcial Intelligence Center, USA
{jix4002, zhx2005, few2001}@med.cornell.edu, peter.b.walker.mil@mail.mil
2

compact binary codes. Rather than data-independent hashing methods (Athitsos et al. 2008; Chi, Li, and Zhu 2013;
Indyk and Motwani 1998), there have been lots of research on learning hashing functions (e.g., Laplacian CoHashing (LCH) (Zhang et al. 2010), Collaborative Hashing (CH) (Liu et al. 2014), Semantic Correlation Maximization (SCM) (Zhang and Li 2014), Spectral Hashing
(SH) (Weiss, Fergus, and Torralba 2012), Anchor Graph
Hashing (AGH) (Liu, Wang, and fu Chang 2011), and the
latest deep hashing methods (Li, Wang, and Kang 2015;
Zhu et al. 2016)) based on a given set of training data so
that certain data characteristics (such as similarity) can be
preserved. Analytics with the learned binary hash codes can
lead to less memory consumption and short query time (Chi
and Zhu 2017). However, the training process of these hashing functions is usually conducted on the entire data set.
What’s more, most methods focus on image or video retrieval, especially for the deep hashing approaches. Hence,
they may not be suitable for healthcare settings where
the patient data are heterogeneous and usually scattered
across multiple different institutions (Denny et al. 2013;
Newton et al. 2013).

Abstract
Privacy concerns on sharing sensitive data across institutions
are particularly paramount for the medical domain, which
hinders the research and development of many applications,
such as cohort construction for cross-institution observational
studies and disease surveillance. Not only that, the large volume and heterogeneity of the patient data pose great challenges for retrieval and analysis. To address these challenges,
in this paper, we propose a Federated Patient Hashing (FPH)
framework, which collaboratively trains a retrieval model
stored in a shared memory while keeping all the patientlevel information in local institutions. Speciﬁcally, the objective function is constructed by minimization of a similarity preserving loss and a heterogeneity digging loss, which
preserves both inter-data and intra-data relationships. Then,
by leveraging the concept of Bregman divergence, we implement optimization in a federated manner in both centralized
and decentralized learning settings, without accessing the raw
training data across institutions. In addition to this, we also
analyze the convergence rate of the FPH framework. Extensive experiments on real-world clinical data set from critical
care are provided to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method on similar patient matching across institutions.

Efﬁcient learning of the retrieval model across institutions without exchanging raw patient data is also challenging. Although some data-independent hashing algorithms,
e.g., locality sensitive hashing (Indyk and Motwani 1998),
can avoid accessing data, their computational complexity increases exponentially with the feature dimension and their
retrieval accuracy is usually low comparing with learning to
hash approaches. The most intuitive solution is to collaboratively learn a shared model stored in a central server while
keeping all the raw training data on local clients, a.k.a. federated learning (Konečnỳ et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2018). Many
researches have been conducted recently on different aspects
of federated learning. For example, Konečnỳ et al. (Konečnỳ
et al. 2016) and Caldas et al. (Caldas et al. 2018) worked
on reducing the communication cost between local clients
and server. Beyond that, aiming at non-independent identical
distribution (non-IID) and unbalanced properties of the optimization, McMahan et al. (McMahan et al. 2016) proposed a
practical method for the federated learning of deep networks
based on iterative model averaging. Smith et al. (Smith et al.

Introduction
Nowadays more and more complex and heterogeneous
healthcare data are becoming readily available. This provides an unprecedented opportunity for digging out insights
from those data with the development of machine learning algorithms. However, due to privacy and other considerations, data access is very restricted, which limits the research and methodology development in many medical applications, such as cross-institution observational studies on
cohort construction, clinical trial recruitment and disease
surveillance (Lee et al. 2018; Vatsalan and Christen 2016).
Therefore, it is crucial to develop an effective way to analyze
fragmented and heterogeneous patient data from multiple institutions.
Hashing function, due to its noninvertible nature, is attractive in this scenario as they can map the sensitive data into
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6486

