The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generating Interactive Worlds with Text
Angela Fan,∗1,2 Jack Urbanek,∗1 Pratik Ringshia,1 Emily Dinan,1
Emma Qian,1 Siddharth Karamcheti,1 Shrimai Prabhumoye,1 Douwe Kiela,1
Tim Rocktäschel,1,3 Arthur Szlam,1 Jason Weston1
1

Facebook AI Research
2
LORIA, Nancy
3
University College London
light-dms@fb.com
Abstract
Procedurally generating cohesive and interesting game environments is challenging and time-consuming. In order for
the relationships between the game elements to be natural,
common-sense has to be encoded into arrangement of the
elements. In this work, we investigate a machine learning
approach for world creation using content from the multiplayer text adventure game environment LIGHT (Urbanek et
al. 2019). We introduce neural network based models to compositionally arrange locations, characters, and objects into a
coherent whole. In addition to creating worlds based on existing elements, our models can generate new game content.
Humans can also leverage our models to interactively aid in
worldbuilding. We show that the game environments created
with our approach are cohesive, diverse, and preferred by human evaluators compared to other machine learning based
world construction algorithms.

1

Figure 1: Sample Constructed Game World. Models arrange
locations, then populate them with characters and objects.
Top predictions are shown. Table 1 shows the descriptions
associated with the location Town of Anoria, placed in middle left of this generated world.

Introduction

A large component of fantasy and science ﬁction literature
is worldbuilding: putting together an elaborate context, with
interesting (but believable) details, that can serve as a backdrop to a story (or for many stories). Successful worldbuilding requires common-sense knowledge about the real world
and an understanding of the expectations of the audience.
In this work, we present a machine learning (ML) approach to creating a cohesive and interesting world built
from elements of the text-based fantasy game environment
LIGHT (Urbanek et al. 2019). These crowd-sourced elements, including descriptions of locations, characters, and
objects, provide a rich source of supervision for learning
common-sense relationships. Previous work in LIGHT focused on static, single-location settings using the crowdsourced data. Instead, we focus on creating full environments for players to explore. We show how ML algorithms
can learn to assemble these different elements, arranging locations and populating them with characters and objects. We
use models to learn how to answer questions such as: Where
is the ornate trunk likely to be? What is likely to be inside

it? Where is the knight likely to be? These considerations
are necessary for building a cohesive game environment.
We demonstrate that our proposed models can construct
rich game environments that are diverse and preferred by
human evaluators. We also develop models to generate descriptions of new locations, characters, and objects. Finally,
we demonstrate that these machine learning tools can aid
humans interactively in designing new game environments.

2

Constructing Game Environments

In this section, we detail methods for learning to build game
elements from compositions of sub-elements; and worlds
from these elements.

2.1

Background on LIGHT

LIGHT is a multi-player text-based fantasy-themed virtual
world. It consists of a set of crowd-sourced game locations,
characters, and objects, and a game engine that controls the

∗

Joint ﬁrst authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1693

