The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Inferring Nighttime Satellite Imagery from Human Mobility
Brian Dickinson,1 Gourab Ghoshal,1 Xerxes Dotiwalla,2 Adam Sadilek,2 Henry Kautz1
1

University of Rochester
500 Joseph C. Wilson Blvd.
Rochester, New York 14627
2
Google Inc.
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, California 94043
{bdicken3, kautz}@cs.rochester.edu, gghoshal@pas.rochester.edu, {xerxes, sadilekadam}@google.com
source of uniformly collected global data that doesn’t suffer the limitations of census (e.g., limited coverage, bias,
time lags) and is not subject to confounding factors like media inﬂuence and political corruption. Applications of this
data are in a wide range of ﬁelds, from predicting socioeconomic factors such as poverty or GDP (Elvidge et al. 2012;
2009) to estimating greenhouse gas emissions (Doll, Muller,
and Elvidge 2000).
As time has passed, another data source is nearing the
same level of global coverage with mostly uniform collection standards: smart phone location. We believe that many
existing studies which use nighttime lights satellite data
could beneﬁt from an alternate data source based on human
mobility rather than light output. This is especially true since
intuitively many of the factors these studies seek to estimate
have a more direct relationship with human mobility than
with electric light production. Additionally, human mobility
from cell phones could be aggregated in real time and released very promptly, while annual nighttime satellite data
releases tend to trail actual collection by at least 18 months.
In this paper, we propose to use anonymous and aggregated
ﬂows from users opted-in to Google’s Location History – a
global data source – as an alternative data source for these
studies. We do this by using human mobility to predict detected nighttime light worldwide. This allows for direct application of human mobility data to previously studied problems without individually adopting it to the diverse set of
existing methodologies. In addition to creating high ﬁdelity
artiﬁcial maps, we show that in general our artiﬁcial satellite
imagery is more highly correlated with GDP than real nighttime lights, demonstrating the beneﬁts of using data based
on human mobility rather than nocturnal light production.

Abstract
Nighttime lights satellite imagery has been used for decades
as a uniform, global source of data for studying a wide range
of socioeconomic factors. Recently, another more terrestrial
source is producing data with similarly uniform global coverage: anonymous and aggregated smart phone location. This
data, which measures the movement patterns of people and
populations rather than the light they produce, could prove
just as valuable in decades to come. In fact, since human mobility is far more directly related to the socioeconomic variables being predicted, it has an even greater potential. Additionally, since cell phone locations can be aggregated in
real time while preserving individual user privacy, it will be
possible to conduct studies that would previously have been
impossible because they require data from the present. Of
course, it will take quite some time to establish the new techniques necessary to apply human mobility data to problems
traditionally studied with satellite imagery and to conceptualize and develop new real time applications. In this study
we demonstrate that it is possible to accelerate this process
by inferring artiﬁcial nighttime satellite imagery from human
mobility data, while maintaining a strong differential privacy
guarantee. We also show that these artiﬁcial maps can be used
to infer socioeconomic variables, often with greater accuracy
than using actual satellite imagery. Along the way, we ﬁnd
that the relationship between mobility and light emissions is
both nonlinear and varies considerably around the globe. Finally, we show that models based on human mobility can signiﬁcantly improve our understanding of society at a global
scale.

Introduction
Nocturnal lighting is one of the most recognizable signs of
human development on our planet. Perhaps the clearest sign
of an area that has undergone human development is the appearance of electrical lighting. At night, these lights are detectable from orbit and have been collected for decades, ﬁrst
as a secondary application of military and weather satellites
and more recently from new satellites with the primary mission of scientiﬁc inquiry (Hall 2001). The launch of these
new satellites was in response to a growing range of applications for this data because it had proven to be a reliable

Background
Nightsat Data and Applications
There are two major sources of nighttime satellite imagery.
The older is the Operational Line-Scan System (OLS) system run by the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program
(DMSP), ﬁrst launched in 1961, declassiﬁed in 1972 and
now being phased out as satellites fail without replacement (Hall 2001). Its successor, Visible Infrared Imaging
Radiometer Suite (VIIRS), was launched in 2011. A com-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
394

