The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

HS-CAI: A Hybrid DCOP Algorithm via
Combining Search with Context-Based Inference
Dingding Chen,1 Yanchen Deng,2 Ziyu Chen,1,∗ Wenxing Zhang,1 Zhongshi He1
2

1
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{dingding, chenziyu, zshe}@cqu.edu.cn, ycdeng@ntu.edu.sg, wenxinzhang18@163.com

and search-based algorithms. DPOP (Petcu and Faltings
2005b) and Action GDL (Vinyals, Rodriguez-Aguilar, and
Cerquides 2009) are typical inference-based complete algorithms which employ a dynamic programming paradigm
to solve DCOPs. However, they require a linear number of
messages of exponential size with respect to the induced
width. Accordingly, ODPOP (Petcu and Faltings 2006) and
MB-DPOP (Petcu and Faltings 2007) were proposed to trade
the message number for smaller memory consumption by
propagating the dimension-limited utilities with the corresponding contexts iteratively. That is, they iteratively perform a context-based inference to solve DCOPs optimally
when the memory budget is limited.

Abstract
Search and inference are two main strategies for optimally solving Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems
(DCOPs). Recently, several algorithms were proposed to
combine their advantages. Unfortunately, such algorithms
only use an approximated inference as a one-shot preprocessing phase to construct the initial lower bounds which lead to
inefﬁcient pruning under the limited memory budget. On the
other hand, iterative inference algorithms (e.g., MB-DPOP)
perform a context-based complete inference for all possible
contexts but suffer from tremendous trafﬁc overheads. In this
paper, (i) hybridizing search with context-based inference,
we propose a complete algorithm for DCOPs, named HSCAI where the inference utilizes the contexts derived from
the search process to establish tight lower bounds while the
search uses such bounds for efﬁcient pruning and thereby
reduces contexts for the inference. Furthermore, (ii) we introduce a context evaluation mechanism to select the context
patterns for the inference to further reduce the overheads incurred by iterative inferences. Finally, (iii) we prove the correctness of our algorithm and the experimental results demonstrate its superiority over the state-of-the-art.

Search-based complete algorithms like SBB (Hirayama
and Yokoo 1997), AFB (Gershman, Meisels, and Zivan
2009), PT-FB (Litov and Meisels 2017), ADOPT (Modi et
al. 2005) and its variants (Yeoh, Felner, and Koenig 2010;
Gutierrez, Meseguer, and Yeoh 2011) perform distributed
backtrack searches to exhaust the search space. They have
a linear size of messages but an exponential number of messages. Furthermore, these algorithms only use local knowledge to update the lower bounds, which exerts a trivial effect on pruning and makes them infeasible for solving largescale problems. Then, PT-ISABB (Deng et al. 2019), DJAO
(Kim and Lesser 2014) and ADPOT-BDP (Atlas, Warner,
and Decker 2008) came out to attempt to hybridize search
with inference, where an approximated inference is used
to construct the initial lower bounds for the search process. More speciﬁcally, PT-ISABB and ADOPT-BDP use
ADPOP (Petcu and Faltings 2005a) to establish the lower
bounds, while DJAO employs a function ﬁltering technique
(Brito and Meseguer 2010) to get them. Here, ADPOP is
an approximate version of DPOP by dropping the exceeding
dimensions to ensure that each message size is below the
memory limit. However, given the limited memory budget,
the lower bounds obtained in a one-shot preprocessing phase
are still inefﬁcient for pruning since such bounds cannot be
tightened by considering the running contexts. That is, the
existing hybrid algorithms use only a context-free approximated inference as a one-shot phase to construct the initial
lower bounds.

Introduction
Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs)
(Hirayama and Yokoo 1997; Fioretto, Pontelli, and Yeoh
2018) are an elegant model for representing Multi-Agent
Systems (MAS) where agents coordinate with each other to
optimize a global objective. Due to their ability to capture
essential MAS aspects, DCOPs can formalize various applications in the real world such as sensor network (Farinelli,
Rogers, and Jennings 2014), task scheduling (Maheswaran
et al. 2004; Fioretto, Yeoh, and Pontelli 2017), smart grid
(Fioretto et al. 2017) and so on.
Incomplete algorithms for DCOPs (Zhang et al. 2005;
Maheswaran, Pearce, and Tambe 2006; Farinelli et al. 2008;
Ottens, Dimitrakakis, and Faltings 2017) aim to rapidly
ﬁnd solutions at the cost of sacriﬁcing optimality. On the
contrary, complete algorithms guarantee the optimal solution and can be generally classiﬁed into inference-based
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In this paper, we investigate the possibility of combining
7087

