The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Incremental Fairness in Two-Sided Market
Platforms: On Smoothly Updating Recommendations
Gourab K Patro

Abhijnan Chakraborty

Max Planck Inst. for Software Systems, Germany
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India

Max Planck Inst. for Software Systems, Germany

Niloy Ganguly

Krishna P. Gummadi

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India

Max Planck Inst. for Software Systems, Germany

Several recent studies have shown how sole focus on the
customers may adversely affect the well-being of the producers, as more and more people are depending on twosided platforms to earn a living (Edelman, Luca, and Svirsky
2017; Hannák et al. 2017; Abdollahpouri and Burke 2019;
Chakraborty et al. 2017; Burke 2017; Graham, Hjorth, and
Lehdonvirta 2017). Subsequently, few research works have
attempted to reduce unfairness in these platforms (Sühr et
al. 2019; Sürer, Burke, and Malthouse 2018; Geyik, Ambler, and Kenthapadi 2019). However, existing works have
overlooked an important issue. They assume that the underlying platform algorithms remain unchanged; whereas,
to offer supposedly higher customer utility, the platform algorithms go through frequent changes and updates. Such updates are often very rapid and immediate, leaving no room
for the producers to adjust to them. For example, with every
change in the Facebook Newsfeed curation algorithm, news
media outlets (i.e., the producers of news stories) complain
about immediate drop in trafﬁc to their websites (Lab 2019;
AdExchanger 2018). Similar complaints have been reported
also for other two-sided platforms like Amazon (Vox 2019).

Abstract
Major online platforms today can be thought of as two-sided
markets with producers and customers of goods and services.
There have been concerns that over-emphasis on customer
satisfaction by the platforms may affect the well-being of the
producers. To counter such issues, few recent works have attempted to incorporate fairness for the producers. However,
these studies have overlooked an important issue in such
platforms – to supposedly improve customer utility, the underlying algorithms are frequently updated, causing abrupt
changes in the exposure of producers. In this work, we focus
on the fairness issues arising out of such frequent updates,
and argue for incremental updates of the platform algorithms
so that the producers have enough time to adjust (both logistically and mentally) to the change. However, naive incremental updates may become unfair to the customers. Thus
focusing on recommendations deployed on two-sided platforms, we formulate an ILP based online optimization to deploy changes incrementally in η steps, where we can ensure
smooth transition of the exposure of items while guaranteeing a minimum utility for every customer. Evaluations over
multiple real world datasets show that our proposed mechanism for platform updates can be efﬁcient and fair to both the
producers and the customers in two-sided platforms.

1

While maximizing customer’s utility may be paramount,
we argue that the platform also needs to be fair to the producers while updating. Multiple works in behavioral economics
have shown that human perceptions of fairness of a new decision making system are inﬂuenced by how far the decision
outcomes change from the status quo (i.e., the existing outcomes) (Bediou and Scherer 2014; Kahneman, Knetsch, and
Thaler 1991). Motivated by this line of work, in this paper,
we propose the notion of Egocentric Fairness for the producers, which requires that the impact of the changed system
should be limited/small. We argue that a simple way of being
fair would be to implement the change in a phased manner.
This also has its practical advantage whereby a producer gets
time to adjust to the change in demand.

Introduction

Many popular online platforms today can be thought of as
two-sided markets, such as, sharing economy platforms like
Uber, Lyft or Airbnb, e-commerce sites like Amazon, news
aggregation services like Google News, location-based review and recommendation services like Yelp, Google Local,
employment sites like LinkedIn, Indeed, or hotel aggregators like Booking.com. There are three stakeholders in these
markets: (i) producers of goods and services (e.g., sellers in
Amazon, hosts in Airbnb), (ii) customers who pay for them,
and (iii) the platform at the center of the ecosystem. Services on these platforms have traditionally been designed to
maximize customer satisfaction, since they are the ones directly contributing to the platform revenue, largely ignoring
the interest of the other key stakeholder – producers.

One naive way of incremental update would be to change
the platform for only a subset of customers and then gradually cover everyone. However, such an approach may be
unfair to the customers. Since the change is supposed to
provide higher satisfaction (utility) for the customers, those
who experience the changed platform earlier will get higher
utility than the customers covered later. To ensure fairness

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
181

