The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Alignment-Enhanced Transformer for
Constraining NMT with Pre-Speciﬁed Translations
Kai Song,1,2 Kun Wang,1 Heng Yu,2 Yue Zhang,3
Zhongqiang Huang,2 Weihua Luo,2 Xiangyu Duan,1 Min Zhang1
1

Soochow University, Suzhou, China
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Engineering, Westlake University, Hangzhou, China
{songkai.sk, yuheng.yh, z.huang, weihua.luowh}@alibaba-inc.com,
kwang1994@stu.suda.edu.cn, zhangyue@wias.org.cn, {xiangyuduan, minzhang}@suda.edu.cn
2

lexical constraints in the decoding process by imposing
them on the translation output (Hokamp and Liu 2017;
Post and Vilar 2018).
The ﬁrst method works well for named-entities, but placeholder tags are too generic for general words and the translation quality can be negatively affected due to the loss
of word meaning. Recent research ﬁnds that the second
method outperforms the placeholder approach (Song et al.
2019). It retains the identity of a matched dictionary translation and models its interaction with the decoding context.
However, the decoding constraints do not explicitly estimate the correlation between the source and target sides
of the pre-speciﬁed translations, as the lexical constraints
are only imposed on the target side. It may hurt translation ﬁdelity because there is little or no consideration
for which source word would produce the target constraint
word. One way to improve the constraint method is to consider the aligned source words when generating target constraint words, as in (Alkhouli, Bretschner, and Ney 2018;
Crego et al. 2016; Hasler et al. 2018) that rely on explicit
word alignment based on the attention mechanism in NMT.
However, it is well known that the multi-head attention
mechanism employed in the Transformer architecture is illsuited for deriving accurate word alignment (Li et al. 2019;
Ding, Xu, and Koehn 2019).
In this paper, we consider the method of employing prespeciﬁed translations to guide NMT decoding directly. Inspired by LISA (Strubell et al. 2018), which shows that external supervision improves a Transformer-based model by
bringing in syntactic information, we use a dedicated attention head to learn the word alignment based on supervision
from external alignment signals. Compared to existing methods (Crego et al. 2016; Hasler et al. 2018), which extract
alignment information based on weights from generic attention heads, we use the dedicated attention head to learn
explicit word alignment and use it to guide the constrained
decoding process.
On 13 development and test sets across ﬁve different language pairs, our method achieves an average improvement
of 4.48 BLEU score when using simulated pre-speciﬁed
translations, in comparison to 3.51 BLEU score of the lexical constraint approach (Post and Vilar 2018).

Abstract
We investigate the task of constraining NMT with prespeciﬁed translations, which has practical signiﬁcance for
a number of research and industrial applications. Existing
works impose pre-speciﬁed translations as lexical constraints
during decoding, which are based on word alignments derived from target-to-source attention weights. However, multiple recent studies have found that word alignment derived
from generic attention heads in the Transformer is unreliable.
We address this problem by introducing a dedicated head
in the multi-head Transformer architecture to capture external supervision signals. Results on ﬁve language pairs show
that our method is highly effective in constraining NMT with
pre-speciﬁed translations, consistently outperforming previous methods in translation quality.

1

Introduction

Neural machine translation (NMT) (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2014; Vaswani et al. 2017) takes an end-to-end approach to generate translation from a source sentence, where
no explicit word alignment is required during model training
or decoding. NMT is less conﬁgurable and interpretable than
traditional phrase-based methods (Koehn, Och, and Marcu
2003; Chiang 2007), making it difﬁcult to incorporate external resources such as user-provided glossaries (Alkhouli,
Bretschner, and Ney 2018), terminology dictionaries for speciﬁc domains (Dinu et al. 2019), and other resources. In
typical industrial applications, users need to produce prespeciﬁed translations in NMT’s output (Song et al. 2019).
To this end, prior studies focus on two main approaches.
The ﬁrst is to use placeholder tags (Crego et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2017) to incorporate named-entity translations
into the NMT process. Speciﬁc placeholder tags are used
to substitute named entities on both the source and target
sides during training. During decoding, named-entities in the
source sentence are replaced with placeholder tags, which
are translated into the corresponding target placeholder tags
and then replaced with the translation of named-entities.
The second method employs pre-speciﬁed translations to
guide NMT decoding directly, taking target dictionaries as
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8886

