The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

High-Order Residual Network for Light Field Super-Resolution
Nan Meng,1∗ Xiaofei Wu,2 Jianzhuang Liu,2 Edmund Y. Lam1
1

Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
{nanmeng, elam}@eee.hku.hk, {wuxiaofei2, liu.jianzhuang}@huawei.com

images obtained by conventional cameras, and many applications such as depth estimation are constrained by lowresolution (LR) images, which increases the signiﬁcance of
the algorithms for light ﬁeld super-resolution (LFSR).
Different from single image super-resolution (SISR), a LF
is characterized by a structure that needs to be maintained
when increasing the data resolution. Such structural information is implicitly encoded in the neighboring views, leading to non-integral shift between two corresponding pixels
in the view images (Wu et al. 2017a). From this perspective, most depth-based approaches (Wanner and Goldluecke
2014; Mitra and Veeraraghavan 2012) generally depend on
such geometric properties as priors to explicitly register the
novel SAIs from other views. Their success depend on the
accurate depth information, which however is challenging
to acquire. Consequently, the disparity errors give rise to
artifacts such as tearing and ghosting, especially in the occluded or non-Lambertian areas where depth information is
not properly estimated.
Recently, deep learning has shown to be powerful in
various computer vision applications (Meng et al. 2018;
Yang, Chen, and Shao 2019), including LFSR (Wu et al.
2017b; Meng, Zeng, and Lam 2019; Meng et al. 2019a).
The learning-based approaches relieve the dependency on
explicit depth information, leading to the improvement of
robustness at depth discontinuities. However, the intrinsic
limitation of 2D (or 3D) convolution makes existing frameworks difﬁcult to handle the high-dimensional structure in
a LF, and therefore most learning-based algorithms simplify
the reconstruction to consider only the spatio-angular relations in epipolar plane images (EPIs) (Wu et al. 2017b), or
the angular correlations among adjacent views (Yoon et al.
2017; Zhang, Lin, and Sheng 2019). Given that the geometric information is encoded in a complex way within the LF,
such simpliﬁcations result in performance degradation.
To remedy the problems of existing learning-based approaches for LFSR, we propose to establish a framework
tailored to the LF structural information. Such an approach
enables the network to learn representations by fully exploiting the LF information from all adjacent views. The main
contributions of our model are threefold: 1) We propose a
novel high-order structure, named high-order residual block

Abstract
Plenoptic cameras usually sacriﬁce the spatial resolution of
their SAIs to acquire geometry information from different
viewpoints. Several methods have been proposed to mitigate
such spatio-angular trade-off, but seldom make use of the
structural properties of the light ﬁeld (LF) data efﬁciently.
In this paper, we propose a novel high-order residual network to learn the geometric features hierarchically from the
LF for reconstruction. An important component in the proposed network is the high-order residual block (HRB), which
learns the local geometric features by considering the information from all input views. After fully obtaining the local
features learned from each HRB, our model extracts the representative geometric features for spatio-angular upsampling
through the global residual learning. Additionally, a reﬁnement network is followed to further enhance the spatial details by minimizing a perceptual loss. Compared with previous work, our model is tailored to the rich structure inherent in the LF, and therefore can reduce the artifacts near
non-Lambertian and occlusion regions. Experimental results
show that our approach enables high-quality reconstruction
even in challenging regions and outperforms state-of-the-art
single image or LF reconstruction methods with both quantitative measurements and visual evaluation.

Compared to a 2D imaging system, the plenoptic camera not only captures the accumulated intensity of a light
ray at each point in space, but also provides the directional radiance information. Together they form the light
ﬁeld (LF), which has shown advantages over 2D imagery
in problems such as disparity estimation (Jeon et al. 2015;
Sun et al. 2016) or 3D reconstruction (Heber, Yu, and Pock
2017) of a scene, generation of images for a novel viewpoint (Kalantari, Wang, and Ramamoorthi 2016; Meng et al.
2019b), and refocusing (Mitra and Veeraraghavan 2012).
Nevertheless, in practice, it can be difﬁcult to achieve a
dense sampling of the entire LF due to the limited resolution
of the camera sensor. Acquisition of a densely sampled subaperture image (SAI) usually sacriﬁces the view point information, or vice versa (Wanner and Goldluecke 2014). As a
result, the LF views exhibit a lower spatial resolution than
∗

This work was done during an internship at Huawei.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11757

