The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dempster-Shafer Theoretic Learning of
Indirect Speech Act Comprehension Norms
Ruchen Wen, Mohammed Aun Siddiqui, Tom Williams
MIRRORLab
Department of Computer Science
Colorado School of Mines
{rwen, twilliams}@mines.edu

for the listener to bring them some water. Accordingly, so
too must robots be able to infer the intended meanings behind their teammates’ utterances according to their current
context.

Abstract
For robots to successfully operate as members of humanrobot teams, it is crucial for robots to correctly understand the
intentions of their human teammates. This task is particularly
difﬁcult due to human sociocultural norms: for reasons of social courtesy (e.g., politeness), people rarely express their intentions directly, instead typically employing polite utterance
forms such as Indirect Speech Acts (ISAs). It is thus critical for robots to be capable of inferring the intentions behind their teammates’ utterances based on both their interaction context (including, e.g., social roles) and their knowledge of the sociocultural norms that are applicable within that
context. This work builds off of previous research on understanding and generation of ISAs using Dempster-Shafer Theoretic Uncertain Logic, by showing how other recent work in
Dempster-Shafer Theoretic rule learning can be used to learn
appropriate uncertainty intervals for robots’ representations
of sociocultural politeness norms.

Research on indirect speech acts has a rich history in
the philosophy of language literature dating back nearly
half a century (Searle 1975), with computational approaches
to indirect speech act understanding stretching back nearly
that far (Perrault and Allen 1980). While early computational work focused on understanding indirect speech acts
through inference-based plan-reasoning techniques, more
recent work has either been cue-based, seeking to statistically estimate the illocutionary force of an utterance (e.g.
whether an utterance is intended as a statement or request)
without more deeply understanding the utterance’s literal or
intended meaning (Jurafsky 2004), or has been idiomatic in
nature. This last category, the idiomatic approach, exploits
the fact that many ISAs are so conventionalized that they
are idiomatic (Wilske and Kruijff 2006), with ISA forms directly associated with inferred meanings, leading to significantly more computationally efﬁcient handling of the vast
majority of ISAs.

Introduction and Motivation
For robots to successfully operate as members of humanrobot teams, it is crucial for robots to correctly understand
the intentions of their human teammates. This not only requires traditional language understanding components such
as speech recognition and syntactic and semantic analysis, but also pragmatic analysis components for performing deeper analysis with respect to the robot’s environmental
and social context. This is especially important in contexts
that have strong sociocultural norms, conventions, and contracts, since, in such contexts, humans typically phrase their
language in the form of Indirect Speech Acts (ISAs) (Searle
1975), in which the speech act’s literal meaning does not
match its intended meaning. For example, in a restaurant
context, even though servers are in some sense functioning as subordinates to clients, it would be considered rude
for restaurant-goers to say, for example, “Get me some water”. Instead, restaurant-goers typically use indirect requests,
such as “Could I have some water?”. While this utterance
may literally be a request for information, listeners effortlessly and instinctively infer the speaker’s true intent, i.e.,

In previous work (Williams et al. 2014), we presented
three capabilities necessary for a robust understanding of
conventionalized ISAs through the idiomatic approach: (1)
accounting for uncertainty in implication rules and their
antecedent context, (2) ﬂuidly adapting rules given new
information, and (3) enabling better modeling of the beliefs of other agents. We also presented a Dempster-Shafer
theoretic approach to ISA understanding (and generation,
see Williams et al. 2015), which we argued increases the
robustness of ISA inference by addressing the three capabilities mentioned above. This approach leverages a set of
Dempster-Shafer Theoretic uncertain logical rules that map
utterances to inferable intentions within speciﬁed contexts.
These rules are annotated with Dempster-Shafer theoretic
uncertainty intervals, denoting the amount of evidence for
and against (and the degree of ignorance with respect to)
each rule. But while we provided mechanisms for online
adaptation of these rules when corrections are explicitly provided, we did not provide any mechanisms for initially learning these intervals from observation, requiring AI practition-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10410

