The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Google Research Football: A Novel Reinforcement Learning Environment
Karol Kurach,∗ Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stańczyk, Michał Zaja̧c†
Olivier Bachem Lasse Espeholt Carlos Riquelme Damien Vincent
Marcin Michalski Olivier Bousquet Sylvain Gelly
Google Research, Brain Team

Abstract
Recent progress in the ﬁeld of reinforcement learning has
been accelerated by virtual learning environments such
as video games, where novel algorithms and ideas can
be quickly tested in a safe and reproducible manner. We
introduce the Google Research Football Environment, a
new reinforcement learning environment where agents are
trained to play football in an advanced, physics-based 3D
simulator. The resulting environment is challenging, easy
to use and customize, and it is available under a permissive
open-source license. In addition, it provides support for
multiplayer and multi-agent experiments. We propose three
full-game scenarios of varying difﬁculty with the Football
Benchmarks and report baseline results for three commonly
used reinforcement algorithms (IMPALA, PPO, and Ape-X
DQN). We also provide a diverse set of simpler scenarios
with the Football Academy and showcase several promising
research directions.

Figure 1: The Google Research Football Environment
(github.com/google-research/football) provides a novel reinforcement learning environment where
agents are trained to play football in an advance, physics
based 3D simulation.

Introduction
The goal of reinforcement learning (RL) is to train smart
agents that can interact with their environment and solve
complex tasks (Sutton and Barto 2018). Real-world applications include robotics (Haarnoja et al. 2018), self-driving
cars (Bansal, Krizhevsky, and Ogale 2018), and control
problems such as increasing the power efﬁciency of data
centers (Lazic et al. 2018). Yet, the rapid progress in this
ﬁeld has been fueled by making agents play games such
as the iconic Atari console games (Bellemare et al. 2013;
Mnih et al. 2013), the ancient game of Go (Silver et al.
2016), or professionally played video games like Dota 2
(OpenAI 2019) or Starcraft II (Vinyals et al. 2017). The reason for this is simple: games provide challenging environments where new algorithms and ideas can be quickly tested
in a safe and reproducible manner.
While a variety of reinforcement learning environments
exist, they often come with a few drawbacks for research,

which we discuss in detail in the next section. For example, they may either be too easy to solve for state-of-theart algorithms or require access to large amounts of computational resources. At the same time, they may either be
(near-)deterministic or there may even be a known model
of the environment (such as in Go or Chess). Similarly,
many learning environments are inherently single player by
only modeling the interaction of an agent with a ﬁxed environment or they focus on a single aspect of reinforcement
learning such as continuous control or safety. Finally, learning environments may have restrictive licenses or depend on
closed source binaries.
This highlights the need for a RL environment that is not
only challenging from a learning standpoint and customizable in terms of difﬁculty but also accessible for research
both in terms of licensing and in terms of required computational resources. Moreover, such an environment should ideally provide the tools to a variety of current reinforcement
learning research topics such as the impact of stochasticity,
self-play, multi-agent setups and model-based reinforcement
learning, while also requiring smart decisions, tactics, and
strategies at multiple levels of abstraction.

∗
Indicates equal authorship. Correspondence to Karol Kurach
(kkurach@google.com).
†
Student at Jagiellonian University, work done during internship at Google Brain.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4501

