The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Making Existing Clusterings Fairer: Algorithms, Complexity Results and Insights
Ian Davidson,1 S. S. Ravi2
1
2

Computer Science Department, University of California, Davis
Biocomplexity Institute & Initiative, University of Virginia and
Computer Science Department, University at Albany – SUNY
davidson@cs.ucdavis.edu, ssravi0@gmail.com

common type of protected variables, namely binary variables
such as gender.
A Flexible Efﬁcient Approach To Ensure Fairness. Our
approach places upper and lower bounds on the number of
protected status individuals in each cluster which can be any
constant expression and these bounds may even be different
for each cluster. For example, if a data set D has N special items and D has been partitioned into k clusters, then
the number of special data items per cluster could be set
to be approximately Nk , effectively balancing the protected
status instances uniformly across all clusters. Alternatively,
i|
we could require each cluster to have approximately N.|C
|D|
(where |Ci | is the size of cluster i) protected status individuals, this would require that the ratio of the number of special
items to the size of the cluster be (approximately) the same
for all clusters. We now provide two fairness deﬁnitions. The
ﬁrst is useful to prove total unimodularity (TU) but in practice the second is more pragmatic and also gives rise to a TU
constraint matrix (see Theorem 3.2):
Deﬁnition 1.1. Let D be a dataset where each data item
has a single binary protected attribute x. Let Nx denote the
number of special data items in D. A partition of D into
k ≥ 2 is strongly fair with respect to x if in each cluster, the
number of special items is either Nx /k or Nx /k.
This is useful in our intractability results and algorithm
design. However, it is a strong requirement; hence we deﬁne
a relaxed notion called α-fairness as follows:
Deﬁnition 1.2. Consider a dataset D where each data item
has a single binary protected attribute x. Let Dx ⊆ D denote
the subset of special data items and let Nx = |Dx |. Let α be a
positive integer < Nx /k. A partition of D into k ≥ 2 clusters is α-fair wrt. x, if in each cluster, the number of elements
from Dx is in the range [Nx /k − α .. Nx /k + α].
ILP Formulations for the Minimal Cluster Modiﬁcation for Fairness (MCMF) Problem. A natural way to formulate the MCMF problem is as a discrete optimization
problem where the goal is to minimize the effect of modifying the clusters (see Section 3 for a precise formulation).
Here, the effect can be in terms of the number of instances
moved or even changes in the quality of the clustering. While
solving an ILP is, in general, computationally intractable, for

Abstract
We explore the area of fairness in clustering from the different
perspective of modifying clusterings from existing algorithms
to make them fairer whilst retaining their quality. We formulate the minimal cluster modiﬁcation for fairness (MCMF)
problem where the input is a given partitional clustering and
the goal is to minimally change it so that the clustering is still
of good quality and fairer. We show using an intricate case
analysis that for a single protected variable, the problem is
efﬁciently solvable (i.e., in the class P) by proving that the
constraint matrix for an integer linear programming (ILP) formulation is totally unimodular (TU). Interestingly, we show
that even for a single protected variable, the addition of simple pairwise guidance (to say ensure individual level fairness)
makes the MCMF problem computationally intractable (i.e.,
NP-hard). Experimental results on Twitter, Census and NYT
data sets show that our methods can modify existing clusterings for data sets in excess of 100,000 instances within minutes
on laptops and ﬁnd as fair but higher quality clusterings than
fair by design clustering algorithms.

1

Introduction

Existing work on clustering and fairness takes a known clustering algorithm and modiﬁes it produce fair results. The
seminal work of Chierichetti et al. (2017) looked at k-center
and k-median style algorithms whilst later work has explored
other formulations such as spectral clustering (Kleindessner
et al. 2019). However, there is a plethora of different clustering algorithms, with this decade old survey (Xu and Wunsch
2005) listing over 15 popular partitional clustering algorithms
with a variety of settings, formulations and followings by end
user communities. It is unlikely that fair versions of all these
algorithms or new clustering algorithms will be developed.
Furthermore, often clusterings results are already deployed.
In these circumstances, one research direction is to modify an
existing clustering to make it fairer whilst not unduly changing its quality. This paper considers this precise situation,
where one already has a good clustering Π and the goal is
to modify Π to improve its fairness with respect to a set P
of protected variables. We focus on the simplest but most
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3733

