The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reinforced Curriculum Learning on
Pre-Trained Neural Machine Translation Models
Mingjun Zhao,1 Haijiang Wu,2 Di Niu,1 Xiaoli Wang2
1

University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
Platform and Content Group, Tencent, Shenzhen, China
{zhao2, dniu}@ualberta.ca, {harywu, evexlwang}@tencent.com
2

Abstract
The competitive performance of neural machine translation
(NMT) critically relies on large amounts of training data.
However, acquiring high-quality translation pairs requires expert knowledge and is costly. Therefore, how to best utilize
a given dataset of samples with diverse quality and characteristics becomes an important yet understudied question in
NMT. Curriculum learning methods have been introduced to
NMT to optimize a model’s performance by prescribing the
data input order, based on heuristics such as the assessment of
noise and difﬁculty levels. However, existing methods require
training from scratch, while in practice most NMT models
are pre-trained on big data already. Moreover, as heuristics,
they do not generalize well. In this paper, we aim to learn
a curriculum for improving a pre-trained NMT model by
re-selecting inﬂuential data samples from the original training set and formulate this task as a reinforcement learning
problem. Speciﬁcally, we propose a data selection framework
based on Deterministic Actor-Critic, in which a critic network
predicts the expected change of model performance due to a
certain sample, while an actor network learns to select the
best sample out of a random batch of samples presented to
it. Experiments on several translation datasets show that our
method can further improve the performance of NMT when
original batch training reaches its ceiling, without using additional new training data, and signiﬁcantly outperforms several
strong baseline methods.

1

Example 1
zh
zh-gloss
en

xianzai ta zheng kaolv zhe huijia.
Now he is thinking about going home.
He is thinking about going home now.

Example 2
zh
zh-gloss
en

wo yao chi niupai.
I want eat steak
I want a steak. Get me a coke.

Table 1: Examples with accurate/inaccurate translations.
Without surprise, curriculum learning is found most helpful in end-to-end neural network architectures (Bengio et al.
2009), since the performance that an artiﬁcial neural network can achieve critically depends on the quality of training data presented to it.
Neural Machine Translation (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom
2013) (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) (NMT) translates
text from a source language to a target language in an endto-end fashion with a single neural network. It has not only
achieved state-of-the-art machine translation results, but also
eliminated hand-crafted features and rules that are otherwise
required by statistical machine translation. The performance
of NMT has been improved signiﬁcantly in recent years, as
the NMT architectures evolved from the initial RNN-based
models (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) to convolutional
seq2seq models (Gehring et al. 2017) and further to Transformer models (Vaswani et al. 2017).
However, since obtaining accurately labeled training samples in machine translation is often time-consuming and requires expert knowledge, an important question in NMT is
how to best utilize a limited number of available training
samples, perhaps with different lengths, qualities, and noise
levels. Recently, the application of curriculum learning is
also studied for NMT. (Platanios et al. 2019) propose to feed
data to an NMT model in an easy-to-difﬁcult order and characterize the “difﬁculty” of a training example by the sentence length and the rarity of words that appear in it. Other
than using the straightforward difﬁculty or complexity as a
criterion for curriculum design, (Wang et al. 2018) propose
a method to calculate the noise level of a training example

Introduction

Curriculum learning, as pioneered by (Bengio et al. 2009),
aims to improve the training of machine learning models by
choosing what examples to present and in which order to
present them to the learning algorithm. Curriculum learning was originally inspired by the learning experience of humans (Skinner 1958) (Peterson 2004) (Krueger and Dayan
2009)—humans tend to learn better and faster when they are
ﬁrst introduced to simpler concepts and exploit previously
learned concepts and skills to ease the learning of new abstractions. This phenomenon is widely observed in, e.g., music and sports training, academic training and pet shaping.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9652

