The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Efﬁcient Representations for Fake Speech Detection
Nishant Subramani, Delip Rao∗
AI Foundation
San Francisco, California
{nishant, delip}@aifoundation.com

tent attributes such as prosody have also been successfully
used for conditioning the speech synthesis — Wang et al.
(2018); Skerry-Ryan et al. (2018); Akuzawa, Iwasawa, and
Matsuo (2018) — resulting in realistic personalized speech
that is becoming harder for humans to distinguish. Such
high-quality and personalized synthetic speech has many
positive applications such as building natural conversational
assistants1 , creating personalized answering machines, and
restoring the voice of people with speech pathologies, to
mention a few.
However, this technology has also been used for malicious
purposes such as spreading misinformation and disinformation, using a person’s voice without consent2 , creating falsiﬁed material (evidence tampering), and committing various cybercrimes including harassment and intimidation. In
multiple recent incidents, perpetrators used synthetic speech
technology to impersonate CEOs and other leaders to commit fraudulent wire-transfer thefts3 . According to a 2018
survey, the rate of voice fraud increased over 350 percent
from 2013 to 2017. It is estimated that voice fraud costs
U.S. organizations $14 billion each year within call centers
alone4 . Improvements in speech synthesis and voice conversion research, and the availability of easy to use toolkits,
such as Project VoCo by Jin et al. (2017), which calls itself
the “photoshop of voice” and the Real-Time Voice Cloning
Toolkit5 , which promises to “clone a voice in 5 seconds to
generate arbitrary speech in real-time,” only exacerbate the
problems with synthetic voices.
In this work, we examine synthetic voice from an adversarial lens, where each synthesis model is viewed as an “attack vector.” Our goal is to build highly accurate, parameter
efﬁcient fake speech detection models that can be deployed

Abstract
Synthetic speech or “fake speech” which matches personal
vocal traits has become better and cheaper due to advances in
deep learning-based speech synthesis and voice conversion
approaches. This increased accessibility of synthetic speech
systems and the growing misuse of them highlights the critical need to build countermeasures. Furthermore, new synthesis models evolve all the time and the efﬁcacy of previously trained detection models on these unseen attack vectors is poor. In this paper, we focus on: 1) How can we build
highly accurate, yet parameter and sample-efﬁcient models for fake speech detection? 2) How can we rapidly adapt
detection models to new sources of fake speech? We present
four parameter-efﬁcient convolutional architectures for fake
speech detection with best detection F1 scores of around 97
points on a large dataset of fake and bonaﬁde speech. We
show how the fake speech detection task naturally lends itself
to a novel multi-task problem further improving F1 scores for
a mere 0.5% increase in model parameters. Our multi-task
setting also helps in data-sparse situations, commonplace in
adversarial settings. We investigate an alternative approach to
the data-sparsity problem using transfer learning and show
that it is possible to meet purely supervised detection performance for unseen attack vectors with as little as 6.25% of the
training data. This is the ﬁrst known application of transfer
learning in adversarial settings for speech. Finally, we show
how well our transfer learning approach adapts in an instanceefﬁcient way to new attack vectors using the Real-Time Voice
Cloning toolkit. We exceed the purely supervised detection
performance (99.18 F1) with as little as 6.25% of the data.

Introduction
Our ability to synthesize human voice with the likeness of
a subject, referred to as “synthetic audio” or “fake speech,”
has dramatically improved in the last 3 years with progress
in speech synthesis (SS), voice conversion (VC), and general deep learning technology. Neural text to speech models such as WaveNet (Oord et al., 2016), Tacotron (Wang et
al., 2017), and DeepVoice (Gibiansky et al., 2017; Ping et
al., 2017) have been extended to incorporate speaker identity Arik et al. (2018); Nachmani et al. (2018). Other la-

1
See Google Duplex: https://ai.googleblog.com/2018/05/
duplex-ai-system-for-natural-conversation.html
2
See this example where Prof. Jordan Peterson’s voice is cloned
without consent: https://www.vice.com/en us/article/43kwgb/notjordan-peterson-voice-generator-shut-down-deepfakes
3
See for example: https://www.wsj.com/articles/fraudsters-useai-to-mimic-ceos-voice-in-unusual-cybercrime-case-11567157402
4
https://www.securitymagazine.com/articles/89432-voicefraud-climbs-350
5
https://github.com/CorentinJ/Real-Time-Voice-Cloning

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5859

