The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Spatio-Temporal Graph Structure Learning for Trafﬁc Forecasting
Qi Zhang,1,2 Jianlong Chang,1,2 Gaofeng Meng,1 Shiming Xiang,1,2 Chunhong Pan1
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{qi.zhang2015, jianlong.chang, gfmeng, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
As an indispensable part in Intelligent Trafﬁc System (ITS),
the task of trafﬁc forecasting inherently subjects to the following three challenging aspects. First, trafﬁc data are physically associated with road networks, and thus should be
formatted as trafﬁc graphs rather than regular grid-like tensors. Second, trafﬁc data render strong spatial dependence,
which implies that the nodes in the trafﬁc graphs usually
have complex and dynamic relationships between each other.
Third, trafﬁc data demonstrate strong temporal dependence,
which is crucial for trafﬁc time series modeling. To address
these issues, we propose a novel framework named Structure
Learning Convolution (SLC) that enables to extend the traditional convolutional neural network (CNN) to graph domains
and learn the graph structure for trafﬁc forecasting. Technically, SLC explicitly models the structure information into
the convolutional operation. Under this framework, various
non-Euclidean CNN methods can be considered as particular
instances of our formulation, yielding a ﬂexible mechanism
for learning on the graph. Along this technical line, two SLC
modules are proposed to capture the global and local structures respectively and they are integrated to construct an endto-end network for trafﬁc forecasting. Additionally, in this
process, Pseudo three Dimensional convolution (P3D) networks are combined with SLC to capture the temporal dependencies in trafﬁc data. Extensively comparative experiments
on six real-world datasets demonstrate our proposed approach
signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art ones.

(a) Grid-like data

(b) Traffic data

Figure 1: (a) indicates the classical CNN on grid-like data
(e.g. image) and (b) is the GCNN on trafﬁc data. Red node
denotes the central node, and yellow nodes are the neighbors
of red one. In the trafﬁc data, each node may stand for a road
or junction. It is obvious that the nodes in the trafﬁc data
have various numbers of neighbors.

Although some inﬂuential works have been developed for
trafﬁc forecasting (Ahmed and Cook 1979; Lv et al. 2015;
Van Der Voort, Dougherty, and Watson 1996), most of these
traditional methods either process each node individually, or
simply concatenate the signal of different place to a vector,
ignoring the underlying spatial trafﬁc topological information.
More recently, a new type of machine learning method,
Graph Convolutional Neural Network (GCNN), is developed to deal with the signals embedded in graph domains
(Bruna et al. 2013; Henaff, Bruna, and LeCun 2015; Kipf
and Welling 2016; Atwood and Towsley 2016; Niepert,
Ahmed, and Kutzkov 2016; Hechtlinger, Chakravarti, and
Qin 2017; Chang et al. 2018; 2019). GCNN generalizes the
convolution operator from grid-like data to graph-structured
data and has achieved superior performance in many ﬁelds,
including molecular feature extraction (Duvenaud et al.
2015), text categorization (Hechtlinger, Chakravarti, and
Qin 2017), point cloud categorization (Simonovsky and Komodakis 2017), and so on. Due to the ability of GCNN to
handle graph-structured data, it motivates us to develop a
new GCNN method for the trafﬁc forecasting task.

Introduction
Trafﬁc forecasting is regarded as one of the key components
of Intelligent Trafﬁc System (ITS). Accurate trafﬁc forecasting is the foundation of many trafﬁc applications, including
route planning, taxi order allocation, travel time estimation,
and so on. Due to the signiﬁcance, it has received great attention both in academic and industrial community.
City trafﬁc data are inherently deﬁned on the graphdomains, due to the complicated topological structure of
trafﬁc networks. Different from the grid-like data (e.g. image in Fig. 1 (a)), the numbers of neighbors in trafﬁc networks are variable at different locations (e.g. Fig. 1 (b))
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1177

