The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Spatial Classiﬁcation with Limited
Observations Based on Physics-Aware Structural Constraint
Arpan Man Sainju,1 Wenchong He,1 Zhe Jiang,1∗ Da Yan2
2

1
Department of Computer Science, The University of Alabama
Department of Computer Science, The University of Alabama at Birmingham
{asainju, whe11}@crimson.ua.edu, zjiang@cs.ua.edu, yanda@uab.edu

cations have spectral data (e.g., a drone or aerial plane could
not cover the entire region due to limited time during a ﬂood
disaster).

Abstract
Spatial classiﬁcation with limited feature observations has
been a challenging problem in machine learning. The problem exists in applications where only a subset of sensors are
deployed at certain regions or partial responses are collected
in ﬁeld surveys. Existing research mostly focuses on addressing incomplete or missing data, e.g., data cleaning and imputation, classiﬁcation models that allow for missing feature
values, or modeling missing features as hidden variables and
applying the EM algorithm. These methods, however, assume
that incomplete feature observations only happen on a small
subset of samples, and thus cannot solve problems where the
vast majority of samples have missing feature observations.
To address this issue, we propose a new approach that incorporates physics-aware structural constraints into the model
representation. Our approach assumes that a spatial contextual feature is observed for all sample locations and establishes spatial structural constraint from the spatial contextual feature map. We design efﬁcient algorithms for model
parameter learning and class inference. Evaluations on realworld hydrological applications show that our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms several baseline methods in classiﬁcation accuracy, and the proposed solution is computationally
efﬁcient on a large data volume.

The problem is important in many societal applications
such as ﬂood extent mapping for disaster response and national water forecasting. Flood extent mapping plays a crucial role in addressing grand societal challenges such as
disaster management, national water forecasting, as well
as energy and food security (Jiang and Shekhar 2017;
Xie, Jiang, and Sainju 2018; Jiang, Xie, and Sainju 2019).
For example, during Hurricane Harvey ﬂoods in 2017, ﬁrst
responders needed to know where ﬂoodwater was in order
to plan rescue efforts. In national water forecasting, detailed
ﬂood extent maps can be used to calibrate and validate the
NOAA National Water Model (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 2018). In current practice, ﬂood
extent maps are mostly generated by ﬂood forecasting models, whose accuracy is often unsatisfactory in a high spatial
resolution (Cline 2009; Merwade et al. 2008). Other ways
to generate ﬂood maps involve sending a ﬁeld crew on the
ground to mark down the ﬂoodwater extent on a map, but the
process is both expensive and time-consuming. A promising
alternative is to utilize observation data from groundwater
sensors and remote sensors on aerial planes or drones. However, sensor observations may have limited spatial coverage
due to only a subset of sensors being deployed at certain regions, making the problem in spatial classiﬁcation with limited features. For example, a drone during a ﬂood disaster
can only collect spectral images in limited areas. Note that
though we use ﬂood mapping application as an example, the
problem can potentially be applied to other broad applications such as water quality monitoring (Yang and Jin 2010)
along river networks.

Introduction
Given a spatial raster framework with explanatory feature
layers, a spatial contextual layer (e.g., a potential ﬁeld), as
well as a set of training samples with class labels outside the
framework, the spatial classiﬁcation problem (Jiang 2019)
aims to learn a model that can predict a class layer. We particularly focus on spatial classiﬁcation with limited feature
observations, i.e., only limited pixel locations in the raster
framework have explanatory feature data available. For example, in earth imagery classiﬁcation, the explanatory feature layers are spectral bands of earth imagery pixels; the
spatial contextual layer can be elevation, and the target class
layer consists of pixel classes (e.g., ﬂood or dry). In the example, it often happens that the elevation values are available for all pixels in the framework, but only limited pixel lo-

The problem poses several unique challenges that are
not well addressed by traditional classiﬁcation techniques.
First, there are limited feature observations on samples in
the raster framework due to only a subset of sensors being
deployed in certain regions. In other words, only a subset
of samples has complete explanatory feature values, making it hard to predict classes for all samples. Second, among
the sample pixels with complete explanatory feature values,
their feature values may contain rich noise and obstacles.

∗

Contact author: zjiang@cs.ua.edu
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
898

