The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improved PAC-Bayesian Bounds for Linear Regression
Vera Shalaeva,1 Alireza Fakhrizadeh Esfahani,2 Pascal Germain,1 Mihaly Petreczky 2
1

The MODAL project-team, INRIA Lille Nord-Europe, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
2
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189
CRIStAL - Centre de Recherche en Informatique Signal et Automatique de Lille, France
{vera.shalaeva, pascal.germain}@inria.fr,
alireza.fakhrizadeh@univ-lille.fr, mihaly.petreczky@centralelille.fr
tighter than the one of Germain et al. (2016), and converges to the generalization loss for proper parameters (see
Section 3). Second, our result holds for training data that
are not independently sampled (see Section 4). The latter result is directly applicable to the problem of learning
dynamical systems from time series data, in particular, to
learning ARX models. ARX models are a popular class
of dynamical systems with a rich literature (Ljung 1999;
Hannan and Deistler 1988) due to their relative simplicity
and modelling power. Note that ARX models can be viewed
as a simple yet non-trivial subclass of recurrent neural network regressions. For example, just like general recurrent
neural networks, ARX models have a memory, i.e., they are
able to remember past input data.
Noteworthy, Alquier and Wintenberger (2012) proposed
PAC-Bayesian oracle inequalities to perform model selection on different time series (weakly dependent processes
and causal Bernoulli shifts). Thus, their work is complementary to ours, as it relies on different assumptions and focuses
on other types of error bounds.

Abstract
In this paper, we improve the PAC-Bayesian error bound for
linear regression derived in Germain et al. (2016). The improvements are two-fold. First, the proposed error bound is
tighter, and converges to the generalization loss with a wellchosen temperature parameter. Second, the error bound also
holds for training data that are not independently sampled. In
particular, the error bound applies to certain time series generated by well-known classes of dynamical models, such as
ARX models.

1

Introduction

When facing a machine learning problem, one must be careful to avoid overﬁtting the training dataset. Indeed, it is well
known that minimizing the empirical prediction error is not
sufﬁcient to generalize to future observations. This is especially important for sensitive “AI” applications that are
nowadays tackled by many industries (self-driving vehicles,
health diagnosis, personality proﬁling, to name a few). Statistical learning theories study the generalization properties
of learning algorithms. For the prediction problems, they
provide guarantees on the “true” error of machine learning
predictors (i.e., the probability of erroneously predicting the
labels of not seen yet samples).
The PAC-Bayesian learning theory, initiated by David
McAllester (1999; 2003)—see Guedj (2019) for a recent
survey—, has the particularity of providing computable
“non-vacuous” generalization bounds on popular machine
learning algorithms, such as neural networks (Dziugaite and
Roy 2017) and SVMs (Ambroladze, Parrado-Hernández,
and Shawe-Taylor 2006). Moreover, as its name suggests,
PAC-Bayesian framework bridges the frequentist Probably
Approximately Correct theory and the Bayesian inference.
This topic is namely discussed in Zhang (2006), Grünwald
(2012), Alquier, Ridgway, and Chopin (2016), Germain et
al. (2016), Sheth and Khardon (2017).
In this paper, we build on a result of Germain et al.
(2016), which analyses the Bayesian linear regression from a
PAC-Bayesian perspective, leading to generalization bounds
for the squared loss. We improve the preceding results
in two directions. First, our new generalization bound is

2

PAC-Bayesian Learning

Let us consider a supervised learning setting, where a learning algorithm is given a training set S = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 of
size n. Each pair (xi , yi ) links a description xi ∈ X to a
label yi ∈ Y. Typically, the description is encoded by a realvalued vector (X ⊆ Rd ), and the label is a scalar (Y ⊆ N
for classiﬁcation problems, or Y ⊆ R for regression ones).
Given S, the learning algorithm returns a prediction function f : X → Y, also referred to as a hypothesis. We restrict
attention to prediction functions/hypotheses that are measurable. The “quality” of the predictor f is usually assessed
through a measurable loss function  : Y × Y → R—such
as the zero-one loss (y, y  ) = 1y=y in classiﬁcation context, or the squared loss (y, y  ) = (y − y  )2 in regression
context, by evaluating the empirical loss
n
1
L  (f )(S) =
(f (xi ), yi ) ,
n i=1

for any S.

PAC Learning. When facing a machine learning problem,
one wants to use f to predict the label y ∈ Y from a description x ∈ X that does not belong to the training set S. A

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5660

