The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reliable and Efficient Anytime Skeleton Learning
Rui Ding,1 Yanzhi Liu,2* Jingjing Tian,3* Zhouyu Fu,4** Shi Han,1 Dongmei Zhang1
1Microsoft Research 2Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 3Peking University 4Alibaba Group
1{juding, shihan, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com, 2lyztyj@bupt.edu.cn, 3tianjj97@pku.edu.cn, 4zhouyu.fz@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Skeleton Learning (SL) is the task for learning an undirected graph from the input data that captures their dependency relations. SL plays a pivotal role in causal learning and
has attracted growing attention in the research community
lately. Due to the high time complexity, anytime SL has
emerged which learns a skeleton incrementally and improves it overtime. In this paper, we first propose and advocate the reliability requirement for anytime SL to be practically useful. Reliability requires the intermediately learned
skeleton to have precision and persistency. We also present
REAL, a novel Reliable and Efficient Anytime Learning algorithm of skeleton. Specifically, we point out that the
commonly existing Functional Dependency (FD) among
variables could make the learned skeleton violate faithfulness assumption, thus we propose a theory to resolve such
incompatibility. Based on this, REAL conducts SL on a reduced set of variables with guaranteed correctness thus drastically improves efficiency. Furthermore, it employs a novel
edge-insertion and best-first strategy in anytime fashion for
skeleton growing to achieve high reliability and efficiency.
We prove that the skeleton learned by REAL converges to
the correct skeleton under standard assumptions. Thorough
experiments were conducted on both benchmark and realworld datasets demonstrate that REAL significantly outperforms the other state-of-the-art algorithms.

Introduction
Skeleton Learning (SL) plays a pivotal role in causal learning and knowledge discovery and has attracted growing
attention in the research community lately (Shanmugam et.
al. 2015; Peters, Janzing and Schölkopf 2017, Bühlmann
and Meinshausen 2016). It is the task for learning an undirected graph from the input data that captures the variables’ dependency relations. Under causal sufficiency assumption (i.e., the set of observed variables 𝒱 include all
the common causes of pairs in 𝒱), each edge A–B in a
skeleton has causal semantic: there exists direct cause* The contributions by Yanzhi Liu and Jingjing Tian have been conducted
and completed during their internships at Microsoft Research Asia.
** The contributions by Zhouyu Fu have been conducted and completed
during his employment at Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10101

effect relationship between A and B but the direction is
unknown. Thus for causal learning, SL is the primary step
for performing interventions over directly linked variables
in skeleton to discover cause effects (Kocaoglu, Dimakis
and Vishwanath 2017; Lindgren et. al. 2018). In addition,
SL has great potential in knowledge discovery (Chen et al.,
2012). For example, an engineer tries to diagnose the causes of service degradation and how its impact propagates.
SL has a high computational complexity (Chickering
1996). The cost of waiting till the final solution is often
unacceptable for practical tasks that require decisions to be
made within given time budget, e.g., 30 minutes for investigating a cloud service degradation (Lou et al., 2017). On
the other hand, a partially learned skeleton can also provide
important clues for obtaining local causal relations (Pearl
2009) or for dependency analysis (Daly et al., 2006). This
motivates the development of anytime SL techniques to
incrementally learn a skeleton and improve it over time.
Two challenges need to be addressed to make anytime
SL practically useful. One is reliability and the other is
efficiency. The reliability challenge entails two requirements – precision and persistency. Precision means that the
partially learned skeleton S(𝑡) at any time 𝑡 should contain
only trustable edges that correctly encode the dependencies
between variables. Persistency means that the skeleton
𝑆(𝑡 + 1) updated at time 𝑡 + 1 should remove as few as
possible edges from previously learned skeleton 𝑆(𝑡). This
enables users to reuse their analysis models obtained from
the previous step over newly added edges rather than start
from scratch. To the best of our knowledge, the reliability
issue was not addressed in the existing work.
Another major source of complication for SL stems from
the inter-variable Functional Dependency (Vardi 1987) in
real-world data. For FD (i.e., short for FD relationship)
between two variables, the value of one variable can be
fully determined by the other. For instance, Country determines Continent, or Date determines Year. Using terms
from relational database domain, FDs typically exist between the primary key and other non-key variables within
a table. Thus, FD is prevalent in tabular datasets composed
by joining multiple tables. We notice that certain FDs

