The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Objective Multi-Agent Planning for
Jointly Discovering and Tracking Mobile Objects
Hoa Van Nguyen,1 Hamid Rezatoﬁghi,1 Ba-Ngu Vo,2 Damith C. Ranasinghe1
1

The University of Adelaide
2
Curtin University
{hoavan.nguyen, hamid.rezatoﬁghi, damith.ranasinghe}@adelaide.edu.au, ba-ngu.vo@curtin.edu.au

because, in practice, agent sensor systems, such as cameras,
have limited detection range. A single agent may only observe a small region of space and a decision to leave a visible
object to explore hitherto unseen regions will lead to losing track of visible objects. Therefore, an agent observing
a small region of the search area needs to collaboratively
interact with other agents to plan its course of actions to collectively maximize the overall team’s objectives of tracking
and discovering multiple objects.
Multi-agent planning to achieve multiple competing objectives remains a challenging problem because of the complex
interactions between agents leading to combinatorial optimization problems (Wai et al. 2018). In practice, the problem
is further complicated because: i) the agent sensors are not
only limited in range but also sensitivity, and measurements
are always subjected to environmental noise. Consequently,
object detectors suffer from both missing detections of objects and false detections; and ii) the number of objects of
interest is often unknown, and varies with time since mobile
objects can enter and leave the scene anytime (Vo et al. 2012).
Most critically, the computation of optimal planning actions
must be timely for real-world applications.
We propose a framework for multiple agents to jointly
plan, search and track a time-varying number of objects using a novel multi-objective information-based value function
formulation. Our multi-objective value function captures the
competing objectives of planning for tracking and discovery.
We adopt the random ﬁnite set (RFS) model for the collection
of objects of interest to account for the random appearance
and disappearance of objects and their dynamics. Our proposed multi-objective value function maximizes information
gain over a look-ahead horizon for both discovered and undiscovered objects. Most importantly, our multi-objective value
function is proven to be a monotone submodular set function;
thus, we can cope with the intractability of the multi-objective
optimization problem (MOP) by employing a greedy algorithm. Our ability to use a greedy algorithm facilitates the
computation of approximately optimal control actions with
linear complexity in the number of agents for realizing an
online planning method.
Related Work: Multi-agent path planning in partially observable environments is a difﬁcult problem for which the

Abstract
We consider the challenging problem of online planning for
a team of agents to autonomously search and track a timevarying number of mobile objects under the practical constraint of detection range limited onboard sensors. A standard
POMDP with a value function that either encourages discovery or accurate tracking of mobile objects is inadequate to
simultaneously meet the conﬂicting goals of searching for
undiscovered mobile objects whilst keeping track of discovered objects. The planning problem is further complicated by
misdetections or false detections of objects caused by range
limited sensors and noise inherent to sensor measurements.
We formulate a novel multi-objective POMDP based on information theoretic criteria, and an online multi-object tracking
ﬁlter for the problem. Since controlling multi-agent is a well
known combinatorial optimization problem, assigning control
actions to agents necessitates a greedy algorithm. We prove
that our proposed multi-objective value function is a monotone
submodular set function; consequently, the greedy algorithm
can achieve a (1 − 1/e) approximation for maximizing the
submodular multi-objective function.

Introduction
We study the problem of controlling a team of agents to
jointly track discovered mobile objects and explore the environment to search for undiscovered mobile objects of
interest. Such problems are ubiquitous in wildlife tracking (Cliff et al. 2015; Kays et al. 2011; Nguyen et al. 2019a;
Thomas, Holland, and Minot 2012), search and rescue missions (Gerasenko et al. 2001; Murphy et al. 2008). For instance, a team of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) can be
deployed to monitor activities of endangered radio-tagged
wildlife in a survey scene, or to search for victims in a disaster
response (Beck et al. 2018). Hence, it is critical to not only
search for undiscovered objects but also track the movements
of discovered objects of interest. Consequently, the overall
team’s objectives arise as a natural multi-objective optimization problem, where several pertinent goals (i.e., tracking and
discovering) need to be simultaneously achieved.
Intrinsically, searching for undiscovered objects whilst simultaneously tracking visible objects are competing goals
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7227

