The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Decidability and Complexity of Action-Based Temporal Planning over Dense Time
Nicola Gigante,1 Andrea Micheli,2 Angelo Montanari,1 Enrico Scala3
1

University of Udine, Italy
{nicola.gigante, angelo.montanari}@uniud.it
2
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
amicheli@fbk.eu
3
University of Brescia, Italy
enrico.scala@unibs.it

To the best of our knowledge, to date only Rintanen (2007),
Cushing et al. (2007), and Cushing (2012) approached temporal planning from a theoretical point of view, focusing their
attention, however, on a temporal model that is substantially
discrete. In particular, Rintanen (2007) proves the problem
to be EXPSPACE-complete over discrete time in the general
case, and PSPACE-complete when actions are disallowed to
self-overlap with already running instances of themselves.
Such results apply to the dense setting if a speciﬁc ε is given
as the minimum amount of time separating mutual exclusive
(mutex) events, and if actions are given only a speciﬁc ﬁxed
duration, whereas PDDL 2.1 generally speciﬁes actions with
an interval of admissible values for the duration.
The computational complexity arising from using a dense
temporal model with no ε value given upfront remains still
poorly understood. It is worth noticing that the formal speciﬁcation of PDDL 2.1 (Fox and Long 2003, Section 8) only
requires mutex events to be separated by a non-zero amount
of time; the idea of accepting an ε-separation value as input comes later in the text as an expedient to facilitate plan
validation (Section 10 - Plan Validation). The very same authors do however admit that this ambiguity was at that time
problematic and they did not ﬁnd a deﬁnitive and principled
way to account for it. Clarifying this aspect is relevant not
only because it could be at times impractical to provide the
right ε value upfront, but also because many planners do not
use a discrete temporal model at all (Shin and Davis 2005;
Coles et al. 2010); practice and theory behind temporal planning problems seem unnecessarily distant.
In order to work out these issues, this paper analyzes the
computational complexity of temporal planning problems
over dense time that takes into account, in a comprehensive manner, a number of different variants: the case with
ε-separation, where an ε value of separation between mutex
events is given upfront, and the case with non-zero separation, where mutex events are only required to not appear at
the same time. Both cases are studied when either allowing
or forbidding self-overlap of actions.
The outcomes can be summarized as follows: when selfoverlap of actions is forbidden temporal planning over
dense time is not harder than classical planning (PSPACEcomplete), regardless of the mutex separation criterion. On

Abstract
This paper studies the computational complexity of temporal planning, as represented by PDDL 2.1, interpreted over
dense time. When time is considered discrete, the problem
is known to be EXPSPACE-complete. However, the ofﬁcial
PDDL 2.1 semantics, and many implementations, interpret
time as a dense domain. This work provides several results
about the complexity of the problem, studying a few interesting cases: whether a minimum amount ε of separation between
mutually exclusive events is given, in contrast to the separation being simply required to be non-zero, and whether or not
actions are allowed to overlap already running instances of
themselves. We prove the problem to be PSPACE-complete
when self-overlap is forbidden, whereas, when allowed, it
becomes EXPSPACE-complete with ε-separation and undecidable with non-zero separation. These results clarify the
computational consequences of different choices in the deﬁnition of the PDDL 2.1 semantics, which were vague until now.

1

Introduction

Domain-independent planning (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso
2016) is one of the classical ﬁelds of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and received considerable attention throughout the years.
One of the most active research directions in this context
is temporal planning, which represents and reasons about
the ﬂow of time explicitly. A popular modeling language
for such problems is PDDL 2.1 (Fox and Long 2003), an
action-centered formalism that extends classical planning by
explicitly modeling the duration of actions. A temporal planning problem in PDDL 2.1 consists of looking for a sequence
of actions that is not only causally executable (as in classical planning), but also schedulable, in accordance to given
action duration constraints, along a timeline of unbounded
length. Several planning systems (Coles et al. 2010; Eyerich,
Mattmüller, and Röger 2012; Gerevini, Saetti, and Serina
2003; Rankooh and Ghassem-Sani 2015) as well as various international planning competitions (Vallati et al. 2015;
Coles et al. 2012) adopt or have adopted PDDL 2.1 for the
speciﬁcation of the temporal planning problem.
Here, we study the computational complexity of PDDL 2.1
temporal planning problems over a dense temporal domain.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9859

