The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On Measuring and Mitigating Biased Inferences of Word Embeddings
Sunipa Dev, Tao Li, Jeff M. Phillips, Vivek Srikumar
School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
{sunipad, tli, jeffp, svivek}@cs.utah.edu

to ascertain if one sentence—the premise—entails or contradicts another—the hypothesis, or if neither conclusions
hold (i.e., they are neutral with respect to each other).
As an illustration, consider the sentences:

Abstract
Word embeddings carry stereotypical connotations from the
text they are trained on, which can lead to invalid inferences
in downstream models that rely on them. We use this observation to design a mechanism for measuring stereotypes using
the task of natural language inference. We demonstrate a reduction in invalid inferences via bias mitigation strategies on
static word embeddings (GloVe). Further, we show that for
gender bias, these techniques extend to contextualized embeddings when applied selectively only to the static components of contextualized embeddings (ELMo, BERT).

(1) The rude person visited the bishop.
(2) The Uzbekistani person visited the bishop.
Clearly, the ﬁrst sentence neither entails nor contradicts the second. Yet, the popular decomposable attention
model (Parikh et al. 2016) built with GloVe embeddings predicts that sentence (1) entails sentence (2) with a high probability of 0.842! Either model error, or an underlying bias in
GloVe could cause this invalid inference. To study the latter,
we develop a systematic probe over millions of such sentence pairs that target speciﬁc word classes like polarized
adjectives (e.g., rude) and demonyms (e.g., Uzbekistani).
A second focus of this paper is bias attenuation. As a
representative of several lines of work in this direction,
we use the recently proposed projection method of (Dev
and Phillips 2019), which identiﬁes the dominant direction deﬁning a bias (e.g., gender), and removes it from all
embedded vectors. This simple approach thus, avoids the
trap of residual information (Gonen and Goldberg 2019)
seen in hard debiasing approach of (Bolukbasi et al. 2016),
which categorizes words and treats each category differently. Speciﬁcally, we ask the question: Does projectionbased debiasing attenuate bias in static embeddings (GloVe)
and contextualized ones (ELMo, BERT)?

Introduction
Word embeddings have become the de facto feature representation across NLP (Parikh et al. 2016; Seo et al. 2017,
for example). Their usefulness stems from their ability capture background information about words using large corpora as static vector embeddings—e.g., word2vec (Mikolov
et al. 2013), GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning
2014)—or contextual encoders that produce embeddings—
e.g., ELMo (Peters et al. 2018), BERT (Devlin et al. 2019).
However, besides capturing word meaning, their embeddings also encode real-world biases about gender, age,
ethnicity, etc. To discover biases, several lines of existing work (Bolukbasi et al. 2016; Caliskan, Bryson, and
Narayanan 2017; Zhao et al. 2017; Dev and Phillips 2019)
employ measurements intrinsic to the vector representations,
which despite their utility, have two key problems. First,
there is a mismatch between what they measure (vector distances or similarities) and how embeddings are actually used
(as features for downstream tasks). Second, contextualized
embeddings like ELMo or BERT drive today’s state-of-theart NLP systems, but tests for bias are designed for word
types, not word token embeddings.
In this paper, we present a general strategy to probe word
embeddings for biases. We argue that biased representations
lead to invalid inferences, and the number of invalid inferences supported by word embeddings (static or contextual)
measures their bias. To concretize this intuition, we use the
task of natural language inference (NLI), where the goal is

Our contributions. Our primary contribution is the use
of natural language inference-driven to design probes that
measure the effect of speciﬁc biases. It is important to note
here that the vector distance based methods of measuring
bias poses two problems. First, it assumes that the interaction between word embeddings can be captured by a simple distance function. Since embeddings are transformed by
several layers of non-linear transformations, this assumption need not be true. Second, the vector distance method is
not applicable to contextual embeddings because there is no
single ‘driver’, ‘male’, ‘female’ vectors; instead the vectors
are dependent on the context. Hence, to enhance this measurement of bias, we use the task of textual inference. We

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7659

