The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning from the Past: Continual
Meta-Learning with Bayesian Graph Neural Networks
Yadan Luo,1 Zi Huang,1 Zheng Zhang,2,3∗ Ziwei Wang,1 Mahsa Baktashmotlagh,1 Yang Yang4
1

2

The University of Queensland, Australia
Bio-Computing Research Center, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
{lyadanluol, darrenzz219, dlyyang}@gmail.com, huang@itee.uq.edu.au,
{ziwei.wang, m.baktashmotlagh}@uq.edu.au,
the efﬁciency of later learning is further improved at metatest time. Particularly, the learned prior for discovering the
transferable knowledge can act as an inductive bias to minimize generalization error.
Generally, mainstream meta-learning models follow the
episodic training paradigm, where the meta-learner extracts domain-general information among episodes so that
it can assist the task-speciﬁc learner to recognize unlabeled samples (query set) based on the few labeled points
(support set). In this way, the meta-learner can be implemented variously: as an optimizer that gathers gradient
ﬂows from different tasks (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017;
Nichol, Achiam, and Schulman 2018; Lee and Choi 2018);
as an classiﬁcation weight generator that hallucinates classiﬁers for novel classes (Qiao et al. 2018; Rusu et al. 2016;
Gidaris and Komodakis 2019); or as a metric that measures
similarity between the query and support samples (Vinyals
et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017). Nevertheless,
existing meta-learning methods are far from optimal due to
the lack of relational inductive bias modeling (Battaglia et
al. 2018), thereby failing to manipulate the structured representations of intra- and inter-task relations.
Motivated to capture more interactions among instances,
another line of work has explored graph structure (Garcia and Bruna 2018; Kim et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019)
or second-order statistics like covariance (Li et al. 2019b)
in meta-learning framework. More concretely, Garcia and
Bruna (Garcia and Bruna 2018) cast few-shot learning as
the node classiﬁcation problem with graph neural networks,
where nodes are represented with the images in the episodes,
and edges are given by a trainable similarity kernels. In the
same vein, Liu (Liu et al. 2019) et al. proposed a transductive propagation network (TPN) for label propagation and
thus enabled transductive inference for all query set. Alternatively, Kim et al. (Kim et al. 2019) modeled the learning as an edge labeling problem, in order to directly predict
whether the associated two nodes belong to the same class.
While promising, most existing graph-based metalearning approaches suffer from two major limitations, i.e.,
catastrophic forgetting (Kemker et al. 2018) and insufﬁcient robustness (Zhang et al. 2019), which make it difﬁcult to transfer knowledge over long time spans or handle

Abstract
Meta-learning for few-shot learning allows a machine to
leverage previously acquired knowledge as a prior, thus improving the performance on novel tasks with only small
amounts of data. However, most mainstream models suffer from catastrophic forgetting and insufﬁcient robustness
issues, thereby failing to fully retain or exploit long-term
knowledge while being prone to cause severe error accumulation. In this paper, we propose a novel Continual MetaLearning approach with Bayesian Graph Neural Networks
(CML-BGNN) that mathematically formulates meta-learning
as continual learning of a sequence of tasks. With each task
forming as a graph, the intra- and inter-task correlations can
be well preserved via message-passing and history transition.
To remedy topological uncertainty from graph initialization,
we utilize Bayes by Backprop strategy that approximates the
posterior distribution of task-speciﬁc parameters with amortized inference networks, which are seamlessly integrated
into the end-to-end edge learning. Extensive experiments
conducted on the miniImageNet and tieredImageNet datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed
method, improving the performance by 42.8% compared
with state-of-the-art on the miniImageNet 5-way 1-shot classiﬁcation task.

Introduction
A key signature of human intelligence is the ability to
quickly acquire knowledge from few examples. Despite
artiﬁcial intelligence (Yang et al. 2019; Bin et al. 2019;
Luo et al. 2019) has made remarkable progress in wide applications, it remains challenging to perform well in situations with little available data or limited computational resources. Such a scenario is typically referred to as few-shot
learning, which has attracted vast interests recently.
Rather than simply augmenting data (Hariharan and Girshick 2017) or adding regularization to compensate for the
lack of data, an emerging line of work tackles few-shot
learning with meta-learning. By leveraging previous learning experience to obtain a prior over tasks at meta-train time,
∗

indicates the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5021

