The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Stochastically Robust Personalized
Ranking for LSH Recommendation Retrieval
Dung D. Le, Hady W. Lauw
School of Information Systems,
Singapore Management University
{ddle, hadywlauw}@smu.edu.sg

learning time. In most cases, learning algorithms can be run
ofﬂine. Meanwhile there have been works on algorithms that
learn from large datasets with millions of users and items.
Just as essential is the retrieval phase, which has received
relatively less attention in the literature. This latter phase is
just as sensitive (if not more) to efﬁciency, but of a different
sort, namely latency of retrieval. A target user would expect
retrieval of her personalized recommendation list in realtime. A naive approach that scans all items to select the top-k
most relevant ones would incur per-query cost of O(n × d),
which scales linearly with the number of items n and the
number of factors d. Given an enormous catalogue of candidate items, such exhaustive approach may not achieve truly
real-time performance. On the other hand, precomputing the
top-k for all users would be impractical given the storage
costs involved for all the precomputed lists, as well as the
rigidity built into those lists that may affect the system’s
adaptability to drifting user preferences. Having a faster alternative for top-k recommendation retrieval is desirable.
LSH Recommendation Retrieval. In face of these challenges, recent approaches turn to indexing schemes to overcome the prohibitive cost of performing exhaustive top-k
recommendation search for each user. In particular, one of
the most popular such schemes is Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) (Shrivastava and Li 2015; Bachrach et al. 2014;
Fraccaro, Paquet, and Winther 2016; Le and Lauw 2017;
Hsieh et al. 2017; Liu and Wu 2016; Koenigstein and Koren 2013; Qi et al. 2017; Smirnov and Ponomarev 2014). In
the prevalent binary variant, LSH approximates relative distances between data points, by computing the Hamming distance between the corresponding codes, and hashing similar
data points to similar codes with high probability. Section 2
gives an overview of LSH-based recommendation retrieval.
There are signiﬁcant advantages to using LSH as an
indexing scheme for recommendation retrieval. By using
hashcodes, we can quickly retrieve a small subset of items
that likely contain the k ”most relevant” items to the
query (user), because computing Hamming distance involves mainly bitwise operations. Hashing-based indexing
provides provably sub-linear algorithms for search which is
beneﬁcial for large scale systems where even linear search
algorithms are impractical due to latency. Unlike spatial

Abstract
Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) has become one of the
most commonly used approximate nearest neighbor search
techniques to avoid the prohibitive cost of scanning through
all data points. For recommender systems, LSH achieves efﬁcient recommendation retrieval by encoding user and item
vectors into binary hash codes, reducing the cost of exhaustively examining all the item vectors to identify the topk items. However, conventional matrix factorization models may suffer from performance degeneration caused by
randomly-drawn LSH hash functions, directly affecting the
ultimate quality of the recommendations. In this paper, we
propose a framework named SRPR, which factors in the
stochasticity of LSH hash functions when learning realvalued user and item latent vectors, eventually improving the
recommendation accuracy after LSH indexing. Experiments
on publicly available datasets show that the proposed framework not only effectively learns user’s preferences for prediction, but also achieves high compatibility with LSH stochasticity, producing superior post-LSH indexing performances as
compared to state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Matrix factorization (MF) gives rise to a widespread class
of techniques for recommender systems (Koren, Bell, and
Volinsky 2009). Deployment of MF-based recommender
system typically involves two phases: learning and retrieval.
• The learning phase analyzes historical feedback to learn
users’ preferences (e.g., ratings, clicks). Fundamentally,
a MF-based method derives a latent vector xu ∈ Rd for
each user u, and a latent vector yi ∈ Rd for each item i,
where d is the dimensionality. The degree of preference of
user u for item i is modeled as the inner product xu T yi .
• The retrieval phase seeks to arrive at a personalized recommendation list for a target user u using the vectors
learnt from the learning phase. To do so, we identify the
top-k items according to preference scores xu T yi .
In both phases, we are concerned with the measures
of recommendation accuracy and computational efﬁciency.
The learning phase is concerned with efﬁciency in terms of
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4594

