The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GDFace: Gated Deformation for Multi-View Face Image Synthesis
Xuemiao Xu,1,2,3 Keke Li,1 Cheng Xu,1 Shengfeng He1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Building Science
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Computational Intelligence and Cyberspace Information

Abstract
Photorealistic multi-view face synthesis from a single image
is an important but challenging problem. Existing methods
mainly learn a texture mapping model from the source face
to the target face. However, they fail to consider the internal
deformation caused by the change of poses, leading to the
unsatisfactory synthesized results for large pose variations.
In this paper, we propose a Gated Deformable Face Synthesis Network to model the deformation of faces that aids the
synthesis of the target face image. Speciﬁcally, we propose
a dual network that consists of two modules. The ﬁrst module estimates the deformation of two views in the form of
convolution offsets according to the input and target poses.
The second one, on the other hand, leverages the predicted
deformation offsets to create the target face image. In this
way, pose changes are explicitly modeled in the face generator to cope with geometric transformation, by adaptively
focusing on pertinent regions of the source image. To compensate offset estimation errors, we introduce a soft-gating
mechanism that enables adaptive fusion between deformable
features and primitive features. Extensive experimental results on ﬁve widely-used benchmarks show that our approach
performs favorably against the state-of-the-arts on multi-view
face synthesis, especially for large pose changes.

Input

CAPG-GAN

CR-GAN

Ours

Figure 1: Existing methods fail to handle large pose variations. We tailor a dual network to cope with face deformation and synthesis simultaneously, leading to photorealistic
face synthesis.

pose information (e.g., a pose vector or two face landmark
masks).
Notwithstanding the demonstrated success, large pose
variation is still the main barrier. GAN-based methods learn
a direct mapping between the source image and the target image but ignore the geometric transformations of faces
across different views. The involved generator applies convolution operations over ﬁxed geometric structures, making
it difﬁcult to model complex deformations of faces (e.g., examples shown in Fig. 1). But indeed, modeling face deformation plays an important role in face synthesis. We observe
that the rotation of faces from different identities share a
similar geometric structure changes. This is a strong prior
knowledge that can be incorporated as a guidance to model
face deformation and beneﬁts the synthesis of multi-view
faces.
Based on the above observation, we aim to incorporate
face deformation into multi-view face image synthesis. To
this end, we propose a dual network that consists of two
modules, each of which copes with deformation modeling
and face synthesis, respectively. Given a source landmark
and a target landmark, the proposed face deformation module learns to estimate the inherent transformation between
two poses in the form of deformable convolution offset. It
serves as the deformation prior for the face synthesis mod-

Introduction
Synthesizing face images with different views has many
practical applications, e.g., surveillance, virtual reality, and
image editing/enhancement. It is ill-posed to synthesize a
face with a different view while keeping its identity wellpreserved. Conventional methods resolve this problem by
ﬁtting a 3D face model from a single-view 2D face image (Hassner et al. 2015; Zhu et al. 2015). Although accurate face structure can be captured, these methods cannot “generate” occluded face regions, and therefore can
only rotate the face in a small range. Deep networks, especially GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014), show great performance in creating multi-view faces (Tran, Yin, and Liu
2017; Huang et al. 2017; Hu et al. 2018; Tian et al. 2018;
Yin et al. 2017). These methods mostly adopt an encoderdecoder structure to learn the texture mapping from the input image to the target image, usually conditioned by the
* Corresponding author. Email: hesfe@scut.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12532

