The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Diversiﬁed Interactive Recommendation with Implicit Feedback
Yong Liu,1,2 Yingtai Xiao,2,4∗ Qiong Wu,2 Chunyan Miao,3† Juyong Zhang,4
Binqiang Zhao,5 Haihong Tang5
1

Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly (LILY)
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
4
University of Science and Technology of China, 5 Alibaba Group
{stephenliu, wu.qiong, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg, gzxyt@mail.ustc.edu.cn, juyong@ustc.edu.cn
binqiang.zhao@alibaba-inc.com, piaoxue@taobao.com
2

cause implicit feedback is user centric, and can be easily collected (Shi, Larson, and Hanjalic 2014; Wang et al. 2019).
However, the implicit feedback usually brings bias signals
which make the recommendation problems much more challenging. This bias comes from the fact that the implicit feedback can only capture the positive user preferences (i.e., observed user-item interactions), and all negative user preferences are missing. Although the non-interaction between the
user and an item is usually treated as negative user preference in previous research work (Shi, Larson, and Hanjalic
2014), it does not explicitly indicate that the user dislikes
the item, as non-interaction may also be caused by that the
item has not been exposed to the user (Liang et al. 2016).

Abstract
Interactive recommender systems that enable the interactions
between users and the recommender system have attracted
increasing research attention. Previous methods mainly focus
on optimizing recommendation accuracy. However, they usually ignore the diversity of the recommendation results, thus
usually results in unsatisfying user experiences. In this paper, we propose a novel diversiﬁed recommendation model,
named Diversiﬁed Contextual Combinatorial Bandit (DC2 B),
for interactive recommendation with users’ implicit feedback. Speciﬁcally, DC2 B employs determinantal point process in the recommendation procedure to promote diversity of
the recommendation results. To learn the model parameters,
a Thompson sampling-type algorithm based on variational
Bayesian inference is proposed. In addition, theoretical regret analysis is also provided to guarantee the performance of
DC2 B. Extensive experiments on real datasets are performed
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in
balancing the recommendation accuracy and diversity.

Moreover, previous interactive recommendation methods
mainly focus on optimizing recommendation accuracy. They
usually ignore other important properties of the recommendation results, for example the diversity of the recommended
item set (Kunaver and Požrl 2017; Wu et al. 2019b). Therefore, the items in the recommendation lists generated by
these approaches may usually be very similar with each
other, and the recommendation results may only cover a
small fraction of items. This usually leads to inferior user experiences, and thus reduces the commercial values of recommender systems. Intuitively, it is very challenging to achieve
both high accuracy and diversity. The methods focusing too
strongly on diversity usually put accuracy at risk. Because
there is a lack of data for less popular items, considering
such items for recommendation may lead to a decrease in
recommendation accuracy (Adomavicius and Kwon 2011).
Therefore, the main objective of diversiﬁed recommendation methods is to optimize the trade-off between accuracy
and diversity, which is usually referred as the “accuracy–
diversity dilemma” (Zhou et al. 2010).

Introduction
Conventional recommender systems are usually developed
in non-interactive manner and learn the user preferences
from logged user behavior data (Liu et al. 2017; Yang et
al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018). One main
drawback of these systems is that they cannot capture the
changes of users’ preferences in time. This requires the development of interactive recommender system that enables
interactions (Steck, van Zwol, and Johnson 2015). In the literature, contextual bandit learning has been demonstrated
to be a promising solution to interactive recommendation
problems (Li et al. 2010; Zhao, Zhang, and Wang 2013;
Tang et al. 2015; Wang, Wu, and Wang 2017; Qi et al. 2018).
In these methods, the recommender system sequentially recommends a set of items to a user and adopts the user’s immediate feedback to improve its recommendation policy.
In practice, users’ implicit feedback (e.g., clicking history) are usually utilized to build recommender systems, be-

In this paper, we propose a novel bandit learning framework for interactive recommender systems based on users’
implicit feedback, which strives to achieve a good balance
between accuracy and diversity in the recommendation results. To solve the bias problems caused by implicit feedback, we model the interactions between users and the recommender system from two perspectives: i) Diversiﬁed Item
Exposure: the recommender system selects a set of relevant
yet diverse items to expose to the user; ii) User Engage-

∗
This work was performed while this author was a research assistant at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4932

