The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

End-to-End Thorough Body Perception for Person Search
Kun Tian,1 Houjing Huang,2 Yun Ye,1 Shiyu Li,1 Jinbin Lin,1 Guan Huang1
1

Horizon Robotics, 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{kun.tian, yun.ye, shiyu.li, jinbin.lin}@horizon.ai, houjing.huang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, huangguan13@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an improved end-to-end multibranch person search network to jointly optimize person detection, re-identiﬁcation, instance segmentation, and keypoint
detection. First, we build a better and faster base model to
extract non-highly correlated feature expression; Second, a
foreground feature enhance module is used to alleviate undesirable background noise in person feature maps; Third,
we design an algorithm to learn the part-aligned representation for person search. Extensive experiments with ablation
analysis show the effectiveness of our proposed end-to-end
multi-task model, and we demonstrate its superiority over the
state-of-the-art methods on two benchmark datasets including
CUHK-SYSU and PRW.

Introduction

Figure 1: Three factors that may affect person search performance. (a) A person has similar posture but in different scenes. (b) There are some errors in the cropped output of detector, and the resulting negative impact can also
be caused by occlusion. (c) A person is captured in similar
scenes with three postures: back, front and side.

Person search (Xiao et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2017) aims
to ﬁnd a probe person in provided gallery images of the
real world scenarios such as video surveillance for criminal search, and multi-camera multi-target tracking (Wen et
al. 2017). Unlike person re-identiﬁcation (ReID) where person is cropped from the original image and resized to a
ﬁxed scale, person search addresses the problem of identifying person without any prior knowledge of location and
scale. Naturally, ReID accuracy will be affected by the detection result. However, what equally important but easily
overlooked is that background clutter and misalignment can
also lead to mismatching between query and gallery.
Background clutter refers to the perturbance of complex
scene in the process of person feature expression, which is
shown in Figure 1 (a). Another key challenge in person ReID
is the misalignment caused by cropping errors and pose variations. For example, in Figure 1 (b), the box in column 1
represent legs, while the boxes in columns 2 and 3 represent the feet and background information, respectively. Furthermore, large pose variation result from camera views and
person motion increase the difﬁcult of matching, which is
illustrated in Figure 1 (c).
Motivated by these observation, we explore how to more
effectively integrate person detection and ReID into an endto-end framework and make this multi-task model achieve
better performance than the single-task ones. A signiﬁcant

gain from our baseline is observed over (Xiao et al. 2017).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that two
sibling branches, namely person instance segmentation and
keypoint detection branches, are introduced to person search
model. We argue that by utilizing Foreground Feature Enhance Module (FFEM), the negative effect caused by background clutter can be mitigated. Furthermore, a keypointsguided learning algorithm is introduced to deal with misalignment between images. All the above improvements enable our model a thorough body perception. Three major
contributions are as follows:
• We build a better and faster base model, which is approximately two times faster than the original method while
achieving a superior accuracy.
• We propose FFEM to effectively enrich the semantic feature of foreground person, which can smooth the response
of CNN and reduce excessive attention to local areas.
• We put forward a feature learning algorithm to obtain
part-aligned representation of person. Experimental results demonstrate that our Body Perception Network (BP-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12079

